Residents paddleboard through the intersection of Huger and King streets in downtown Charleston.

Thursday, Oct. 1

Ron Morales didn’t sign up to be a meteorologist to be a prophet of doom, much less a false prophet.

While most South Carolinians kept a wary eye on Hurricane Joaquin, Morales and the other meteorologists at the National Weather Service office in North Charleston already had shifted their attention to another threat, as yet invisible: Rain, lots of it, maybe as much as 25 inches, was about to pummel the state from the Lowcountry to the Midlands.

By Thursday, as the first sheets of rain blew in over the Lowcountry, the total rainfall forecasts were still holding steady above 20 inches. “Ridiculous,” Morales thought. But the science checked out. The models were sound.

But would the millions about to face the deluge believe the forecast? Morales wondered.

Friday, Oct. 2

As the rain poured down after 9 p.m. Friday in North Charleston’s Peppermill neighborhood, Brenda Dugan’s phone rang.

It was the daughter of one of her best friends in the neighborhood, Roberta Frasier, a friend she met on an inclement day many years before, when Frasier offered Dugan a ride home after dropping her children off at Pepperhill Elementary.

Water was beginning to enter Frasier’s home, it was dark out, and the daughter was anxious.

“Pray now. Water’s coming into our house,” she said.

“Call the fire department,” Dugan replied. “Don’t try to drive.”

But the Frasiers were too worried to stay put. Dugan invited them to ride out the storm at her home on Firetree Court.

Dugan watched the water creep up to her door and she wondered: Am I next? She called her sister in Massachusetts and asked her to pray for her.

At that moment, the rain let up.

“Thank you, Lord,” she said.

Saturday, Oct. 3

Rain spilled like from an open spigot, crashing on Kathy Roberts’ roof, rolling down her window. Throughout the night, she opened the front door of her one-room garage apartment on Pryor Street in North Charleston to check on the water collecting outside. Each time, it was higher.

The rain pooled around the concrete stepping stones leading to her doorway. Then it swelled past the second step to her studio.

When she awoke around 7:30 a.m., her gold tabby Frisky pawing at her face, she stepped onto the linoleum in an inch and a half of lukewarm water.

Oh my God, she thought. Not again.

This was the second time her apartment had flooded since she moved in Aug. 10. She grabbed a red plastic bowl from the kitchen. With a pair of pink cups, she started scooping floodwater from the floor and into the bowl. She dumped the bowl into the bathtub. She started scooping again.

By Saturday evening, the water coming in under the door and walls had sunk into Roberts’ crimson carpet. Her toilet gurgled. Spurts of black sewage splashed the bathroom wall.

Roberts called Denise Cromwell, her property manager, in tears.

That night, Cromwell paid for a room for Roberts at the Masters Inn. Roberts packed a couple of changes of clothes in two reusable grocery bags, plus a few cans of Beanee Weenees, tuna, soup and stewed tomatoes. At least she wasn’t going to go hungry. She stuffed Frisky inside her pillow case.

At the motel, Roberts stayed up watching the news. President Barack Obama had declared a federal emergency in South Carolina. Three people had died on the roads. Almost 3,000 people had lost power statewide.

In the Shadowmoss neighborhood of West Ashley, Charleston County Councilman Vic Rawl watched the water rise as high as he had ever seen it. During the day and into the evening, it rose even higher, trapping his family in their home, which remained dry even as nearby streets were flooded with more than 3 feet of water.

They coped with cabin fever by watching television, but during halftime of the Clemson-Notre Dame game, the power went off.

Sunday, Oct. 4

In the woods behind an abandoned bowling alley on Savannah Highway, water rushed inside a man’s tent. He scrambled out with just his backpack on moments before his tent washed away into the darkness. He cursed. He should have used stakes.

“B” is his street name. He has been homeless since he and his wife separated about a year ago. She moved in with family. He made camp in the woods.

It was around 2 a.m. Sunday. B hadn’t had anything to eat since the rain started on Thursday. A sign for Waffle House shined like a beacon a few blocks away. B trudged across a parking lot. Before he reached the sidewalk, he slipped into a ditch, where cold water lapped around his waist.

He walked in Waffle House soaking wet. He jammed his hand inside the left pocket of his jeans. A pack of Marlboro Reds crumbled between his fingers. He pulled a wad of pennies, two nickels and a dime. Thirty-five cents.

“Can I please get something to eat?,” he asked the woman at the counter. “I’m not having a good night.”

“That’s fine,” she said.

She ordered up two hamburgers. They were the best he’d ever tasted in his life.

Allison Hardy felt the ocean rocking her in a boat. A hand pushed her into the waves, and as she struggled to rise to the surface, she opened her eyes and woke from her dream.

She realized all at once that she was on the first floor of her townhouse in Evergreen, floodwater was coursing around her bed, and her phone was ringing. The rain had not relented all day or night in Evergreen, a neighborhood off Bacons Bridge Road in Summerville where the nearby Sawmill Branch creek had started to look like a whitewater rapids overnight. Water was coming in through the door frame and windowsills now.

Still gasping for breath, Hardy answered the phone and stepped out of bed and into the chilly water. It was 2 a.m., and her brother was calling from her mother’s house across the street to say he’d seen an alligator swimming in the street.

Hardy scrambled upstairs with her sister Janada Morris and the rest of her family. Someone called 911, and an operator said to open the second-story windows and start yelling so a National Guard unit could find them.

Across the street in another townhouse with Hardy’s extended family, Hardy’s mother Latasia Delaney set out a cooking pot under an ever-growing leak in the kitchen ceiling. She was waiting for the National Guard too, and growing more nervous by the minute.

Finally, a canvas-backed military vehicle rumbled up to the house in the standing water, and a National Guardsman opened the front door, letting in a torrent of floodwater. The water surged up to Delaney’s chest, and she cried out in a panic that she didn’t know how to swim.

“Just focus on walking behind me,” the uniformed man said. “Don’t look down. Just walk straight.”

Ron Pryor stood in his neighbor’s front yard, taking contemplative drags off a cigarette in one hand while holding a pair of dollar-store mops in the other. Across Jedi Lane, the Sawmill Branch had risen to 2 feet inside his house. He’d just moved in a month ago.

He had been able to save his dog and his truck, sloshing rainwater out of the pickup bed as he forded the street. Now, by the light of day, these clean white mops seemed tragically unequal to the task of drying out his home. As for so many residences in Evergreen, it was going to take a lot of work.

Around the corner on Magwood Drive, Latasia Delaney and her family were aghast at what they found when they returned home. After lying down on hard cots near dawn in the American Red Cross temporary shelter at Summerville High School, they had caught a ride back to Evergreen to check on their townhouses. Delaney’s daughter’s house was soaked but intact, but Delaney’s own home was in shambles.

Overnight, someone had broken a window and stolen videogame systems and other electronics. The ceiling had caved in. She sniffed at the mold that had already begun to grow.

Denise Cromwell was out in the rain doing what she often does when the weather turns bad: visiting homeless camps and tent cities.

Cromwell, who also runs a barbershop on Remount Road, and her neighbor had set up a temporary shelter on the padded floor of his mixed martial arts training gym, Charleston FIT & MMA. The gym had served as a shelter for more than 20 homeless men Saturday night.

Mid-afternoon, she found one man, a homeless veteran she had known for years, standing on the front porch of a house near Reynolds Avenue in North Charleston. His face was flushed, his fingertips pale white. Normally it would take some cajoling to get him inside for the evening. Not today. When he got in her car without putting up a protest, she knew something was wrong.

Back at Cromwell’s barbershop, which she had converted into an intake center and soup kitchen, she popped open a can of ginger ale for him and dialed 911.

“Ma’am, I’ve got a really sick homeless guy here,” she said.

By the time the ambulance arrived, he looked like he wanted to cry, but he didn’t.

Later, a doctor at the VA hospital called to let Cromwell know that her friend was suffering from double pneumonia. His condition was stable now, but he probably would have died on that front porch if she hadn’t found him.

Monday, Oct. 5

Many of Leona Rampersant’s Evergreen neighbors had evacuated in the middle of the night but Rampersant stayed behind.

She had screamed out the window for the soldiers to stop by her house, but they drove down the street with a load of passengers and didn’t come back for hours. By 6 a.m., when the truck returned, she had decided to stay put.

As water drained out of her house, black mold already was beginning to appear, and the floors and walls bore the stench of sewage. When she opened the hallway closet, it smelled like a fish market. She grabbed a mop and started scrubbing at the peeling laminate floors.

Rampersant decided she was going to move. She had called FEMA as soon as the flooding stopped, and an operator told her it could be more than a week before an adjustor came out to assess the damage and determine whether she was eligible for relocation assistance. In the meantime, she was told, she needed to stay put and leave the soggy furniture in place.

Like Latasia Delaney and her family, who were still staying in the shelter at Summerville High, Rampersant would have to live on FEMA’s timetable.

“I have to leave,” she said. “It’s too low here.”

Friday, Oct. 9

Roberts sat on the curb outside the work camp on the Sheriff Al Cannon Detention Center campus, waiting for a ride to her flooded apartment. Roberts liked the first shelter at the North Charleston United Methodist Church better. When the Red Cross closed the shelter at the church on Tuesday afternoon, volunteers drove the flood evacuees to the shelter at the work camp.

Six days had passed since the flood forced her from her home. Inside, a film of white mold had crusted over the waterlogged carpet. Her new red sneakers sunk into floor as she yanked jeans and T-shirts from their hangers and stuffed them in a garbage bag. Her mattress was damp. Frisky’s scratching post was bent in half. The air smelled wet and heavy, like an old sock.

“Lord, have mercy,” she said.

Reach Paul Bowers at (843) 937-5546. Reach Deanna Pan at (843) 937-5764. Reach Robert Behre at (843) 937-5771.