TALLAHASSEE – After striking out with federal officials, Gov. Rick Scott accelerated his efforts Thursday to secure federal funding for hospitals’ care for the poor, filing an injunction aimed at preventing the Obama administration from ending the program.

Scott met with Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell on Wednesday to ask for a prompt decision on extending the Low Income Pool, a Medicaid program set to expire June 30 that would bring $1.3 billion in federal dollars to health providers in the state. No agreement was reached, and federal officials are still reviewing Scott's proposal to extend LIP, filed in April.

He filed suit in U.S. District Court last week alleging that the federal government was tying it’s decision on whether to extend LIP to Florida’s decision to expand Medicaid. Such “coercion” is unconstitutional, Scott argues.

Time is of the essence for Scott, whose top priorities of tax cuts and increased education spending are tied up in a fight between the House and Senate over whether to expand Medicaid, so he filed an injunction to push the court to order the federal government to unbind its LIP decision from Florida’s Medicaid expansion decision.

Lawmakers in both chambers say they need a definitive answer from the federal government on LIP before they know how much is available for tax cuts and other spending priorities, but they are constitutionally obligated to pass a balanced budget each year. The fiscal year ends June 30. The Legislature adjourned last week without a budget but will reconvene for a special session June 1.

“By refusing to continue funding a multibillion-dollar Medicaid program that offsets the costs of uncompensated healthcare (sic) provided by safety-net hospitals and trauma centers, children’s hospitals, medical schools, and other providers statewide unless and until Florida agrees to opt into the Affordable Care Act’s Medicaid expansion program, the federal government has engaged in ‘unconstitutional coercion,’” the filing states.

Read the full injunction filing here.

A "readout" of Scott's meeting with Burwell issued by HHS says she told the governor LIP funds "are not dependent" on Florida's Medicaid expansion decision. But the readout also states that health insurance coverage rather than funding hospitals for uncompensated care funding is the best way to ensure affordable health care access and would be a metric used to evaluate the LIP proposal.