The Guardian Life Insurance Company has completed its acquisition of Avesis, an Owings Mills, Md.-based government contract vision, dental and hearing provider.

New York-based Guardian Life offers employee benefits and is one of the largest dental insurers in the country.

Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.

Chris Swanker, formerly Guardian’s vice president of group and worksite markets, has been appointed chief executive officer of Avesis, which has 440 employees between its Baltimore-area headquarters and operational center in Phoenix, Ariz.

Avesis oversees benefits for 3 million people insured under Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance Program and Medicare Advantage and has partnerships with managed care organizations that contract with governments in 21 states.

As previously announced, on Dec. 21, 2015, Guardian entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Avesis Incorporated in exchange for the payment to Avesis stockholders of cash and certain contingent earn-out payments in exchange for their Avesis stock. On January 29, 2016, Avesis completed the spin-off of its AbsoluteCARE subsidiary (separately valued at approximately $4 million, or $0.35 per share) to the Avesis stockholders. Then, later on January 29, 2016, Avesis completed the merger and became a subsidiary of Guardian.

Pursuant to the terms of the definitive agreement, Avesis stockholders will be entitled to an initial cash payment of $16.45 per share as soon as the stockholder surrenders his, her or its Avesis stock certificates and provides the required letter of transmittal and any other necessary documents to the paying agent, Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company. Approximately $0.80 per share (an aggregate of approximately $9.2 million) initially will be deposited into escrow accounts to be available to indemnify the Buyer for any breaches of representations and obligations under the merger agreement, to be used to fund any required working capital adjustments, and to be used for expenses of the representative of the stockholders, Alan S. Cohn.

The Guardian Life Insurance Company of America is one of the nation’s largest mutual life insurers, with $6.8 billion in capital and $1.3 billion in operating income in 2014.