VIDEO: See Fred Hochberg defend the Ex-Im Bank in The Debrief, a new policy series.

The Export-Import Bank, the 80-year-old behind-the-scenes credit institution that suddenly became a juicy target for anti-government types last year, is on the chopping block. Tomorrow morning, its president and chairman, Fred Hochberg, will try to persuade congressional Republicans not to swing the axe.

The Ex-Im Bank's lending authority will expire June 30 if Congress doesn't agree to extend it, so there will be a lot at stake when Hochberg testifies before the House Financial Services Committee and its chairman, Rep. Jeb Hensarling of Texas, a leader of the effort to kill the bank. Hochberg then returns to the Hill on Thursday to face the Senate Banking Committee.

In the hearings he's sure to face some tough questions: Does the world's most powerful economy really need an export credit agency to help its companies do business abroad? How much of its work is essentially just helping Boeing and other massive conglomerates that don't seem to need federal aid? And if the bank is truly profitable, as its advocates like to point out, and its loans are truly safe, then why can't commercial banks take over the job?

Before his visit to the Hill, Hochberg spoke to POLITICO’s Michael Grunwald about why his bank should live, how he’s tried to improve it over the last six years, and what Americans don’t understand about it. He also discussed what it’s been like serving and traveling abroad as one of the most senior openly gay officials in the history of the U.S. government. And he revealed that Ex-Im's operators are waiting for your call.

MG: Your authorization expires on June 30. Have you started packing your boxes and getting ready to leave Washington? Are the Ex-Im Bank’s marble walls going into storage?

FH: Well, none of us actually expire June 30th. The bank’s authority to make a new loan expires on June 30th, if Congress doesn’t act before that. So they have the month of June to reauthorize the bank, just like we’ve been reauthorized 16 different times over 80 years, including under President Reagan.

MG: You’re starting to hear some conservatives saying they think they can kill this just by not bringing it up for a vote. How worried are you?

——

FH: Well, Speaker Boehner has made it very clear that the House has to take a vote in some fashion, and not just let it lapse on us. Mitch McConnell, the Senate Leader, also said there’s going to be a vote in June. And President Obama has been very clear. Now, we’ve got only 30 days, but let’s be clear, that’s the President of the United States, the Speaker of the House and the majority leader of the Senate.

MG: The Ex-Im has become a political football. I think a lot of people kind of know they’re fighting about it in Washington, but don’t know what it is. What is the Ex-Im? What do you do all day?

FH: We start a lot of conversations saying we’re not XM the radio station! We’ve been around for over 80 years. We’re an export credit agency, one of about 70 around the world. All the developed countries of the world have them. And developing countries have them. So we exist to support US jobs, as do the others in their countries. And when there’s a financial crisis—we just came through the worst crisis since the depression—we can fill in a gap in the financial markets when they’re retreating or pulling back. So that’s what we do, and as a result last year we supported 164,000 jobs.

MG: Do the companies usually pay back your loans? Do you give loans to anybody who asks for one?

FH: No, first of all, we’re a bank. We’ve got to get paid back. Second, one of the reforms Congress just put in place three years ago is that we must report our default rates every 90 days. Well, we’re running an 0.167% default rate. In common English, that’s less than one-fifth of one percent.

MG: That’s incredible. You guys are making unbelievably safe loans! So the obvious question is: why do we need the government to do that? Why can’t some private sector guy make 99.8% effective loans?

FH: First of all it’s the private sector that brings us into the deal. A client goes to a bank, a company overseas, and says we need a loan to build this petro-chemical plant, we need a loan to build this this power plant. Working with a bank, they’ll determine can we do this on our own, or do we need the support of the export credit agency? Generally, that’s because of one of two things. Sometimes there’s just not enough debt capacity in that market; frequently in sub-Saharan Africa, banks are just reluctant to go there. Or we’ve got a US company competing against a foreign company that’s backed by their government, and we want a level playing field between a US exporter and a foreign exporter.

MG: So by backing that US exporter, you’ll get them a better rate.

FH: It’s simply a government guaranteed loan. Essentially, the bank says, we’ll pay you a fee, and you’ll guarantee us if we have a loss. And those fees more than cover our losses. Last year, we sent $675 million to the taxpayers for deficit reduction, that’s fees in excess of what we needed for loan-loss reserves. We’re self-sustaining. If we were in business, we’d call that a profit. By the way, the World Trade Organization requires that if you have a government-sponsored export credit agency, it has to be self-sustaining; if it isn’t, it would be a subsidy.

MG: Come on, these are essentially export subsidies. They’re government-guaranteed loans for exporters. Maybe they’re competing against a country that has their own export subsidies...

FH: I have trouble with the word subsidy. Subsidy implies you take money from one group and subsidize somebody else. These companies are buying insurance from the U.S. government to insure a transaction. And the insurance more than covers our costs, so it’s hard for me to get where the subsidy is. The only subsidy in the technical sense is, they’re getting the full faith and credit of the U.S. government, but they’re paying for it, they pay for it all the time.

MG: I think a lot of outsiders hear that so many of these loans go to Boeing. Some are going to do oil deals with the Mexican government. These don’t seem like risky deals that need the full force of the United States government behind them.

FH: We don’t lend a single penny to Boeing. We lend, and we also guarantee loans, so that Ethiopian Airways can choose a Boeing plane over an Airbus plane. That way they can make their choice on the basis of the product, not because somebody’s offered cut-rate financing on one side of the deal and the other one is cash only. That would make it a very un-level playing field.

MG: So if the other countries got rid of their export banks, you’d be happy to shut down on June 30th?

FH: You know, the problem I have with that, as our counterpart in Britain said: we’re like a fire truck. We’re there in an emergency. We went through the worst financial crisis since the Depression, we kept trade flowing, kept jobs growing, and now that the financial markets have come back, we’ve been able to retreat. Two years ago, we did $36.5 billion in loan guarantees and insurance. Last year it was about $20 billion. Why was it down by almost half? Because the banks have a lot more liquidity. They’re making the loans. But when the banks pulled back, we had a choice: Either trade grinds to a halt and more people lose their jobs, or an Export Credit Agency fills in the gap to maintain some economic activity until the markets recover. We did that globally from 2009 through 2012, and we’ve done that regionally when you had a crisis in Korea, in the Middle East. We fill in those financial emergencies.

MG: In the past, it felt like you’d only hear about Ex-Im when William Jefferson got caught with cash in his freezer from a guy doing an Ex-Im deal. There have been some scandals here over the years. Tell me how the bank works now, what it really is you do.

FH: The most important thing we do is that we support the small businesses. Ninety percent of our customers are small businesses. And small businesses received the lion’s share of the actual loan guarantees: 39 percent of the exports we supported came from small business.

MG: Wait, 39% isn’t a lion’s share!

FH: It’s bigger than any other category. Bigger than what we do in transportation, satellites, natural gas. It’s the largest single category. That’s what I mean.

MG: But the Boeing type deals are vastly bigger than the ones that small businesses…

FH: Boeing accounted for, last year, in the range of about 25%. Small business was 39%. Yeah, that’s divided among a lot of small businesses. But if you look at commercial aviation versus small businesses, we supported more small businesses exports.

MG: You said all in all, it’s 160,000 jobs you support. But presumably it’s not like all 160,000 jobs would disappear if…

FH: We absolutely created some of those jobs, but I use the word supported because I want to be overly cautious. I’ll give you an example. A great company we work with called Floratine, they sell what their executive describes as Red Bull for lawns. A high-tech fertilizer used on golf courses. So because of us, he exports to Australia, Vietnam, China, Singapore, and as a result, instead of laying off his 32 employees for four months a year when it isn’t peak season, he keeps them year round. Is that created or supported? I don’t know.

MG: That sounds so awesome I think I’m going to go start my own bank just to lend this guy money. Why can’t the private sector just step up? Why do they need a guarantee?

FH: First of all, in his case – it’s small transactions. The average shipment is 50,000 dollars. Banks and insurance companies rarely like to deal with transactions that small.

MG: You’re saying you need the US government’s balance sheet because the deals are too small?

FH: Totally! I was a small business owner for 20 years. Commercial banks aren’t keen on lending small companies money. It’s a lot transaction time, a lot of work, not a lot of volume. So there just isn’t the margin and profitability. Frequently, the transactions we do are too small for the private sector.

MG: You’re hearing a lot of from Tea Party types in particular that this is just Big Government run amok. Does government have to do everything?

FH: Listen, I spent 20 years in business. I have a business degree. I’m a capitalist. I actually believe that government shouldn’t do things they shouldn’t do. I actually believe we ought to cut waste, fraud and expenses and only do the minimum things. I totally believe in that. That just has nothing to do with this place. I’ve worked in this job for 6 years, and what we do is we support those small companies that can’t get a loan. Yeah, we do larger company transactions, but if we have a company competing against an Airbus, that’s backed by the government of Germany, France and Britain, or we’re competing against farm equipment made in China backed by the government of China, why would we want to turn our back on American workers and say, you have to go compete against those countries on your own?

MG: What’s it been like, when you’ve gone to meet with Jeb Hensarling and some of these other Tea Party guys who want to pack up this office in a few weeks. What’s their attitude?

FH: Well, I have not seen Chairman Hensarling in this Congress. I tried to meet with him. We haven’t been able to meet. I met with him in the previous Congress. Some of them are cordial, some don’t want to really have a meeting with me. But I‘m open to meet with anybody. I want to hear their concerns. I want to see how I best address them. Congressman [Stephen] Fincher of Tennessee, who voted no against us in 2012, is now leading the effort in the House to reauthorize the bank, it has 60 Republican co-sponsors. He said there are a lot of jobs in my district; we need some reforms, but this is crazy. Why would we unilaterally disarm, and turn our back on American workers without having this as a backstop?

MG: How about on the left? There have been a lot of complaints that you’ve backed coal projects in the past, doing business with dictators who don’t like us so much.

FH: Frankly, on the Democratic side of the House, we have over 190 co-sponsors, the entire congressional delegation is with us. In the Senate, we had 78 senators vote for us in 2012, and 330 in the House. In both cases, we had every single Democrat vote for the Ex-Im bank extension last time.

MG: Why do you think suddenly this became a thing? What made suddenly Ex-Im became this sexy political topic?

FH: I’ll tell you, I just came back from Western New York, Erie, Pennsylvania, and Kansas City this week, and the business owners are somewhat bewildered. They say to me: I don’t get it. Last year, 164,00 jobs, 90% of the people you work with are small businesses, and you make a profit? When I speak to our foreign counterparts, they don’t understand, either. We have probably the smallest footprint of any export credit agency in the entire world, relative to our economy. As it should be: we have the best private sector, the deepest financial markets. But our foreign competitors say: “We just came through the worst financial crisis in years. Why would you dismantle one of the very few tools that’s there to step in when you have a crisis?” The crisis is not even five years old and we’re sort of forgetting about it and saying, ‘We don’t need that tool anymore.’” Nobody could understand this.

MG: You make the Ex-Im bank sound awesome. What could make it awesome-er? What have you done to improve it over the last 6 years? You mentioned reforms.

FH: First, we’ve expanded our small business footprint. We’ve opened more offices. Our operators are standing by right now if you wanted to call, Michael – 1-800-565-EXIM. 9am to 8pm, Monday to Friday, we’ve got operators who will answer people’s questions.



MG: Is this like a telethon?

FH: We’re trying to be much more customer-oriented. We’re speeding our turnaround times. We developed a product called Express Insurance, that will give a customer credit insurance for overseas sales, and we turn that around in 5-7 days. We actually got an award from the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard for innovations of government. So we’ve been trying to be far more customer oriented, on the one hand. And pay really close attention to risk management on the other side.

MG: Can I ask you a personal question? As a gay man, what’s it been like spending six years in this administration? Things have changed so much.

FH: It’s been breathtaking, to be honest with you. I remember even in 1996 during the debate on the Employment Non-Discrimination Act, I was quite stunned to hear senator after senator, Chris Dodd, Chuck Robb, talk about the importance of equality for gay men and lesbians. And that fight still isn’t done. You still can be fired in a lot of states just because you’re gay or lesbian. You don’t need any other reason. Your boss can simply say, “I’m uncomfortable having a lesbian in my office. I don’t like having this transgender person.” But I’m elated to work for President Obama, and all the progress he’s made in terms of marriage equality, the military, hate crimes. And frankly as good as it’s been in the United States for LGBT people in the last couple of years, it’s been worse globally. I do see that when I travel.

MG: I was going to ask about that. You come in as this high-ranking banker, representing the U.S. government.

FH: When I travel to India, when I travel to Africa, it’s been worse. In some way it’s been the best of times, in the United States to be openly LGBT people, and some of the hardest times globally. And that’s very disheartening. Whenever I travel abroad, I always ask the Embassy if I can meet with LGBT people. I feel it’s important that they see the face of the US government.

MG: Now you personally, assuming this place isn’t cleaned out in a few weeks, are you going to stay to the end? Are you going to try to help Secretary Clinton?

FH: Well, right now I’ve got this job to do. And frankly, we’re going to be reauthorized; the question will be precisely when and what form. But there’s a large function as bank that does not go away – we’ve got an over $110 billion loan portfolio that’s got to be managed and serviced to make sure we get repaid. The authorization is about making new loans, but in any case we’ve got a lot of work to do here.