Antonin Scalia is the Holly Madison of the Supreme Court.

He’s annoying, he’s increasingly incoherent and self-serving, yet his nutty rants against his bedfellows, and the “Ruler” that keeps him front and center, just as it has kept her front and centerfold.

On Friday, Scalia nearly blew his Inquisitor’s hat after he was outgunned, outmanned and outwitted when his colleagues on the Supreme Court decided that same-sex marriage must be recognized in every state. (On Gay Pride Weekend yet!)

FOLLOW THE DAILY NEWS ON FACEBOOK. CLICK HERE TO "LIKE."

This terrific blow to his ego came just a day after the Supremes had decided that Obamacare was legal once and for all.

It was all enough to make Justice Scalia want to go hunt down heretics in his St. Thomas More hat. (That insane bonnet he wears was a gift from the Thomas More Society and, ironically, the Inquisition itself was known as “the Council of the Supreme.”)

But instead of hunting sodomites (his word), hoping we all pray the gay away or calling for gay celibacy as his son the priest suggests, Scalia maintained the dignity of office, relying on the letter of the law and Legal English to make himself clear and concise on the gay marriage decision.

It’s “legalistic argle-bargle!” he declared. And then reverting to the original Nazi German, he declared it, “Judicial Putsch” (as in the Nazi uprising).

What a Putsch putz!

Scalia actually does sound like Holly Madison on Hef more than a Justice on the Supreme Court. Where’s the legal Viagra when you need it? (Jesse Grant/Getty Images)

In what might be his most profoundly incoherent and showy sentence, however, he declared, “the opinion’s showy profundities are often profoundly incoherent.” What?

Then, equally incoherently, he wrote, “Who ever thought that intimacy and spirituality (whatever that means) were freedoms?”

I do, and would figure most everyone else does too, except maybe ISIS.

Then he added, “And if intimacy is, one would think Freedom of Intimacy is abridged rather than expanded by marriage.” Right. What?

If you don’t know what the hell that means, he suggests, “Ask the nearest hippie!”

Too bad the nearest hippie is still in Woodstock contemplating the millenium and how Y2K is going to destroy all the capitalists.

Happily, the fool on the hill didn’t restrict his brilliant legal opinions to same-sex marriage, calling Thursday’s decision on Obamacare, “Pure applesauce,” and “Jiggery-pokery.”

Finally, in a true Holly Madison-turncoat moment, Scalia added, about the Supreme Court itself: “A system of government that makes the People subordinate to a committee of nine unelected lawyers does not deserve to be called a democracy.”

So if he thinks the Supreme Court is a kangaroo court out to destroy democracy, what the hell is he still doing there?

Finally, “...with each decision that is unabashedly based not on law, but on the ‘reasoned judgment’ of a bare majority of this Court — we move one step closer to being reminded of our impotence.”

Jiggery-Pokery? Impotence? Here Antonin Scalia actually does sound like Holly Madison on Hef more than a Justice on the Supreme Court. Where’s the legal Viagra when you need it?

N.J. Gov. Chris Christie IS in fact running for President. (Scott Olson/Getty Images)

CHRISTIE RUNNING IN PLACE

Chris Christie announced on Thursday that he’s not announcing. And then turned around and put up his campaign website on Saturday.

Despite leaks that he’d jump aboard the overcrowded Republican clown car on Tuesday, he snarled on his radio program, “When I decide, I’ll let everybody know.”

Christie said he was too busy now working on the state budget, which he signed on Friday.

“My team, over the course of time has proven themselves to be rather nimble at being able to do things in public.” No kidding. “If I told them tomorrow that I wanted to do something on Monday, they’d have it ready. They’re good.”

Hey, it took them no time to get lanes closed on the GWB. Must have made the website in 45 minutes then.

Kinda makes you feel like a dope for believing anything any pol says. Ever.

PAINTED INTO A CORNER

No one will ever be able to trade power tools for an original Hacksaw Matt ever again. Convicted killer/escaped convict/prison worker-sex god/artist-in-incarceration Matt, who was shot to death by a cop as he approached the Canadian border, was simply indulging his passions — border jumping and meat.

On the lam for 20 days, he had tools smuggled inside a big hunk of chopped meat by the jail’s hot-to-trot Tillie the tailor, which was, in turn, handed off to a guard who had collected Matt’s prison Oprah paintings. Must be hard to find good art in Dannemora.

Anyway, Matt was jailed in the first place for killing his boss before eating a pepperoni and heading south of the border to Mexico.

Hacksaw was likely headed north of the border this time when he was shot dead.

Co-prisoner sex god/escapee David Sweat is still on the loose.

DEMOGRAPHIC DUNCE

Mayor de Blasio jumped again into international politics, condemning the entire Dominican Republic, a third-world nation, as racist. Why? Because the DR gave undocumented Haitians a deadline to register to remain past the deadline or face deportation.

De Blaz said, “It’s happening because these people are black. And it cannot be accepted.” What?

As a yearly visitor to the Dominican Republic for 25 years and now a homeowner there, I find his remarks offensive and unfounded. Truth: 73% of Dominicans are of mixed race, 16% white and 11% black. Does that sound like a country of racists? Maybe he should stick to the plight of undocumented immigrants here. Two million undocumented immigrants were deported from the U.S. last year alone. Or doesn’t that count?

STINKS ON THE LINKS

Donald Trump proved how presidential a reality host can be by banning Univision execs from playing on his golf course after they refused to air his beauty pageant. Why? Because of his derogatory remarks about Mexican immigrants at his presidential kickoff. He said that Mexicans are bringing in rapists, drug dealers and “I assume some good people.” You think?

COWARDLY CREW

To the terrorists who wreaked havoc in France, Tunisia and Kuwait on Friday:

You think you are doing what God wants by gunning down unarmed people who were merely going about their lives. You think that God, who created humans, wants you to decapitate his creations, kill them at worship or shoot them on a beach?

You want to know what God wants, geniuses? No matter which God you worship, everybody’s God detests your kind and venerates humans like Welshman Matthew James, who used his body as a shield to protect his fiancée in Tunisia, and who, in the face of unimaginable horror, said, “I love you babe. But just go — tell our children that their daddy loves them.”

James is what God calls brave and righteous.

God only knows what he calls you.

Follow Linda Stasi on Facebook here.