Topics: michael jordan, the daily dot, union busting, Unions, Wal-Mart, Business News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot

Walmart and unions go together like oil and water.

The retail giant’s famous anti-union policies are nothing new and appear to be getting worse all the time. As further proof of this, a new Walmart training video leaked online has illustrated the specific propaganda the company feeds their employees to prevent them from organizing.

In a particularly revealing sound bite from the video, the company explains, “Our company prefers to have open and direct communication with our associates—we don’t think a labor union is necessary here. And because our associates have said time after time that they don’t want a union, we usually don’t spend a lot of time talking about them.” All of this comes on the heels of Walmart shutting down five stores in four states for “plumbing problems,” an excuse many are interpreting as “union problems.”

More from The Daily Dot: “This death metal band fronted by a parrot is real and it’s amazing”

In terms of labor regulations, Walmart is basically the Michael Jordan of retail chains. At one point, it was estimated that they were receiving around 5,000 lawsuits a year from workers at Walmart and Sam’s Club stores alike. This is why criticism of Walmart has become about as common the store itself; the Wikipediapage on this very subject is not what you would call light reading.

It’s important that people remember just how toxic Walmart’s views on unions are, but it’s also important not to forget all of their other equally problematic corporate policies. For Walmart, unions are just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to atrocities.

To that end, here’s a quick rundown of all the other reasons the company is so awful.

1) Walmart hurts local communities

Of all of Walmart’s egregious practices overtime, this is the one that’s probably the most well-known. For additional evidence, check out the 2005 documentary, Wal-Mart: The High Cost of Low Price. Many people are aware that when Walmart comes to town, the company drives out smaller mom-and-pop businesses, but what not everybody realizes is that the presence of Walmart actually does little to bolster the economy of local communities in the long run either.

As Jared Cram at Generation Progress points out:

A study commissioned by the Los Angeles City Council in 2003 found that Walmart is a net loss for the communities it moves into. An influx of “big box retailers” such as Walmart was estimated to cost an additional $9 million in state health care costs and a loss in pensions and retirement benefits so large that the increase in public assistance necessary to make up the shortfall could not even be covered by increased sales and property taxes.”

The truth is that when Walmart moves in, they don’t make things better. Instead, they make things much worse, and create unsustainable economic models in surrounding communities for years to come.

2) The company uses foreign labor, including child workers

It’s been estimated that over 50 percent of Walmart goods come from overseas suppliers. This doesn’t just take away American jobs in favor of cutting costs; it also creates a living hell for those forced to meet Walmart’s hefty supply needs. The corporation has been accused of paying off officials in foreign companies in order to keep many of the details silent, but various stories paint a gruesome picture.

A great example of this is Bangladesh, where the minimum wage for garment industry workers is just $37 a month. The conditions in the facilities where these products are made are incredibly unsafe. A 2012 fire in one factory which made garments for Walmart killed 111 people, while another in 1990 killed 32. And aclass-action lawsuit from 2010 alleged that one woman worked seven days a week, from 7:45am to 10pm, putting chalk marks on pants, without a day off for six months.

The corruption doesn’t stop at Bangladesh, though. Global supply chains which aid companies like Walmart have even been linked to the slave trade in Thailand.

To top it all off, it’s been noted in the past that most of the employees at Walmart’s overseas factories may be underage. Harvard Law cites a human rights study from 2006 which found that describes the conditions at one factory in Bangladesh:

The children report being routinely slapped and beaten, sometimes falling down from exhaustion, forced to work 12 to 14 hours a day, even some all-night, 19-to-20-hour shifts, often seven days a week, for wages as low as 6 ½ cents an hour. The wages are so wretchedly low that many of the child workers get up at 5:00 a.m. each morning to brush their teeth using just their finger and ashes from the fire, since they cannot afford a toothbrush or toothpaste.

Of course, Walmart isn’t the only company who has employed child labor, but as the United States’ top retailer, its continued use of the practice is even worse. While the company claims to be changing many of these policies, there is ampledocumentation which suggests otherwise. By now, child and foreign labor has become such a key part of the fabric of Walmart, and of the product they sell, it’s hard to imagine anything less than a complete overhaul of Walmart’s business methods will change that.

3) Walmart underpays women and neglects pregnant workers

Although working at Walmart may not necessarily be great for anybody, it may also be additionally tough for women. Beginning in 2001, the case of Wal-Mart vs. Dukes sought to change that, but unfortunately, the Supreme Court shot it down in 2011, making it harder for female employees at Walmart and everywhere else to break free from being underrepresented and underpaid.

More from The Daily Dot: “‘The Crow’ is recasting its supervillain as a woman”

As recently as 2013, despite the fact that women account for as much as 57 percent of Walmart’s U.S. workforce (and that they employ more women than any other U.S. company), women were paid $1.16 less per hour. That adds up to $1,100 less per year than men doing the exact same jobs, and female employees in salaried positions of $50,000 or over earned $14,500 less than their male counterparts.

And if you think working at Walmart as a woman is hard already, forget about working there when you’re pregnant. Multiple lawsuits against the company are currently fighting for women who’ve been overworked, put in dangerous situations, and fired by Walmart while pregnant. (Fortunately, these cases are coming on the heels of the Supreme Court ruling in favor of pregnant women inYoung vs. United Parcel Service.)

For now, we can only hope that this time around, the courts rules in favor of justice, and against Walmart.

4) The company also discriminates against workers with a disability and elderly employees

Besides women, the other marginalized groups Walmart goes after are the disabled and the elderly. In 2001 alone, the company paid $6 million to settle 13 lawsuits filed by various disabled workers. And in 2014, Walmart was forced to shell out $363,419 to settle a suit filed by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission on behalf of an employee with an intellectual disability who had been sexually harassed.

This year, the company coughed up $150,000 to settle a suit filed by the EEOC for age and disability discrimination. However, the Supreme Court recently ruled against Julie Heimeshoff in Heimeshoff v. Hartford Life & Accident Insurance Co. and Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., with Heimeshoff denied disability benefits by the company.