President Barack Obama holds up a ring and a football helmet that was presented to him by the United States Naval Academy football team. (Photo: AP)

In response to your paper’s articles regarding Gov. Snyder’s appearance on Fortune Magazine’s poll of the “World’s Most Disappointing Leaders.” (Note: the magazine called it an “unscientific” online poll. What exactly does that mean? Hearsay?)

If anyone belongs at the top of the Fortune poll, it should be Barack Hussein Obama … the most disappointing president ever. The following is a list of his disappointments (or crimes). He managed an unprecedented tripling of America’s debt (now critical and impossible to repay). He remained silent after his secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, let four heroes get murdered in Benghazi. Silent again after Hillary recently compromised American national security. He made a catastrophic nuclear “deal” with Iran that could trigger an atomic doomsday. He has weakened our military so much that a third world country captured a U.S. ship and humiliated our once-proud Navy. He released four “Gitmo” killers in exchange for a traitor. He and his puppet staff won’t refer to Muslim terrorist killers as Muslim terrorists! He is viewed as a buffoon and the U.S. as “limp-wristed” among global leaders. He stood by his pal, Sharpton, blamed police and defended thugs while a city burned. He shows total disregard for our Constitution.

More disappointments? How about the Obamacare fiasco, or his nonexistent immigration reform permitting illegals and drug traffickers to swarm over our boarders, or his anti-U.S. energy self-reliance and anti-business stance, or a mismanaged welfare system resulting in a huge increased of welfare recipients?

Let’s not forget past disappointments including IRS corruption, FBI corruption and VA corruption.

This “scientific” list is the tip of the disappointment iceberg. Obama and his administration belong, forever enshrined, at the top of the Fortune “World’s Most Disappointing Leaders” list.

Paul C. Wonsack

Hamburg Township

Read or Share this story: http://ldpaa.com/1SZ5I07