Topics: Amanda Peet, Editor's Picks, HBO, james blake, jay duplass, manish raval, mark duplass, melanie lynskey, steve zissis, the wilhelm scream, togetherness, Tom Wolfe, Entertainment News

This post contains plot details for the season 1 finale of HBO’s “Togetherness,” airing Sunday, March 8 at 9:30 p.m.

As I wrote when the show first premiered, one of the hardest things to explain about “Togetherness” is that it looks generic, but isn’t. To some observers, it is generic — Heather Havrilesky at BuzzFeed wrote a scathing diatribe against the show for embodying “the apotheosis of hipster family awfulness.” As someone who typically is the first to complain about self-absorbed, affluent white-people stories taking center stage, it’s amazing how little I agreed with her point of view. Aside from the obvious part — which is that she didn’t like the show — Havrilesky’s specific complaint is that the characters of “Togetherness” aren’t “regular people” — they are instead “miserable, spoiled jerks” who aren’t self-aware enough to know that they’re the aforementioned miserable, spoiled jerks.

That stayed with me when I re-watched the excellent season finale of “Togetherness,” which airs Sunday night. It’s a gorgeous, heartbreaking episode of television, one that is immediately in contention for one of the best episodes of the year. It chronicles the rupture of what the characters throughout the first season have been fiercely clinging to — the Pierson marriage, Alex and Tina’s undeniable chemistry, and these four people’s lives together in Los Angeles.

The finale starts with Brett (Mark Duplass), Michelle (Melanie Lynskey), Alex (Steve Zissis), Tina (Amanda Peet) and even the kids Sophie and Frankie in a convivial mood at the dinner table. It ends with each of them in a separate, enclosed space — not just apart, but slowly moving farther away from each other, like our own red-shift universe. The exact hows and whys of their dissolution has been the work of the whole season — Michelle’s growing interest in the charter school as a way to find her voice and connect to her community after taking several years off from the working world; Tina’s fear of really risking her heart in a relationship; Alex’s apathetic approach to his acting career. But by the last minutes of Sunday’s episode, the damage has been done, and no more words are necessary. Instead “Togetherness” resorts to a montage, set to James Blake’s “The Wilhelm Scream.” It is stunning — haunting, and beautiful, and tragic, and just so, so well-executed.

James Blake is a 26-year-old British musician whose style is notoriously difficult to define, even for Blake himself. It’s technically dubstep, and technically electronica, but doesn’t really sound like either; a more mainstream analogue might be Beck, who, like Blake, uses hip-hop beats and electronic modes of production, like sampling, to create a distinctive sound. The first beats of “The Wilhelm Scream” are staccato and muted — so by the time the viewer realizes it’s a song in the background, and not just a variation on the “Togetherness”’ score, you’re already in.

“The Wilhelm Scream” starts playing when Brett, realizing his marriage is on the edge of a knife, packs the kids off with a babysitter and starts driving north to Sacramento. But the moment you realize it’s a song is when Zissis’ character Alex stares slightly off-frame, sitting in his airline seat. “Togetherness” has been a revelation both for Alex, the character, and Zissis, the actor — a breakout moment for Alex in this season of the show corresponds with Zissis’ rising profile, as many viewers are getting to know him for the first time (including myself). It makes his moment of silence here more poignant than most, as this character, and this actor, and we, the audience, recognize that there is power and talent present. For a brief moment, it seems like Alex can hear the music, can see it’s too late, can feel the tragedy unfolding. It’s an elegant bit of foreshadowing.