D.C. City Council member and mayoral candidate David Catania is set to release a 126-page book full of his proposals and plans for running the city. (Mary F. Calvert/For The Washington Post)

During the six months of his mayoral campaign, David A. Catania has sought to make the case that his long record as a D.C. Council member makes him better qualified than his rivals to lead the city. Now the independent candidate is pivoting to another message: He has better plans, too.

Quality aside, Catania has now laid out a greater quantity of plans than his leading rivals, Democrat Muriel Bowser and independent Carol Schwartz. He is set to release a lengthy platform, a “Vision to Secure Our City’s Future,” on Monday in a bid to portray his campaign as more substantive than the competition.

The release of the 126-page book comes during a crucial period in the campaign, with summer winding down and voters starting to focus on the race and the first major debate, set for Thursday. It offers a more substantial accounting of Catania’s plan for education — the signature issue of his campaign — while also sketching out proposals to address affordable housing, employment, public safety and other issues.

“I understand when you put nearly 130 pages of ideas on paper, it’s a way of leading with your chin, because it opens you up to endless criticisms of what you did or didn’t do right, but I’m willing to do that,” Catania said in an interview.

In one proposal, Catania said he would seek to guarantee paid parental leave for D.C. workers. While federal law guarantees 12 weeks of unpaid leave, only California, New Jersey and Washington state mandate that employers offer some amount of paid leave to new parents.

The proposal could be funded, he said, with a small payroll tax. “What we are proposing is not revolutionary,” he said. “It has been standard operating procedure in the industrialized world for generations.”

The release of Catania’s platform comes 10 days after Schwartz released a 15-page education plan, one that proposes to make new efforts to retain veteran teachers, increase city oversight of charter schools and take more aggressive steps to combat truancy. Bowser, meanwhile, has sketched out her platform in a series of brief policy papers on education, affordable housing and homelessness.

On education, Catania promises to pursue focused improvement plans for underperforming schools, fund an ambitious college scholarship program, bring new focus to special education and increase funding for schools serving “at-risk” students.

The platform makes no mention of the recent process of redrawing D.C. public school boundaries, which Catania, the chairman of the council’s Education Committee, has criticized. But he does propose to address “disparities in quality and preparedness” between elementary schools that feed into the same middle and high schools, affecting school quality at the higher grades.

His proposed solution is “greater vertical alignment and integration” between schools in the same feeder pattern to ensure more equal levels of readiness. To improve individual schools, Catania proposes establishing a “local performance framework” that incorporates parent and student satisfaction, teacher retention and other evaluation metrics in addition to test scores.

To address a dwindling supply of affordable housing, Catania pledges to develop a comprehensive housing plan that “must produce concrete implementation strategies, not simply general timelines and broad ideas.” A housing plan developed under Mayor Vincent C. Gray (D), he said, made valuable recommendations but has not been translated into action.

“If a specific barrier to increasing affordable housing requires legislative action, the housing plan must give a date certain for the introduction of that legislation,” the platform reads. “If the study determines funding levels of specific programs are inadequate, it must identify the steps to secure those resources.”

Existing housing programs, such as inclusionary zoning and tax credit programs, must be better utilized, he says, and novel approaches — such as a long-term tax abatement incentive program used in New York — also should be pursued.

On transportation, Catania commits to building out the 37-mile streetcar network favored by Gray, saying “the system must be sufficiently expansive in order to serve as anything more than a novelty or tourist attraction,” while also endorsing dedicated bus lanes, expanded bicycle facilities east of the Anacostia River, and “new technologies” such as the ride services Uber and Lyft.

On health care, Catania pledges to renew his focus on initiatives he pursued during his eight-year stint chairing the council’s Health Committee. On public safety, he promises to improve “recruitment and retention strategies” for police officers and “rebuild the culture of excellence” at the ailing Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department. For senior citizens, he proposes to create new “senior villages” to support older residents in more city neighborhoods.

And, with the platform being released on the day of the first Capitol Hill hearing on D.C. statehood in 21 years, Catania promises a “new and more expansive strategy” to secure congressional voting rights. That would include, he says, reaching out to supportive state legislatures to build support for D.C. democracy and establishing a political action committee to oppose lawmakers who vote against the District’s interests.

Some excerpts from Catania’s platform

On improving D.C. Public Schools: “As Mayor, David will accelerate school improvement by creating a local performance framework that measures outcomes of all kinds, not simply test scores. From parent and student satisfaction to teacher retention, the framework will provide an open and accountable way to measure school progress. It will prioritize delivering the resources, flexibility, and autonomy schools require to meet the specific needs of the school and its students.”

On the University of the District of Columbia: “David will make recruiting a top tier president for UDC a priority from the outset of his administration. He will look for someone with energy, boldness of vision, and record of delivering results.. . . . Because UDC has for too long been under resourced, he will invest capital funds to give the University the same quality facilities that other state universities enjoy.”

On affordable housing: “The District must develop a comprehensive housing plan that . . . look[s] at the entirety of the District’s housing landscape and develop[s] specific data-driven solutions to identified problems. Further, it must produce concrete implementation strategies, not simply general timelines and broad ideas. . . . Ideas without action will not solve the District’s affordable housing crisis.”

On the Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department: “As Mayor, David will bring labor and management to the table to improve the Department’s work culture, build an environment of mutual respect, and create a plan for improvement of the Department. . . . And importantly, he will ensure the Department has the leadership to restore a culture of excellence throughout D.C. Fire and EMS.”

On Metro: “To ensure that Metro Momentum becomes a reality, the entire region will need to prioritize the plan’s funding. As Mayor, David will ensure that the District leads the effort with our regional and federal partners to create a dedicated funding mechanism for this vital investment in our collective future. Failing to do so will result in a future Metro system that is over-crowded, unreliable, inadequate, and unsafe.”

On transportation: “From Uber and Lyft to Sidecar and Car2Go, District residents are benefiting from the recent expansion of transportation options made possible through mobile technologies. As Mayor, David will support and encourage the growth of these services and at the same time explore ways to reduce unnecessary regulations affecting the competitiveness of the District’s taxi industry.”

On D.C. voting rights: “Because Congress continues to be either unwilling or unable to address these issues, it is time to begin building momentum and support for our cause elsewhere. As Mayor, David will pursue a state legislative strategy, identifying and fostering support among like-minded state legislators and legislatures to expand support for statehood and congressional voting representation for District residents. David will lead that effort and will not rest until our goals are achieved.”