× Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton: You Decide 2016

Current position: None

Career: Secretary of State 2009-2013, U.S. Senator 2001-2009, First Lady 103-2001, First Lady of Arkansas 1983-1992

Hometown: Chicago, Illinois

Family: Husband former President Bill Clinton and daughter Chelsea

Religion: Methodist

On the issues:

Economy: Clinton says she believes in tax cuts to middle-class families and small businesses. She also wants to expand overtime, raise the minimum wage and increase workers’ benefits. She puts emphasis on women in the workforce by pushing for equal pay, paid leave and affordable child care.

Education: Her plan to make college education affordable will cost about $350 billion over 10 years. It includes allowing students to refinance debt and creating an income-based repayment program. She also calls for funding for head-start programs for early-childhood education.

Environment: Clinton has a detailed plan for clean energy, including the installation of half a billion solar panels by the end of her first term. She also wants to generate enough renewable energy to power every household in the country within 10 years of her taking office.

Gun control/rights: Clinton supports universal background checks. She wants to keep guns out of the hands of gun traffickers and stop those convicted of domestic violence from obtaining firearms.

Health care: Showing continued support for the Affordable Care Act, Clinton wants to lower copays, deductibles the cost of prescription drugs. She believes in women’s reproductive rights, including access to emergency contraception and breast exams through Planned Parenthood.

Immigration: Clinton supports immigration reform with a path to citizenship, targeted immigration enforcement and an end to family detention.

National security: Iran should never be allowed to acquire a nuclear weapon, according to Clinton. She also believes in working with our allies and the Iraqi government to defeat ISIS.

Social issues: The former U.S. Senator has pushed for hate crime legislation and LGBT equality.

Social:

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hillaryclinton

Instagram: https://instagram.com/hillaryclinton/

Twitter: https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton

Website: https://www.hillaryclinton.com/