It sounds like a great idea: Your employer covers the cost of a voluntary program that could help improve your health and fitness. This program could include cash rewards, gym memberships, lifestyle coaching, weight-loss programs, insurance premium discounts and other incentives to participate. When they were introduced, employee wellness programs also promised to benefit employers by lowering costs, since healthy employees equate to increased productivity from reduced absenteeism, reduced disability claims and reduced medical costs from expensive illnesses; a win-win for everyone, right?

It sounds great on paper, but that’s not necessarily how things are working out. Some employers haven’t seen positive results or aren't breaking even with their programs. In response to these less-than-stellar results, some employers have begun cost shifting by charging employees with higher body mass indexes more for their health care than their thinner counterparts.

[See: 7 Reasons to Call Off a Surgery.]



In 2008, Alabama announced that state employees with BMIs above 35 would have to pay $25 more per month for their health care than their thin peers, Fox News reported. According to the Alabama state employee benefits website, this has since been changed to a “discount” structure. To get the $25 discount, employees must join the state’s wellness program. If employees have a risk factor, such as a BMI above 40, they must join an exercise or weight-management program or offer proof of improvement if self-managing in order to get the discount.

Many programs are no longer voluntary. Workers who choose not to participate in employee wellness programs or make “unhealthy choices” are reportedly being hit with higher premiums, deductibles and out-of-pocket expenses, and in some cases, not being offered the company health insurance at all. One business located in Richmond, Virginia, requires employees and their spouses to submit to health-risk assessments to obtain health insurance, according to the website of attorney search and placement firm General Counsel Consulting. That’s just one example.

Because the Affordable Care Act encourages wellness programs, a study was conducted to determine whether these programs are discriminatory. The study, published in 2013 in the journal Health Affairs, raises doubts that employees with “health risk factors, such as obesity and tobacco use” spend more on medical care than others and revealed there is little evidence that wellness programs can easily save costs without being discriminatory.

In 2003, PepsiCo began a workplace wellness program that encouraged employees to adopt “healthier habits.” Another Health Affairs study published in 2014 concluded that PepsiCo's program had no statistically significant effect on health care costs.

Not only are these wellness programs generally not paying for themselves or saving employers money, a 2015 study published in the American Journal of Managed Care concluded that they can impact employee morale and even harm employee health. So why do employers keep pushing these programs? The authors of that study believe “corporations should disband or significantly reconfigure weight-oriented wellness programs, and that the Affordable Care Act should be amended to require such programs to conform to accepted guidelines for harm avoidance" ... "meaning removing all express or implied incentives to crash diet.” Yet American corporations continue to expand wellness programs, which now reach an estimated 90 percent of workers in large companies, according to the study.

[See: 5 Extreme Diets You Shouldn't Try.]



Now the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, a federal agency created to ensure employees in the workplace are not discriminated against on the basis of race, religion, sex, age, national origin, pregnancy, disability or genetic information, has proposed changes to the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008. These changes include the possibility of collecting genetic information on spouses and families of employees who participate in employer wellness programs (docket #80 FR 66853). What happened to medical privacy? Why is it an employer’s business to know the medical information of an employee’s family members?

[See: HIPAA: Protecting Your Health Information.]



So how do we make this better? Corporate decision-makers need to listen to those who have already tried or researched these programs. We should stop wasting money on programs that don’t pay for themselves and that discriminate against employees based on BMI, a faulty, stigmatizing measure that does not indicate health or disease.



Employees should be given equal pay for equal work. Health cannot be regulated, so rewarding some and penalizing others for something over which they have little control is ridiculous. All employees should have access to the same health care plan. Period.