Topics: Animals, Climate Change, Editor's Picks, Global Warming, polar bears, The Arctic, Sustainability News, Life News

In the summer of 2013, seven American hikers set off on a two-week expedition through Canada’s Arctic tundra. The plan was to experience a pristine landscape rarely seen by humans and, if they were lucky, catch a glimpse of the region’s polar bears. They went prepared with flares and electric fences — enough, they assumed, to protect them from the massive predators. It wasn’t.

To say any more would be to spoil the suspenseful, true-life story that Sabrina Shankman recounts in her e-book “Meltdown: Terror at the top of the world,” which was produced with InsideClimate News. You can read an excerpt here. (An accompanying documentary series produced with Vice Media will be premiering later this month.)

Just as terrifying as the details of the attack is the other story Shankman tells: that of the rapidly melting Arctic and its accompanying loss of sea ice, habitat to the polar bears, which scientists warn are facing extinction. Without the ice, the polar bears are unable to hunt seals, their main source of food. Starving and stuck on land, they venture inland in search of alternative food sources — because of that, experts believe that the number of dangerous interactions between the bears and human populations are set to increase dramatically. “After all,” Shankman writes, “to a starving bear, a human is just meat.”

All that would be reason enough, for me, to avoid polar bear country entirely. But what’s happening up north, of course, is but a magnified version of the changes taking place throughout the planet. As one scientist told Shankman, “What’s happening to the polar bears is what’s going to happen to us.”

Salon spoke with Shankman about her book. This interview has been lightly edited for clarity.

Tell me how you found this story.

It came directly to us at InsideClimate News, through one of the guys on the trip, Larry Rodman. In the early fall of last year, after he’d been back for a while, he reached out to David Sassoon, our publisher, and had this crazy story of this trip that he’d been on. Around that time, I was starting to talk with David about coming onboard at ICN and he said, ”Yeah, and we’ve got this story we’d love for you to take on,” so that was kind of hard to say no to. As a journalist, you hear about these stories once in a blue moon where it’s just such an incredible survival adventure narrative but at the same time has such interesting depths that you can get into from a scientific and climate-change perspective.

Did you know going into it that this was going to be about more than just a random attack that happened? That it would have the huge implications about what’s happening in the Arctic?

I knew from the start that it was going to have bigger implications, but I wasn’t sure exactly what the connections were going to be. For anyone in our field, if you hear about polar bears there’s this inherent connection to climate change. One thing I didn’t know, for instance, was what the polar bears in that specific region were dealing with, because a lot of the issues that polar bears are facing are future problems. There are some populations that are already dealing with declines: I saw you wrote about that report that came out earlier this week, and that’s further evidence of another group that’s really not doing well. But a lot of the bigger issues that biologists talks about, it’s what’s coming down the line for them.

It wasn’t until I really started working on the project that I realized that though the numbers are really good for the Davis Strait population, it’s actually starting to experience some of the early warning signs that come right before the decline in population — like decreasing body condition and lower survival rates of cubs — and that they had seen such a huge decrease in days of sea ice.

So are polar bear-human interactions definitely increasing? And if so, how much of that can we attribute to climate change?

The biologists who are working on this are just really wrapping their arms around this right now. There’s a guy named James Wilder who I quote in the book who, until recently, was with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in Alaska. He’s been working on compiling the first-ever database of all these attacks because the problem is, the reporting is really shoddy even in places where it’s good — Canada’s known for having better reporting. In the e-book I talk about all these incidents that weren’t in the database, I think because in some of these Inuit communities these incidents are almost part of life.

What James Wilder has found is that they are on the rise, and what other biologists like Ian Stirling and Andrew Derocher and Steven Amstrup — the big names in polar bear biology — what they’ve been saying all along is that you’re going to see an increase in interactions as climate change progresses.

When I talked to James Wilder about it, I asked him, “Is this because of climate change? Is that why we’re on target for 35 incidents this decade when, in the past, it was more like 10?” And he said, “Maybe.” That’s definitely one of the reasons it could be; it could also have to do with other things that we’re maybe not aware of yet, and that’s kind of the idea of classic scientist hedging. But you can’t definitively say anything except for the fact that it’s been projected for a long time that incidents like this would rise as climate change continues; climate change has continued; you’ve seen a lot of other indications of population stress in certain regions; and you’ve also seen an increase in attacks.

Anecdotally, there also seem to be a number of indications that climate change is changing the region, that polar bears are popping up more. What did you observe when you traveled up there?

It was new to me — I’d never been up that far north. But I was up there with the Vice crew and with Matt Dyer, the guy that got attacked. As opposed to what the group did a year earlier, we hired a couple of Inuit bear guards from the region. It was a brother and a sister, and it just so happened that they had grown up going to this exact same fjord every summer with their family, so they had really seen these changes. These are people who are in their 50s, maybe 60s, so what they had seen was a total change in the landscape. As the summers have gotten warmer, which is something they’ve noticed, you’ve seen the mountaintops change from grey and brown to green because there’s all this growth happening now because the climate’s changed. You also see mosquitos everywhere where in the past there weren’t mosquitos at all. Someone from Parks Canada told me they’ve had someone come to the park to study that exact phenomenon and ask why the bugs are there.