Paul Ryan won't seek presidency in 2016

Associated Press Rep. Paul Ryan won’t run for president in 2016, according to a new report from the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel’s Craig Gilbert.

WASHINGTON, D.C.—Confirming what most observers have been speculating for months, Rep. Paul Ryan said Monday he would not run for president in 2016.

The Janesville Republican's office also confirmed to The Gazette that Ryan plans on running for a 10th term in the House of Representatives in 2016.

Ryan represents the 1st Congressional District, which stretches from Janesville to Lake Michigan along the state line and north into Waukesha County.

Ryan's announcement opens the door a bit wider for Gov. Scott Walker's presidential ambitions. Observers thought it unlikely that two Wisconsinites would seek the nomination at the same time.

A Ryan spokesman told The Gazette that Ryan “recently” talked with Walker about Ryan's decision to not run for president next year. The spokesman declined to say what advice Ryan might have given the governor. The two are longtime friends and political allies.

Ryan told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel that he made his decision in late 2014 and that he wanted to announce it “before we get rolling” in his new job as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee on Tuesday.

The committee meets for the first time Tuesday.

Ryan, the Republicans' preeminent voice on matters related to the budget and taxes, has long sought the chairmanship of the powerful Ways and Means Committee, which handles legislation affecting taxes, health care and social welfare programs such as Social Security, food stamps and Medicaid.

Ryan has long sought to rein in the costs of those programs.

“I always believed chairman of Ways and Means was the right place for me. Now that I have it, I'm very happy with where I am,” Ryan told the Journal Sentinel.

Ryan said his goals as chairman are preventing a debt crisis, moving people from welfare to work and repealing and replacing Obamacare, the Affordable Care Act.

Ryan's first news release from the committee, however, announced his backing for modifying rather than repealing Obamacare. The Republican bill would change Obamacare's definition of full-time employment from 30 hours a week to 40 hours.

Ryan and other Republicans contend that the 30-hour rule encourages employers to keep workers below the 30-hour mark so they don't have to provide health care coverage.

Obamacare supporters counter that raising the standard to 40 hours would mean fewer workers would have access to employer-provided health care.

“Our work at the House Ways and Means Committee over the next few years will be crucial to moving America forward, and my job as chairman deserves undivided attention,” Ryan said in a statement. “It's clear our country needs a change in direction. And our party has a responsibility to offer a real alternative. So I'm going to do what I can to lay out conservative solutions and to help our (presidential) nominee lead us to victory.”

Ryan was Mitt Romney's running mate in the 2012 presidential race, which they lost to the incumbents, President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden.

Ryan, who turns 45 on Jan. 29, could conceivable run for president in 2020 or beyond.

Ryan told NBC News on Monday he plans to "keep my options open" when it comes to other potential political opportunities.

Romney indicated Friday that he is considering whether to run in 2016.

Ryan had said previously that he would not run if Romney were to enter the race.

Ryan declined to endorse any other candidate for president, telling NBC News it's too soon.