3 stars What:"Radical Grace" When: 2:30 p.m. Friday, March 4, First United Methodist Church, 1421 Spruce St., Boulder (producer Maggie Cramer in person); 10 a.m. Saturday, March 5, eTown Hall, 1535 Spruce St., Boulder; 2:15 p.m. Saturday, Longmont Museum's Stewart Auditorium, 400 Quail Rd., Longmont Tickets: $10-$14 Info: biff1.com Parents' guide: All ages

It's difficult to argue with the moral authority of a good Catholic nun. You know, the kind of devoted servant of Jesus' teachings who spends her life caring for the marginalized, the poor, society's outcasts and underprivileged.

"Radical Grace," a documentary directed by Rebecca Parish, follows three such dedicated souls who find themselves at the center of a battle for what it means to be Christian.

In 2009, the Vatican chastised the leadership of U.S. nuns, calling them "radical feminists." Three years later, Rome censured the nuns, issuing a strong denunciation of their devotion to social justice.

The film, which was executive produced by Susan Sarandon (who won an Oscar for her portrayal of a nun in "Dead Man Walking"), effectively pits the sisters against the Church's patriarchy. In "Radical Grace," it's not a fair fight.

It's just plain fun to watch the dowdy, dedicated women go about the Lord's work, contrasted with the men in leadership roles, festooned in flowing formal Church garb as they soberly criticize the sisters' behavior.

One male U.S. Church leader opines that good works are all fine and well but getting to heaven should be the focus of a Catholic's life. A supporter of the sisters disagrees: "They're out in the street; they're doing the work of the Church; they are the Church."

"Radical Grace" follows both the sisters' work among the struggling and disadvantaged and gives audiences a seat on the Nuns on the Bus tour — a months-long journey across the country during which a group of sisters campaigned for the passage of the Affordable Care Act, and against a Republican budget.

Things turn personal as cameras join one of the nuns on a trek to Europe, where she encounters archeological artifacts that, some experts suggest, show women held more prominent roles in the early Christian church than they do now. (Indeed, one of the social-justice items that has been ignored, the nuns lament, is gender-role reform within the Catholic religious system.)

In the film's most touching moments, we're privy to a pure-hearted, yet tough-as-nails nun's ministry to former felons and, later, her physical demise.

In the film, one male Bishop goes so far as to question the nuns' Christianity. Perhaps he has forgotten to read the Gospels, where Jesus clearly states, "by this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another."