This article is a collaboration between MedPage Today® and:

Action Points Note that this study was published as an abstract and presented at a conference. These data and conclusions should be considered to be preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

BALTIMORE -- The prevalence of asthma among high school students can be just as high in the countryside as it is in the inner cities, a researcher said here.

In a survey of 2,543 students in four rural schools, more than 18% had diagnosed asthma, according to Poneh Davoodi, MD, of Georgia Regents University in Augusta, and colleagues.

Another 7% reported symptoms suggesting asthma, although they had not been diagnosed with the disease, Davoodi reported at the annual meeting of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology.

In other words, Davoodi told MedPage Today, about one student in four had signs and symptoms of asthma, similar to the reported prevalence of the disease among children in urban areas.

The finding was "very surprising," Davoodi said, and her group is now trying to understand why the rate is so high and which groups are most affected.

One clinical implication, she said, is that doctors in rural areas should be alert for asthma in children and adolescents, rather than assuming it's mainly an urban issue.

But the issue might not be a rural-urban split, commented Jay Portnoy, MD, of Children's Mercy Hospital in Kansas City, Mo.

"We've always known that asthma prevalence increases in underserved populations," Portnoy, who was chair of the meeting's abstract committee, told MedPage Today.

"That can include minorities in the inner cities, but also rural patients tend to be underserved as well," he said.

Allergens from mice and roaches have been blamed for much of the urban problem, but Portnoy noted that rural residents are exposed to an even wider range of allergens.

But the most important factor might be simple lack of access to healthcare. "This documents that there's a problem," he added, "and now they have to figure out what's causing it."

Nationwide, about 9.5% of children have asthma, compared with 8.2% of adults, according to the CDC.

The Georgia survey is part of the so-called Puff City study, which is evaluating a web-based management program for youths (ages 13 to 19) with asthma, Davoodi said.

Students were identified as having diagnosed asthma if they reported having such a diagnosis and also reported at least one of:

Asthma symptoms in the previous 30 days

Use of asthma medication in the previous 30 days

Over the previous year, at least one emergency department visit or hospital admission or more than two doctor's visits

Students without a diagnosis were classified as having asthma if they reported a range of signs, including severe wheezing or dry cough at night and activity-limiting symptoms including night awakening in the previous 30 days.

Students with a diagnosis reported an average of 0.69 emergency room visits and 0.24 hospital admissions for asthma, the investigators found.

They also reported symptoms, on average, occurring 1.89 days in the previous 30, with 1.19 nocturnal awakenings, and 1.44 absences from school.

Those with undiagnosed asthma reported an average of 0.72 emergency visits and 0.23 admissions for asthma-like symptoms, as well as an average of 3.53 symptomatic days in the previous 30, with 2.38 nocturnal awakenings and 1.77 days away from school.

The Puff City study is sponsored by the Henry Ford Health System, the University of Michigan, Georgia Regents University, Kaiser Permanente, and the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. No conflicts of interest were reported.