The HHS Office of HIV/AIDS and Infectious Disease Policy (OHAIDP) invites participants in the 2015 American Public Health Association (APHA) annual meeting to join us for a special session:

The Changing Epidemiology of Viral Hepatitis – Hepatitis C Emerging Trends and Disparities Tuesday, November 3rd from 12:30pm-2:00pm CT

If we are to realize the goals of the national Viral Hepatitis Action Plan it is critical to increase engagement of public health professionals at all levels. In an effort to better coordinate the national response to the epidemic of hepatitis C and prevent liver cancer in the U.S., the Action Plan calls for enhanced hepatitis surveillance, targeted efforts to address hepatitis C health disparities, and expanded strategic partnerships among Federal and non-Federal stakeholders.

The 90-minute APHA Special Session was selected by the APHA’s Epidemiology Section and will be moderated by Michelle Moses-Eisenstein, MPH, a Public Health Analyst at OHAIDP. Three public health leaders from U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) will share the work their agencies and offices are undertaking to increase our knowledge of hepatitis C; promote awareness, education, and community engagement; and identify and disseminate public health practices and policies to combat hepatitis C in the United States.

Scott Holmberg, MD, MPH, Chief, Epidemiology and Surveillance Branch, CDC Division of Viral Hepatitis, will present current hepatitis C surveillance and epidemiology, including emerging trends in infections and mortality.

Sonsiere Cobb-Souza, Director, Division of Program Operations, HHS Office of Minority Health, will describe the impact of hepatitis C in African American communities, as well as strategies to increase awareness and engagement with this population.

Corinna Dan, RN, MPH, Viral Hepatitis Policy Advisor, and Michelle Moses-Eisenstein, MPH, Public Health Analyst, OHAIDP, will discuss the national Viral Hepatitis Action Plan as a framework to increase effective community engagement, promote public health policy and practice, as well as facilitate improvements in clinical care and access to curative treatment.

Hepatitis C infection affects approximately 3 million people in the U.S., and almost 30,000 new infections were reported in 2013 (CDC, 2013 Viral Hepatitis Surveillance Report). Hepatitis C disproportionately impacts several groups in the U.S., highlighting a need to identify strategies that target these populations to improve awareness and health outcomes.

The field of hepatitis C is undergoing tremendous changes with new trends in infection and mortality, recently updated screening recommendations, and the availability of new, curative treatments. Please join us for this APHA Special Session as we work together to combat the silent epidemic of viral hepatitis in the United States.