The NFL Players Association representatives late Friday unanimously approved the terms of a new drug policy that includes the implementation of testing for Human Growth Hormone and an increase in the threshold for testing positive for marijuana.

The decision sets up the possibility that Denver Broncos slot receiver Wes Welker will return to the field as soon as Sunday against the Kansas City Chiefs. Welker will not be cleared to play until the NFL signs off on the agreement, too, which is expected on Saturday.

“This is a historic moment for our players and our league,” NFLPA president Eric Winston said in a statement. “We have collectively bargained drug policies that will keep the game clean and safe, but also provide our players with an unprecedented level of fairness and transparency. Players should be proud of their union for standing up for what was best for the game.”

But even if he can play, he may be among the inactives. He has missed considerable practice time since he was suspended for four games because of testing positive during the offseason for amphetamines. Welker had been cleared to play several weeks ago by an independent doctor.

With approval of the new policy, Welker’s suspension is lifted because his positive test has been moved from the jurisdiction of the performance enhancement policy — where four-game suspensions are issued to first-time offenders — to the substance-abuse policy, where first-time offenders are essentially placed on probation but aren’t suspended until a second infraction.

Among the other highlights, according to a statement from the NFLPA:

Neutral arbitration: An independent arbitrator will hear appeals for positive test violations for both substances of abuse and performance enhancing drugs. Both the NFL and NFLPA will select, approve and pay for three to five arbitrators.

An independent arbitrator will hear appeals for positive test violations for both substances of abuse and performance enhancing drugs. Both the NFL and NFLPA will select, approve and pay for three to five arbitrators. Amending Marijuana Policies : The threshold for a positive test for marijuana will increase to 35 ng/ml from the previous limit of 15 ng/ml. There will be additional steps for players who test positive for the substance before suspension.

: The threshold for a positive test for marijuana will increase to 35 ng/ml from the previous limit of 15 ng/ml. There will be additional steps for players who test positive for the substance before suspension. Retroactivity Discipline of players for certain violations in the 2014 League Year will have their discipline adjusted by certain aspects of the new policies.

Discipline of players for certain violations in the 2014 League Year will have their discipline adjusted by certain aspects of the new policies. Driving under the influence : Players successfully rejected the league’s proposal to issue discipline upon arrest, prior to adjudication. A two-game suspension will be issued upon conviction or plea agreement for violations of law involving alcohol and driving.

: Players successfully rejected the league’s proposal to issue discipline upon arrest, prior to adjudication. A two-game suspension will be issued upon conviction or plea agreement for violations of law involving alcohol and driving. Amphetamines: During the off-season, a first time positive test for amphetamines without a Therapeutic Use Exemption (TUE) will now be evaluated under the Substances of Abuse Policy. During the season, a positive test without a TUE will continue to be a violation of the Performance Enhancing Drug Policy.

During the off-season, a first time positive test for amphetamines without a Therapeutic Use Exemption (TUE) will now be evaluated under the Substances of Abuse Policy. During the season, a positive test without a TUE will continue to be a violation of the Performance Enhancing Drug Policy. Human Growth Hormone Testing : Testing for hGH will occur in the 2014 season. Players have the right to challenge any aspect of the science of the hGH isoforms test. The collection of blood specimens is prohibited on game days.

: Testing for hGH will occur in the 2014 season. Players have the right to challenge any aspect of the science of the hGH isoforms test. The collection of blood specimens is prohibited on game days. Discipline for breaches of confidentiality: The NFL and NFLPA will have the right to retain independent investigators to review cases where player confidentiality as related to the drug policies has been breached. Employees of the NFL/NFLPA/Clubs, players, certified contract advisers (agents) and policy administrators found to be in violation will face fines up to $500,000 and/or termination or other discipline.