Brick Superintendent of Schools Walter Uszenski (Photo: Courtesy of Ocean County Jail)

The Asbury Park Press brings you the biggest crime and mayhem stories of the week at the Jersey Shore. Several shocking developments came to light this week, from a mother claiming her son passed out from a security guard's chokehold to the Brick schools superintendent faces misconduct charges.

1. Brick schools superintendent arrested on misconduct charges



Less than a year into his jobs as superintendent, authorities said, Walter Uszenski and co-conspirator Andrew Morgan orchestrated a plan to illegally obtain services for Uszenski's grandson--services for which he was not eligible. The alleged scheme used nearly $40,000 of public funds.

2. Mom: My 7-year-old was choked by security guard in Asbury Park school

Karen McMillan claims that her son Ne'rek Johnson, a first-grader at Barack H. Obama School in Asbury Park, was held by a school security guard around the neck. (Photo: Photo courtesy of News 12 NJ)

A security guard was placed on paid leave after a mother claimed her 7-year-old son passed out after being placed in a chokehold by a school security guard, who was trying to restrain him during a tantrum.

Social services officials are investigating the incident, which the mother said occurred May 1 at Barack H. Obama Elementary School.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Karen McMillan claims that her son Ne'Rek Johnson, a first-grader at the Barack H. Obama School in Asbury Park, was held by a school security guard around the neck until he passed out. VIDEO COURTESY OF NEWS12

3. Prison for brutal Freehold stabbing murders

Buy Photo Dong Biao Lin is sentenced to life in prison for the 2010 murders of Yao Chen and his sister Yun Juan Chen in Freehold. (Photo: TOM SPADER/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)

Ya Li was seven months pregnant when her husband, Yao Chen, was stabbed about 70 times in his Freehold home. He and his sister were killed in a botched burglary by his former employee, Dong Biao Lin, and an accomplice.

"My daughter lost her father before she was born," Li told a judge at the sentencing hearing.

See what Dong Biao Lin and Zeng Liang Chen were sentenced with for the murders.

4. Marlboro man accused of stealing dead godfather's pension money

Terence Fitzpatrick (Photo: COURTESY OF ATTORNEY GENERAL’S OFFICE)

Police officer Thomas Sullivan died in 2003, and his wife died three years later. But more than $78,000 in pension benefits were withdrawn in Sullivan's name between Nov. 1, 2006 and Aug. 31, 2012. Authorities tied Sullivan's godson, 43-year-old Terence Fitzpatrick to the scheme.

The Marlboro man pleaded not guilty to a charge of grand larceny during his arraignment Monday in Albany, New York, County Court, according to a release from the New York state Attorney General's Office.

5. Authorities say man rode up on bicycle, shot at three people on front porch

A Neptune Township man was arrested Monday on charges that he opened fire on three people on a front porch during a gunfire exchange in July, according to acting Monmouth County Prosecutor Christopher J. Gramiccioni. (Photo: GOOGLE MAPS)

A drive-by shooting is scary enough, but authorities say Esmond A. McEnough rode up to a Neptune house on his bicycle and opened fire on three people standing on the front porch. The township man was arrested this week, after a nearly 10 month search for the second suspect in the July 14 incident.

Follow Steph Solis and Andrew Ford on Twitter for the latest Jersey Mayhem news.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1H5SsDv