Frank Ryan of Cornwall topped two fellow Republicans in the Pennsylvania primary to gain the party's nomination for the 101st District house seat in Lebanon County.

Ryan, with 36 percent of the vote, overtook Pier Hess, who received 30 percent of the vote, and Jeffrey Griffith, who had 28 percent, according to unofficial results.

John Dissinger, who was still on the ballot but announced he was pulling out of the race and throwing his support to Ryan, still received 6 percent of the vote.

Ryan, 65, of Cornwall, is a CPA and owns his own consulting firm, FX Ryan and Associates, which specializes in helping companies restructure to avoid bankruptcy. He retired from the military after 30 years and served in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Ryan advocated pension and property tax reform, a leaner state government and elimination of waste and abuse. He said he would serve no more than two terms and wouldn't accept mileage, per diems or a pension.

Three Republicans seek to fill open seat in 101st District in Lebanon County

Griffith, 49, of Lebanon, is a minister and teacher at Lebanon Christian Academy. He describes himself as a constitutionalist, and said he has taken a no tax increase pledge. He was one of the organizers of a 2009 town hall meeting in Lebanon where U.S. Sen. Arlen Specter faced criticism on the Affordable Care Act.

He advocates House Bill 76 to shift away from property taxes, which he describes as "immoral." He also believes in protecting religious freedom and streamlining the state bureaucracy.

Hess, 32, of Lebanon, is senior deputy district attorney in Lebanon County, and worked in the DA's office for six-and-a-half years. Hess said she ran for the 101st because she enjoys helping people. She advocates harsher consequences for Protection From Abuse violators, elder and child abuse and for violent crimes.

Hess said she isn't looking to politics as a financial windfall, and would be a full-time legislator and reduce her hours at her law practice.

Negative campaigning surfaced toward the end of the election, with flyers from Better Pennsylvania PAC targeting Ryan with what he said were "distortions and outright lies" intended to "stifle change." Hess and Griffith also called out the negative campaigning in the race.

According to campaign expense filings, Better Pennsylvania PAC had $12,250 in contributions from Harrisburg lobbyists Long Nyquist & Associates. Better Pa. PAC also gave $125 to Citizens for Pier Hess and $750 to Friends of Russ Diamond.

During the campaign Hess challenged her opponents' political involvement in the past despite their claims at being outsiders. She said Ryan unsuccessfully ran twice for Congress, and Griffith accepted $30,000 in donations from Sen. Folmer, and was a county GOP committeeman for eight years.

Hess said she received $750 from Gingrich's PAC among her $19,000 in contributions.

In turn, Griffith's camp questioned a Harrisburg event hosted by Rep. Mauree Gingrich for Pier Hess, which said proceeds were going to Gingrich's PAC, rather than to Hess.

Adam Gingrich, son of the incumbent legislator and a Hess campaign worker, said no funds from the event went to Hess. The Pa. Department of State said campaign finance reports on that event would be due in an annual report, unless the PAC gives the funds to a candidate on the ballot.

The nominee will face Democrat Lorraine Scudder, who is unopposed on the Democratic ballot.

The 101st District includes the city of Lebanon; Cornwall, Mount Gretna and Palmyra boroughs; North Cornwall, North Londonderry, South Annville, South Londonderry, West Cornwall townships.