The following article is entirely the opinion of Bradley Ryder and does not reflect the views of the Inquisitr.

If one didn’t know Dr. Ben Carson, they’d think he diagnosed Barack Obama as a psychopath, based on his recent statements. However, for those that know the retired good doctor — and rumored presidential hopeful — it’s another example of his anti-Obama name-calling that some say signals his eventual entry into the fray of candidates vying for the White House in the 2016 elections. And as of this writing, Carson has not walked back his charge that the POTUS is a psychopathic liar, this according to a CNN report.

A GQ writer caught up with the renowned neurosurgeon, the first ever to separate conjoined twins (at the head) in the United States, on the night President Obama gave his sixth State of the Union Address. Carson was only a short distance away from Capitol Hill at the home of Armstrong Williams, his so-called image-maker and likely campaign manager — should he announce his run for the presidency.

Shortly into the speech, Carson studied Obama like he was sizing up his quarry on a hunt, and called him a psychopath. He elaborated on Williams’ comment moments earlier that the Democratic leader of the free world looked “elegant” on camera. Ben Carson continued his diatribe in a surgical-like manner, not mincing his words along the way. In his opinion, what Obama is “selling” America is simply a “lie.”

“Like most psychopaths. That’s why they’re successful. That’s the way they look. They all look great. He’s trying to sell what he thinks is not true! He’s sitting there saying, ‘These Americans are so stupid I can tell them anything.’ “

Carson is also known for calling “Obamacare the worst thing since slavery.” Moreover, his assertion that “prison proves being gay is a choice” inflamed the LGBT community, liberals, and even members of the Tea Party. He’s even lobbed incendiary comments about bestiality and pedophilia when talking about American politics under Democrats and the Obama Administration. And who can forget the rhetoric from Ben Carson when he said America today is “very much like Nazi Germany.” So, the fact the retired brain surgeon likened the POTUS to a psychopath is not that unusual, considering his history.

Many pundits call Carson’s barrage of attacks against the president smear campaign tactics. As a probable candidate for the Republican nomination, the theatrics from the esteemed surgeon and other anti-Obama emissaries — Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, and others — are expected and well tolerated at this stage of the game. However, when political window-dressers descend on the race tarmac, Ben Carson may be need to tone down his fiery characterization of Obama, and referring to him as a psychopath may be a dangerous gamble.

Psychologist Deborah Stokes, PhD, countered and said in her professional opinion, Ben Carson “misdiagnosed Obama” by calling him a psychopath. Instead, she thinks a more appropriate assessment is “charming sociopath.”

“They lure people in with their charisma. We see that with politicians, with cult figures and so forth.”

[Photo by: Scott Olson/Getty Images]