× Feds, PA Attorney General opposed to Penn State Hershey and PinnacleHealth merger

HARRISBURG, Pa — The Federal Trade Commission sent notice to Penn State Hershey and PinnacleHealth that it will oppose the merging of the two health care systems and as early today could file legal action to prevent the plan from happening. The two health systems are the largest health care providers in the greater Harrisburg area.

Penn State Hershey issued the following statement:

“We are extremely disappointed that the FTC does not share the enthusiasm of the many employers, community leaders, private physicians, commercial insurance providers and others who have recognized the benefits of our integration and demonstrated their broad support for it.

“We firmly believe that the integration of PinnacleHealth and Penn State Hershey serves the best interests of patients and the entire central Pennsylvania community. The joining of our two health systems is completely consistent with the goals of the Affordable Care Act. It creates the depth of services and scale that is required to manage the health of distinct populations of patients and better positions us to provide the most appropriate care, in the most appropriate setting at the lowest possible cost.

“By coming together, PinnacleHealth and the Milton S. Hershey Medical Center also create a powerful platform to produce future generations of health care providers and make discoveries that improve health.

“Over the next several days our respective boards and leadership teams, with guidance from legal counsel, will carefully examine our options in continuing to advocate for our partnership. Ultimately, the best interests of our patients, families and community remain at the heart of whatever course of action we choose to pursue.”

Pennsylvania Attorney General Kathleen G. Kane’s office plans to join the legal action. In a press release, the Attorney General’s Office announced it will join a complaint for a temporary restraining order and preliminary injunction the FTC will file tomorrow in federal court in Harrisburg to prevent the parties from consummating the merger, and to maintain the status quo pending an administrative proceeding.

“We have learned the hard way in Pittsburgh what happens when a health system has a large market share,” Attorney General Kane said. “The continued competition between Pinnacle and Hershey will ensure that the greater Harrisburg area will continue to have a vibrant and competitive health care market.”

The FTC issued an administrative complaint alleging the combination of the two largest health systems in the greater Harrisburg area would create a dominant provider of general acute care inpatient hospital services sold to commercial health plans in the area of southcentral Pennsylvania. The area consists of Dauphin, Cumberland, Perry and Lebanon counties.

According to the complaint, the merged entity would control approximately 64 percent of this market, likely leading to increased healthcare costs and reduced quality of care for more than 500,000 local residents and patients.

The complaint alleges that Penn State Hershey and Pinnacle compete vigorously on price, quality of care, and services provided, both for inclusion in commercial health plan networks and to attract patients from one another. Competition is particularly intense in Dauphin County, where Penn State Hershey and Pinnacle operate the only three hospitals.

The complaint notes that Pinnacle and Hershey view each other as close competitors. Health plans have been able to use the threat of dropping one of the hospitals from their networks to extract price concessions.

The complaint will be filed in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania.