FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE:

Thursday, September 18, 2014

CONTACT: Josh Rosenblum, 202-434-2560, media@aarp.org, @AARPMedia, @joshuarosenblum

AARP Releases Nonpartisan Voter Guides

Voters Can View Candidates Own Words on Social Security, Medicare, Financial Security, Caregiving

WASHINGTON, DC – Today the nonpartisan AARP released voter guides featuring positions from Senate, Congressional, Gubernatorial and other statewide candidates – in their own words – on critical issues including Social Security, Medicare, and financial security. Voters of all ages may view the voter guides at www.aarp.org/yourvote.

“AARP wants to make sure our members and all voters know what the candidates are saying – and not saying – about key issues that matter to them and their families,” said AARP Executive Vice President Nancy LeaMond. “Our nonpartisan voter guides help voters cut through the political clutter and pressure candidates to share their views on lifeline issues like Medicare and Social Security before Election Day.

AARP’s federal guide poses three questions on Social Security, Medicare, and Financial Security to candidates in all 471 federal races:

How would you protect Social Security for today’s seniors and strengthen it for future generations?

How would you put Medicare on stronger financial ground and protect today’s seniors and future retirees from the burden of rising health costs?

How would you help Americans save so they can secure their future and live independently as they age?

The responses, which appear alongside AARP principles on each issue, consist of publicly available information and excerpts from candidate campaign sources. Voters can enter their address to see responses from general election candidates in their specific races for seats in the Senate and the House of Representatives. Visitors to www.aarp.org/yourvote can also contact the campaigns with their comments or questions and find out where they can vote in their state.

In many of the states that have gubernatorial and other state races, questions asked of candidates vary and pertain to specific state issues that matter to older Americans including caregiving, financial security, and utilities. An index of all races across the nation in AARP’s voter guides is located here. Additionally, this year AARP has taken election and issue surveys in Arkansas, Illinois, Florida, Iowa, Michigan, North Carolina, Ohio, and Pennsylvania.

The nonpartisan AARP does not support, oppose, or contribute to any candidates for elected office.

AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization, with a membership of nearly 38 million, that helps people turn their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities and fights for the issues that matter most to families such as healthcare, employment and income security, retirement planning, affordable utilities and protection from financial abuse. We advocate for individuals in the marketplace by selecting products and services of high quality and value to carry the AARP name as well as help our members obtain discounts on a wide range of products, travel, and services. A trusted source for lifestyle tips, news and educational information, AARP produces AARP The Magazine, the world's largest circulation magazine; AARP Bulletin; www.aarp.org; AARP TV & Radio; AARP Books; and AARP en Español, a Spanish-language website addressing the interests and needs of Hispanics. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to political campaigns or candidates. The AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. AARP has staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Learn more at www.aarp.org.​

###