Letter to the Editor (Photo: TNS)

As students are learning less and teachers are teaching less, we shall revisit a common debate: Should students be able to grade their teachers?

By students having the ability to grade teachers, it allows teachers to see their progress and be able to make their class more enjoyable for the students. The more the students are into the class the more their grades improve. The teachers are accountable for making an environment for students to learn, and they should know if they’re doing a great job or not.

Yes, some kids may be too immature to evaluate their teachers, but having a kid's input on how their teacher is performing in the classroom may be better than an adult supervisor. Teachers need to know how the ones they're teaching feel about their style. If you have more than half of the class sleeping, then maybe that’s an indication that the lesson is boring. Also, by allowing students to grade teachers, it develops a better environment for the kids to learn more and teachers to teach in a way the kids can understand.

The only way this concept may not be developed into the school system is if the kids are not serious about grading their teachers. Some students may have a bias against their teacher and give them a bad grade because they’re failing the class. Others might not care about the concept at all. If this was the case, then there should be a compromise. Instead of grading their teachers, the students can give feedback. Feedback helps the teacher to improve their methods to become a better teacher and develop different styles of teaching. Feedback can also help the teachers and students be more on the same page.

The more teachers and students are on the same page, the more the environment in the classroom improves. The class can go from being a sleeping place to a place of vibrant discussions and lectures.

Myles Lewis

Lafayette

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/opinion/2016/03/12/voices-should-students-able-grade-their-teachers/81645656/