A hot new technology. A widespread, deadly disease. A whole lot of money changing hands. That was the story last Wednesday when St. Jude Medical (STJ) agreed to pay $3.4 billion in cash for Thoratec (THOR), developer of an implant called the left ventricular assist device (LVAD), which helps heart-failure patients keep their blood moving. And lately it's been the story in the whole field of cardiology devices.

Breakthroughs in technology suggest new hope in the fight against heart failure, which afflicts up to 10% of all senior citizens in the developed world and kills a third of them within a year of diagnosis. The devices also present alternatives to the trauma of open-heart surgery, thanks to noninvasive methods such as inserting valves into the heart through catheters.

After the cardiology device business hit a downturn in 2012, companies responded by rolling out innovative new products — or, like St. Jude, acquiring them. While the overall cardiology market is only growing in the low single digits, a generation of young upstart companies, or the older players acquiring them, is rising to the top of IBD's Medical Products industry group.

The group ranked No. 15 on Friday among 197 industries tracked by IBD.

One of the group's top seeds is 16-year-old Edwards Lifesciences (EW), whose stock has been hitting new highs on the strength of its Sapien line of valve-replacement products. Abiomed (ABMD), though more than 30 years old, is just lifting off now after the Food and Drug Administration allowed wider marketing of its Impella heart pump. Small-caps Merit Medical Systems (MMSI), LeMaitre Vascular (LMAT) and Vascular Solutions (VASC) have achieved double-digit growth by selling disposable equipment for cardiovascular surgery.

Even the old giants are getting new life on the market. St. Jude — with market capitalization of $21 billion — already was trading at all-time highs before it announced the Thoratec deal. Boston Scientific (BSX), now with a $23 billion market cap, has climbed more than 60% so far this year. In March the field's 800-pound gorilla, the $109 billion Medtronic (MDT), hit a new high before forming a flat base. Medtronic has become Edwards' No. 1 competitor through its CoreValve line, which it initially acquired in 2009.

"If the last decade can be characterized as 'Decade of Incremental Innovation', the present decade can lay claim to the title 'Decade of Breakthrough Innovations,'" wrote Evercore ISI analyst Vijay Kumar in May as he launched coverage on the space.

An Era Of Innovation

Why now? Kumar believes necessity is a large part of the story. Looking back over industry trends since 2006, he found that the business seemed impervious to downturns in the larger economy, but was sensitive to bad publicity. In the mid-2000s, the market in cardiac stents — the core business of Boston Scientific, among others — plummeted after concerns were raised about their safety. The market recovered, then in 2012 shrank again after medical-journal articles on the overuse of implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) led to a Justice Department investigation and a considerable drop in sales for Medtronic and St. Jude. With those cash cows gone, Kumar believes, companies had to turn to new technologies.

Morningstar analyst Debbie Wang says new devices take years to develop and that the industry also goes through cycles of product innovation. During the fallow period three to five years back, many of today's hot products were in the early stages.

"Now it just so happens that all of those pipeline products have started to come to fruition," she told IBD. "And you've also seen the stock prices of those companies ramp up over the last three years.

A Four-Valve Market

The global cardiology device market generates about $35 billion a year. It is divided into four major segments. The oldest and largest is cardiac rhythm management (CRM). This includes traditional pacemakers as well as newer ICDs and other devices to regulate abnormal heartbeats. It is the market where Medtronic made its fortune.

Interventional cardiology, which makes up about a quarter of the market, deals with the blood supply to the heart. It is dominated by drug-eluting cardiac stents, essentially sleeves inserted via minimally invasive surgery which are used to prop open arteries and gradually release various drugs. The field is also dominated by the big, old players such as Medtronic, St. Jude, Boston Scientific and Abbott Laboratories (ABT).

Much of the innovation these days, however, focuses on the smaller markets. Structural heart devices, which aim to support and/or repair the heart itself, is where Thoratec's LVADs, Abiomed's Impella and Edwards' and Medtronic's valve replacements come in. St. Jude's new CardioMEMS product is an implantable monitor launched last year and used in heart-failure patients, which St. Jude plans to pair with Thoratec's LVAD.

"With Thoratec in hand, St. Jude will now be able to address the end-stage heart failure market, providing a full solutions-offering for physicians," Leerink analyst Danielle Antalffy wrote in a research note after the deal was announced.

Analyst Wang believes that the structural heart segment is appealing under the new climate of the Affordable Care Act. Getting approval and reimbursement for devices has been harder unless companies can prove that they bring a real improvement on existing treatments — or on no treatments.

"It has pushed these cardiac companies to move into areas that have not been explored," she said. "They're trying to apply their technology to diseases and conditions where there are not many good medical options right now.

The fourth segment, peripheral vascular, focuses on the circulatory system that's outside the heart — keeping it open and functioning with devices such as catheters, stents and balloons. Both Wang and Kumar flag renal denervation (RD) as an especially promising new technology in this area. These devices emit a radio-frequency pulse into the arteries that supply blood to the kidneys, with the aim of lowering high blood pressure.

Medtronic, St. Jude, Boston Scientific and the Cordis division of Cardinal Health (CAH) all have RD devices out in Europe. The European Union's leaner approval process typically brings medical devices to market around two years before they hit the U.S. But the technology suffered a blow last year after a Medtronic-sponsored study failed to meet its endpoint of diminishing hypertension.

However, there was some debate about the design of that trial, given that some of the patients were heavily using hypertension drugs to prove they were "treatment resistant." After the FDA issued new guidelines late last year, device makers started launching new studies. In April, Boston Scientific started enrolling patients for a trial of its own Vessix RD system, in which patients will go drug-free for a month before treatment.

"If we have a successful outcome in RD, it could be a multibillion-dollar market," Kumar told IBD.

Heart-To-Heart Mergers

The quest to bring new products across all the market segments likely will likely keep driving mergers and acquisitions, analysts say. On top of that, Wang points out that the consolidation and cost-cutting mood among hospitals lately has increased their preference for one-stop shopping. This, in turn, has encouraged consolidation among vendors.

Much of the buying is expected to be done by the big four vendors who take up two-thirds of the market — Medtronic, St. Jude, Boston Scientific and Abbott. However, Edwards, which currently holds a 5% share, has also been making buyouts here and there. Earlier this month it acquired privately held CardiAQ, which will add a new mitral-valve replacement system to complement Edwards' aortic-valve business.

Buyout anticipation has certainly helped goose some stocks. Heartware (HTWR), which is developing a potential competitor to Thoratec's LVAD, has surged 12% since rumors of the St. Jude-Thoratec deal broke out. Abiomed rose 5% when the news surfaced, but it has since eased back a touch.

Over the long haul, though, Wang says that investors can expect the industry to continue to have its ups and downs.

"I think that at this point, the R&D cycle is waxing," she said. "There's no guarantee it will continue at this pace."