Democratic presidential hopeful Martin O’Malley slammed Donald Trump’s comments on Mexican immigrants as “hate speech” and promised on Tuesday to stop millions of deportations if elected.

The former Maryland governor outlined his policy plan at a Manhattan roundtable event with immigrant New Yorkers.

“As Americans, we are good people, and we can do better than this backwards, broken immigration process that rips families apart without good reason, fails to protect public safety as it should and is holding us back from an economy that works for everyone,” O’Malley said.

O’Malley’s plan includes working with Congress to pass comprehensive reforms providing a path to citizenship for the undocumented and expanding immigrants’ access to Obamacare.

He also said he would stop Immigration and Customs Enforcement from detaining all immigrants except those who pose a "clear risk to public safety.”

“As Americans, we are good people, and we can do better than this backwards, broken immigration process that rips families apart without good reason,” he said. (ANDREW GOMBERT/EPA) O’Malley said as President, he would stop millions of deportations. (Anthony DelMundo/New York Daily News)

On Tuesday, he vowed to widely expand President Obama’s deferred action programs — some of which are held up in a protracted court battle — if he takes office.

O’Malley said he hoped Trump’s statements were not representative of the Republican Party's views. "It is disturbing though, that their presidential candidates appear divided, and some of them very silent on calling out that sort of hate speech that he was spewing."

The ex-governor, who is far behind Hillary Clinton and Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders in the polls, also touted his past record of “forging a new consensus” on the issue — including securing the votes to allow undocumented immigrants to get drivers’ licenses in Maryland.

“He has not only stood up for immigrant rights but he has advanced immigrant rights and he has the track record to back it up,” said Steve Choi, executive director of the New York State Immigrant Action Fund, which hosted the event.