Clinton Mayor Janice Kovach wants to go to Washington to represent residents of six New Jersey counties, saying today that she seeks the endorsement of fellow Democrats in the 7th congressional district.

That seat has been held since 2009 by U.S. Representative Leonard Lance, a Clinton Township resident who Kovach calls "a friend."



She said today that she called Lance before announcing her candidacy.

Kovach said, "I'm not happy with how I'm being represented by anybody in Washington. I look at what we do in small towns across the county," where, she said, office-holders "represent the best interests of our communities."

She feels there's a disconnect between voters and legislators at the national level: "It's not about making it better, it's about making the statement, making a mark. Everyone is focused on rhetoric, making stump speeches or one-liners."

She thinks that an "angry mentality" has overtaken the male-dominated Congress — women in 2013 held 99 of 535 seats. "I see so much not getting done, that should be getting done," Kovach said. "We've lost sight of what we're going."



In Clinton, she pointed out that she works with an all-Republican Town Council. "We work well together because we're doing it for the right reasons, not for special interests or parties," Kovach said.

She said that the same attitude has fostered "Great working conditions in Clinton and with other municipalities. There's a willingness to help each other out. For a long time, that didn't exist."

She laughs at the thought of becoming beholden to special interest groups, feeling that her financial support will instead come from "people who believe there needs to be change. This is an opportunity to change the way we do business."

Kovach was appointed director of the state Division on Women, stepping down from a town council seat to take the job in 2006. She served at the state level through 2010 and was elected mayor in the 2011 General Election.

Kovach has three children, and is married to husband Stephen. She sat on a number of state councils and boards during her time as a state official and also served on the Highlands Water Protection and Planning Council.

She also talks about the power of women to get things done. During the government shutdown this past fall, "How many stories did you hear about who created a framework for government to re-open?" she asks.

Women created that framework but went largely unrecognized, she said, with a couple of notable exceptions, including "Senator McCain," the Republican and former presidential candidate, she said.

The Affordable Care Act is one place where Kovach said she would take a different approach than Lance.

"Is the act perfect? Absolutely not. But rather than arbitrarily saying, 'No, we have to get rid of it," work on it to make it better. I'm paying for charity care in emergency rooms now. I'd rather pay for someone to get the services they need" including "preventative care," she said.

New Jersey's 7th district covers all of Hunterdon County, most of Somerset and parts of Morris, Warren, Union and Essex counties.

Lance is well-known, having served in the state government for nearly 30 years. A lawyer, he was in the state Assembly 1991-2002 before being in the state Senate from 2002 to 2008, when he was first elected to Congress.

He went to Washington after beating Democrat Linda Stender with 50 percent of the votes in November 2008, compared to Stender's 42 percent.

Two years later he handily beat Democratic newcomer Ed Potosnak.

More Hunterdon County news: NJ.com/hunterdon • Facebook • Twitter