— Pennsylvania Sen. Pat Toomey voted Thursday to undo key provisions of the Obamacare law, advancing legislation on the Republicans' long-sought goal of dismantling the health care statute.

The measure cleared the Senate after a flurry of votes on amendments related to the health care law, Planned Parenthood funding and the gun background check proposal that Toomey unsuccessfully pushed two years ago. Swift House passage will send it to President Barack Obama's desk.

Democratic West Virginia Sen. Joe Manchin and Republican Toomey reintroduced their background check measure in the wake of this week's mass shooting in San Bernardino, Calif. The proposal failed on a 47-50 vote, with Toomey and Pennsylvania Democratic Sen. Bob Casey both in support.

Thursday was the first time that the U.S. Senate has signed off on reversing Obamacare, a policy that has repeatedly cleared the U.S. House of Representatives. Casey joined fellow Democrats in voting against the repeal effort.

The bill is expected to be vetoed by the president, but Democrats challenging Toomey and other politically vulnerable Republicans are likely to resurrect it on the campaign trail next year.

Toomey, a staunch critic of the Affordable Care Act, said during the floor debate that the law has led to "disastrous consequences," including higher premium costs, incentives against hiring employees, and the loss of health care plans that Pennsylvanians had liked.

"This is a fatally flawed piece of legislation," Toomey said.

The repeal legislation would not fully abolish the Affordable Care Act, but it would nix a number of key provisions on taxes and coverage requirements. It also would defund Planned Parenthood, which conservatives have sought to do.

The mandates on individuals and certain businesses to buy insurance or provide it to their employees would end, as would the subsidies for purchasing insurance.

It would undo taxes on medical devices and expensive insurance plans, and undo the expansion of Medicaid that made an additional 643,000 low-income Pennsylvanians eligible for health care coverage.

Other sections of the law, such as the provision allowing a child to remain on their parents' health care plans until the child is 26 years old, would remain in place.

GOP lawmakers suggested the bill could serve as a bridge to a new Republican health care law. The Medicaid expansion and insurance subsidies would remain in place for two years in order to give time to craft a replacement with the next presidential administration.

The White House opposed the bill, saying it would "take away critical benefits and health care coverage" from families. Republicans lack the two-thirds House and Senate majorities needed to override a presidential veto.

Still, the Senate spent much of Thursday voting on amendments, including a failed effort to undo the section removing Planned Parenthood's funding.

Ahead of the vote on Toomey's gun background check provision, the Pennsylvania senator told reporters that he continues to support the policy, but that it was unlikely to see a positive outcome this time around.

"Most of the people who were here in 2013 are still here," Toomey said, accurately predicting a failure to win majority support.

The proposal seeks to expand background checks to gun show sales and Internet transactions. Pennsylvania has state background-check laws for all sales of handguns; the Toomey-Manchin legislation would extended that to rifles and shotguns.

Toomey said Manchin approached him, saying he was thinking of resurrecting the proposal as an amendment. After it failed, Toomey said in a statement that enhanced background checks might have prevented some, but not all, mass shootings.

"If there's a sensible way to help keep the American people safer, I believe it deserves our support," Toomey said.

He opposed another gun-related amendment put forward by Democrats, which aimed to make it more difficult for those on the terrorism watch list to purchase guns. That amendment also failed.

Three of the Democrats seeking to unseat Toomey next year, Joe Sestak, Katie McGinty and John Fetterman, criticized him for not pushing harder on the gun-control legislation.

The gun background check isn't the only vote likely to come up again on the campaign trail. Democratic operatives bashed Toomey and other Republicans for voting to end the recently expanded Medicaid benefits.

That vote may not dramatically change next year's political debates, but it will clarify for voters where Toomey and his opponents stand on Obamacare, said Chris Borick, a political science professor and pollster at Muhlenberg College.

"For Sen. Toomey, if he wants to lead with his opposition, now he has a vote to prove it," Borick said. "For his opponents, now they have a vote to show exactly where he stands."

Support for Obamacare remains divided among Pennsylvania voters, largely along party lines, Borick said. A 2014 Muhlenberg/Morning Call survey showed 47 percent of Pennsylvania adults had an unfavorable view of the law, and 39 percent had a favorable view.

Those tallies have shown little movement in polls, but the potential political ramifications of Toomey's opposition to the law will depend on how voters see it next fall, Borick said.

lolson@mcall.com

Twitter @LauraOlson