BARTOW | Seeking health insurance under the Affordable Care Act has been time-consuming and baffling for many people in Polk County and confusion remains strong in the final seven weeks of this first enrollment period.

Appointments can be made locally with navigators or certified applications counselors for help enrolling through the Health Insurance Marketplace/Affordable Care Act/Obamacare. ■ For a BayCare Health System navigator at Winter Haven Hospital, call 855-404-3334. ■ For help through Community Health Systems/Lake Wales Medical Center, call 800-353-1380 or 863-678-2734. ■ A navigator at Family Fundamentals in Lakeland is at 863-686-1221, Ext. 226. ■ Call Central Florida Health Care at 863-413-8600 in Lakeland; 863-292-4280, Winter Haven; and 863-635-4891, Frostproof. ■ The federal online site is www.healthcare.gov. The toll-free federal number is 800-318-2596. HAVE YOU ENROLLED? Have you tried to get enrolled for health insurance through the marketplace system set up for the Affordable Care Act? If you are a Polk County resident, The Ledger would like to hear about your experience, how long it took and whether you qualified. Email Robin Williams Adams at robin.adams@theledger.com or call her at 863-802-7558.

"I get 75 calls a week, and I can only book four people a day because it takes that long," said Jane Coyle-Hart, one of several Polk navigators who help people enroll through the federal marketplace in what's better known as Obamacare.

But for many who have enrolled, the outcome has been dramatic. Workers helping Polk residents sign up tell of people getting health insurance for the first time or resuming insurance after having lost a job.

"I've had people sit down and cry because they've never had health insurance before," said Vanessa Bonet, a navigator based at Winter Haven Hospital.

She and others said they've seen people who qualify for tax credit subsidies end up with monthly premiums as low as $2, $6 or $30.

Polk residents are enrolling daily even with the well-publicized computer problems that made the numbers signing up nationally smaller in 2013 than advocates originally predicted.

Still, thousands of people in Polk County are still without insurance, many of them because Florida refused to accept millions of federal dollars that would have been used to expand Medicaid.

Others who may qualify for help haven't done so for reasons ranging from lack of knowledge, frustration with the enrollment website or philosophical objections to the act.

ENROLLMENT DATA

More than 100,000 Polk County residents are uninsured, according to research released as Polk began expanding its safety net clinics for the poor three years ago.

About 52,010 people in Polk, not all of them uninsured, are eligible for premium tax credits, often referred to as subsidies, to help pay for insurance, according to an analysis from Families USA.

Families USA said more than 1.8 million people are eligible for those subsidies statewide because of the Affordable Care Act, which created the Health Insurance Marketplace through which people look for plans and subsidies.

How many in Polk have enrolled for insurance through the marketplace is unknown.

The federal government hasn't released state-by-state enrollment figures through January. There isn't county-by-county enrollment breakdown for Florida.

Standards for reporting data keep changing, some involved in the process said, making the enrollment numbers a shifting figure.

Of 2.5 million Floridians the Kaiser Family Foundation estimates qualify to enroll, 158,030 or 6.2 percent had enrolled through December, according to the foundation.

Those enrolling people locally said things improved in January as they worked with the federal website.

"There's been drastic improvement in that website," said Sophia Turner, manager of financial counseling at Winter Haven Hospital.

People enrolling on their own have missing or incorrect information about half the time, delaying the process, said Bonet, the navigator based at Winter Haven Hospital. But the system is working despite "all the quirks and all the problems," she said.

Nationally, enrollment started increasing in December and January. About 3 million people had selected plans from the state and federal marketplaces through the first three weeks of January, according to Marilyn Tavenner, administrator of Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

MORE EDUCATION NEEDED

Lack of knowledge about what the law provides and what's involved in qualifying persists here and nationwide.

"People are a mile deep in line" to ask questions when she speaks to groups about the act, Coyle-Hart said.

Navigating the enrollment process has been difficult for some uninsured Polk residents

Sally Davis, 64, once had health insurance, a job, even a 401K plan. She lost her insurance in April, after losing her job because of medical issues. She is on oxygen around the clock and takes several medications but has no health insurance.

"Ever since I was 13 years old, I had a job," the Dundee resident said. "I raised three kids."

She tapped into her 401K to pay medical bills, and now gets primary care at Lake Wales Free Clinic.

Not officially classified as disabled, she said, she was turned down for Medicaid and "was on the computer going nuts" as she tried without success for new insurance.

Because of the problems she's encountered Davis is sticking with the Lake Wales Free Clinic, which she said "has been here 100 percent for me," until she gets Medicare at age 65.

Theresa Asberry, 35, who works part time at a fast-food restaurant in East Polk, got help from an insurance agent and successfully enrolled.

The only remaining step for her to have insurance is making her first $26 monthly payment.

Like Davis, Asberry has gotten free basic, primary health care from volunteers at Lake Wales Free Clinic, but she wants access to more doctors.

"I haven't been to a doctor in a long time," she said. "I'm getting older and I feel things I didn't used to feel."

Asberry said she couldn't have enrolled without help from the insurance agent. "She did it at my house because I don't know how to do a computer that well," she said.

Mike Lewis, director of patient access at Heart of Florida Regional Medical Center in Haines City, said people who seek help often don't have computers and email accounts, making it harder to apply.

People can fill out paper applications, which local navigators and applications counselors helped some do in 2013 when the computer glitches prevented online enrollment.

There are other obstacles for some who most need help: Some Florida residents whose income is less than 100 percent of the federal poverty guideline aren't eligible for subsidized insurance through the act.

The federal poverty guideline is $11,490 for an individual, $15,510 for a two-person household and $23,550 for a four-person family.

Some below that amount do qualify for Medicaid, and people are advised to apply for it, but Florida's Medicaid rules don't cover everyone whose income is below 100 percent of the federal poverty guideline.

The federal government expected state governments to expand their Medicaid programs, using federal dollars offered as part of the act.

It didn't expect situations such as Florida's, where lawmakers have refused to expand Medicaid, creating a major gap in coverage that Polk County volunteer programs do their best to fill.

The Affordable Care Act provides tax credits to help people with incomes between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level buy private insurance plans.

Medicaid expansion was to cover those with less income.

The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the federal government couldn't force states to expand Medicaid, creating the coverage gap of people who can't get Medicaid under Florida's current rules, but who have incomes too low to qualify for help in buying private insurance.

Willie Mae Anderson of Haines City is in that gap.

For 23 years, she worked as a custodian, lifting heavy garbage bags and doing other physical labor.

That ended when her breathing got very bad, she said, and she had to retire. She's applied for disability, and she's awaiting a decision, but finds herself at a frustrating impasse.

Her income, under $700 a month, isn't enough to let her pay $441 a month for insurance through the school system where she once worked.

Because her income is too low, insurance through the Health Insurance Marketplace would cost more because she can't get the tax-credit subsidy to help her pay.

"The doctor says I need to go see a lung doctor," she said, close to tears. "I can't."

Some counselors helping people enroll said they want to lobby state legislators to expand who is eligible for Medicaid.

[ Robin Williams Adams can be reached at robin.adams@theledger.com or 863-802-7558. Read her blog at robinsrx.blogs.theledger.com. ]