Topics: Bill O'Reilly, Donald Trump, Elections 2016, John Kasich, Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz, The O'Reilly Factor, Elections News, Media News, Politics News

After Thursday night’s Fox News GOP debate, each candidate separately guested on a live “O’Reilly Factor.” After a supposedly “awkward” leadoff interview with Trump and a few intermittent speech blips, some are positing host Bill O’Reilly went a little heavy on the pre-show sauce.

The speculation appears to have originated with Patton Oswalt’s Twitter, and then spread thenceforth:

Holy shit. I want to turn away but Bill O'Reilly is TRUMAN CAPOTE TALKSHOW DRUNK. #wow — Patton Oswalt (@pattonoswalt) March 4, 2016

Okay, I have to stop watching this. Bill O'Reilly is the wet-brain carnival geek from NIGHTMARE ALLEY. I'm the villain here. #GOPDebate — Patton Oswalt (@pattonoswalt) March 4, 2016

Be that as it may, until President Trump has something to do with it, we live in a democratic society with due process. It would be negligent not to presume O’Reilly sober until proven sloshed. So let’s break it down.

Donald Trump:

O’Reilly keeps his composure quite well in the Trump spin-room interview. He interrupts Trump’s tired “(Mitt Romney’s) a failed candidate” spiel in typical fashion. He asks Trump why he thinks he “engender(s) so much loathing” from his own party. His posture is impeccable:

He does get a little too friendly with Melania, but, to be fair, Trump initiates the exchange to ease the tension after suggesting that O’Reilly ask his therapist why his coverage of the Trump campaign has become increasingly negative.

“I think I’ve been fair,” O’Reilly reverses, even after Trump introduces “my boy Eric” so as to avoid a heated post-debate debate. To poke a bear like Trump, you’d have to be drunk, stupid, Mitt Romney, or a combination thereof.

O’Reilly will not stop: “You wanna give me an example?” And when Trump says no, “C’monnn!”

Thankfully for everyone’s sake, O’Reilly finally recognizes he’s hit a dead end and switches gears, this time looking ahead to the Convention this July in Cleveland. Unable to find the words “brokered convention,” O’Reilly settles for, “the under table thing.”

Marco Rubio:

A little blip right off the bat: He calls it the “post-Factor” instead of the “post-debate Factor.” Splitting hairs here; he still has the benefit of my doubt.

I don’t know if this is the case, but I might start watching “The Factor” more if he treats all his interviewees like he did Rubio. After talking about Trump the entire time, O’Reilly gave Rubio the last 30-or-so seconds to explain how he’ll win Florida. Then, squeezing in the last word, Bill says, “I don’t think it’s gonna work.” And throws to commercial. Fuck objectivity; that was beautiful.

Ted Cruz:

O’Reilly messes up the name of his show again — a serious blow to his case for sobriety. Bill has a certain smug cadence, resting on the last word in a clause, which he’s mastered over a century on-air. “Continuing nowww with The Factorrr” was what he was going for. At the last second, though, he tried to fit in “Special Edition of,” then decommitted. In a vacuum, the stumble is a brain fart. But up against his shaky performance thus far, it’s fair to get suspicious.