Kirk Sprinkles coaches dancers Laura Delarosa (from left), Tiffany West and Molly Keegan from the floor in front of the stage.

For a modest-sized metropolitan area, Charleston and its suburban surroundings have their share of cultural institutions. Some would argue, more than their share.

The latest sign of artistic vitality comes in the form of two new music conservatories, one catering to classical musicians, the other to musical theater practitioners.

Operators of both schools say they are filling voids and striving to provide high-level training to serious students who think a performance career might be in the cards.

The Charleston Performing Arts Center, or C-PAC for short, is just now all set up and ready to go on James Island. It occupies a space at 873 Folly Road and it's run by Kirk Sprinkles, an experienced Broadway professional and teacher, and his partner Scott Pfeiffer, who boasts a strong business resume and an obsessive interest in theater.

The Lowcountry Conservatory of Music is located near the northern end of the metropolitan area, at Eastbridge Presbyterian Church in Mount Pleasant, 3058 U.S. Highway 17. It's run by the husband-and-wife team of Michael Scott Giuliani and Agnes Miriam Giuliani, professional musicians who moved from Chicago to South Carolina two years ago.

'Getting our feet wet'

The Lowcountry Conservatory is similar to the Charleston Academy of Music, located downtown, but it seeks to serve students who live in Mount Pleasant, Awendaw, McClellanville, Georgetown and farther up the coast. The school's been up and running in Georgetown since July, several months after the Giulianis settled there. He had taken a church job as organist and choir director. She brought her violin. Both started teaching private lessons.

Last November, they moved with their two young children to Mount Pleasant, and Michael Giuliani assumed his post as music director at Christ Church Presbyterian (which currently uses Moultrie Middle School for worship on Sundays).

Now, the musical pair are holding auditions for new students, adding to a small stable of ambitious youngsters in Georgetown.

The conservatory offers private lessons, theory classes and ear training, as well as community courses for adults (sort of like continuing education). The Georgetown branch already has about 25 young students who study violin, piano and cello, Giuliani said.

Now that they live and work in Mount Pleasant, it made sense to set up shop there, too.

"A lot of people in Mount Pleasant don't drive downtown" for music lessons, Giuliani said.

The focus is pre-college preparation; the assumption is that some of these students could go on to enroll in music conservatories.

"We're getting our feet wet," Giuliani said. Eventually, he hopes to secure a stand-alone space for the school, provide scholarships to low-income students and offer some concerts, such as a summer lunchtime series like the one running in Georgetown, evening performances that feature the work of collaborative visual artists and more.

The Giulianis want to keep these concerts admission-free and reach out to underserved communities, he said.

Nothing like this - a serious school that trains young classical musicians - exists in the far reaches of Mount Pleasant, or in Georgetown, he said.

"A nonprofit shouldn't be competing with other nonprofits, it defeats the purpose. So we purposefully tried to fill a void."

'First-hand experience'

Meanwhile C-PAC is drafting its own "pre-professionals" seeking well-rounded musical theater training that includes voice coaching, ballet and tap lessons and acting workshops. The goal is to prepare students for dance musicals, the big-production shows Broadway is famous for.

"The level of education is what sets us apart; this is not just recreational," said co-founder Scott Pfeiffer. "This is for someone who really wants to pursue a career. It's fun, but intensive."

You have to audition to get in, and the school will cap enrollment at 40 per year. Classes are offered in three-day clusters, Monday-Wednesday, beginning in the late afternoon.

Kirk Sprinkles, C-PAC's artistic director, has plenty of professional experience under his belt. He appeared on Broadway in "Tap Dogs," toured in major productions and worked as a choreographer and director in regional theaters and for cruise lines.

He said the new school will do more than train performers. It will teach career lessons as well, such as how to make the most of an audition, how the theater business works and what to expect as a professional.

Getting to this point has been an evolution, the two men said. Pfeiffer was a business manager in the fashion industry, working in California and New York City before moving to Charleston last year. Sprinkles, who previously led ballet and theater companies in North Carolina, was in the Charleston area in the second half of the 1990s running a dance and acting studio. He was back in 2011 hoping to help start a ballet school, but soon turned his attention to cabaret and burlesque.

Under the auspices of Sprinkles Productions, the two men assembled the Holy City Harlettes, who perform for private functions, and they recently produced two new shows, "The Charleston" and "Santa's Naughty and Nice Burlesque."

For the school, they have assembled a small faculty consisting of professional colleagues, including Broadway veteran Caitlin Carter and voice teacher Stephanie Samaras.

Carter will travel to Charleston for periodic weeklong workshops. Samaras, who has coached many successful actors and singers, is relocating to the area. Pfeiffer will teach acting; Sprinkles will teach dance. Other faculty include Andrea Roule, Don Eitner, Mary Ann Lamb and Patrick DeGennaro.

Carter has enjoyed a robust theater career in New York City and on the road, working both on stage as a dancer-singer and behind-the-scenes as a coach and choreographer. She met Sprinkles two years ago at Career Transition for Dancers. She was on the board, he was volunteering.

"He told me what he was thinking of doing at that time," she said. "Then six months ago, he called me."

Carter will teach intensive master classes.

"I think Kirk's really put together a good combination (of faculty) for this," she said. "It's great for students but also great for the community." It will mean that local theaters will have more talent to draw from, and local actors will be in better shape for auditions here and elsewhere.

Carter said she plans to be clear and blunt: this is a difficult, fickle business. Serious students should give themselves five years in the professional arena then consider doing something else. Timing is a big factor, she said. Sometimes directors and casting agents are looking for a certain type that's in fashion - tall, leggy girls, for example, or athletic male dancers - and not everyone fits the bill.

So effort will be made to teach not only the right moves but the necessary practical lessons.

"These are the educational tips that only we can give, because we have first-hand experience," Carter said.

Up for the challenge

The two new pre-professional conservatories join several existing nonprofit schools in the Charleston area, including several ballet and contemporary dance studios, at least two after-school acting schools and the Charleston Academy of Music.

The Lowcountry Conservatory of Music is relying on its geographical niche for its success. C-PAC is banking on its ability to raise the bar and leverage professional teaching talent.

George Stevens, president and CEO of the Coastal Community Foundation, a local philanthropic advocacy organization, has worked closely with a variety of arts organizations in the area and their donors.

"There is no magic number" of nonprofit arts groups, no easy way to know when the scale tips toward the unsustainable, he wrote in an email. "Ultimately, the size and diversity of our nonprofit community is determined by the donors, volunteers and grant-making institutions that sustain them. Nationwide, giving to the arts is up. Perhaps these new organizations reflect that uptick."

Serving students and patrons surely is important, but for arts organizations to thrive, they must provide benefactors with important new opportunities, Stevens wrote.

"Over the years, I've seen a pattern: the nonprofits that demonstrate real value and diligently serve their donors survive and thrive," he wrote. "Those that fall short are absorbed by larger organizations or disappear. I have great respect for the wisdom of the Lowcountry philanthropy community. They decide, on an ongoing basis, how many arts organizations we can sustain and the variety of programs they offer."

Two new organizations now have accepted that challenge.

Reach Adam Parker at 937-5902. Follow him at www.facebook.com/ aparkerwriter.