Share This Article:

Family Health Centers of San Diego was awarded a $900,000 federal grant Monday, part of $83.4 million handed out by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to help train resident physicians.

The grants, funded by the Affordable Care Act, were provided to 60 health centers that will provide training for resident physicians during the 2014-15 academic year.

Residents will be trained in family medicine, internal medicine, pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, psychiatry, geriatrics, and general dentistry, according to HHS.

“This program not only provides training to primary care medical and dental residents, but also galvanizes communities,” said Mary K. Wakefield of the federal Health Resources and Services Administration. “It brings hospitals, academic centers, health centers, and community organizations together to provide top-notch medical education and services in areas of the country that need them most.”

The nonprofit Family Health Centers of San Diego operates 18 primary care clinics, six dental clinics and four behavioral health clinics throughout San Diego County, serving 200,000 uninsured and low-income patients.

The communities the health centers serve include Logan Heights, Mission Beach, North Park, Chula Vista, Spring Valley and Oceanside.

Last year, Family Health Centers announced a program to offer three-year residencies to physicians. CEO Fran Butler-Cohen said in a release then that her medical group is in a unique position to “create training opportunities unmatched by smaller residency programs.”

Dr. Chris Gordon, residency program director for the centers, leads the training program.

“Community-based ambulatory healthcare is the future of medicine in the United States and we are excited to lead the way. Our program will provide the highest quality education in a real world setting to improve the health disparities of our community’s most vulnerable patients,” Gordon said in the same release.

– City News Service contributed to this report.

>> Subscribe to Times of San Diego’s free daily email newsletter! Click here

Follow Us: