Area senior citizens who use Medicare Advantage will have fewer choices, and can expect to pay more, when they select a plan for 2015, according to information revealed Wednesday by the federal agency that oversees Medicare.

Several insurers have discontinued plans – and raised rates in their remaining plans – in response to declining federal subsidies for the popular managed Medicare program, which serves more than half of the region’s seniors.

Medicare Advantage enrollees still have a number of options, and some plans are going down in price, but overall the cost to members here will rise by nearly 7 percent next year, according to a Buffalo News analysis of federal plan data.

Wednesday was the first chance for seniors to begin researching their options for Medicare Advantage plans for next year, and it was the first day for insurers to begin marketing to prospective members. Open enrollment begins Oct. 15.

For seniors in Erie County, the change in monthly premiums between 2014 and 2015 for plans with drug coverage ranges from a $3 decline for one Today’s Options plan to an increase of $67 for a BlueCross BlueShield of Western New York offering, according to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

“Our senior members are experiencing an upheaval in what they are used to. Premiums, the way they’ve been in the past, are unsustainable. BlueCross BlueShield decided to get ahead of that inevitability and accept those realities this year,” Julie Snyder, the insurer’s director of corporate relations, said in a statement.

Medicare Advantage plans are a type of Medicare health plan offered by insurers that contract with the federal government to provide hospital and medical coverage to those who are eligible.

The plans often offer additional benefits such as gym memberships and vision coverage, though the benefits provided can change from year to year within the same plan.

National enrollment in Medicare Advantage has nearly tripled over the last decade, rising from 5.6 million in 2005 to 15.7 million this year, the Kaiser Family Foundation reported.

The plans are exceptionally popular in this region, with 54 percent of seniors here enrolling in Medicare Advantage plans compared to 30 percent of seniors nationwide.

As part of the Affordable Care Act, however, the federal government has begun reducing how much it pays private insurers through the Medicare Advantage program, bringing the payments in line with those for traditional Medicare.

Though the Obama administration this spring abandoned its proposed cuts to Medicare Advantage for 2015, several insurers cited earlier cuts to the program as the reason they were discontinuing or raising the price of their managed Medicare plans.

“There’s continued pressure on the reimbursements from CMS (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services),” said Nora K. McGuire, senior vice president and chief marketing officer for Independent Health.

MVP Health Care of Schenectady, for example, said last month it was dropping Medicare Advantage plans that serve 2,100 seniors in Western New York, and 19,800 seniors statewide, and raising the monthly premiums on its remaining plans by an average of 45 percent for 2015.

The plan information posted Wednesday by CMS, the federal Medicare agency, shows that seniors in Erie County can choose from 32 Medicare Advantage plans for 2015, down from the 36 plans available in 2014.

The estimated annual cost to enrollees for the 22 plans that include drug coverage – including premiums, co-pays and other charges, and assuming an average level of spending on prescription medication – is an average of $4,761 for 2015, up $295, or 6.6 percent, from the average cost of the same plans in 2014, The News found.

Seniors who enter accurate information about their own use of medical services and prescription drugs can get a better estimate of their costs.

The changes from this year to 2015 vary dramatically, however, with estimated annual costs decreasing by as much as 7.2 percent for Independent Health’s Network Advantage plan and increasing by 21 percent for BlueCross BlueShield’s Senior Blue HMO 651 Part D plan.

The plan prices remain low compared to traditional Medicare, which is estimated to cost $6,590 next year.

The information posted by the federal Medicare agency applies to seniors who directly enroll in Medicare Advantage, but does not cover the many seniors who enroll in group Medicare Advantage coverage through an employer.

Amherst-based Independent Health has the highest Medicare Advantage enrollment in the region, with 74,725 total members in 2014, and the insurer largely avoided dramatic changes to its plans for 2015. Independent Health also is the only local insurer offering a $0-premium plan for 2015.

Enrollment in its managed Medicare plans has soared since 2009, when 56,254 members signed up for Medicare Advantage.

“What’s most important to us is to maintain consistency and stability in our plans. So we try to do that while offering people the choice,” McGuire said.

BlueCross BlueShield is dropping one plan with drug coverage, adding another, and raising the rates of its other three plans with drug coverage. The insurer has about 48,000 Medicare Advantage members, including those enrolled through an employer.

“The current Medicare Advantage premiums that our loyal BlueCross BlueShield members are hearing about this week are best explained in the overall context of a dramatically changing national health care marketplace, driven by the federal Affordable Care Act, stringent government regulations and new taxes,” Snyder said.

Univera Healthcare dropped one of its Medicare Advantage plans with drug coverage, leaving three for 2015 enrollment. The average estimated annual cost is rising by 10 percent or more next year for each plan, according to CMS. Univera’s direct-pay Medicare Advantage enrollment is 18,600.

“Luckily, we’re not in that position where we’ve had to make radical changes. We’ve done the best we can to keep the premium as low as possible,” said Heather Smith, director of Medicare sales for Univera Healthcare and its parent, Excellus BlueCross BlueShield of Rochester.

The insurers will aggressively market their plans to seniors over the next few months, setting up phone banks and in-person information sessions to take questions from prospective members.

Enrollment for 2015 begins in two weeks and closes Dec. 7.

email: swatson@buffnews.com