At the same time Senator Ted Cruz declared that he was running for president in a speech decrying same-sex marriage and Obamacare, almost-certain Democratic contender Hillary Clinton participated in a roundtable about urbanism.

Evoking the rhetoric of New York City mayor and former Clinton senatorial campaign staffer Bill de Blasio, the former senator from New York on Monday bemoaned the reality of “inequality” in urban America.

Cities “have some of the most dynamic, well-educated affluent people in the world, and people who are trapped in generational poverty and whose skills are not keeping up with what the jobs of today and tomorrow demand,” she said.

Clinton pointed to her bona fides on the issue.

“I not only represented New York City, I represented Buffalo and Rochester and Syracuse and Albany and Binghamton and a lot of other places that had very different challenges,” she said.

Clinton made her remarks during a panel discussion in Washington hosted by the Center for American Progress and the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees.

A U-shaped table, with Clinton in the middle, was populated by allies: Neera Tanden, a former Clinton policy adviser who is now the center’s president; HUD secretary Julian Castro, a possible vice presidential contender and the former mayor of San Antonio; and American Federation of Teachers president Randi Weingarten, among others.

From the camera-facing side of Clinton’s table hung a banner imprinted with the hashtag #UrbanProgress.

Clinton’s remarks were brief and her policy prescriptions general.

She said that cities these days are on the upswing, and while federal resources once followed population shifts to the suburbs, so that roads and utilities could be developed, a new funding approach might make more sense to better deal with aging cities' aging infrastructure.

“So we have to do, what I would hope to see, is kind of a mapping of our cities,” said Clinton. “And an understanding that when it comes to the physical infrastructure, we have to take care of what we already have, upgrade it, modernize it. We’ve had problems here in Washington, we have problems in New York—potholes exploding, all kinds of issues.”

The United States needs to invest more in “the human infrastructure,” too, she said, and that’s where she brought up de Blasio.

“We need to do more to fit the human needs with both the potential that people have, starting early with pre-K,” said Clinton. “I’m very much a supporter of what Mayor de Blasio did in New York, trying to create pre-K access for every young child in New York, regardless of who that child is and who its parents are.”

“But we also have to do more on affordable housing and more of the amenities, so that families, middle-class families, working families can actually stay in cities and have a place to go,” she continued.

Her final point was about social mobility, or the lack thereof.

Citing the work of Raj Chetty, the Bloomberg professor of economics at Harvard University, she talked about the how some cities have much more social mobility than others.

"Two cities with similar affluence, Seattle and Atlanta, have markedly different rates of economic mobility,” she said. “It’s not about race. White and black citizens of a city like Atlanta both have low upward mobility.”

Rather, she said, it’s about “where the fabric of community is strong,” where there’s a “vibrant middle class,” where there’s cross-class integration, good schools, unions, religious and civic organizations, and a sense of community.

“So we need to think hard about what we’re going to do now that people are moving back into and staying in cities to make sure that our cities are not just places of economic prosperity and job creation on average, but do it in a way that lifts everybody up to deal with the overriding issues of inequality and lack of mobility,” Clinton said.

Clinton will deliver another speech Monday evening at a celebration for the Toner Prize for Excellence in Political Reporting.

It may well be her last public appearance before an announcement declaring her entry into the presidential race, which is expected to come early next month.