We've officially reached a new and obscene level of hypocrisy, folks.

As I write about extensively in my latest book Assault and Flattery: The Truth About the Left and Their War on Women, liberal organizations parading as women's rights groups aren't actually concerned about women, but instead about expanding government and implementing socialist policies in America.

Case-in-point. Colorado Republican Congressman and U.S. Senate Candidate Cory Gardner has suggested birth control pills should be over-the-counter as part of his campaign platform and stance on women's health. Instead of applauding Gardner's approach, which would greatly expand women's access to birth control, Planned Parenthood has come out against him. The justification? Obamacare and government dependence for women is better.

"If Cory Gardner and others were serious about expanding access to birth control, they wouldn’t be trying to repeal the no-copay birth control benefit, reduce Title X funding for birth control, or cut women off from Planned Parenthood’s preventive health services. This is simply a cynical political attempt to whitewash his terrible record and agenda for women's health. The reality is that Cory Gardner’s proposal would actually cost women more by forcing them to pay out of pocket for the birth control that they are getting now at no cost thanks to the ACA. We would welcome a sincere conversation about expanding birth control access for women - sadly Cory Gardner has not offered one," Planned Parenthood Action Fund Executive Vice President Dawn Laguens said in a statement.

Big government leftists like Laugens wage their own war on women by making them more dependent on government and by treating them like victims. Planned Parenthood wants to limit access to contraception so long as it's "free" with a prescription through big government mandates in Obamacare and 100 percent higher healthcare premiums for women overall, proving that this isn't about access to birth control, but instead making women dependent on Uncle Sam at all costs.