The following article is entirely the opinion of Robert Jonathan and does not reflect the views of the Inquisitr.

Obama cheerleader Debbie Wasserman Schultz may have experienced a talking points malfunction.

Congresswoman Wasserman Schultz is a Florida Democrat who also chairs the Democratic National Committee.

Registering her disagreement with the U.S. House of Representatives plan to sue President Obama over abuse of power, she had this to say on MSNBC about the commander in chief’s work ethic:

“I’m going to go to the House floor and actually debate why we shouldn’t be voting for the first time in American history to sue the president of the United States for doing his job, and doing his job actually less often and at a rate that is lower than any other president since Grover Cleveland…”

Cleveland served as U.S. president for two non-consecutive terms (1885 to 1889 and 1893 to 1897).

Wasserman Schultz may have been actually trying to suggest that Obama has issued fewer executive orders than any of his predecessors going back to back to the Cleveland administration. According to Noah Rothman of HotAir.com, however, “If that is an accurate interpretation, it is worth noting that Wasserman Schultz disturbingly equated the president issuing executive edicts with ‘doing his job.’ That’s a unique take on the role of chief executive, especially considering that the Supreme Court recently ruled by 9 to nothing that Obama’s take on what constitutes his job violates the separation of powers.”

In June, in a 9-0 decision, the high court struck down Obama’s recess appointments to the National Labor Relations Board because the Senate wasn’t legally out of session at the time.

Although just superficially totaling up the number of executive orders (helped along by an analysis in the Obama-friendly Washington Post) has been a Democrat talking point, it actually misses the point.

For many of the right and the left, such as highly respected liberal law professor Jonathan Turley, it’s not the amount of executive orders but instead the scope and the content. No one really cares, for example, if a president issues an innocuous executive order about national belly button lint day or which dignitary’s name goes on a post office. Those actions don’t prompt a constitutional controversy over separation of powers and checks and balances in relation to the selective enforcement or non-enforcement of federal law.

As The Daily Caller noted about the humanitarian and law enforcement crisis at the southern border that may have been created by Obama administration policy, “Despite the relative rarity in issuing executive orders, Obama has wielded his pen unilaterally on hot-button issues, frustrating Republicans. One example was a 2012 executive order implementing the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals policy which has provided amnesty to nearly 600,000 illegal immigrants. Recent reports have suggested that Obama may issue new executive orders amid the immigration crisis currently unfolding at the southern U.S. border involving tens of thousands of unaccompanied child immigrants.”

The GOP-controlled House voted 225-201 on Wednesday to sue Obama in connection with the many unilateral changes made to Obamacare without the approval of Congress, primarily focusing on the one-year delay in the employer mandate.

Wasserman Schultz has a history of going on TV with extremely partisan memorized messaging despite how abrasive or ridiculous it sounds. On one occasion, she even claimed she was misquoted by a tape recorder. During the last presidential campaign, she denounced 2012 GOP nominee Mitt Romney for offshore bank accounts even though she also held overseas investments.

Wasserman Schultz has also insisted that it is acceptable for President Obama to deny any knowledge of scandals engulfing his administration, but the same doesn’t apply to New Jersey Governor Chris Christie.

The congresswoman may inadvertently be on to something as far as the president’s work load is concerned, however. According to the New York Post, and despite one crisis after another, as of late July, Obama “has played 81 rounds of golf and had attended 75 political fund-raisers in the 628 days since his 2012 re-election.”

A colleague of Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, in also condemning the House lawsuit against Obama, apparently forgot that she tried to impeach George W. Bush in 2008.