In an editorial published this past weekend, we noted that 2015 was a relatively productive year for Congress. The 114th Congress, which convened a year ago this month, passed 87 substantive laws* in the first year of its two-year term, compared with 61 and 63 substantive laws passed during the first year of the two previous Congresses. A new education law replacing 2002’s No Child Left Behind Act, a five-year, $305 billion highway bill and a $1.15 trillion omnibus spending bill that included a measure ending the 40-year-old ban on exports of American crude oil were among the significant pieces of legislation passed by Congress last year.

A productive year for Congress often means a bipartisan year for Congress. In an era of polarization on issues like guns and immigration and fighting within Republican ranks, any congressional success in finding common ground on any issue deserves a few kudos.

Last year was the first time in four years that Republicans controlled both the House and the Senate — and the first time in four years the two chambers weren’t divided between Democrats and Republicans. The fact Republicans currently run Congress does not explain Congress’ productive year. But I think the bipartisanship that occurred last year generally fits the congressional politics we’ve seen since at least the election of Bill Clinton in 1992. I’ll try to explain what I mean.

First, I realize I’m writing broadly because any given piece of legislation that becomes law in any given year can stand in contradiction to my (again general) observation. Which is this: Congressional bipartisanship is more likely when Republicans control Congress than when Democrats control Congress because Democrats are more willing to vote for Republican proposals than Republicans are willing to vote for Democratic ones. Indeed, when Democrats control the House and the Senate, as they did from 2007 to 2011, the bipartisanship one is likely to see occurs more often on the “no” side of legislative votes than on the “yes” side because Democrats often don’t do unified resistance all that well, and also because there are conservative Democrats so it’s not unusual to see numerous Democrats standing against their own party’s proposals.

To illustrate my point, let’s first look at a few major pieces of legislation that passed Congress when Democrats controlled the House and Senate:

A prime example is the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, the formal title of Clinton’s first budget as president. Every Republican in Congress voted against it. Meanwhile, 41 Democrats in the House defied their president and party leaders, as did six Democrats in the Senate. Democratic opposition in the Senate to Clinton’s budget resulted in a famously tied, 50-50 vote. Vice President Al Gore, as president of the Senate, was called upon to break the tie and send the budget to Clinton’s desk to become law.

Sixteen years later, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 passed the House without a single Republican vote and passed the Senate with only three Republican votes. Meanwhile, 11 House Democrats initially opposed the stimulus bill; seven voted no when the bill came up for a final vote after emerging from a House-Senate conference committee.

And in 2010, Congress passed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act without a single Republican vote in either the House or Senate. Just as notably, Obama’s health care bill narrowly passed the House, 219-212, because 34 Democrats voted against it.

Now let’s look at a few major pieces of legislation that have passed Congress when Republicans controlled the House and Senate:

Thirty House Democrats joined 226 Republicans in passing welfare reform in 1996; 98 Democrats supported the final conference version of the reform bill. In the Senate, welfare reform initially passed 74-24, with 23 Democrats joining 51 Republicans in voting yes. The final vote was 78-21.

Five years later, 13 House Democrats supported the initial version of the first George W. Bush tax cuts — formally known as the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001. Twenty-eight Democrats in the House supported the final, conference committee version. Other than a handful of their colleagues who didn’t vote, every Republican in the House supported Bush’s tax cuts.

In the Senate, 12 Democrats supported the tax cuts on final vote, instrumentally sending them to Bush to be signed into law. Only two Republican senators weren’t in lockstep with their party on the tax cuts: Lincoln Chafee of Rhode Island and John McCain of Arizona.

The budget surpluses of the Clinton era soon disappeared under Bush and large deficits quickly returned. By the time Congress voted on another round of Bush’s tax cuts — the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 — Democratic support in the House had dwindled considerably, to seven.

Meanwhile, the final vote in the Senate mirrored the 50-50 vote on the Clinton budget that had occurred a decade earlier, with Vice President Dick Cheney this time on hand to break the tie. Two Democrats joined 48 Republicans to help pass the bill, while three Republicans — McCain again among them — voted with 46 Democrats and independent Sen. Bernie Sanders in opposition.

Of course politics evolve and parties change. Democrats have become less diverse ideologically over the past several election cycles — only 14 conservative Blue Dog Democrats remain in the House, for example — and that trend probably will continue in 2016. Republicans, on the other hand, arguably have become more diverse, at least within a narrow ideological range — hence the intraparty divisions. Plenty of Republicans defied their party leaders in 2015 — to the point they drove John Boehner out of the speaker’s seat in the House.

This time next year a new Congress will have convened and we’ll be two weeks away from inaugurating a new president. If election results favor Republicans in November, it’ll be interesting to see if the general bipartisanship patterns of the past 25 years hold. Or if they have begun to change — and change so much that Democrats, despite their desire to make government work, emerge as the Republicans of 2009 and plot to obstruct any and all proposed legislation before the new president is even sworn in.

__________________

*As opposed to ceremonial laws, like those that rename federal buildings or commemorate historic events.