As directed by its board of directors during its April 26 meeting, The Hospital & Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania (HAP) issues its full support to allow certified nurse practitioners (CNP) to practice to the full scope of their license without the need for physician supervision after they have worked under such supervision for three years and 3,600 hours.

HARRISBURG, PA (PRWEB) May 02, 2016

As directed by its board of directors during its April 26 meeting, The Hospital & Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania (HAP) issues its full support to allow certified nurse practitioners (CNP) to practice to the full scope of their license without the need for physician supervision after they have worked under such supervision for three years and 3,600 hours.

In addition, HAP supports CNPs who are licensed in another state and demonstrate that they have met the three-year/3,600-hour requirements to practice in Pennsylvania without a collaborative/written agreement.

HAP's support comes during a time when critical discussions are taking place across the country and state about how to ensure that all individuals have access to primary care.

"The 2010 Affordable Care Act is the largest overhaul to our nation's health care system since the creation of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965. It has required a comprehensive rethinking of the way care is provided. This rethinking also must include the role of health care professionals in new, team-based models of care," said HAP President and CEO Andy Carter.

Allowing full-practice authority for CNPs after meeting the three-years/3,600-hour physician collaboration requirements would make Pennsylvania one of the strictest states in the U.S. allowing practice without the collaborative/written agreement.

Currently, 21 states and the District of Columbia allow CNPs to practice to their full authority.

HAP believes that CNPs do not need unending physician supervision when caring for patients within the boundaries of their training.

"Today's health care professionals are being educated to function as part of a practicing health care team, which is consistent with the team-based care delivery models being used by hospitals and health systems. The full use of CNPs and other clinical professionals is needed to build strong patient relationships, help patients and families follow care plans, coordinate care across the continuum, improve patients' health literacy, and provide health education. Allowing full-practice authority for CNPs after meeting the appropriate physician collaboration requirements is a reasonable, responsible approach to helping to meet the growing health care needs for Pennsylvania," said Carter.

An amendment to Senate Bill 717 is pending in the State Senate that would allow full practice authority for CNPs after meeting the three-year/3,600-hour physician collaboration requirements.

ABOUT HAP: HAP is a statewide membership services organization that advocates for nearly 240 Pennsylvania acute and specialty care, primary care, subacute care, long-term care, home health, and hospice providers, as well as the patients and communities they serve. Additional information about HAP is available online at http://www.haponline.org.

For the original version on PRWeb visit: http://www.prweb.com/releases/2016/05/prweb13384217.htm