Wyoming road worker hopes family is finding some peace of mind

The area where Nathaniel Tallman's body was found, referred to as "the Breaks" along Highway 85 about 10 miles north of Lusk, Wyo. ( Lori Himes / The Lusk Herald )

Kirk Sturgeon has not been sleeping well lately — since he found the body of Nathaniel Tallman.

Sturgeon, 60, runs a road grader for the Niobrara County, Wyo., road and bridges department. He was atop his rig on Highway 85 just a few miles north of Lusk about 7:45 a.m. March 13 when he spotted something unusual in the draw alongside the road.

"The road grader only runs like 30 miles an hour, and I'm setting about 10 foot up, and I could see over the guardrail," Sturgeon said.

"There's big draws right there, and I always look down in them because a lot of times there's elk or deer down there. This time there was no elk or deer. There was this body, as simple as that."

He parked the road grader several hundred yards farther down the road, then detached his pickup from the grader and doubled back to double-check on what it was that he had seen.

"I remember so many things about this," Sturgeon said. "I walked down past his feet, and when I seen his face, that is when I realized that it was a body, a human body, and I'll tell you what, that's the worst feeling I have ever had in my life.

"I figured he had to have been killed somehow and thrown out there, like a bag of garbage."

Tallman's body was clothed but had no coat. No shoes were on his feet, but one was nearby. There was no evidence of the gunshot that killed him. Sturgeon said at first glance, it could have been mistaken for a mannequin.

Advertisement

He marked the location by jamming a large stick into the ground, and went to call the authorities.

Had Tallman's body been deposited just a short distance farther along Highway 85, Sturgeon said, the steepness and height of the slope would have likely left it completely obscured to passing drivers -— and anyone else — for a much longer time.

2nd suspect extradited, 3rd arrest possible

Nathaniel Tallman, a 2006 graduate of Monarch High School, was last seen alive Jan. 21. His body was found near Lusk, Wyo., on March 13. (Courtesy photo / Daily Camera)

Tallman, 25, had been reported missing to Lafayette police after he was last seen Jan. 21. On that day, according to a Lafayette police report, Tallman planned to meet Larimer County resident Russell Britton, 58, to "conduct a marijuana transaction."

On March 14, the day after Tallman's body was discovered, Britton was arrested. On Thursday, he was charged in Boulder District Court with first-degree murder, accessory to murder, robbery, possession of marijuana with intent to distribute 5 to 100 pounds, and possession of marijuana with intent to distribute 5 to 50 pounds,

Also arrested in the case for investigation of first-degree murder is Moises Mendez, 26. He was taken into custody in California on March 15 and held at the San Diego Central jail until he was extradited Friday night. Officials said he was being transported to Boulder County to be held on a $1 million bond.

Court documents also name a third suspect, California resident Daniel Ortiz, but he has not been arrested. The charges against Britton allege that he "unlawfully and feloniously rendered assistance to Daniel Ortiz and Moises Mendez with intent to hinder, delay or prevent the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment of Daniel Ortiz and Moises Mendez for commission of a crime, knowing that person committed the crime of murder in the first degree."

In a Lafayette police arrest report, it is stated that phone records show Tallman called Britton several times on the way to meeting with him, and that the last known location for Tallman's phone was near Britton's home.

In several interviews with Lafayette police, Britton denied that Tallman had ever arrived, according to an arrest report. Britton told police that when Tallman failed to show up, he left to travel to Minot, N.D. But police found blood in the back of Britton's van that allegedly matched Tallman's DNA profile — even though Britton told Lafayette police that Tallman had never been in his van.

'You don't see this in real life'

Kirk Sturgeon, a road crew worker for the Niobrara (Wyo.) County roads and bridges department, found Nathaniel Tallman's body March 13 while riding this rig. (Lori Himes / The Lusk Herald)

Sturgeon, on finding Tallman's body, likened the experience to a scene out of the Oscar award-winning movie "No Country For Old Men," based on Cormac McCarthy's novel chronicling the violence sparked by a drug deal gone awry in the stark West Texas plains.

"This is something you see on TV; you don't see this in real life," Sturgeon said. But he admitted that happening upon just this kind of discovery is a possibility he has imagined, while driving the often lonely roads of the least populous county in the nation's least populous state.

"This has always been my biggest fear," he said. "I figured someday out in the middle of the boondocks ... and, all of a sudden, there it is. It's a big shock."

Sturgeon said he had a heart attack about 10 years ago and has a pacemaker, and he was told by a doctor in the wake of his cardiac ordeal that he might find himself growing more emotional, or less so, as time goes on. This experience, he said, has conclusively answered that.

"I really get emotional about a lot of things anymore, and I just have flashbacks of the body laying there," Sturgeon said. "It's something that you see in movies, and it never bothers you. But real life, it does."

He said he was relaying his experience "to get it off my chest," and that his road crew foreman, Fred Thomas, had encouraged him to do so, to help him in moving past it.

Thomas, along with the Wyoming Highway Patrol and the Niobrara County sheriff, came quickly to the site where Tallman was found. He confirmed Sturgeon's account.

"He's doing all right," he said of Sturgeon. Thomas added, "It's something you don't find every day."

Lafayette police Cmdr. Brian Rosipalja said it was too soon to know whether Sturgeon would qualify for any or all of a $10,000 reward put forward by Tallman's family and friends for information as to his whereabouts.

"That wasn't an area we were going to touch upon right now with the family," Rosipalja said. "We're just allowing them to mourn the loss of their son, and then we would address the reward fund" at a later time.

Sturgeon catches himself thinking a lot about Tallman's family members. They have said little publicly since the first days of his disappearance.

"My son was in Afghanistan, and I think about what if he had gotten killed, and I didn't know about it," Sturgeon said. "This way, with me finding his body, now his family knows what happened. ...

"He didn't make it, but still they can do the closure, and they can do a funeral. Good or bad, they've got his body."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Charlie Brennan at 303-473-1327 or brennanc@dailycamera.com.