The Eagle Ford Shale in South Texas, which Shell said it planned to sell its stake in following a $2 billion writedown

A long list of energy companies have shaved billions of dollars off the value of their natural-gas properties in the last couple of years. Conspicuously absent: America’s biggest gas producer, Exxon Mobil The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has been wondering why.

The energy behemoth became America’s biggest natural-gas producer when it bought XTO Energy Inc. for $25 billion in June 2010. At the time, gas sold for just shy of $5 per million British thermal unit, but since then the price has hovered well below that level – dipping under $2 per Btu in 2012 – until this winter.

Exxon chief executive Rex Tillerson even said in 2012 that the company was making “no money” on shale gas.

The SEC quoted Mr. Tillerson when it wrote to Exxon in September, according to correspondence the commission made public on Monday. The regulators asked whether the company had tested the value of its shale reserves and why it had taken no write-downs.

As a nationwide gas glut pushed down prices, many companies – including Royal Dutch Shell PLC and BHP Billiton Ltd. – concluded some of their shale properties were worth billions of dollars less than what they paid, prompting them to take write-downs.

For energy companies, the reserves of oil and gas they control are a measure of the cash they can bring in the future. When the value of those reserves falls below their internal price tag, they recognize it as a charge to income.

Exxon’s answer to the SEC boils down to this: Yes, low gas prices hurt in 2012, but the pain was fleeting and the future looks a lot better.

To put a value on wells that pump oil and gas for decades, Exxon argued in its response to the SEC, it has to factor in things that haven’t happened yet. For instance, Exxon pointed out that the U.S. is poised to export a significant amount of natural gas overseas, which could boost prices for the fuel.

Exxon also told the SEC it didn’t test the value of its shale holdings in 2012, because low commodity prices in the short term don’t justify such an exercise. Last month, natural-gas prices rose to their highest level since June 2010.

It can be embarrassing for CEOs to admit they overpaid. The chief executive of BHP Billiton forfeited a bonus in 2012 after the Australian conglomerate took a $2.84 billion write-down on some of its U.S. shale-gas properties. A few months later he left the company. Shell took a $2 billion write-down on North American shale assets last August, just weeks after naming a new chief executive.

Writing down asset values can help reduce income taxes and make a company look more profitable, but first “somebody has to bite the bullet,” Oppenheimer & Co analyst Fadel Gheit said. That’s easier for a new CEO than one already in place, like Exxon’s Mr. Tillerson.

“He doesn’t want to take the write-off on his watch,” Mr. Gheit said, adding that Exxon has long resisted writing down the value of assets.