Christina is a reporter based in Boise, Idaho. She's a veteran vegetarian, a political junkie and a huge grammar snob. On the weekends, she can usually be found binging on Netflix, playing the piano or petting her cats, Daisy and Dandelion.

Image: Derrick Salters/WENN.com

Print

Bobby Brown is turning to music during hard times.

More: New report about Bobbi Kristina Brown's hospice bed pics will disgust you

With his daughter, Bobbi Kristina, still in hospice care and reportedly unresponsive after she was found unconscious in a bath in her home in late January, New Edition frontman Brown and his band were the opening act at a concert in Atlanta, Georgia.

Brown and his band opened for a group called Mint Condition at the Affordable Old School Concert Series at Wolf Creek Amphitheater, according to Us Weekly. The R&B legend wore all pink and sweated profusely during his set, the site reports.

And although fans didn't seem to notice — "Fans loved his performance," one onlooker told Us Weekly — Brown seems to have struggled to get through the show. The witness continued, "Bobby did his New Edition classics and busted out into some of his signature dance moves, but had to stop several times during the 30-minute set."

More: Latest Bobbi Kristina Brown update has everyone worried

At one point, during a break, Brown reportedly apologized to the crowd, saying, "Sorry, I'm in a different zone tonight."

He continued, "Y'all got me sweating and dancing. I'm so happy to be here."

So, despite repeated interruptions, Brown seems to be finding solace in performing.

Still, those close to the singer say he's struggling as his daughter clings to life. He didn't mention her during his performance, but Brown rushed to her side a day after she was placed into hospice care on June 24. Johnny Gill, one of Brown's New Edition bandmates, told Entertainment Tonight that Brown's mental state has taken another dive following the latest development in his daughter's care.

"State of mind? In a nutshell, not good. Not good," Gill said of Brown. "We just had a conversation yesterday. I wouldn't wish this on my worst enemy."

More: Bobbi Kristina Brown's family now has to deal with an ill-timed lawsuit