About 27,000 foreign residents of Broward County have a chance to live legal: find a job, obtain a driver's license and cast off fears of deportation under President Barack Obama's forthcoming immigration rules.

They are among 253,000 Floridians and 5.2 million nationwide who may benefit from the new federal rules, as Congress and the president head for a showdown on this explosive issue.

Floridians living in the shadows of the law — and those covered by Obama's rules — are concentrated in urban counties with sprawling suburbs: Miami-Dade, Broward, Palm Beach, Orange and Hillsborough, according to figures released by the Migration Policy Institute, a non-partisan and independent research group in Washington.

Many who are eligible to be spared from deportation greeted Obama's executive action in November with celebrations, hugs and tears of joy. But the new rules, expected in the next few weeks or months, will leave many more with constant fear.

"My mom and dad said, 'Oh my God, you are going to be able to work, you are going to be able to go to school!'" said Charlene Rupert, 21, who came from Venezuela at age 11 to settle in Palm Springs. She is covered by Obama's rules, but her parents are not.

"A lot of people have been here 20 years and still haven't gotten an opportunity to be able to have a driver's license or to be able to work," Rupert said. "I am looking for something more. I'm talking about many others who are in the same situation, and some who are in a worse situation than I am. We want something for our parents so they can work, can make a little money."

The president, backed by South Florida immigrant activists, is trying to persuade Congress to provide a path to citizenship for as many as 632,000 Florida residents and as many as 11 million nationwide. But the House moved in the opposite direction by attaching an amendment to a spending bill earlier this month to block Obama from carrying out the rules.

As the guest of U.S. Rep. Lois Frankel, Rupert watched from the House gallery Tuesday night when Obama delivered his State of the Union address. "Yes, passions still fly on immigration," Obama said, "but surely we can all see something of ourselves in the striving young student, and agree that no one benefits when a hard-working mom is taken from her child …"

His rules will provide a shield from deportation for children who were brought to the country illegally and for parents of U.S. citizens and legal residents. The new rules will spell out a process for applying for this status.

The Migration Policy Institute's compilation of Census data estimates that 72,000 in Broward County live in the country illegally and that 27,000 of them will be eligible under Obama's rules to remain temporarily without fear of deportation. That will make it easier for them to work and get driver's licenses.

Nearly half of the county's unauthorized population, 49 percent, was born in South America. Twenty-seven percent were born in Mexico or Central America, 12 percent in the Caribbean, 6 percent in Asia and 5 percent in Europe or Canada.

Seventy-five percent have lived in the United States for more than five years, according to MPI's analysis. Two-thirds are uninsured, perhaps largely because none of those living in the country illegally are eligible for coverage or benefits through the Affordable Care Act.

Forty-four percent are homeowners — a substantial proportion, though less than the total county rate of 66 percent.

"There is housing available for purchase by unauthorized immigrants, and they are able to show credit in some cases," said Randy Capps, MPI's director of research for U.S. programs. "Some may double up with someone who has legal status."

Many in Congress, including Republicans and Democrats from South Florida, are determined to end the legal limbo, reform a broken immigration system and reunite separated families by allowing long-established residents to remain. They support a comprehensive reform bill, passed by the Senate in the last session but ignored by Republican leaders in the House, that would have provided a path to citizenship for most of those living in the country illegally.

"Because the fact of the matter is, there's no realistic way to send 11 million people back to their country, and it would be totally contrary to our values," said Frankel, D-West Palm Beach. "We have to work together to figure out how to let people out of the shadows, let people like Charlene go to school and live productive lives, keep families together."

But most Republicans, backed by the tea party movement, strongly oppose the Senate bill, which they call "amnesty" for lawbreakers, and they are infuriated by Obama's executive order to spare millions from deportation.

U.S. Rep. Ted Yoho of Gainesville is among Republicans leading the charge against Obama's order. "I could not stand idly by as the president trampled our Constitution, our laws and our sovereignty," Yoho said.

Three Cuban-American Republicans from the Miami area — Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Mario Diaz-Balart and Carlos Curbelo — voted against the amendment to block Obama's rules. The Senate is expected to reject the provision.

The American public is divided, and poll results are mixed. A Washington Post/ABC News poll found that 56 percent of those polled thought Congress should block Obama's executive order, but a CBS News poll found that 55 percent of respondents thought Congress should "let it stand."

During her visit to Washington, Rupert told members of Congress and their staffs her personal story while urging passage of a comprehensive reform bill.

"Hopefully they will be touched and be motivated to do something about it," she said.

Wgibson@Tribune.com, 202-824-8256