Pennsylvania to limit premium increases for Affordable Care Act insurance plans

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Pennsylvania is preventing some of the biggest cost increases that insurers requested for health plans they will sell on the Affordable Care Act's marketplace for next year, forcing insurers to find other ways to manage the costs of treating the sicker-than-expected people who have signed up.

The Pennsylvania Insurance Department kept premium increases to less than 27 percent, denying requested increases of as much as 36.6 percent from Highmark and 58 percent from Geisinger, the department announced Thursday. The department released information about rates for individual and small business plans before the Nov. 1 start of open enrollment for the plans, which are sold on healthcare.gov.

Highmark said treatment costs for marketplace enrollees exceeded premiums by about $318 million for the first six months of this year, a deficit driven by high rates of hospitalization and claims related to cancer, congestive heart failure and other chronic conditions. Geisinger said it, too, paid more for care than it collected.

Both companies said they were dropping some plans they planned to offer in 2016, in part because the department limited the amount by which they could increase premiums. Highmark has added plans with new benefit designs, including its Community Blue Flex plan that has three tiers of costs for doctors and hospitals, rather than traditional in-network and out-of-network rates.

“The action that we need to take to keep plans financially viable is to modify the offerings,” said Highmark spokesman Aaron Billger.

Highmark enrolled more people than any other insurer in the state in the federal health law's first open enrollment period by offering some of the lowest premiums for 2014. The nonprofit increased costs for 2015, and competitor UPMC Health Plan gained market share by selling cheaper plans.

UPMC Health Plan will offer the lowest-cost “silver” plan — a popular type of mid-range plan sold on the marketplace — in southwestern Pennsylvania next year. A 40-year-old non-smoker would pay $187 per month for the plan. Highmark's lowest-cost silver plan in the same area will cost about $211 per month.

“We think we're very well positioned in the market,” said UPMC Health Plan spokeswoman Gina Pferdehirt. “The lowest-priced silver plans, people seem to respond to well.”

UPMC Health Plan kept increases below 10 percent for all its plans, Pferdehirt said.

“We are working to guarantee that Pennsylvanians can continue to shop for their best coverage options in a competitive insurance marketplace, while still paying reasonable prices,” Gov. Tom Wolf wrote in a news release.

But increases of more than 20 percent are still large, said Insurance Federation of Pennsylvania President Sam Marshall.

“We obviously still have a ways to go in terms of keeping insurance affordable,” he said. “Those were thoroughly reviewed rates, and they come with some sizable increases.”

The federal Department of Health and Human Services announced Thursday that it expects about 10 million people to have enrolled in marketplace plans by the end of 2016, up from the 9.1 million enrolled this year.

Of the 19 companies selling individual health insurance plans in Pennsylvania on the Affordable Care Act's marketplace next year, seven are increasing premiums by more than 10 percent, according to the release. All 23 companies that sell plans to businesses with fewer than 50 employees are increasing premiums by less than 10 percent, according to the release. The insurance department asked six insurers that requested increases of more than 25 percent to limit the increases, noting that they could seek more increases in the future.

Consumer advocacy organizations encourage people with Affordable Care Act plans to check whether their costs are increasing and to consider switching plans if they can save money.

“If individuals are unhappy with how plans have changed their options or that the price has gone up, they should definitely shop around,” said Antoinette Kraus, director of Pennsylvania Health Access Network.

For 2015, the average monthly premium is $222 for Pennsylvania's lowest-cost silver plan, one of the most popular sold on the marketplace. But about 80 percent of people who are eligible for marketplace coverage are eligible for tax credits that lower their monthly premiums, according to HHS. Average premiums for 2016 are not yet available.

Kraus noted that most consumers will pay smaller increases than the insurers requested since the tax credits are based on income.

Wes Venteicher is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-380-5676 or wventeicher@tribweb.com.