Ohio Republican Party Chairman Matt Borges mulls the question: Could the Tea Party derail Ohio Gov. John Kasich’s potential bid for president in 2016?

“The Tea Party?” he says. “Let me tell you a story.”

Story Continued Below

Two years ago, around the time Borges became chairman, he scheduled separate meetings with two Tea Party activists in Cincinnati. Both men had garnered their share of headlines—too many, some Republicans privately griped—and Borges wanted to reach out to them.

First, he met with the guy who’d been a vocal critic of Borges.

“He had been saying terrible things about me and we had never met,” Borges says. “We sit down at lunch. He tells me Christian conservatives are the voice of the Tea Party and they’re A-OK with John Kasich and fine with helping him. But they were going to do everything they could to defeat [U.S. Sen.] Rob Portman.”

Next week, Borges met with the other Tea Party activist.

“He tells me John Kasich will never get elected president and no one will support him because of the Medicaid expansion,” Borges says. “But they will support Rob Portman. He’s fine.”

Borges laughs at the memory. “These self-appointed leaders of the Tea Party? They were not on the same page.”

It is hardly a revelation, of course, that the Tea Party has never been a monolithic group—not nationally, and certainly not in Ohio. For many Tea Partiers, the issue that moves them is strictly the size of government. Others trace their Tea Party affiliation to abortion and same-sex marriage. Still others embrace a “secure our borders” mantra.

What is far less clear, on the eve of the 2016 presidential primary campaign, is whether John Kasich or other establishment GOP figures can win over enough of this multifarious movement on the right to take both the nomination and the election. The Tea Party, in all its configurations, has brought diversity to a party that wasn’t looking for the disruption. Will this diversity be the Republican Party’s undoing, especially if the GOP candidate goes up against a Democratic juggernaut like Hillary Clinton?

For someone like Kasich, who is poised to trounce his Democratic opponent for reelection in this crucial Midwestern state—the latest poll shows him up by 22 points over Democrat Ed FitzGerald—these are important questions. With his burnished conservative pedigree and past congressional experience as chairman of the House Budget Committee, the governor is in an enviable spot: that of the overlooked guy everyone should be watching.

In April, Daily Beast writer Myra Adams made a big deal of billionaire Sheldon Adelson’s summoning Kasich to his “Sheldon Primary,” along with governors Chris Christie of New Jersey, Scott Walker of Wisconsin and former Florida governor Jeb Bush. Adelson has made no secret of his intention to shower millions on the one Republican candidate he thinks can win the White House in 2016. The headline for Adams’ story: “Is John Kasich The Most Formidable 2016 GOP Candidate You Don’t Know?”

In July, a Gallup Poll ranked by popularity the top 11 potential 2016 Republican presidential candidates: Mike Huckabee, Rand Paul, Marco Rubio, Rick Perry, Paul Ryan, Bobby Jindal, Ted Cruz, Scott Walker, Chris Christie, Jeb Bush and Rick Santorum.

Missing from that list: John Kasich. But with Bush on the fence, and Christie and Walker damaged by legal scandals (or pseudo-scandals, depending on your point of view)—not to mention the likelihood that Kasich will run up a huge margin of victory over FitzGerald, the fiscally conservative Ohio governor could be the savior the Republican establishment is desperate to anoint.

Kasich has won, praise, too, for balancing Ohio’s budget, and for bouncing back from a resounding defeat after voters rejected his attempt to eliminate public workers’ right to collective bargaining.

Today, however, some Kasich supporters are nervous that he’s getting attention for the wrong reasons—being known, for example, as one of nine Republican governors to accept the Medicaid expansion under Obamacare (two more are considering it). Ultraconservative activists tend to talk about Kasich in terms of betrayal. By their lights, he is the man who started out as a Newt Gingrich acolyte but has moved so far from the base who elected him that New York Times reporter Trip Gabriel last year described him as a guy who “occasionally sounds more like an heir to Lyndon B. Johnson than to Ronald Reagan.”

Kasich, if he is to run a successful race for president, will have to run the gauntlet of the Republican primaries first. He will have to connect the dots between his early years as one of the Young Turks of the proto-Tea Party movement—the Gingrich-led takeover of the House in 1994—and his tenure as governor. He must do this in a way that makes the trajectory appear not only natural, but ideal to conservatives.

***

As personal stories go, John Kasich’s roots reflect the experience of many old-school Democrats, which would include his parents. He grew up in a small town in western Pennsylvania. As he never tires of mentioning, he is the son of a mailman and the grandson of a coalminer and immigrants.

He refers often to his parents, Anne and John, who were killed in a car accident in 1987. Their deaths “helped me to jump-start my faith,” he wrote in his third book, Every Other Monday: Twenty Years of Life, Lunch, Faith, and Friendship . “I wanted to know if this ‘God thing’ was real,” he wrote. “For several years, some of my Washington friends had been trying to get me to attend their weekly Bible study reform group, and I’d always resisted. The last thing I wanted was to sit in a chapel with a group of politicians talking about God, because I worried we’d say one thing in there and then go back out and do the exact opposite. But when I returned to Washington after my parents’ death and tried to cobble my life back together, I started to look on this group as a possible lifeline. I was devastated, shattered, and desperate for any tether.”