ASHEBORO — Randolph Hospital is the largest nonprofit corporation in Randolph County.

By a country mile.

With 1,200 employees, it’s also the second-largest employer in the county, behind only the Randolph County School System.

The Asheboro hospital generated revenues of $122.8 million in the fiscal year that ended on Sept. 30, 2012, up about $5 million from a year earlier. Subtract wages, salaries, benefits and such (the payroll was $53.1 million) and other operating expenses, and the bottom line that year was a loss of $2.47 million.

In that year, as reported on IRS Form 990, Randolph Hospital:

* Served 6,722 inpatients.

* Had 30,076 emergency room visits.

* 105,570 other outpatient visits.

* 43,903 home care visits.

* 28.7 percent of emergency patients were uninsured.

“Our mission is to take care of people’s health care needs regardless of their ability to pay,” said Steve Eblin, Randolph Hospital’s chief executive officer.

Based on ability to pay, the hospital’s fee schedule slides to zero for some patients.

“We provide a large amount of charity care,” he said. “That does not mean we don’t need to make money. We have to generate income. The money that we make goes back into the organization so that we can remain state of the art.”

The members of the hospital’s board of directors are Sam Cranford, Robert Shaffner, Mac Pugh, Mary Cooper, Elbert Lassiter, Diane Frost, Reynolds Lisk, Cranford Knott, Michael Miller, Sam Rankin Jr., Cris Richardson and Robert S. Shackleford.

Built to serve

Randolph Hospital, which opened its doors on July 9, 1932, turned 82 last week.

The N.C. General Assembly enacted a bill authorizing its incorporation. The bill detailed “the objects for which this corporation is formed.”

Among them: “To maintain and operate an institution for the treatment of sick people under the direction and supervision of skilled physicians and surgeons.”

Also: “The corporation is to have and issue no capital stock and is to be operated and maintained at actual cost and entirely without profit, making only such charges to its inmates and patients for rooms, beds, attention and services as will be adequate to defray its actual cost and no more.”

An invitation from the members of the hospital building committee appeared in the July 7, 1932, edition of The Courier: “Everybody is invited to come to Asheboro Saturday, July 9th to celebrate the opening of the Randolph Hospital Inc. Special invitation are not necessary. The hospital belongs to the Randolph people and the general public is invited to attend the formal opening. The formal opening program will be held in the Asheboro school auditorium at 10:45 a.m. and an inspection reception at the hospital at 2:00 p.m.”

The hospital was built with a matching grant from the Duke Endowment. Original plans called for a donation of $50,000 from the endowment and construction of a 40-bed hospital at a cost of $100,000. When the community raised $65,000 — at the outset of the Great Depression — the Duke Endowment raised its donation to $65,000.

The extra money allowed for construction of a nurses’ home, beautification of the hospital grounds, and completely equipping the hospital with the latest modern appliances and conveniences. The hospital was debt-free when it opened.

Outcomes, not profit

Eblin estimated that 90 percent of the hospitals in the nation — and most hospitals in North Carolina — operate as nonprofits.

“Last year,” he said, “two-thirds of the hospitals in North Carolina lost money.”

Randolph Hospital has lost money for two years in a row due to a combination of factors, including the economy, Eblin explained. He said cuts to Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements contributed to the shortfall. Another factor was ongoing changes in the healthcare industry accelerated by the Affordable Care Act.

“In the past, we were paid for how much we did for a patient,” Eblin said.

Now, reimbursements are tied to patient outcomes.

“The goal — and this is a good goal for the patient — is to keep people healthier and not in hospital beds,” he said. “The medical community here and all around has become much more effective at doing that.”