US Supreme Court Building in Washington, DC. (KAREN BLEIER/AFP/Getty Images)

Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts shied away from striking down Obamacare for fear the court’s long-term credibility might be hurt if it countermanded legislation enacted by the popularly elected branches. Now, ironically, in the wake of two rounds of Obamacare rulings, gay marriage and other controversial issues, the court is less respected than ever, according to a Gallup poll:

Half of Americans (50%) disapprove of the job the U.S. Supreme Court is doing, while slightly fewer (45%) approve. Although the high court’s approval rating is similar to what it has been in recent years, the current disapproval rating is at a new high. Fewer Americans (5%) now have no opinion about the court. . . . This July, Democrats’ approval of the Supreme Court reached a record high of 76%, while Republicans’ approval hit a record-low 18% after the court handed down major decisions legalizing same-sex marriage and upholding the Affordable Care Act. Two months later, this wide gulf continues to exist in Republicans’ (26%) and Democrats’ (67%) approval ratings of the court, but the division is not as extreme as it was in July.

It is tempting to think that had the court simply ruled as conservatives wanted, its overall approval would have gone up. (“Already, the court’s highest and lowest partisan approval scores in the past 15 years have come from Republicans,” Gallup says.) But in that event, it would be Democrats tipping the scales toward an overall disapproval rating.

So is this a matter of the court not being able to win in a highly polarized country no matter what it does? Perhaps this is the new normal. When the court was viewed as carrying out a lofty mission of enforcing the Constitution, it earned wider respect. Now that the opinions read like political statements and “liberal” justices predictably vote one way and “conservatives” the other, it has become like any other government entity — mistrusted. Citizens think everything has become hopelessly partisan — from the Internal Revenue Service to the courts. The “fix” is in, many suspect.

Conservative legal scholars and observers would say Roberts had it wrong in perceiving that the court would lose stature if it struck down the health care statute. In fact, they argue the court is obligated to do so when a state or federal law runs afoul of the Constitution. Rather the mistake here, conservatives felt, was in Roberts’s transparent effort to reach a particular outcome (sustaining the law) by virtue of the taxing authority. His equally specious reasoning in deciding that subsidies could continue even in exchanges set up by the feds also seem guided by the desire to reach a particular outcome. In the gay marriage case, again, disappointed defenders of states’ power to ban gay marriage resented the court moving to stamp out the last vestiges of democratic protection for “traditional marriage.” In short, conservatives think the court is playing politics — and favoring the other side. They point to the liberal justices who, unlike Roberts and Justice Anthony Kennedy, are entirely predictable in favoring the left’s desired policy outcomes.

It is tempting to conclude that conservatives simply did not like the results reached in the Obamacare and gay marriage cases. There is certainly something to that, just as enthusiasm for the court from the left stemmed from winning on issues they cared deeply about. But that does not mean the court is destined to be in low repute.

Justices, for one thing, might consider clamping down on their public nonjudicial pronouncements which sound an awful lot like political ruminations. Justices need to continually examine their own reasoning and question whether uniform adherence to outcomes favoring one side in the political debate is indicative of their subsuming law to politics. And in decisions — whether in majority, concurrence or dissent — justices would be well advised to avoid personal screeds and to take pains to explain, again and again, why judicial decision-making is different than politics. If it’s not and the two have become irreparably blurred, the court will permanently lose the respect of the citizenry. With that, the temptation to stack the court with political hacks and evade its rulings will only increase.