Taylor Hall gave goalie Semyon Varlamov a complimentary tap on the left leg pad after the right one stoned him at the second-period buzzer Saturday. Hall, who is Edmonton’s star left winger and leading scorer, had just put his seventh shot on Varlamov, and he and his linemates had 15 through two periods.

“I saw that,” Varlamov said of Hall’s gesture. “You’re not going to see this very often, I can tell you. Huge respect there by Taylor. He’s a good player, the leader of the Edmonton Oilers and when he’s on the ice his line is creating a lot of scoring chances.”

Hall’s public plaudit of Varlamov suggested the Oilers were beyond frustrated, and somewhat appreciative of the red-hot goalie from Russia. Varlamov was just that good in Colorado’s 5-1 victory at the Pepsi Center.

The Avs built a 3-0 lead to support Varlamov’s stellar play and went on to secure their fifth consecutive win to improve to 17-16-1 on the season. The winning streak is the longest since Colorado won six in a row in coach Patrick Roy’s first season of 2013-14, when it captured the Central Division and finished second in the Western Conference.

“Varly is playing so well right now,” Avs coach Patrick Roy said. “When you’re looking at him, it seems very easy. He’s under control. He’s moving well. He sees the puck big. He’s in a zone right now and we feed off him.”

The Avs got short-handed, power-play and even-strength goals from Blake Comeau, Tyson Barrie and Nick Holden to take a 3-0 lead into the third period. It marked the fifth consecutive time Colorado scored first and the fourth time during that stretch it built a 2-0 lead.

Edmonton got within 3-1 early in the third period with a bar-down goal from defenseman Andrej Sekera before Edmonton native Jarome Iginla, the Avs’ right winger, scored his 598th career goal to reestablish the three-goal lead. Iginla is two goals away from becoming the 19th player to score 600 goals.

Iginla ended a nine-game goal-less drought. Comeau scored on a short-handed breakaway 1:12 into the game after the Avs were whistled for too many men while making their first shift change of the game. Barrie and Holden beat goalie Anders Nilsson with long shots through traffic.

“We stuck together for the last two or three weeks and we’ve grown, learning how everyone plays. We’re all really comfortable with each other,” Comeau said. “We’re a confident group. We’ve been doing really good things.”

Fourth-line winger Jack Skille beat Nilsson with a wrist shot late in the third period.

The Avs continue their four-game homestand Monday against the Toronto Maple Leafs.

“We had a tough schedule and our players deserve a lot of credit. They work hard, they believe in themselves. I am very proud of our players,” Roy said.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or @mikechambers