BRISTOL, Pa. -

The Republican candidates for the 8th Congressional District laid out and clarified a few of their campaign and policy platforms during a public debate Thursday afternoon at Bucks County Community College, Lower Bucks campus, Bristol.

The debate was moderated by part-time social and behavioral science faculty member Bill Pezza.

The Republican candidates for the 8th Congressional District include Dr. Marc Duome; Brian Fitzpatrick, former Federal Bureau of Investigation Agent; and Andy Warren, former Bucks County commissioner.

Duome asked the voters to consider his candidacy based on his business and executive experience.

Fitzpatrick referred to his 15 years of experience as an FBI agent as a reason for his running for Congress, adding he was offering himself "up to the voters of the district to serve my country in a different way."

Warren, whose public service includes serving as a county commissioner, township supervisor, teacher and coach, stressed that running for public office is a higher calling.

"My roots go deep in the county," Warren said of his 20 years of service.

Pezza asked the candidates who they support as the Republican Presidential candidate.

All three Republican candidates said they would lend their support to the Republican presidential nominee ultimately selected.

Warren indicated he was concerned with Donald Trump, noting what lesson Trump's candidacy may give to the electoral process. Warren also said Americans are drawn to Trump "because they are at the end of their rope."

Duome added Trump and Ted Cruz are breaking down the barriers by offering the voters something new.

The candidates were asked their views on maintaining a proper balance between an individual's privacy and national security in terms of the recent government request asking Apple to decrypt a phone belonging to one of the San Bernardino, Calif. killers.



Duome indicated support for protecting Apple.



"I'm taking the side of liberty," he said.



Fitzpatrick expressed support for the government's request.



"National security and civil liberties are not mutual exclusive," he said. "I think the FBI's request was a reasonable one."



Warren said court approval should be sought in such cases.



"That's precisely the way it should have been done," he said.



The candidates were also asked to identify ways they will help college students and future college graduates enter a stronger workforce.



"We need to balance the budget, that is first and foremost," Fitzpatrick said, adding the government should also use zero-based budgeting.



"With the zero-based approach, they [government departments] would have to justify every single line-item," he said.



Warren said more emphasis should be placed on colleges such as Bucks County Community College. He also said job stifling regulations should be repealed, such as the Affordable Care Act.



"It's [Affordable Care Act] killed 20 million jobs," he said.



Duome agreed the Affordable Care Act should be repealed, adding the focus should also be on college training that results in jobs.



The candidates also agreed they support expanding the presence of the military.