A Panama City Beach teacher is in the Bay County Jail charged with 2-counts of child abuse.

Department of Children and Families investigators contacted Beach Police saying 33-year old Daniel Patrick Holmes, the Surfside Middle School Band Director and music teacher had caused an injury to his own child, requiring medical treatment.

Both agencies carried out an investigation and say they uncovered a second similar incident.

Holmes was arrested at his apartment at the Paddock Club on Jackson Boulevard, charging him with 2-counts of child abuse.

Holmes is suspended with pay and reportedly will meet with Superintendent Bill Husfelt early next week to discuss the matter

Parker police department say they arrested 6-people Friday after finding 3 small children playing by themselves in the middle of East Highway 98.

They served a search warrant on a nearby home and arrested all of these Parker residents ranging in age from 17-to 43. All are charged with several counts of child neglect, as well as drug and paraphernalia possession.

They say the home itself was unlivable, with urine and feces in the floors, drugs, paraphernalia and a loaded gun within reach of the children, and bare electrical wires.

There were a total of 11-kids living in the house. They're all in the custody of the Department of Children and Families.

Two Panama City residents are behind bars on child abuse and neglect charges.

Bay County sheriff's deputies say they arrested 24 year olds Kaitlyn Marie Walsh and Robert John McWhorter, after daycare workers noticed bruises on the body of the 4-year old child in their care

A doctor allegedly found scrapes on the child's buttocks, face and ear as well.

Investigators say McWhorter slapped and struck the child, and that Walsh failed to make a reasonable effort to protect the child from his attack.

Walsh was charged with child neglect, McWhorter with aggravated child abuse.

And an Okaloosa man is heading to prison after a jury convicted him of capital sexual battery and lewd and lascivious molestation of a victim under the age of 12, and witness tampering.

Gregory Goodson performed sex acts on the girls from July 2010 until June 2012.

After authorities arrested him, he offered the victims' parents 40-thousand dollars to drop the charges.

Goodson faces a mandatory life sentence and designation as a sexual predator. His sentencing is set for October 22nd