SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Representative and DNC Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz (D-FL) ducked a question on when she believes life begins on Tuesday’s “Kelly File” on the Fox News Channel.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

When asked when she believes life begins, she first criticized Senator Rand Paul (R-KY) for dodging questions on his abortion position, then stated “from my perspective, from my party’s perspective, we do not support rolling back the protection that the constitutional right to make your own reproductive choices established in Roe versus Wade has given to women, and Republicans like Rand Paul did — do.”

Wasserman Schultz added, “a woman’s right to make her own decisions about her body should be between her and her doctor, and that in terms of personal liberty, we definitely have a different opinion, Rand Paul and I do, and there is a Supreme Court decision, though, that answers those questions for us.”

After Wasserman Schultz was asked “you would admit that you can’t have women aborting third trimester babies just on a whim, right?” Wasserman Schultz responded, “certainly not on a whim, but when a doctor –.”

She concluded, “we’ve been very clear. There’s no — ambivalence here, we’re very clear. We believe that that decision is best left not to government, but between a woman and her doctor. So there isn’t — I can’t tell you a specific date and time past which we on all — in all cases are certain that that choice shouldn’t be made. Because that decision is very unique and individual to the woman, and should be in consultation with her conscience, and her God, and her doctor, that is a decision left to her. Now, there are — there’s an overlay of restrictions that the Supreme Court has imposed through Roe versus Wade and subsequent decisions, and states have gone and implemented their own laws to put those restrictions in place. That’s how the law — now, I don’t agree with all of those restrictions, but the law should be followed, and that’s our view.”

Follow Ian Hanchett on Twitter @IanHanchett