Support for soccer growing in the US, including here in Loveland

Soccer fans celebrate after the US scored a goal just 30 seconds into their World Cup match against Ghana on Monday at the British Bulldog in Denver. ( John Leyba / THE DENVER POST )

A record number of viewers watched the United States' dramatic World Cup victory over Ghana on Monday. With more than 11 million people tuning in to ESPN's broadcast, it was the network's most-viewed soccer match ever.

Soon after the Americans' 2-1 victory, videos began popping up everywhere of fans reacting to John Brooks' go-ahead goal in the 86th minute. Based on the footage, it sure seemed like the best place to watch was in a crowded bar, shoulder to shoulder, celebrating one's love for country and sport together with friends and strangers alike.

With the US set to play Portugal on Sunday, and a chance to advance to the round of 16 with a win, soccer enthusiasts in and around Loveland have a few choices if they're looking for such an experience — or simply a reason to get out of the house for a few hours and see what all the fuss is about.

Among the places to watch is McGraff's American Grill, 1602 E. Eisenhower Blvd., where the Thompson Soccer Association (TSA) is hosting a watch party. TSA technical director Nick Bestor helped organized the event and said he's expecting between 30-50 players from the club, in addition to their family members and anyone else who wants to come. A special menu has been created just for the party, which begins a half hour before kickoff at 3:30 p.m.

"That's kind of the goal of this, to get people excited about soccer," Bestor said. "It's the United States. We're one of the most patriotic countries there is."

Advertisement

Though soccer has long been considered the most popular sport in the world, only recently has the game's following here in the US become more mainstream. That a network like ESPN is airing every match live is a sign of huge progress, Bestor said.

"I think that's pretty cool, because a lot of times in the US it's not necessarily about what the biggest event is, but it's what the market is willing to pay for in terms of advertising," he said. "In the US it shows that if they have to do what their sponsors demand, it shows that their sponsors have done research and that people are watching this."

TSA's watch party isn't the only option around town to watch the US take on Portugal on Sunday. The Sports Station, 409 Railroad Ave., in downtown is also expecting a big turnout for a sport that's not typically in such high demand there.

The bar/restaurant was caught a little by surprise for the US-Ghana match Monday. So this time they'll be ready.

"I'm expecting a great crowd, especially with what happened the last game. I've already had people calling me about it," general manager Daryl Gary said. "I'm bringing in more waitresses just for it. If I didn't have that response from the first game, I probably would get crushed. But now that I know what to expect, we'll be prepared."

Gary said he's not running any specific specials for the World Cup, but that the 180-inch screen the match will be on is "about as big as you can get."

For those looking for a more intimate setting, KJ Wood Distillers in Berthoud, 403 Fifth St., has you covered, and not just for when the US is playing, either.

Owner John Wood has a passion for the game that is pretty much unmatched. So much so, that he's been scheduling his distillery's tasting room hours specifically in sync with the World Cup. Which means for than a week now, Wood's been opening his doors at 9:30 a.m., welcoming anyone who wants to come by and watch.

"We don't have a ton of people here, but we've had on the weekends an average of four to eight people a game come in," he said. "For Berthoud that's not too bad."

As a former semi-professional player and high school coach, Wood says having played the sport means being able to appreciate it more. And that's why he thinks Americans are tuning in now more than ever.

"Ten years ago when I was coaching high school and club we had already reached a statistic that more kids played soccer than basketball, baseball and football combined," he said. "But 10 years ago those kids were 10, 15, 18 years old. Now those kids are 20, 25, 30 years old. They're starting to have children of their own, and they're actively paying attention to the World Cup.

"That's where you're seeing this groundswell and more excitement and attention being paid to it."

Contact Reporter-Herald Sports Writer Sean Star at sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/seanvstar