A new hospital licensing fee will help pay for the state to create a health care reporting system authorized nearly a decade ago but never funded. Part of the money will also be used to beef up hospital inspections.

The legislation establishing the fee of $55 per patient bed was signed by Gov. Pat Quinn last week. It will raise about $1.7 million a year, state officials estimate.

The state public health department tried unsuccessfully for years to establish the licensing fee. But all the previous proposals called for the money to be used solely to fund investigations of complaints against hospitals, as well as other regulatory actions, and were opposed by the hospital industry.

Meanwhile, the reporting system, which was created by law in 2005, mandated that hospitals report so-called adverse events, such as performing surgery on the wrong body part or the wrong patient. The goals was to find patterns that could be used to improve health care. But that 2005 law did not include a funding mechanism, so the system wasn't implemented.

Last year, the Illinois Department of Public Health and the Illinois Hospital Association, an influential lobbying group, brought the two ideas together: fund the hospital reporting system and inspections with one fee. Shifting the focus to quality and safety rather than just bulking up inspections brought on board the Naperville-based IHA. The bill passed the Senate last year, but not the House. This year it was approved by both chambers.

“We fully support this law to help the department have the necessary resources to implement the law as part of an overall framework for quality improvement and patient safety initiatives,” said Danny Chun, vice president of corporate communications and marketing for the hospital association.

A massive transformation in the way health care is delivered and paid for has helped fuel support for the bill, said Dr. LaMar Hasbrouck, director of the Illinois Department of Public Health. The Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, has put new emphasis on quality. Hospitals and physicians traditionally were paid for each service they provided, which led to unnecessary testing and procedures, but now they're financially penalized for providing poor care.

“I think everybody knows they need to focus on making sure their quality standards are getting better,” said state Sen. Heather Steans, D-Chicago, a sponsor of the bill.

More than half of the money collected will be dedicated to the hospital reporting system. Another 30 percent is earmarked for developing new quality and safety measures, and about 20 percent will be used to address patient complaints.

“We're moving from a punitive approach to consultative so that we can learn from bad things that do happen and will happen,” Dr. Hasbrouck said.

The public health department now has 17 people who inspect facilities statewide. That includes not only hospitals, but also dialysis centers, rural health clinics and hospice facilities.

ONLY 17 PERCENT OF CASES INVESTIGATED

In fiscal year 2013, the state received 617 hospital complaints. It investigated 106, or 17 percent. That's because the state relies on funding from the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services to pay for its investigations, and CMS only authorizes action in the most egregious cases, a spokeswoman for the state public department said. The state would like to add routine inspections as part of the licensing process.

A spokeswoman for Downers Grove-based Advocate Health Care, the biggest hospital network in Illinois, declined to comment about the new fee. Advocate, with 12 hospitals, would pay around $200,000 a year. The system had $4.9 billion in 2013 total revenue.

Chicago-based Presence Health, which also has 12 hospitals and is the largest Catholic hospital network in Illinois, would pay around $192,000. The system had $2.7 billion in 2013 total revenue.

The legislation “will allow the state to fund and implement a wide range of safety and quality improvement initiatives which will help ensure that patients continue to receive the highest quality of care in Illinois,” Tabrina Davis, system leader of corporate communications and public relations for Presence, said in a statement. “Creating a mechanism that funded safety and quality initiatives is critical at a time of significant changes in the healthcare industry.”

Hospitals will pay the fee once a year when their license is renewed. Small rural hospitals and so-called safety net hospitals that treat a large proportion of poor and uninsured patients are exempt from the fee.

Before the new law, hospitals were the only licensed health care organizations not paying a state licensing fee.