Buy Photo William Morgan of Alexandria, who lost his legs to diabetes, talks about having to hang on to the top of his house while in floodwater for 14 hours before being rescued after Hurricane Katrina a decade ago. (Photo: Richard Sharkey/The Town Talk)Buy Photo

William Morgan was lucky to get out of New Orleans alive after Hurricane Katrina, and he is happy to call Central Louisiana home.

"I'm perfectly content the way I am," he said in his home on Prospect Street in Alexandria.

Morgan, 81, was dealt a rough hand by Hurricane Katrina and life in general in his later years, but he remains generally upbeat. He is comforted by his two dogs — a poodle named Morgan Lafay and a terrier named Snoopy.

Having barely survived flooding in New Orleans after Katrina hit a decade ago, Morgan says he can live without the Crescent City.

While he says the Prospect Street area is a "hard neighborhood," he is thankful to have his own home and also is grateful for help from neighbors and others that he has received since coming to Alexandria.

Morgan lost most of one of his legs in 1999 and most of the other in 2000 because of diabetes-related complications. He and his wife, who was 25 years his junior, then divorced, and he was living with his trusty poodle, Morgan Lafay, on the edge of the 9th Ward area in New Orleans when Katrina blew through.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Katrina survivor William Morgan Richard Sharkey/The Town Talk

He had been through many a storm before, and he decided to ride out Katrina at home. He thought warnings about potentially major damage was "hogwash." Besides, he notes, it's hard to evacuate when you don't have any legs.

The hurricane itself didn't hit New Orleans that hard, but then levees broke, and much of the city flooded quickly.

Floodwater started seeping in under a door into his house, and then it started gushing in.

"Suddenly, it took me out of my chair up to the ceiling, and then I panicked. … What am I going to do now? I hadn't planned on what would happen if the water would go where I couldn't control it, couldn't get out of the way," Morgan said.

He swam to a middle room and got on top of a cabinet. He tried to punch a hole in the ceiling to try to escape the rising floodwater, but he couldn't even make a dent in it.

It became a life-or-death struggle.

"It was then I really panicked. I said, 'Well, I'm going to die,'" Morgan recalled.

He swam down through the floodwater, went through a side window and surfaced outside his house.

"I finally got outside the house, and then I heard the dog bark, and I said, 'Oh, Jesus.' Back down I go again to get the dog."

Morgan swam back into the house through the window, found his poodle and swam back outside. He put Morgan Lafay on the rooftop, which was barely above water, and he hung on to the edge of the roof and to the top of a tall banana tree while in the water for 14 hours before a Coast Guard boat arrived to rescue him.

Rescuers did not let the dog into the boat, so Morgan Lafay was left on the rooftop, which Morgan said was "an awful experience."

Morgan was taken to "Big Charity" hospital where water was up to the second floor and where he could hear periodic gunfire from the streets of New Orleans, he said. He was there a couple of days and then was loaded "like cattle" into an 18-wheeler along with other special-needs evacuees and taken to Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport, where he spent two days lying on a cot without food.

From there, he was flown by a military airplane to a VA hospital in Miami.

When he had to part with Morgan Lafay on the rooftop of his house, he wasn't sure he'd ever see the pooch again, but amazingly they were reunited, thanks to a dog rescue group. Morgan Lafay had been taken to Utah but was later flown to New Orleans and then to Miami to be reunited with Morgan.

Because of his diabetes and other health problems, Morgan was "falling apart" when he arrived in Miami, but he finally recovered.

"It was time to go home, but I didn't have a home to go to," Morgan said.

Morgan, who served nine years in the Air Force and later worked in the shipyard and aircraft industries along the Gulf Coast, ended up in Alexandria, thanks to assistance from a military caseworker.

After some stints in hospitals and nursing homes, he ended up buying the house on Prospect Street.

He was happy to have some distance between himself and the coast. He had been to Alexandria during his days in the Air Force, so he was familiar with the area.

Buy Photo William Morgan pets his poodle named Morgan Lafay in his Alexandria home. The two were lucky to survive Hurricane Katrina-related flooding in New Orleans a decade ago, and Morgan is glad to be in Alexandria with a good bit of distance between him and the Gulf Coast. (Photo: Miranda Klein/The Town Talk)

Returning to New Orleans was not something he ever considered after the Katrina experience.

"Once was enough. I felt that I must have been awful lucky to remain alive," Morgan said.

Since he's been here, the Air Force arranged to fix up a vehicle for him that could be driven without legs, he said, and New Horizons built a wheelchair ramp leading from his front door to his driveway.

Neighbors help him out, including taking his dogs for walks, but he is still independent enough that he can mow his grass with a push lawnmower while in a wheelchair, attracting stares from passersby.

Ten years after Katrina, Morgan is settled in Alexandria and doesn't plan on going anywhere.

"This is where I stayed. … I consider myself an Alexandrian."

Read or Share this story: http://www.thetowntalk.com/story/news/local/2015/08/28/katrina-nightmare-man-finds-peace-cenla/71313532/