This story is provided by our sponsor, NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital

National Public Health Week — a time to recognize the contributions of public health agencies and highlight issues that are important to improving our nation. (Photo: Getty Images/Purestock)

During the first week of April each year, the American Public Health Association brings together communities across the United States to observe National Public Health Week — a time to recognize the contributions of public health agencies and highlight issues that are important to improving our nation.

On the local level, Dr. William Higgins, vice president of medical affairs at NewYork-Presbyterian/Hudson Valley Hospital, and the president of the NewYork-Presbyterian Medical Group/Hudson Valley, talks about this year’s National Public Health Week initiative — creating healthy communities — and the importance of patient education as part of the continuum of health care.

Q: How important is patient education with regard to health?

A: It is extremely important. Concentrating on wellness, prevention and healthy living is central for patients and naturally requires education and communication. Patient education is not only important with regard to a person’s specific diagnosis, prognosis and treatment plan, but also for understanding and implementing strategies that will contribute to their wellness, such as creating healthy habits and practicing good nutrition.

Q: What specific public health initiatives does Hudson Valley Hospital actively promote?

A: The landscape of healthcare delivery has changed dramatically in the past decade, notably with the Affordable Care Act. It is our mission at NYP/Hudson Valley Hospital to serve the public not only as a leading healthcare provider, but as a responsible community partner. Here are just some of the ways we accomplish these goals:

Medical excellence: In 2015, this hospital became part of the NewYork-Presbyterian Regional Hospital Network, which is considered one the highest-quality hospital networks in the nation. It has enabled us to strengthen and broaden our primary care base and to deepen our 127-year commitment to our patients, their families and the Hudson Valley communities, by providing access to the best and brightest in global talent and resources. The strong communication between NewYork-Presbyterian Medical Group and our primary care providers before, during and after patient hospitalization is a key component of our success.

Readiness: NYP/Hudson Valley is in a constant state of readiness, including times when new global health concerns knock on our doors — such as the outbreaks of viruses or other health emergencies we hear about on the news. Our No-Wait Emergency Department is one of the busiest in Westchester, treating an average of 40,000 patients annually.

Community health initiatives: The hospital is actively involved in a host of community outreach projects that provide many ways to learn more about healthy living overall. Our Health Fairs provide free screenings for heart and lung health; we host Farmers’ Markets and cooking classes at the Chef Peter X. Kelly Teaching Kitchen, adjacent to the hospital on our Cortlandt Manor campus, which also features an on-site organic garden. Also at the Teaching Kitchen, a popular program is “Young Chefs of Westchester,” held for local middle school students to increase nutrition awareness.

Community lectures: Our physicians and rehabilitative therapists are educators as well, holding a number of free community lectures each month at the hospital and at local nursing homes, assisted-living communities and high schools. We have also added a new monthly program titled an “Ask the Doctor: Lunch and Learn” series, that community residents are invited to attend.

Q: What do you want your initiatives to accomplish?

A: Practitioners and administrators face global health and medical concerns, in addition to constantly changing resources and policies, all while continually looking to innovate and raise the level of healthcare at the local level. We are proud of our affiliation with NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, which makes it easier for us to accomplish our ultimate goal — to bring the best care to the Hudson Valley region.

For more information, call 914-734-3012 or visit nyp.org/hudsonvalley.

This story is provided and presented by our sponsor: NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1MMQbkA