About 15 months ago, Volunteer Connect announced the end of Project Connect after eight years. The one-day, one-stop event gave Central Oregon’s homeless and nearly so access to everything from hairdressers to veterinarians to dentists. Social service agencies were there, as were professionals who could vaccinate children or adults if need be.

But Project Connect was expensive, said Volunteer Connect Executive Director Betsy Warriner not long after the announcement was made, and attendance was down (from 3,421 in 2011 to 1,459 in 2014), while planning took up most of a year for those involved. Funding, which initially came from the Partnership to End Poverty, also grew more difficult to secure.

A couple of things led to the decline in attendance, I suspect. Perhaps most important, Project Connect’s early success was very much traceable to the recession that began in 2007. The first Project Connect was held in September of that year, when unemployment rates ran from 5.5 percent in Crook County to 5.7 percent in Jefferson County and 4.4 percent in Deschutes County.

By 2011, the event’s biggest year, Crook County’s unemployment rate was 19 percent, Jefferson’s 13.6 percent and Deschutes’ 12.7 percent. In 2014, the event’s last year, unemployment rates had fallen to 10.1 percent in Crook County, 10.8 percent in Jefferson and 7.9 percent in Deschutes. They’re well below that now.

Meanwhile, Warriner’s agency turned the remaining Project Connect funds over to the nonprofit Icon City, which in a different fashion provides at least some of the services that had been available at the annual event.

Icon City is probably best known for its shower truck, which can be found at Family Kitchen in downtown Bend on Tuesday and Wednesday, at Jericho Road in Redmond each Thursday and, in summer, at Drake Park. It also supplies food regularly and helps those in need find everything from bunk beds for new apartments to propane fuel for those who spend their winters in tents. It does all this with no paid staff and no formal fundraising, though it accepts donations on its website.

And when Project Connect ended, it stepped in to take over some of the services that event offered. Its efforts, says Kenny LaPoint, one of Icon City’s founders, have largely focused on medical and dental care, particularly the latter.

While the Affordable Care Act makes it easier to get medical care these days, dental care is a different story. If you’re homeless, a semiannual checkup is out of reach, so relatively inexpensive problems can grow to become serious health threats before they’re dealt with. Thus Icon City has used a chunk of its Project Connect money to provide clients with dentures or extractions and implants — none of which comes cheap.

What neither Icon City nor, to my knowledge, any other nonprofit in the area has stepped up to do is fill the need Project Connect’s veterinarians used to meet each year, unfortunately. Those vets were in huge demand, too, providing routine checkups for upward of 700 animals in the event’s peak year, including vaccinations. At the same time, as many as 70 cats and dogs — 65 percent the latter — were spayed and neutered before day’s end.

Gone, too, is the pet food handed out free of charge.

I’ll admit to being a softie about such things. My own belief system tells me we have a responsibility for our pets, who rely on us in a way people never will, and my own observation tells me homeless men and women often need their pets as much as or more than the rest of us do.

Just as I think the rest of us should do what we can, individually and collectively, to help those in need, I think we should help assure that their animals get what they need as well. That can be difficult for those with housing but limited incomes; it can be nearly impossible if you’re homeless.

— Janet Stevens is deputy editor of The Bulletin. Contact: 541-382-7107, jstevens@bendbulletin.com .