While Fox’s The Five hosts were scare mongering about Bernie Sanders’ “attacks” on the “daddy” who pays the bills, some of them figured they’d smear Social Security right along with him.

“Why Bernie Sanders scares us is the constant attacks on people who are generating the money that makes socialism able to be paid for,” Geraldo Rivera said.

Eric Bolling said to Kimberly Guilfoyle, “Socialism is liberalism on steroids, KG.”

Guilfoyle agreed. “They’re missing the daddy to pay the bills,” she said. “That’s the problem. You can’t keep handing out all this free stuff. This is one of the big problems with government right now, is just bloated bureaucracy, entitlements that can run amok, and this guy just, he likes the idea, the sound of it, he loves all the socialist and communist regimes out there, but no, the American people are not agreeing with him.”

Actually, Americans are agreeing with Sanders. According to a recent CNN poll of registered voters, Sanders leads Trump by 9 points, and is in a dead heat with Dr. Carson, trailing by only two points.

But Jesse Watters sneered, “It just shows how kooky the Democratic party is... He didn’t think Obama’s trillion dollar stimulus was enough. He’s proposing another trillion dollar stimulus. He wants to raise taxes to 90% on the wealthy. Obama already tried that, and the middle class is getting hosed. He thinks ObamaCare is too conservative, he wants to empty Gitmo. This guy is totally ridiculous.”

”Socialism is communism,” Bolling said. In reality, Sanders is a democratic socialist, not a full-fledged socialist, and not even close to being a communist.

But the only “correction” came from Rivera, who said, “Socialism is what you call it when someone else is getting the benefit and you’re not. When you’re getting the benefit, it’s great American patriotism.”

Watters sneered again, “Socialism only works until rich people don’t exist any more.”

Later, as the discussion moved on to paying for government programs, Bolling said, “My answer is to …get rid of Social Security altogether.”

“Whoa, Eric!” Dana Perino said, laughing. Then she added, “Actually, it’s not a bad thought.”

”Get rid of Social Security? I’m not surprised,” Rivera said.

“God forbid you go back to you earn your money, you save you money, you keep your money, you spend your money, and then you retire,” Bolling argued.

“Go back to starving old people?” Rivera retorted.

Guilfoyle gave the elimination of Social Security her vote of approval. “I don’t understand why we have to act like this country is so crippled and everybody has to take a knee and get a handout. Come on, grow up.”

Let’s see Bolling, Perino and Guilfoyle refuse Social Security when they retire.

Watch it below, from the October 19 The Five.