Published: Sunday, 1/25/2015 - Updated: 1 year ago



COMMENTARY Toledo’s library: Open to all, and always changing

The Toledo-Lucas County Public Library attracted more than 3 million visits — a record number — in 2014. Think about that for a moment.

That’s the equivalent of seven library trips last year for every man, woman, and child in the county; how many did you make? And that figure doesn’t include the 14.7 million visits in 2014 to the library’s Web site, toledolibrary.org, or the thousands of library users who were served at home or at nursing homes, public housing sites, and community centers.

I can’t think of an institution in this community that helps more people — or a broader cross section of our population — than Ohio’s oldest (176 years and counting) public library does. Our library puts Toledo in the big leagues in a way that few, if any, other amenities in northwest Ohio can claim. Its services also create tremendous economic value for the region.

The Blade’s editorial board visited the main downtown library last week, so that director Clyde Scoles and his colleagues could show us some of the library’s latest digital technology and update us on its expansion plans, even as it must cope with what Mr. Scoles calls an “information Armageddon.” He notes: “This is not your grandmother’s library.”

That’s for sure. The conference table around which we sat was decorated with items made on the library’s new three-dimensional printer: a cell phone case, a snowflake, a dreidel, dollhouse furniture. The library soon will allow customers to use the 3-D printer for a nominal fee.

It’s an example, Mr. Scoles says, of dramatic changes in technology that require the library to adapt. That means enabling users not only to absorb content — print, music, video — but also to create it. In the next few months, he says, the library will launch an initiative aimed at helping users to publish the essays they write.

“The learning models and business models are changing very fast,” he says. “We are tapping into centers all over the country and around the world.”

Cheap — but high-value

To illustrate, the library hooked us up, via Skype and a gigantic video monitor, with Maryland author Jeff Yeager, who calls himself “the ultimate cheapskate.” Mr. Yeager, a Toledo native, will be in town this week to speak at the main library and two branches as part of the library’s “Open Book” series.

Mr. Yeager advises Americans how to spend and consume less, especially in retirement, without sacrificing quality of life. He calls Toledo “the cradle of cheapskate civilization.” To that end, he notes that the library is a fine way to get not only printed material but also online books and magazines, movies, music, audiobooks, and computer access — all for free.



THE BLADE Enlarge | Buy This Image The library soon will allow customers to use its new three-dimensional printer, which created this ornamental snowflake.

That includes Mr. Yeager’s four books, which he says have attracted more than a million readers, “and all the cheapskates read them at the library. Most books are written for public libraries; they’re incredibly valuable in introducing writers like me to a broad range of readers. I tell people, go to the library — it’s a cheap date.”

Cheap, but high-value. Mr. Scoles shared attractive renderings of the library’s newest branch, at King Road and Sylvania Avenue in Sylvania Township; construction is scheduled to start in May and take about a year. Sylvania city residents need not worry: The current branch on Monroe Street will undergo a program of upgrades and stay in business after the new branch opens.

We also got to see the floor plan for the expanded Oregon branch; that renovation is set for completion this summer, and it looks good. A new Mott branch library on Dorr Street is in the works.

Even as the library embraces the digital future, it is expanding its traditional emphasis on promoting reading and literacy. It maintains 500 community partnerships — with Toledo Public Schools and suburban districts, the Metroparks, Imagination Station, the art museum, the zoo, the botanical garden, public media, the Boys & Girls Clubs, and many other local institutions.

“We want to increase our impact on the community,” says Jim Funk, the library’s manager of institutional and community initiatives. Working closely with other organizations, he adds, breaks down walls that can hamper collaboration.

Service provider

The library also continues to broaden its array of nontraditional service for users. Starting in March, it will offer passport services. The children’s library in the main branch is providing vision screenings for children and adults as part of its new “Wise About Eyes” exhibit. In recent weeks, the library enabled users to sign up for the latest round of health insurance provided by the Affordable Care Act.



THE BLADE Enlarge | Buy This Image Clyde Scoles, director of the Toledo-Lucas County Public Library, says the library is embracing new technology and services.

The Sylvania branch now conducts classes to show iPad owners how to get library materials on their devices. Similar classes teach business owners to use the library’s electronic databases to gain a competitive edge.

The Blade has reported in recent weeks on some of the problems the library faces in serving its diverse clientele: computer users who download pornography, children whose parents expect the library to care for them after school, people who display dubious hygiene or disruptive and even violent behavior. Of course, such problems are not unique to Toledo, but affect public libraries across the country.

The library could alleviate these difficulties by becoming more exclusive about the customers it allows through its doors. But that would violate Mr. Scoles’ mission statement for the library: “Open to All.”

“The library mirrors the entire social fabric of the community,” he says. “Sometimes the issues are troublesome. We want people to come here to read, to research, to look for jobs, to get assistance. We do a pretty good job of meeting the challenges.”

Despite the alarms regularly sounded about how electronic devices are crowding out reading, Mr. Scoles insists that five centuries of book publishing are not going to end abruptly. Neither is the library’s role as a repository of the printed word.

“Books are not going away — that is our brand,” Mr. Scoles says. “But the library always is in a changing mode.”

Toledoans enjoy one of the best public libraries in the country. County residents have shown, both through our patronage and our approval of property tax requests to support its operations, that we appreciate how the library improves our lives every day.

The library’s description of itself as “a beacon of community engagement, experimentation, and expression” is, if anything, understated. Let’s never take it for granted.

David Kushma is editor of The Blade.

Contact him at: dkushma@theblade.com or on Twitter @dkushma1