Readers sound off on public transportation and police shootings.

Letters to the editor: letters@tennessean.com (Photo: The Tennessean.com)

Uber, Lyft proposal must be inclusive

On Tuesday, March 28th The Tennessean published a story on Nashville’s efforts to expand and improve on our public transportation in a piece titled “Nashville explores linking Uber, Lyft to Metro bus system."

I agree that transportation is a major issue in our city that needs attention and creativity. One element that is missing from this piece is the availability and accessibility for those who do not have smart phones or regular internet access. Creating a public transportation system based on a ride-share app or smart card payment system puts those that do not have regular access to such technologies at a disadvantage.

While having more people utilize our public transportation system would increase revue for MTA and our city, we cannot forget about those who do not and cannot access systems that require having smart phones and regular access to the internet.

Our best option as a city would be to increase frequency and availability of bus routes and hours of operation. More bus route options as well as extending hours means that more people in Nashville can utilize our public transportation system. I support improving and changing the MTA system in order for it to become a more reliable and reasonable means of transportation for all people in Nashville.

Jenna Najjar, Nashville 37206

Bus, train plans must be carefully planned

The Nashville Public Television taping of the town hall meeting regarding transportation should be watched, April 14th at 8 p.m., by people in all six counties covered in the three proposed plans.

I prefer a plan that would start with improving bus transportation and Smart traffic lights, while working through light rail transportation details.

When people arrive by train, they must be able to continue in any direction to their destinations. The routes must meet other routes to transfer and the buses must be frequent during longer hours of operation. The buses must all have lifts for wheelchairs and areas to turn around and possibly be strapped into place. Buses must have digital debit card readers at both doors. Also designated front seating for seniors and the disabled.

Bus stops should be every two or three blocks and have shelters with digital screens showing time, buses that stop there and number of minutes until each bus arrives.

Having all this in place when the trains begin service, will make public transportation convenient and user friendly.

Elaine Hackerman, Nashville 37209

Police shootings raise questions

I need help understanding what is happening today.

As a veteran I was trained in weapons and qualified as an expert with the M14 rifle, and I know that the police are trained as well at their weapons.

Why is it that when an officer gets into a situation where he or she has to use their weapon they do not seem to be able to shoot to disable; it’s almost always shoot to kill. I realize sometimes they have to shoot quickly to disable a perpetrator, but why kill? Why not hit the legs to drop them, or the arm with the weapon in it?

I know the police have a terrible time protecting the citizens in their district, and I wish them all the best, but like the woman with the hatchet, or the young man in Chicago with a knife, why?

Sometimes I wonder what is happening with this world with all the guns everywhere. It has got to stop!

Richard Smith, Spring Hill 37174

The LiaBILLity. (Photo: Cagle Cartoons)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1N2aHhh