I would like to donate $

Per Month Per Year One Time

Donate Now

Video by Brian Myers, Media Arts Center San Diego

Here’s her question:

“My question is, I have an HSA, which is a health savings account. With the health savings account, you need to have a high-deductible plan. Can I get that under the Affordable Care Act?”

The Takeaway: HSA users can shop on Covered California, but not all plans are HSA-friendly.

The federal guidelines on HSAs say you must have a high-deductible insurance policy to complement your account. The IRS decides how high each year and for 2014, it wants the deductible to be at least $1,250 for an individual and $2,500 for a family.

You’ll find plans that satisfy the IRS requirement in both the individual and small business sections of the exchange. They’re typically bronze-level plans and they’ll be labeled HSA-compatible at the top, where you’ll also see HMO and PPO designations. Make sure you’re looking there and not just at the deductible.

These plans do come with subsidies if you’re eligible.

The Orders: Start window-shopping (and take note of some changes to HSAs under Obamacare).

Many of the high-deductible plans that cover people with HSAs are grandfathered into the Affordable Care Act. That means they may not perfectly comply with the law but were in existence before it was passed in 2010.

Once you leave a grandfathered plan, you can’t get back in, so make sure you do some thorough window-shopping before switching plans. And take note of some recent changes to HSAs. They could impact your decision.

The health reform law says you cannot use an HSA to purchase drugs without a prescription, unless it’s insulin. It also upped the penalty for non-medical spending from 10 to 20 percent.

And something the law did not change for HSAs: coverage for dependents. HSAs do not cover kids until age 26 like most plans now do. They’re cut off at age 24.

Check out last week’s Second Opinion: Do Student Health Center Fees Satisfy the Individual Mandate?

This article relates to: City Heights, Community, Health Care, News, Share

Written by Megan Burks Megan Burks is a reporter for Speak City Heights, a media project of Voice of San Diego, KPBS, Media Arts Center and The AjA Project. You can contact her directly by emailing meburks@kpbs.org.