Indians will call other diamonds home in 2014

The movie, 'The Sandlot' drew a bit of a cult following, as people loved the charming simplicity of it — nine neighborhood ragamuffins, four makeshift bases and a big plot of balding grass.

No perfectly mowed field, no fuss, no problem.

This season, the Loveland baseball team is reenacting the Sandlot. The floods that washed over Northern Colorado last fall took it's toll on the fields at First and Taft, fields used by high school softball and baseball teams.

Though it affected everyone in the baseball community, Loveland was hit the hardest. Their varsity practice field was decimated, as well as Swift Field, where they play their home games.

The baseball fields at Centennial Park were damaged by flooding this past fall, leaving the Loveland baseball team without a home field this season. (STEVE STONER / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

LHS head coach Jake Marshall kept busy during the offseason, communicating with his fellow coaches and athletic directors of the neighboring high schools to find his kids a place to play their games.

"I approached the boys this year and pretty much had to say, here's the challenge this year — we don't have Swift or Centennial 5 to practice on. We don't have a home field," Marshall said. "We have to have that motto — we are the true Sandlot team; we'll take you on anywhere."

The varsity Indians will be playing some games at Mountain View, Thompson Valley and even Berthoud. And while they have their practice area (Owens Field at North Lake Park adjacent to the school), they are sharing that space with all three skill levels, so accommodations have to made.

Advertisement

"We've had to practice in the school parking lot or in the cages indoors when the weather is bad," senior captain Ryan McCloughan said. "We just look at ourselves like the sandlot squad; we play anywhere anytime; we will cope just fine."

But the added complication is Mother Nature; she's the jealous girlfriend that just won't quit causing trouble.

As if finding time to share fields wasn't hard enough — area teams will continue to battle wet weather. Already, Loveland's first game of the season had to be postponed from Saturday to Monday, creating space issues for Thompson Valley coach Jay Denning.

"We may not have a field that day for practice because they will need it to play, and that affects our preparation to open up our season Thursday," Denning said of the game change. "It'll be a challenge, but it's a welcome one because we are blessed to have a field, and we are able to host Loveland High at a time when they don't have a field. We will find a way to make our guys as ready as we possibly can."

Part of the Eagles' sacrifice is scheduling games to be played at 1 p.m., forcing the players to cut short their lunchtimes and miss classes to use their field. TVHS athletic director Ernie Derrera ultimately made this decision in the hopes of preventing afternoon showers from canceling games.

"They will probably be out there preparing at 11 for a 1 o'clock game time," Derrera says. "Part of it is going to be time they give up willingly, and part of that is a decision I made as athletic director as one of the things we had to do because of the lack of availability of the fields."

But despite the difficulties all three teams are sure to face this season: the make-up games and tests, overcrowded practices or practicing on asphalt, all parties involved are willing to do it if they can play the game they love.

Because even though a lot of fuss went into giving the Indian baseball team a season this year, baseball is still a game of simplicity, able to be played by anyone with a stick, a ball and some grass.

"We may not have all the great facilities some of the other schools do," Marshall said. "But we make do and we compete — anything can happen in baseball."

Contact Cali Rastrelli on twitter.com/c_rasta5