Topics: Barack Obama, Carl Gallups, Donald Trump, Elections 2016, FL, Florida Panhandle, Michele Bachmann, Milton, Nativism, neo-fascism, Sandy Hook, white supremacism, Elections News, Media News, Politics News

Having already secured the neo-fascist and white supremacist vote, Donald Trump is thrilled to be dipping his undoubtedly stubby toes into the conspiracy theorist cesspool with an endorsement from Carl Gallups, a Florida pastor, radio host and best-selling author, who has openly condemned same-sex marriage, accused President Obama of being a “Saudi-sponsored Muslim” operative, and called Sandy Hook a “hoax.”

Gallups officially endorsed Trump on Jan. 13, one day before giving the opening convocation at the GOP frontrunner’s rally in Pensacola, Florida. In a press release on his campaign website, Trump said it was his “great honor to receive endorsements” from Gallups and a number of other “prominent community leaders” — among them George Scarborough, brother of MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” co-host Joe Scarborough.

The press release describes Gallups as “an author, radio and television talk show host and senior pastor of Hickory Hammock Baptist Church in Milton, FL.” Milton is a small town in the Florida Panhandle with an estimated population of 9,445, according to most recent census data. His radio show “Freedom Friday” airs (you guessed it) every Friday on AM radio. He appears with some frequency on several shows I’ve never heard of and the “Jim Bakker Show,” which I’ve heard of only in reference to the host’s endorsement of survivalist food buckets:

But beyond a certain Evangelist niche, Gallups is a relative no-name. What makes this small-town conservative pastor interesting?

Well, for starters, Gallups is the proprietor of PNN, a self-described “News & Media Network” tirelessly devoted to “investigating” various conspiracy theories, especially if they concern Barack Obama’s allegiance to Islam.

In a 2010 YouTube video titled “SHOCK INTELL! Is Barack Obama Really A Saudi / Muslim ‘Plant’ in the White House?” published on PNN’s account, Gallups — narrating an ineptly DIY iMovie with text effects — points to video of Obama bowing to the now-deceased King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia as evidence of the president’s Muslim origins. The PNN video only showed stills of Obama’s “offense,” but frequent pseudonymous guest Barry Soetoro (the monicker conspiracy theorists falsely alleged Obama used as an “international student” at Columbia University) posted on his website (which now ironically redirects to whitehouse.gov) video proof set to Tool’s “The Pot”: