Over the last few weeks, millions of Americans have discovered that their current health insurance plans are being cancelled as a result of the Affordable Care Act. Many of those Americans are also discovering that new plans on the exchanges will cost them significantly more. Both realities are in direct contradiction with the promises that President Obama and the Democrats used to sell ACA in 2009.

One of the Americans affected happens to be former MSNBC host Dylan Ratigan. Ratigan tweeted on Thursday that his $170 per month plan was cancelled, and his replacement plan will cost $600 per month. Mediaite’s Tommy Christopher has written a response to Ratigan’s complaints that is very instructive of the Democrat mindset in regards the consequences of the Affordable Care Act. Christopher’s reply suggests two main points: 1) Ratigan is a millionaire so he can afford the increase and 2) The new more expensive plans are better than the old plans and that justifies the huge increase in premiums.

The first argument is similar to the warped thinking that Democrats use to argue for even greater tax redistribution. In a free society, someone being able to afford something does not legitimize the government forcing him or her to buy a more expensive product. People work to make extra money in order to choose how to spend it, not to have the government dictate that to them.

The second argument shows a complete ignorance of economics and the real world. There is quite a bit of evidence that this “better” claim is not accurate. However, even if this claim was true, it does not justify the consequences of this law. Most of the people that are losing their plans and paying more for new ones are not millionaires, but regular middle-class Americans that have already been dealing with a continuously sluggish economy, chronically high unemployment, and strained budgets.

Those people didn’t choose their old plans because they were foolish or did not know what was best for them; they chose those plans because they were the best value available for the price that fit their budget. Would some of those people have preferred more expansive plans? Absolutely. Many of us would also prefer to live in a mansion and drive a Rolls-Royce.

However, desires are not all that is required when purchasing a product. Most Americans recognize that their purchases have to fit their budgets, and more costly purchases will result in tradeoffs elsewhere. Although it would be nice, middle class families cannot just print more money or vote to raise their debt ceiling.

Middle class families could not afford to pay for more expensive health plans before Obamacare, but now Democrats are telling them they do not have a choice. Instead of making health insurance more affordable, Obamacare is simply forcing these Americans to pay for a more expensive product.

Americans that were already suffering under the Obama economy must now choose between paying a fine and having no insurance or paying for more expensive insurance, which they had previously determined did not work for their budgets. A few of these families will qualify for subsidies, but in many cases, those subsidies will not fully cover the premium increases. All of this does not even consider the very real pain that this law will inflict on the labor markets as companies scale back to keep up with increased costs.

The President likes to mention the middle class in his speeches, but that is exactly who Obamacare is hurting the most. If the President wants to help the middle class beyond mentioning them in a speech or a meaningless semi-apology after years of false assurances, a good start would be repealing the catastrophic law that he dishonestly forced on them.