Julie Mix McPeak (Photo: Submitted)

The state's insurance commissioner expects Community Health Alliance, the Knoxville-based insurer that is winding down, will be able to pay its projected medical claims through the end of the year.

Julie Mix McPeak, commissioner of the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance, testified before a subcommittee of the U.S. House of Representatives' Energy and Commerce committee about the events of the past two years that led to CHA voluntarily winding down.

The runoff "will continue well into 2016. There may be additional surprises," McPeak testified.

The consumer operated and oriented plan, or co-op, created under the Affordable Care Act is one of a dozen to shut down after hitting financial straits.

McPeak, joined by her counterpart in Louisiana and leaders of two co-ops, pointed to the circumstances under which the insurers were established as well as the ongoing barriers to entry that cause the consumer-focused insurers to struggle.

The 23 insurers were launched as a way to increase competition in markets sometimes dominated by a handful of insurance giants but were asked to learn to "sail in a hurricane," said Jim Donelon, Louisiana Commissioner of Insurance.

Many of the co-ops, including CHA, had to lease networks in the beginning and were undercapitalized compared to competition, speakers at the hearing said.

Designing insurance plans for the exchange-eligible population was an enigma. Insurers, both established and new, were unsure of the demographics of those who would be insured. The state of health of the overall group would in large part determine how many medical claims came into the insurer.

In the case of CHA, as with other insurers around the state and country, the population turned out to be sicker and in need of more medical services than projected.

"We didn’t have any company accurately project claims costs,” McPeak said.

Larger insurers, such as BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, could sustain losses, but CHA "didn’t have those resources available," McPeak said.

Dr. Peter Beilenson, president and CEO of Evergreen Health, a co-op in Maryland, said some of the strife could be alleviated through regulation changes at the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, including changes to risk corridor payments and a revised risk adjustment program. Those, he said, would not require congressional action.

Evergreen Health is one of the remaining co-ops. Beilenson said they have a diversified book of business and have been making a profit for the past few months. He expects Evergreen Health to hit 30,000 enrollees by the end of the year.

Part of CHA's problem was the growth spurt it had from the first to second year on the exchange, McPeak said.

CHA projected it would enroll 12,000-15,000 in its first year on the exchange and then 20,000 in the second year. Its plans, though, were among the higher-priced options on the exchange in the first year, but it enrolled only a fraction of what it projected: It had 2,287 members, with 186 on individual plans at the end of 2014.

Then, in the second year, it redesigned and re-priced its plans, coming in as one of the least-expensive options, and enrolled 35,761 by mid-January. Its sudden growth concerned state officials, and the insurer was frozen from open enrollment.

McPeak publicly questioned at a June hearing before Congress whether even large premium increases would make the co-op financially stable enough to sell plans in 2016. The insurer requested a 32.2 percent average increase from the TDCI in May, but saw its request escalated to 44.7 percent. It agreed in October to enter a voluntary runoff.

The structure of and speed with which the co-ops were launched put the insurers in a taxing position from day one, speakers said. For example John Morrison, vice chairman of Montana Health CO-OP, said the regulations that allowed existing insurers to extend some plans skewed the pool of potential enrollees.

"It truly was not possible, in my judgment, to succeed under those circumstances," Donelon said.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Currently insured by Community Health Alliance?

Community Health Alliance will no longer offer insurance plans as of Jan. 1. You will need to enroll with a different insurer.

Resources

Check out the plans for yourself at healthcare.gov/.

For help enrolling, contact Get Covered Tennessee online or by phone to schedule an appointment with someone in your area to get free help.

http://www.getcoveredtenn.org/; 1-844-644-5443

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1NvCyVg