Topics: Bicycles, Bike lines, Bill de Blasio, Christine Quinn, Dream City, Editor's Picks, Mayor's race, New York City, sustainability, Sustainability News, Life News, Politics News

New York City Council speaker Christine Quinn swept the big papers; Bill Thompson, the former city comptroller, earned the support of the teachers union.

As for the front-runner in the Democratic primary for New York City mayor, Public Advocate Bill de Blasio? Last week, he won the endorsement of StreetsPAC, a political action committee dedicated to improving the safety and mobility of New York City streets, and, at 5 months old, one of the city’s youngest political entities.

“De Blasio Wins the Bike Vote,” announced the New York Daily News, as if such a thing as the “bike vote” were a known quantity. With major differences between mayoral candidates on issues like education, policing and taxes, are there New Yorkers who will cast their votes thinking of speed cameras and bike lanes?

If so, it would mark the emergence of a surprising political force in the city, though not a new one. Before the automobile was king, bike voters were a formidable political force. Organizations like the League of American Wheelmen (today the League of American Bicyclists) lobbied for the first paved roads in cities across the U.S. At the turn of the 20th century, the League counted over 100,000 members.

In an 1897 report for the American Society of Municipal Engineers on bike paths, L.W. Rundlett, a city engineer from St. Paul, Minn., succinctly summarized the political development of the bicycle:

“Bicycles at first were considered a nuisance on the street and sidewalk, but as the number increased and the public became accustomed to them, this sentiment gradually wore away. Moreover, the number of wheelmen has so increased that they represent quite a power at the polls, and without giving allegiance to any particular party they could easily be able in any local election, to elect to office those who would at least show them justice in establishing rules and regulations for the proper use of the streets and sidewalk.”

The rest, as they say, is history: The political influence of the “wheelmen” was eclipsed and then vanquished by that of the automobile lobby and its constituents, the car owners of America.

“We joke that we slipped a little during the 20th century,” says Andy Clarke, president of the League of American Bicyclists. “But we’re back.”

In New York, the would-be “bike voters” face an important election. Mayor Michael Bloomberg’s tenure, a benevolent era for cyclists, pedestrians and park-lovers, is expiring. New York has replaced traffic jams with picnic tables, added hundreds of miles of bike lanes, and implemented one of the world’s largest bike-share systems. It seemed at times that his initiatives — innocuous though they may appear, to residents of other cities — would cause some kind of citywide crackup. But Bloomberg held his ground.

His would-be successors, though, have struggled to stake out territory of their own. In the early stages of the campaign, they were eager to distance themselves from this transportation legacy. De Blasio, for one, had called transportation commissioner Janette Sadik-Khan a “radical.” The tenor of the debate caused some consternation on the part of cyclists and others who have supported the administration’s changes to street design.

“I get that Bill de Blasio and others are striving to distinguish themselves from Bloomberg,” Paul Steely White, the executive director of advocacy group Transportation Alternatives, told the New York Times in February. “My advice to them is to pick another issue.”

Amid this discussion and the general hysteria over transportation policy that marked the latter half of the Bloomberg years, the founders of StreetsPAC sensed an opportunity.

“What we saw was a livable streets movement that had matured a lot over the past few years, in NYC but also around the country,” said Eric McClure, who is a co-founder and board member of StreetsPAC. “It was a movement that had grown up but was missing one leg of the stool, which was a direct involvement in the political process.” (Transportation Alternatives, which turns 40 this year, has refrained from supporting candidates.)

“We certainly think there is a complete streets voter out there who will prioritize transportation policy — who will prioritize this as one of their deciding factors,” McClure added.

There is certainly an expanding constituency. The NYC Department of Transportation records a 58 percent increase in cycling since 2008 in New York City. Some 900,000 New Yorkers ride a bike each month. Though StreetsPAC, Transportation Alternatives (TA) and similar outfits champion a variety of transportation causes, cycling has often been the public face of the movement.