LOS ANGELES (AP) — There's no such thing as being all dressed up with nowhere to go on Oscar night.

The Hollywood elite have various glamorous parties to choose from, whether they attended the Academy Awards or not.

Here's a roundup of the post-Oscars party action:

GOVERNORS BALL: After hours on the red carpet and a three-and-a-half hour telecast, Academy Awards guests are ready for some food when the show ends. That's why the first stop for many is the Governors Ball, the Oscars' official after-party, held just upstairs from where the show takes place.

Benicio del Toro snacked on pizza as he snaked through the party. "The Revenant" cinematographer, Emmanuel Lubezki, enjoyed some strawberries, his new Oscar by his side. Steven Spielberg opted for liquid refreshment (a Heineken), which he sipped on while speaking with supporting actor winner Mark Rylance, who gleefully posed with his trophy.

Meanwhile, Tobey Maguire chatted with Bryan Cranston, and Common smiled for a photo with fans.

Wolfgang Puck catered the party, serving mini-burgers, smoked-salmon Oscars, caviar-topped baked potatoes and chicken pot-pies. There was also a sushi spread, a table filled with crab legs and lobster claws, and a vast array of desserts.

The Governors Ball is also where the night's winners can have their new Oscars engraved with their names. Leonardo DiCaprio commanded a huge audience when he arrived to have his statuette personalized, all trying to capture a cell-phone photo of the best actor winner. No sooner had he left than best actress Brie Larson arrived, her new Oscar and longtime boyfriend Alex Greenwald in tow. He snapped pictures of her as her statuette was engraved, and the two toasted with Champagne and a kiss when it was finished.

In fact, every guest at the ball took home an Oscar: tiny chocolate Oscars were given as party favors.

___

ELTON JOHN AIDS FOUNDATION: Charlie Sheen made a grand entrance to the Elton John AIDS Foundation Oscars viewing party Sunday.

The actor, who revealed his HIV-positive status last year, took photos with fans at the event, which organizers say raised $6.2 million to help fund AIDS research.

More than 1,000 guests attended the lavish annual gala, where colorful gowns and sharp suits ruled.

Caitlyn Jenner, who wore a fitted red Zac Posen frock, was seen hugging and whispering with supermodel Heidi Klum, who wore an elegant off-the-shoulder lilac dress. The two snapped photos and laughed while admiring each other's outfits arm-in-arm at Jenner's table.

Additional celebrity attendees included Mariah Carey, Jeffrey Tambor, Russell Simmons, Gene Simmons, and Steven Tyler, who donated five days at his Mau home to the foundation's silent auction.

Notable Oscar viewing moments included Sam Smith's acceptance speech for his original song win for "Writings on the Wall." Guests gave the openly gay singer a standing ovation in response to his support of the LGBT community.

They also jumped out of their seats to cheer on Leonardo DiCaprio as he accepted his first Academy Award.

After the show, Elton John, in a deep blue suit, congratulated the Oscar winners, thanked his guests and offered his thoughts on the show.

"Well, that was an interesting Oscars for a change," he said, before closing the party with a performance. John crooned his hits, including "Benny and the Jets" and "Rocket Man," and sang some tracks from his latest album, "A Wonderful Crazy Night." Guests went home with a signed copy.

___

VANITY FAIR PARTY: Elton John and Lady Gaga chatting side-by-side on a sofa made for a hot photo op at the magazine's annual Oscar party, this year held in Beverly Hills.

Other guests caused a logjam as they stopped to take photos of Gaga, who had performed at the Oscars, and John, who had hosted his own party earlier in the evening. A few feet away, and unnoticed for the moment, was Alejandro G. Inarritu, who had just won the best director award for "The Revenant."

Leonardo DiCaprio, best actor winner for the film, dropped by with his trophy. The eclectic crowd also included Jon Hamm, Serena Williams, Jennifer Garner, Keegan-Michael Key and Don Rickles.

"Out of my way," Rickles barked as he was pushed through the crowded room in a wheelchair, pretending to wield the cane in his lap as a weapon. But he was smiling, and so were those getting a taste of the 89-year-old's trademark insult comedy.

Nominee Charlotte Rampling stood briefly alone before she was swarmed by admirers.

Guests dined on chef Thomas Keller's black truffle lasagna and salmon at the evening hosted by the magazine's editor, Graydon Carter. There were souvenirs to be had, with people lining up to get their photos taken for mock Vanity Fair covers.

Even stars have to wait for cars when it's time to go home. Caitlyn Jenner, who earlier in the evening had been deep in conversation with Lady Gaga, cooled her high heels at the limo line until her transportation arrived. Meanwhile, Patricia Arquette got comfortable sitting inside a tent that was part of an elaborate hub to usher partygoers into and out of the event.

___

AP Entertainment Writers Sandy Cohen and Lynn Elber contributed to this report with Kay Angrum.