County Releases 2015 Budget

updated: May 16, 2014, 6:03 PM

Source: County of Santa Barbara Today the County of Santa Barbara released its FY 2014-15 Recommended Operational Plan. The coming fiscal year marks the first time since the recession that the County's immediate fiscal outlook is positive and improving, caused by increasing revenues and controlled expenditure growth. "The Board of Supervisors has navigated the County towards greater stability through and following an unprecedented economic recession," said County Executive Officer Mona Miyasato. "As the economy recovers, we're in a better position than in prior years but need to remain cautious and prudent in our choices." In total, operating expenditures are $903.2 million and operating revenues are $905 million. This a 6.2% increase in revenues compared to the current year, and a 4.8% increase in expenditures. In the General Fund, operating expenditures are $320.9 million and operating revenues are $353.9 million, a 2.2% and 4.7% increase; respectively, compared to the prior year Adopted Budget. The Recommended Budget continues to focus on core County services, as well as continue the Board's commitment to public safety, the well-being of families and children and healthy livable communities. Recommendations include adding funding to rebuild the County's strategic reserve, providing additional funds for building, park and road maintenance; and restoring vital services, such as the Fire Fuels Crew program. The Recommended Budget also includes an increase of 115.3 full-time equivalent positions, or a 2.9% increase, primarily to support requirements of the Affordable Care Act and funded by state and federal dollars. The Santa Barbara County Board of Supervisors will meet June 9th and continue, if necessary, through June 20th to conduct the annual County Budget Hearings on the FY 2014-15 Recommended Operating Plan and Budget. Specific hearing dates are scheduled for Monday, June 9th and only if needed Wednesday, June 11, 2014. The Budget Hearings are required prior to the adoption of the County's annual budget. This past April, the CEO conducted three days of budget workshops to provide the Board of Supervisors and county residents a department-by-department review of accomplishments, program objectives for the coming year, their expected revenues and expenses and performance measures. The June Budget Hearings will provide another opportunity for residents to provide public comment on the recommended budget and operational plan for the coming fiscal year. Board hearings will begin each day at 9:00AM and testimony can be provided at 105 East Anapamu Street in Santa Barbara in the Fourth Floor Hearing Room or via video conference from the Betteravia Government Center at 511 East Lakeside Parkway in Santa Maria. Members of the public can examine the Budget Hearing Schedule and the Fiscal Year 2014-15 Recommended Budget and Operating Plan materials at the following link: Budget: http://www.countyofsb.org/uploadedFiles/ceo/bud get/2014-16RecommendedBudget.pdf#pagemode=Bookmarks Hearing Schedule: http://www.countyofsb.org/uploadedFiles/ceo/budget/RecommendedFY2 014-16BudgetHearingSchedule.pdf For additional information, please contact Dennis Bozanich, Assistant to the County Executive Office at 805-568-3107. Be the first to comment on this article. # # # #