QUINCY, Ill. (AP) - Lemonia “Joy” Sims now has something awaiting her she never thought possible.

A future.

“Every sad word in the dictionary described me,” she said. “I never thought I would have peace or be able to smile.”

Sims, a native of Chicago who now calls Quincy her home, has been battling a variety of mental illnesses for much of the past 21 years. She says she tried to commit suicide 10 times, attempting to end a life that began to spiral out of control at age 14 when her parents abandoned her and she became a ward of the state.

“My mother chose drugs over me,” Sims said. “It’s a miracle I am still alive.”

Sims has been working in recent years with staff at Transitions of Western Illinois. She has become a shining example of how a relatively new approach to caring for and treating mental illness has provided hope — and a future — to people who years ago would have been locked up in a state institution and all but forgotten.

Sims soon will become a full-fledged member of society, thanks to what is called the “recovery approach” to mental illness. Part of this concept is the use of “recovery specialists,” staff members who once dealt with mental illness themselves and recovered.

The recovery process is regarded as a journey rather than a set outcome.

“The key word in recovery is ‘hope,’” said Alan Obert, who coordinates community-based services at Transitions.

An integral part of developing that hope is assisting someone like Sims to build a secure base and sense of self, be a part of supportive relationships and emphasize such intangibles as empowerment, social inclusion and coping skills.

Barb Baker Chapin is the director of development at Transitions, which was founded as the Adams County Mental Health Center in 1955. She has worked in the mental health field for more than 40 years and says attitudes about mental health are much different today than when she began her career.

“Rather than viewing a mental health problem as something to be embarrassed about or ashamed of, we now know that depression, schizophrenia, bipolar disorders are illnesses — just like diabetes or heart disease,” she said. “They are caused by chemical imbalances in the brain.”

Obert said the approach to treating mental illness began to change dramatically around 2002 when President George W. Bush’s New Freedom Commission on Mental Health helped establish a shift in attitudes and how mental health services would be delivered.

The commission emphasized what was termed a “recovery approach.”

Transitions has embraced the concept of recovery and has tailored its services to that model during the past seven years.

“What this means is that we focus with our consumers on what they want to do in life, rather than on what they cannot do,” Obert said. “We help them focus on their dreams and their desires and help them develop a plan to achieve the goals they set for themselves. Sometimes goals relate to employment, living independently, participating in a hobby or sport, traveling, etc.

“Whatever the consumer identifies as something they would like to do, we try to assist them in achieving that goal. When we focus on what people can do rather than on what they cannot, people accomplish amazing things.”

Transitions employs three recovery specialists — Vickie Laack, Jeannie Schultz and Trisha Goodwin — who assist people with a mental illness. The recovery specialists are now staff members who themselves once dealt with a mental illness and have recovered. They serve as automatic inspirations to those in recovery, Obert said.

“Our recovery specialists bring a unique perspective to their work,” he said. “They have been there, and their successes help inspire those they serve. Much of their work involves helping consumers learn how to live with a mental illness.”

Obert says the specialists conduct WRAP (Wellness Recovery Action Plan) groups in which they help consumers identify what makes them well then develop a plan to use these tools to stay well. They also help consumers take steps to reach the goals they set for themselves.

“We recently received a grant that helps consumers who have a mental illness enter the workforce,” Obert said. “When a consumer mentions an interest in employment, we rapidly engage them in job-seeking activities. We also provide them supports, as needed, when they are hired. All of these services emphasize recovery and living a full, meaningful life.”

Sims is looking forward to that kind of meaningful life. Ideally, she would like to become a recovery specialist after the necessary training.

“I want to get a job,” she said. “I have never filed taxes. I want to file taxes. A job can solve a lot of problems.”

Laack is impressed with the progress Sims has made in her journey.

“I knew her during some of her darkest times, when she was highly suicidal,” Laack said. “Each person’s recovery is like a fingerprint. Each is different.”

Along with combating mental issues, Sims also had to confront several physical problems that require continued therapy. She has had no family support through her ordeal.

“Transitions has been like my family. It has taken a long time and a lot of work, but I don’t want to be disabled the rest of my life,” Sims said.

Schultz said that along with helping a consumer build a life-skills set, building trust is equally important.

“Everyone advances at their own speed,” she said.

Sims said she can pinpoint the moment she felt she began to turn the proverbial corner in her recovery.

“I finally asked God that if he would show up and help me that I would do my part,” she said. “(It was then that) I started putting effort into everything in my life. When I wake up in the morning now, I am happy. Before, I didn’t think that I could be helped.”

The recovery specialists are as excited as those they help.

“We get to see people get well,” Laack said.

This relatively new approach to mental illness is in stark contrast to how those with mental issues were treated decades ago.

“In the 1940s and 1950s, people who were suffering from a mental illness were housed in large institutions run by the state,” Obert said. “There was little hope for recovery from their illnesses.”

Obert said a community mental health care movement in the early 1970s resulted in community-based mental health treatment services and the closing of the large institutions.

With treatment and support available in the community, patients lived in the community rather than in state-operated institutions.

“While this movement provided more humane mental health treatment, our attitudes did not change much,” Obert said. “We believed that people who suffered from a mental illness would likely never recover from their illnesses and would face a steady decline in functioning. They were given little hope of successful employment and living meaningful lives.”

Then along came “recovery approach.”

Goodwin said even though she works as a recovery specialist and can now aid others in their own recovery, the process never ends.

“My own recovery is like anyone else’s,” she said. “It’s day to day, month to month, year to year. Some days you think, ‘What am I doing?’ “

Goodwin, 34, was once a college athlete with dreams and goals. She once again has dreams and goals, which makes it easier to relay that kind of thought process to those she is trying to help.

“We help create goals. We want to see those we are trying to help succeed get back to being part of society,” she said.

___

Source: The Quincy Herald-Whig, http://bit.ly/1vG6VB6

___

Information from: The Quincy Herald-Whig, http://www.whig.com