THE REPUBLICAN presidential race has so far focused more on personality and bombast than on policy. With the first GOP debate Thursday night, we hope that will begin to change. At least some of the candidates have advanced serious proposals on a range of issues; though we don’t necessarily agree with them, that substance shouldn’t be lost in the circus-like atmosphere surrounding the debate.

Income inequality and ensuring that hard work is adequately rewarded are likely to resonate with voters next year. Yet broad claims that the solution is super-charged economic growth — which no candidate can predict, let alone guarantee — aren’t sufficient answers. Sen. Marco Rubio (Fla.) has proposed expanding the earned-income tax credit, a work-linked wage-support program that once commanded bipartisan backing. Would the other candidates agree with this?

Every Republican candidate can talk in general terms about taming the budget for Medicare and Social Security without fear of reprisal from the base. But what specific tradeoffs — in reduced benefits or increased taxes — would they make? New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has made his relatively detailed plan a centerpiece of his campaign, promising to raise the retirement age and means-test benefits so that precious public resources don’t subsidize wealthy seniors. How would other candidates balance the books?

You can expect many of the candidates to insist that they will get tough in international affairs, but what substantive alternatives to President Obama’s foreign policy will they offer? Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (S.C.) favors keeping a sizable U.S. military commitment in the Middle East and Afghanistan. That would be a hard sell to a war-weary American public, but it at least draws a clear line. Candidates who promise to strengthen the military must explain where they’d get the money to increase defense spending.

Obamacare has been a GOP punching bag for years, but candidates can’t pretend that time-worn Republican proposals dating from before the Affordable Care Act can be offered as adequate replacements now. Lanhee Chen, Mitt Romney’s 2012 campaign policy director, called a plan from Sen. Orrin G. Hatch (R-Utah) and Sen. Richard Burr (R-N.C.), who aren’t running this election cycle, the “gold standard in ACA replacement proposals.” Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal’s less-detailed health plan has some similarities. We’d like to hear what other candidates say about the Hatch-Burr plan’s specifics, which are less generous to current Obamacare beneficiaries and which envision continuing federal involvement.

A couple of candidates have shown that they are sensitive to the effects that the mostly dysfunctional Obamacare debate can have on vulnerable people. Mr. Christie and Ohio Gov. John Kasich expanded Medicaid in their states instead of rejecting federal health-care money to make an ideological point. Other governors on stage should have to explain why they chose the opposite path.

One issue on which substantive differences will probably be obvious is immigration. Mr. Graham and Mr. Rubio have pushed comprehensive reform in the Senate, while others in the race offer non-solutions and stoke nativism in the GOP base. Talking up border security isn’t enough: All should have to explain, with precision, what should happen to the millions of undocumented immigrants working in the country. While they’re at it, candidates such as Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker should explain why cutting back on legal immigration belongs on the table.

Thursday’s crowded debate may not allow the candidates to explore these issues in much depth. The trick for GOP voters will be weeding out those least interested in seriously engaging.