CHICAGO, June 17, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Caremerge, Inc., a revolutionary communication and care coordination network for the senior care industry, announced today the launch of the Chronic Care Management Solution, one of the first solutions designed to connect the fragmented aspects of chronic care coordination and the new Medicare Chronic Care Management reimbursements as set forth by the Affordable Care Act.

Physicians have long coordinated care for their chronic patients, but until recently, this went largely unrecognized by the healthcare industry. The new Medicare reimbursement code ushered in by the Affordable Care Act focuses on patient wellness across the entire continuum of care. This amendment recognizes the importance of care coordination for chronically ill patients and at the same time gives an incentive to physicians by providing the opportunity for reimbursements if the proper coordination is implemented to ensure improved care and decreased costs to the patient.

While traditional Electronic Health Records might be equipped to handle the billing component of CCM, they are not set up to create and manage the care plans, or electronic communications with patients and families required by the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS). The Caremerge Chronic Care Management Solution will provide physicians with an easy-to-use tool that is necessary to coordinate and manage chronic care patients directly and in a more simplified manner, allowing them to streamline care coordination in-house and eliminating the need to pay outside providers to treat CCM patients while ensuring personal attention and reimbursement from Medicare. What's more, for any physician already working within senior care, the solution integrates seamlessly with the Caremerge family of products already being used within senior communities nationwide.

"Creating the CCM solution was a natural extension of our care coordination network. We already serve seniors and this simply extends our reach to widen the circle of communication among physicians, staff, patients and families," said Asif Khan, Founder and CEO of Caremerge.

For more information on Caremerge, Inc. and the Care Coordination Network, please contact Stacy Callahan at 917-972-1101, email: stacy@astonishmediagroup.com

About Caremerge

Caremerge launched its first solution in late 2012 to help solve the care coordination and communication problems surrounding the senior care industry. Since then, they have built strategic relationships with many leading healthcare providers and technology vendors in this space making it one of the top companies changing the face of senior care in the U.S. today.

With a revolutionary, easy-to-use cloud-based coordination network, Caremerge keeps the entire care team informed and cohesive through an intuitive interface that enables real-time staff interaction, provides families with peace of mind and improves overall senior wellness.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150528/219227LOGO

SOURCE Caremerge, Inc.