Now all Pam Dent can do is wait for the Medical Examiner's office to make the official ID, and let her know if it is or isn't the body of her son Marshall.

Pam Dent says she grew even more concerned when she found out Marshall had left their Shawnee home with 36-year-old George E. Walker.

It could be several days or even weeks before we know if the body investigators found in the wooded field is indeed the body of 27-year-old Marshall Dent.

New details on a missing Shawnee man and how it may be linked to a body found buried in a shallow grave near Meeker.

News 9 first brought you the news Thursday night as breaking news at 6 p.m. The medical examiner has yet to make a positive identification on the body. But we have learned a convicted felon, who is back in jail, may have something to do with the disappearance.

Pam Dent says one of the men who were last seen with her son has served time for killing a man, and was just arrested Jan. 5 for assault with a deadly weapon.

It could be several days or even weeks before we know if the body investigators found in the wooded field is indeed the body of 27-year-old Marshall Dent. His mother says the last time she saw him was Dec. 23.

"Personally I believe he was hurt," said Dent. "I just want to know."

Dent says she grew even more concerned when she found out Marshall had left their Shawnee home with 36-year-old George E. Walker. Walker was convicted of first-degree manslaughter and sentenced to 15 years in prison for stabbing and killing a man back in 1994. He was released in 2005, but went back to prison two more times for Assault and battery.

Now he's back in jail again, after being arrested and accused of trying to stab three people and hurting two of them. He faces a long list of charges, including assault and battery, carrying a concealed weapon and endangering others while eluding police.

1/15/2014 Related Story: Body Found In Rural Area Near Meeker

And Dent believes Walker may have something to do with Marshall's disappearance. She just hopes anyone who may know what really happened will come forward.

"I just pray that they call police, or call the detective, or call me even," said Dent.

Neither federal nor local investigators will confirm or deny if Walker is indeed a suspect in Marshall's disappearance. But News 9 has learned the DA has increased his bond to $400,000. We know investigators spent hours Wednesday night, sifting and digging through the dirt for clues.

Now all Dent can do is wait for the Medical Examiner's office to make the official ID, and let her know if it is or isn't the body of her son Marshall.

"A lot of people will miss him if he's not with us anymore," said Dent.

We've learned one of the victims Walker is accused of trying to stab the night of Jan. 5 has filed a protective order against him as a result of the attack. She states Walker stabbed her in the left upper arm and it required eight staples. She claims he threatened that if she called the police, her grandchildren would be next. Also in the protective order, she writes "I really thought he would kill me".

She also wrote Walker took the knife and started flicking it across her face and then cut her face across her left cheek and forehead.