Sarah Palin was very busy last night. Too busy and important to watch the State of the Union, but she did catch it on her “truck radio” and she’s very concerned about that man in the White House. He’s arrogant and dangerously full of hubris. He dared to act like a President and use presidential powers. Something must be done!

She warned her flock on Facebook today, “We the People” don’t have to be “We the Sheeple” and just get shepherded towards a fundamental transformation that’s against America’s will.” To remedy this horrible, big government intrusion, she says we can elect more Republicans this November. Because if anyone knows how to do nothing while getting paid a lot of money for it and using taxpayer funded health insurance, it’s the GOP.

Yes, Ms. Palin did not watch “the fantasy declaration of ‘utopia’s-on-its-way'”, which is good, because I’m beginning to suspect that she allergic to hope and optimism, so certainly utopia is out.

Listening on her truck radio, she heard what she “forebodingly anticipated.” She was alarmed by the President’s hubris, “But the extreme hubris and naïveté that emanated from that speech was something new and alarming.” It’s as if he is President or something. Uppity Obama.

Palin cited Ronald Reagan and claimed that Obama’s speech “confirms we need rescuing from government like never before.” Who’s gonna rescue us from the “government”? Governmental employees like Republicans. Don’t try to work this out in your head. It works on a bumper sticker and that’s all that matters.

Apparently, Ms. Palin, who had health insurance via her husband’s union at one point and certainly as a governor, even if she did quit, lost her health insurance because of affordable health insurance being made available to everyone else. I think you know who wins in this case, and it’s not you. “In an attempt to “fix” our health care system, government has taken away our health insurance and forced us to buy worse plans we don’t want and can’t afford.”

She worried about the deficit but never mentioned the 24 billion dollars her tea party doppelgänger Republican Senator Ted Cruz cost the country with his shutdown over nothing. And while she hates green energy (she was the most socialist governor in America by the way – she pushed for oil companies to pay citizens for the privilege of using their land), nothing gets her down like amnesty. Obama amnesty.

Speaking of which, while claiming to be concerned with job creation for American workers, our government is trying to ram through amnesty, which will result in a flood of foreign workers competing with Americans for the few jobs there are.

Fear! I tell you fear! They’re coming for your stuff! VOTE GOP in 2014 because they already have your stuff and they want to keep it. They don’t want you getting a piece of the pie before some “foreign worker” comes in to snatch it from you, so it’s best if you just don’t have health insurance at all, and it’s best if Republicans keep obstructing job bills.

Palin is very hot under the collar about Obama’s “arrogance” and “hubris”, which she mentioned yet again in her clearly not over her 2008 defeat tome, “Between the hubris of an executive branch governing by fiat, to the arrogance of believing it can spy on citizens’ communications and unleash the IRS to harass people who happen to disagree with the President, it’s now more important than ever for us to press in and pay attention.”

Yes, pay attention! The IRS investigated liberals and conservatives, but if we ignore the facts, we can feel really scared and sorry for ourselves, which is always a bonus in Palin world. This is leading up to an implied request for money. Are you scared enough yet? (Please don’t ask about Republicans wanting the IRS to investigate rape victims, because we are on a one-way ticket to utopia here and reality does not apply.)

Why? Because we’re obviously on a dangerous path, but “We the People” don’t have to be “We the Sheeple” and just get shepherded towards a fundamental transformation that’s against America’s will.

You are being manipulated by evil, “alarmingly” “dangerous” Obama. Glenn Beck, is that you?

Understand the way words are manipulated by politicians who practice to deceive, so that we can DO something about it. For instance, proving he’s immune to irony, the President used the phrase “fairness and equality under the law” at the end of last night’s address. This is the same President who has been arbitrarily amending his signature legislation, Obamacare, practically every other day to give breaks to his cronies and leave the rest of us without “connections” out in the cold. I guess some of us are less fair and equal under Obama’s laws.

Oh, God yes, if anyone is without connections, it’s Sarah Palin and her new TV show, her Fox gig, her PAC, and her standing as a person of importance in the Republican Party in spite of having quit on Alaska mid term in order to pursue reality TV appearances and make some cold hard cash. Sparkly flags and God, please donate.

The last thing we need is “big government”, so send Republicans to DC:

The last thing we need right now is more “help” from big government. In this mid-term year, we need to send new leadership to D.C. to get government back on our side and off our aching backs. Thankfully, November is just around the corner.

Now you know what to do. There’s a nice little button going to SarahPAC at the top of the page. Donate to her so she can keep the cash in her PAC, which allows her to send Republicans to DC because it frees her up to write things like this on Facebook.

Arrogant Obama needs to stop acting like he was elected, stop using that executive power, which he uses much less than Bush, but Bush was President so… Obama needs to stop being so “arrogant” by acting like a president. It burns. The jealousy is palpable.

Many say Sarah Palin is a has-been and irrelevant, but she perfectly embodies the problems of the modern day GOP. She is all hot rage and vague fear tactics, lots of accusations steeped in not so veiled southern strategy and no solutions, and most troubling of all, there is zero consistency in the policy positions. You can’t fear monger about big government while you try to use the IRS to harass rape victims. Sarah Palin is all bitter Obama hate and nothing else. Just like the entire modern day Republican Party.

Go ahead, laugh, because ultimately, this is what is behind every Republican politician right now. They are all Sarah Palin, some of them just manage to hide it better. They are the party of spoiled children who do nothing but point fingers at others and call names. That is their only contribution, and for that, they expect to be paid by you.