BRIDGEPORT — Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump roared into Connecticut Saturday with two stops in major cities in an effort to run up the score and sweep the state's 28 Republican delegates by securing more than 50 percent of the vote.

The stops in Waterbury and Bridgeport came on the heels of an earlier stop in Hartford, part of a major effort in Connecticut, whose primary is Tuesday, after winning his home state of New York by a wide margin.

He told the crowds assembled for his speeches that his goal is to capture more than 50 percent of the vote in the state's Republican primary on Tuesday, saying he won nearly 62 percent in New York. Gaining 50 percent in a primary was difficult in the past, when he had 16 opponents, he said, but now his chances are now better with only two opponents: Texas Sen. Ted Cruz and Ohio Gov. John Kasich.

Caption Trump Speaks At Rally In Bridgeport Trump Speaks At Rally In Bridgeport Trump Speaks At Rally In Bridgeport Caption Why Vote Trump: Supporter Discusses His Views Trump supporter Tony Ensminger of Cleveland, OH., talks about why he supports Donald Trump in Bridgeport before the rally at the Clein Memorial. Trump supporter Tony Ensminger of Cleveland, OH., talks about why he supports Donald Trump in Bridgeport before the rally at the Clein Memorial.

During a 49-minute speech in Bridgeport, Trump said he has been purposely coming to Connecticut because he is taking nothing for granted, despite his lead in the polls. He reminded the audience of his plans to make numerous changes if elected — repealing the Obamacare health law, building a 1,000-mile wall along the border with Mexico, and improving trade deals that he says have been disastrous for America.

"We're going to change it on Tuesday when you go to the polls,'' Trump told the overflow crowd at Klein Memorial Auditorium in Bridgeport.

The crowd was so large in Waterbury that hundreds who could not fit inside listened to an audio feed of the speech outside.

"Let's show America that Connecticut is 100 percent behind Donald Trump," Rep. Tony D'Amelio of Waterbury told a crowd of around 3,000 gathered in the Crosby High School gym in the morning.

A scoreboard in the gym read Trump 28 — Guest 0. That's the goal in Connecticut, to capture all 28 delegates, as Trump continues a contentious fight for the Republican nomination.

The stakes are high because of the Republican Party's complex delegate rules.

Donald Trump made a second trip to Connecticut Saturday to hold rallies in Waterbury and Bridgeport.

If Trump doesn't reach the 50 percent threshold, a pool of delegates will be awarded proportionally. Every single delegate counts in the national race, with projections showing Trump may come into the Republican National Convention in Cleveland short of the 1,237 needed to win the nomination on the first ballot. If Trump isn't nominated on the first ballot, and voting goes to a second round, he could lose the nomination despite a large plurality.

"This is a rigged system," Trump said in Waterbury, continuing a theme that has been present in his recent speeches. "I'm millions of votes more than lyin' Ted Cruz. I'm millions of votes more than Kasich. … I'm 300 delegates more."

Trump also weighed in on reports that his new advisers, including New Britain native Paul Manafort, have been suggesting he take a more conciliatory tone on the campaign trail.

"I sort of don't like toning it down," he told the crowd. "Isn't it nice that I'm not one of these teleprompter guys?"

The hour-long speech in Waterbury included a wide variety of topics, including his plans to turn around the economy. He read from a printed piece of paper about all the manufacturing jobs that had been lost in the Brass City.

Trump left Waterbury in a helicopter to head to Bridgeport.

State House Republican leader Themis Klarides of Derby was the first main speaker in Bridgeport, even though she has not endorsed anyone publicly and previously said that she would not vote for Trump in the primary. She did not direct her brief remarks at Trump during the speech.

"I was asked to talk about Gov. Malloy and the House and the Senate,'' Klarides told The Courant after her speech.

She said she has not decided yet who she will vote for on Tuesday, and purposely has remained neutral as the Republican leader. But the state Democratic Party issued a sharply-worded statement saying Klarides had "fully embraced" Trump by speaking at the rally.

D'Amelio, who spoke before Trump at the Waterbury rally, is one of the few elected Republicans in the state who have backed him.

While a rally in Hartford last week at the Connecticut Convention Center featured a tense confrontation between protesters and Trump supporters after the event let out, a smaller group of protesters was present Saturday in Waterbury. They stood in what has become known as the "First Amendment" pen, created at Trump rallies around the country, waving signs and shouting "Dump Trump."

"We're young and full of energy — you're old and don't have any," shouted Dez Volnixshin, 28, of New Milford. He said he supports Bernie Sanders but was in Waterbury mainly because he opposes against Trump.

In Bridgeport, a series of barricades kept the protesters far away from the Klein Memorial Auditorium. A section of Fairfield Avenue was closed off in front of the auditorium, and at least four police officers on horseback gathered outside the auditorium as they patrolled the area.