Buy Photo An effort to replace Colburn Pool in Green Bay met its fundraising mark of $1 million. (Photo: File/Press-Gazette Media )Buy Photo

Green Bay takes great pride in its park system, and it shows.

Bay Beach, the Wildlife Sanctuary, Bairds Creek, the Resch Aquatic Center, the Arnie Wolff Sports Complex and numerous other parks loaded with ball diamonds, soccer fields, ice rinks, playgrounds, park shelters, tennis and basketball courts, splash pads and trails are shining examples of the importance we have placed on parks.

This pride was clearly evident about a decade ago when we debated the fate of Fisk Pool. Like Colburn Pool today, we had another aging park icon.

Myself, along with many passionate citizens, led the charge and the pool was reborn as the Resch Aquatic Center. It is now the busiest pool in the area, ready to serve the next generation.

It is vital to note that the proposed pool will simply be replacing existing park infrastructure that has served our city for almost 50 years. We must maintain strong neighborhoods and build for the future.

The proposed pool will be unique, just like it is now. Colburn’s beautiful forest of oaks and pines are rare to find in an urban park setting. It feels like being transported to the northwoods.

The Olympic-size swimming pool makes it especially attractive to competitive swimmers, who already rent the facility for training and are planning on running their own swim meets in the future.

The proposed pool will add a zero-depth entry for easier access for young and old, a much enhanced concession area that will also serve outside the pool to the park itself and an attached community room that can be used year-round for any event.

By hosting a few swim meets our city will benefit economically as swimmers and their families flock here from around the state. They will stay at our hotels, eat at our restaurants and shop at our stores.

As a city, we wisely invest millions of dollars in our other city infrastructure. We fork over endless incentives to developers and businesses, especially downtown.

An argument can be made that investing in our parks is just as important. When young couples and families are deciding where to put down their roots, our park system is often a factor. We should be giving people reasons to live in Green Bay, not taking them away.

Additionally, having quality parks improves the values of all the surrounding properties.

Like other large projects, this can be a public/private partnership success story. The parks department and the Friends of Colburn Pool will welcome any individuals or businesses who might want to name the pool or some of the structures within it.

If you are one of these, please let us know. If you would like to donate towards the Friends of Colburn Pool, also please let us know. Just as with Fisk Pool, I will be asking that the fundraising goal be set at $500,000.

Park projects such as this are incredible community building opportunity. Let’s work together and get this done.

Alderman Chris Wery represents District 8 on the Green Bay City Council. A consultant has said it will cost $4 million to $5 million to replace Colburn Pool.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1vZxdMd