This national champion plains cottonwood is on the Huls Dairy Farm near Corvallis, Montana ( Lorie Palm / Montana DNRC )

Hi Johnnie: Thanks for all your mystery-solving over the years.

How to score a national champ American Forests scores trees on their circumference, height and crown (or canopy coverage). Trees on the National Register of Big Trees earn a point for every inch of circumference and a point for every foot in height. The crown — called "spread" — is measured by averaging its diameter — in feet — then dividing that by four for a point total. The new national champ has a circumference of 394 inches, is 112 feet tall, and has a crown average of 94 feet. Its point total is 530. The Hygiene champ's measurements were 432, 95 and 98, for a point total of 552. Hubba, hubba.

After reading the article on Tuesday, Sept. 23, about the clone of the "Gentle Giant of Boulder County" being planted following the death of the great tree, it has caused me to wonder which tree now holds the distinction of largest plains cottonwood in the country.

I hear that the oldest pains cottonwood is still in Hygiene, so maybe the newest contender is also! — Just Curious

Hi Curious: The keeper of the National Register of Big Trees is a group called American Forests.

Advertisement

American Forests' latest National Register — http://tinyurl.com/bigtreelist — lists more than 750 national champions and co-champions. On that list is a "Populus deltoides ssp. monilifera" (that's a plains cottonwood to you) in Ravalli County, Montana, that was crowned in 2012. That's the year Hygiene's national champ tree died.

I spoke with Dan Rogers, coordinator of the Montana Big Tree Program, who confirmed that the new champ is on the Huls Dairy Farm, which is northeast of Corvalis, Mont.

Rogers knew about the "Gentle Giant" and had been keeping an eye on news about it.

"It's gamesmanship across the country," he said. "You know about these trees and their conditions."

That's how he knew that the Boulder County cottonwood had died.

"All of the sudden ... it's well, let's put ours in and see if it makes the list."

So, the Ravalli County cottonwood is the new champ, with a point total of 530. Our old champ had a point total of 552. (See breakout.)

Rogers said that speculation is that the Montana champ was planted around 1900.

"There's a big, 100-plus-year old ditch system (nearby)," he said. "We suspect that's why this thing is as big as it is."

Curious, you'll probably want to check out the tree registry yourself. Of the hundreds on the list, only 27 national champions have higher point totals than the Montana cottonwood. Only 24 surpassed our old champ.

That was one big tree.

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com