I am skeptical that debates in this year's midterm elections will serve a useful function.

Workmen continue to gird the Capitol Dome in scaffolding Thursday for a long-term repair project. (Photo: J. Scott Applewhite, AP)

Under some circumstances, debates serve an admirable role in connecting the people to government. Debates are particularly useful in primaries or in local races, where a candidate's party doesn't tell the viewers all they need to know.

I am skeptical that debates in this year's midterm elections will serve a useful function, however, given the unprecedented level of polarization in the House and Senate today. It simply is not likely that candidates will provide meaningful explanations of why their political views differ from those of other members of their party, or that any differences they can name will change the way Congress legislates.

OUR VIEW: What are debate duckers hiding?

There is also little reason for this year's candidates to say anything that will distance them from their party's core supporters. Midterm elections historically have had lower turnout than presidential elections, which means that the electorate this year has fewer swing voters. If candidates know that victory has more to do with mobilizing their party's base than with reaching across the aisle, they are unlikely to say anything very original.

Midterm elections, furthermore, tend to be referendums on the performance of the current president. Although Barack Obama is not on the ballot, many of this year's debates have revolved around Republican efforts to pin alleged failures of the Obama administration on their Democratic opponents, or around Democratic efforts to distance themselves from the president.

This is particularly obvious given the nation's foreign policy crises. It's hard to imagine constructive, bipartisan discussions about responding to the Islamic State terror group, for instance, when the temptation to attack the president outweighs reasoned discussion of policy options.

Candidates for Congress are coached to avoid "gotcha" moments in debates, and to try to force their opponents to make mistakes. Watching how someone performs under this sort of pressure might be a good way to choose among people who agree on most things.

Given the state of our Congress, however, it's not a very useful way to choose among House and Senate general election candidates.

Robert G. Boatright is an associate professor of political science at Clark University in Worcester, Mass.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1vHEu3c