A Democratic donkey and a Republican elephant throwing mud at each other. (Photo: Gannett)

The best news of the last week is the fact that the U.S. Senate still doesn't work. Things had been looking bad after the election.

Even worse than hearing politicians begging for votes and promising to "fight for the middle class" before the election was hearing them pledging to "work together" and "get things done" after the election.

"The message from voters is clear: they want us to work together," said Sen. Harry Reid after the midterm elections. "I look forward to working with Sen. McConnell to get things done for the middle class."

The next day, President Obama told reporters, "The American people sent a message…. They want us to get the job done." "I think they're frustrated by the gridlock," he said a few days later. "They'd like to see more cooperation."

On this point he's right. According to an NBC/Wall Street Journal survey shortly before the elections, 36 percent of Americans said that "breaking the partisan gridlock in Washington to get things done" was their first or second concern.

The press is similarly fed up. The New York Times blamed Republicans for "creating an environment where every (Obama) initiative is opposed and nothing gets done." The Washington Post advised the GOP, soon to be in control of both houses of Congress, not to "behave like a petty opposition party" and to work in concert with the president.

Bad advice. The job of an opposition party is to oppose. For Republicans, this means obstructing, and if possible dismantling, the most irksome parts of Obama's agenda. If the voters had wanted harmonious government, they would not have elected Republicans, who campaigned explicitly on their antipathy toward Obama.

There is a consensus, among pundits and politicians alike, that consensus is in itself desirable. There is widespread agreement that widespread agreement is better than the alternative. Even strident partisans believe that partisanship is somehow dishonorable.

But partisanship, far from being the cause of our divisions, is merely a reflection of them. We live in a country composed of 316 million individuals who can't agree on which brand of bottled water is the best. Why should we expect 536 politicians to resolve our differences on issues more controversial than Aquafina vs. Dasani?

Some disputes cannot be settled. Take health care. Many Americans like the Affordable Care Act and want to keep it. Others want to repeal it. Tell me, please, how to reconcile these two positions — how to keep a law and abolish it at the same time. It can't be done.

This is why, according to poll after poll, Americans hate their politicians. But if they hate them as much as they claim, they would hate bipartisanship even more. The only thing worse than a politician is a group of politicians working together. What passes for "cooperation" in politics would qualify as collusion in private industry.

Adam Smith, the father of capitalism, observed, "People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices." In this respect, politics is a trade like any other. It was on this ground that Professor Steven E. Landsburg proposed that bipartisan compromise be treated as a violation of antitrust law.

Consider what bipartisanship has bequeathed us. In this millennium, it has given us the No Child Left Behind Act, the Iraq War Resolution and bailouts for Wall Street. Its counterpart, partisan hegemony, which is what we had during the first two years of Obama's presidency, gave us more bailouts, a failed economic stimulus and Obamacare. Take your pick.

Contrary to popular mythology, we are best off when partisanship is fierce. The only way to constrain the appetites of politicians is through competition, by pitting the proponents of one bad idea against the proponents of another bad idea. This is what James Madison had in mind when he wrote, "Ambition must be made to counteract ambition."

When politicians fight amongst themselves, we get gridlock. It doesn't solve problems, but at least it doesn't create new ones. What it does is nothing, and it does it splendidly. Surely that is a point on which we can — but won't — agree.

Windsor Mann is the editor of "The Quotable Hitchens: From Alcohol to Zionism."

Read or Share this story: http://on.mgmadv.com/1qJ5uQl