FARGO – Sanford Health is studying how to expand its presence in Minot, which could include building a new hospital there.

The importance of the Minot market—where dominant Trinity Health is planning an unrelated merger—is linked to Sanford's presence in Bismarck, where it merged with the former Medcenter One three years ago, said Sanford CEO Kelby Krabbenhoft.

When it joined with Medcenter, Sanford gained several satellite clinics, including one in Minot, one of the state's four major health care hubs.

Krabbenhoft has been in periodic discussions with executives of Billings Clinic, which has signed a letter of intent that would add Trinity to a joint venture it has with RegionalCare, a small hospital chain based in Tennessee. Billings Clinic serves Montana, Wyoming and the western Dakotas.

The jockeying for alignments among major health providers in Minot is the latest example in the ongoing drama of health care consolidations and partnerships that continues to sweep the region, in both North Dakota and Minnesota.

Earlier waves included the 2009 merger between Fargo-based MeritCare and Sanford, based in Sioux Falls, S.D.; and Essentia Health's 2008 acquisition of Dakota Clinic and Innovis Health in Fargo. Essentia, based in Duluth, Minn., formed in 2004 through a partnership between Benedictine Health System and St. Mary's/Duluth Clinic Health System.

Hospital Scramble

But a variety of forces, including new regulations established by the Affordable Care Act, is driving a new round of health systems combining or striking cooperative deals.

"It's becoming more and more expensive for freestanding organizations to provide services," said Jerry Jurena, executive director of the North Dakota Hospital Association.

Collaboration—or joining a large system—can make it easier. For example, sophisticated electronic medical records systems can cost $40 million to $60 million, require technical expertise and bring in no additional revenue, Jurena said.

Sanford considers Minot move

Krabbenhoft expects to present a recommendation to his board this year for a decision on a possible expansion, including hospital services, in Minot. That could come in the form of a partnership or a solo initiative on Sanford's part, he said.

"That decision is imminent," Krabbenhoft said. "It might be we build a Sanford facility."

If so, that would be reminiscent of Sanford's decision to open a $60 million, 48-bed hospital next to its existing multispecialty clinic in Aberdeen, S.D., three years ago.

Expansion in Minot as part of its efforts in shoring up Bismarck-based operations is consistent with what Sanford did in Fargo after its transformative merger with MeritCare, Krabbenhoft said. Expansions included adding physicians, staff and services—and building a new $494 million medical center.

Sanford's interest in Minot comes as Trinity and Billings Clinic continue preparations for their planned merger, which they hope to complete later this year.

Trinity found itself straining to meet increased demand for services, thanks in large part to the nearby oil boom, and is saddled with outdated hospital campuses.

More than a decade ago, Trinity absorbed rival St. Joseph's Hospital, so it has two downtown campuses, both with older buildings that don't provide for smooth patient flows.

If the merger goes forward, it will give Trinity Health access to the $250 million to $300 million that early estimates say is needed to build a new medical campus on the southwest edge of town.

"We've got a great plan and a great vision," said Randy Schwan, a Trinity vice president. "This will help us meet that need."

Schwan declined to comment on Sanford's interest in expanding in Minot. A spokesman for Billings Clinic said the organization's chief executive has spoken to Krabbenhoft about "collaborative opportunities," but not involving Minot.

Forces driving mergers

Trinity's pending merger comes less than a year after Bismarck's St. Alexius Medical Center joined Catholic Health Initiatives, a national organization with a division based in Fargo that owns seven hospitals in North Dakota and five in Minnesota.

At least partly, St. Alexius sought the backing of an organization with $14 billion in revenues in response to the merger of rival Medcenter One with Sanford.

Mergers among hospitals and clinics have been going on for decades due to trends that include access to capital, the need for a wide range of medical and business expertise and to tap the efficiencies of size through economies of scale.

But the drive to consolidate in health care has accelerated in recent years for a variety of reasons, some stemming from the Affordable Care Act. The national health reform law, commonly known as Obamacare, calls upon hospitals and clinics to meet the full spectrum of health needs of patient populations.

Also, public and private insurers are exerting increasing pressures on health providers through so-called pay-for-performance initiatives, which pay more for better results and penalize poor results.

"All of these together are pushing, not only in this state and region, but in the nation," Trinity's Schwan said of the forces driving the latest round of hospital mergers.

"Those factors are pushing harder than ever before," he added. "This will continue at a stronger pace in our country, no doubt about it."

In fact, hospital administrators agree, those forces often are more significant than the periodic mergers that are struck, although they are largely internal and seldom make headlines.

Still, when mutual interests align, mergers continue to reshape the landscape. Trinity Health's suitor, a for-profit joint venture between Billings Clinic and Tennessee-based RegionalCare, gains an expanded referral network to help support its medical specialists, who need a large population base to be sustainable, Schwann said.

Geography also helped bring the partners together. The service areas of the organizations based in Minot and Billings, Mont., separated by 438 driving miles, come close but don't overlap, he said.

Similar dynamics last year brought St. Alexius into the arms of Catholic Health Initiatives, which owns 105 hospitals and serves markets in 18 states. The Bismarck medical center gets greater access to capital, more buying power and a range of expertise.

"There are a lot of efficiencies gained by joining a national system," said Chris Jones, vice president for strategy and business development in Catholic Health Initiative's Fargo division.

At the same time, CHI gained a referral center for patients in its smaller North Dakota hospitals, including those in Williston, Dickinson, Valley City and Carrington.

"St. Alexius fit very well into the puzzle piece," Jones said. By adding a medical center in Bismarck, CHI gained a foothold in one of North Dakota's four major medical hubs; the others are Fargo, Grand Forks and Minot.

'Where the real action is'

Much of the consolidation in hospitals and medical centers already has occurred, Jurena and others said. For example, the Red River Valley and adjacent areas in eastern North Dakota and western Minnesota are dominated by three systems: Sanford and Essentia Health, both with Fargo as hubs, and Altru Health, based in Grand Forks.

"I think a majority of what's going to happen has already happened," Jurena said.

In Minnesota, 111 of 147 hospitals are tied in some way or another to a system, either owned, managed or affiliated, said Wendy Burt, vice president of communications for the Minnesota Hospital Association.

"Consolidation in Minnesota has been going on for quite a while," she said, adding the trend likely will continue as hospitals position themselves to deal with payments based on quality and efficiency instead of volume.

If the Trinity merger goes through, Altru would be left as the last major health system in North Dakota that is not part of a larger regional or national organization.

That's just fine with Dave Molmen, Altru's CEO, who said he is not looking to strike a merger or new strategic alliance.

"We really feel well-positioned right now," he said. "Every community is searching and finding the right answer for it."

In Ada, Minn., the answer for what had been a municipal hospital and clinic was to combine in 2005 with Benedictine Health System, which three years later became part of Essentia.

The 14-bed critical access hospital and adjacent clinic, built in 2000, gives patients access to visiting specialists and those in Fargo, 43 miles away, and a range of business and health care expertise.

"They recognized it's a highly specialized industry" requiring intensive management that a system can provide, said Ryan Hill, who administers Essentia's operations in Ada. "That's where I think additional value from a system comes into play."

Although the Sanford and Essentia networks are well-established, both health systems remain open to new partnerships. Administrators from diverse organizations agreed, in fact, that the future might hold more tailored partnerships than outright mergers.

"I always believe that collaboration is what we need most in health care," Altru's Molmen said, adding that the focus will be streamlining operations and using proven methods.

"If you look at the future," he said, "that's where the real action is."

Coming Monday

A look at one North Dakota hospital that's bucking the merger trend.