If you haven’t met him, you probably have heard of him or at least read some of his stories spanning seven decades and touching four generations.

And you wish you had a dollar for every player, coach, official, fan, stadium worker, executive or family member he has interviewed, written about or exchanged pleasantries with since the 1950s. He is a native Denverite who turned into a newspaper institution with an encyclopedic knowledge of sports from kids to pros. Now 81 years old, he still has ink running through his veins and remains a combination of bulldog and gentleman.

His name is Homer (you know him as Irv) Moss, fittingly the first Denver Post sportswriter to be inducted into the Colorado High School Activities Association Hall of Fame, which will occur Wednesday.

“I really feel good about the fact that I started out in this business covering the high school sports,” Moss said. “I think there’s an element there that if you don’t do it, you miss out.”

In the middle of college, the 1952 graduate of Denver’s West High was drafted into the Army while working at The Post. He eventually reported on servicemen playing sports overseas for a military publication while stationed in Germany.

When he returned in March 1959, the former copy boy said “they put me in sports and I’ve been there ever since.” Moss said he had a large crew that he supervised, including Joe Sanchez, Michael Knisley, Terry Anderson and Mike Monroe.

Moss said those were the glory days. He could write — and did — chapter and verse about all that was happening on the Colorado sports landscape. He witnessed the height of the Denver Prep League before suburbia took over. He saw the old Parochial League. Opposing coaches would whine about the DPL’s advantage playing in the old Auditorium Arena — it would help them in the state tournament. A Saturday meant covering four consecutive city football games.

Coaches? Moss knew Pat Panek. Tom Hancock. Dick Yates. Still talks with Guy Gibbs and Fred Tesone. And he presented The Denver Post Gold Helmet, which had switched from the Thom McAn shoe or boot, to Wheat Ridge’s Fred Steinmark before he died of cancer. “It’s something I’ll always remember,” Moss said.

He convinced The Post to sponsor an all-star baseball game that began with public schools vs. private schools, then the city against the suburbans, and was one of the most popular events of any school year. After 1968, he switched to covering Wyoming sports, then handled his beloved Air Force Falcons from 1970 to a couple of years ago, notably the football teams coached by Ben Martin, Ken Hatfield and Fisher DeBerry.

“They’re not the most talented guys around, but when they can beat Notre Dame four straight years, that’s amazing for Air Force to be able to do that,” Moss said.

He had only spot duty covering ice hockey and the Broncos, but he remains convinced that he was first with a source in the meeting that led to the birth of the Rockies and later broke the story of which colors Denver’s first major-league baseball team would sport.

In addition, his Colorado Classics, which still grace these pages — and our website — continue as one of his great sources of pride, periodic offerings on individuals, blasts from the past with a sense of authentication because, well, Moss was there covering that person.

“They’ve been accepted well by readers,” he said. “I get something on them all the time. People say they’re new in town and it kind of gives them a way of hearing what happened in the past.”

Having worked alongside hundreds of peers, several sports editors and for many newspaper ownership groups, Moss will continue writing. Even with the newspaper industry in constant change, Moss said the rounds of buyouts over the years as an incentive to leave or take retirement “weren’t for me.” Recently, he was honored with the Football Writers Association of America lifetime achievement award.

Like his current column, Moss is a Colorado Classic.

Neil H. Devlin: ndevlin@denverpost.com or @neildevlin

CHSAA’s call for the Hall of Fame

The CHSAA will induct another Hall of Fame class Wednesday at the Radisson Hotel in Aurora, including longtime Denver Post sportswriter Irv Moss, left. Other honorees: