After nearly three years of studying, planning, fundraising and debating for and about a new stadium on the Colorado State campus, school president Tony Frank has reached a verdict.

Build it.

The morning after CSU’s football team finished its regular season with a disappointing 27-24 loss to Air Force, Frank on Saturday announced he will ask the CSU system’s board of governors to approve moving forward with the project.

Frank said he would make the request Friday at the board’s meeting in Denver and noted he had determined that remaining at Hughes Stadium, either with short-term fixes or a long-term commitment and massive expenditures under a “Hughes 2050” plan, wasn’t a viable or financially sound option. Frank made his recommendation to members of the board in a Saturday morning memorandum that also was posted on the university’s website.

Frank said he had concluded it might be possible for the university to stick with the full-scale project — estimated to cost $220 million — rather than scale back in a “phased” approach, with an estimated original price tag of $195 million.

He asked the board to allow him to “return to the Board with both a final program plan and a plan of finance in accord with State and Board policies.”

Frank said explorations of a public-private partnership for the project “with a variety of potential partners” either didn’t produce viable options or eventually evolved into plans in which ownership of the stadium remained solely in the university’s hands.

He said those talks led him to conclude that aspects of that public-private partnership plans still could be implemented in “versions” of the university-owned model “in which minimal changes from the original design can meet the fiscal standard we’ve established: the lowest risk of any negative impact on the general fund.”

He added that he believed a new stadium could “have the likely outcome of a positive fiscal impact without any utilization of tuition, fees or state support.”

Frank also sent out a mass e-mail to the university community announcing his recommendation and directing recipients to the website for the full memorandum. Additional material includes a report on donor support for the various stadium options from Brett Anderson, CSU’s vice president of university advancement, and interim athletic director John Morris. Anderson and Morris said none of the donors who had pledged $100,000 or more were willing to have their contributions used to support remaining at Hughes Stadium.

In late September, Frank announced in advance of the previous board meeting that the school had come up short of its announced goal of raising $110 million in seed money — or roughly half the cost — for the on-campus stadium by October 2014. He said the amount raised was roughly $50 million.

Former athletic director Jack Graham, who had a falling-out with Frank and was fired in August, maintained that the internal goal virtually from the start had been $75 million. He said he had raised about $45 million for the project and that the total would have been about $60 million by the October board of governors meeting.

At that meeting in early October, the board approved Frank’s request to study, with input from several committees, four possible options for the football program’s home stadium. Two were the options for remaining in Hughes Stadium. The third was to build a scaled-back or “phased” stadium owned by the university, hoping to add to it when feasible. Finally, the fourth was to stick with the full-scale project and build it as a public-private partnership.

Frank’s Saturday announcement, then, was an indication that he was hopeful the design wouldn’t have to be scaled back significantly and the stadium could remain under university ownership.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei