Photo

Good Wednesday morning from Washington, where speculation about Chuck Hagel’s replacement as defense secretary is the new favorite cocktail-hour game, two conservatives are squaring off to lead the Senate Budget Committee and Senator Charles E. Schumer made a surprising confession about the Affordable Care Act. We also look at the potential political costs of the civil unrest that has spread from Ferguson, Mo., to both coasts. Plus, favorite political recipes for Thanksgiving Day.

With the National Guard still out in force in Ferguson, Mo., and protesters in the streets nationwide, political figures and analysts say the police shooting of Michael Brown, the grand jury’s decision not to indict the police officer who shot and killed him, and the ensuing violence will have significant political repercussions both at the national level and in Missouri.

“I think it is something that is going to be part of the conversation going into 2016,” said Peverill Squire, a political science professor at the University of Missouri. “Questions are going to continue to linger, and I don’t think candidates in either party will be able to escape questions about it.”

In calling for calm, lawmakers have urged frustrated members of the public to take out their anger at the ballot box rather than through violence. Members of the Congressional Black Caucus plan a series of special floor speeches about Mr. Brown’s killing when they return to Washington on Monday.

In a Time magazine essay, Senator Rand Paul, the Kentucky Republican, said, “I mostly blame politicians” for the crisis in Ferguson. “Something is wrong with criminal justice in America,” he said.

Before Ferguson erupted in violence, Gov. Jay Nixon of Missouri was seen as a centrist Democrat with a possible national future, but his heavily criticized response to events there has ended any such speculation. At the same time, Claire McCaskill‘s high-profile role in urging a less militarized police presence will only add to a growing sense that the Democratic senator intends to run for governor of Missouri in two years.

— Carl Hulse

A brewing battle between the Republican senators Michael B. Enzi of Wyoming and Jeff Sessions of Alabama for the chairmanship of the Budget Committee will end up shaping the tenor and substance of the fiscal fights over the last two years of the Obama presidency.

Since the Republican midterm sweep, Washington has expected Mr. Sessions, a hard-charging conservative, to move from ranking Republican to committee chairman, aligning the leadership of the Senate panel with that of the House Budget Committee, where Representative Tom Price of Georgia has been elected chairman.

Surprising virtually everyone, Mr. Enzi has declared, “Not so fast.” He has made it clear that because he has more seniority than Mr. Sessions, the chairmanship should be his for the taking.

“It is Senator Sessions that is challenging him, not the other way around,” Mr. Enzi’s spokesman, Dan Head, said. “Senator Sessions is currently the ranking member because Senator Enzi did not exert his seniority two years ago.”

The low-key Mr. Enzi is conservative, but as a member of the Senate Finance Committee and a former member of the “Gang of Six” that tried to reach bipartisan accord on a near-universal health insurance bill in 2009, he has far more experience working with Democrats than Mr. Sessions.

Conservatives are already rallying around Mr. Sessions. But in the Senate, seniority almost always triumphs.

— Jonathan Weisman

When Republicans renew their efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act in 2015, it is likely that they will cite a prominent new critic of the health care law — Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, the chamber’s No. 3 Democrat and his party’s messaging maestro.

Mr. Schumer, in a speech at the National Press Club, confessed on Tuesday that he believes Democrats made a mistake in pushing for the Affordable Care Act in 2009 and 2010 when they should have focused on middle-class money concerns.

It is pretty easy to imagine how that will play on the Republican side of the Senate floor: “Even my good friend Senator Schumer, a respected Democratic strategist, says the law was a mistake.”

Mr. Schumer told reporters he was not worried about becoming the Democratic face of opposition to the health law. Republicans, he said, don’t “need anything else to play into their repeal efforts.”

He also noted that Republicans seemed to step back from their repeal push during the midterm campaigns and that “they moved on to other issues by and large.”

— Carl Hulse

Guessing games are among Washington’s favorite pastimes, and this week’s resignation of Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel has players off and running.

It’s even more fun when the front-runners refuse to participate. And with Michèle A. Flournoy and Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island saying this week that they aren’t interested, it’s a wide-open field.

Jeh Johnson, the secretary of Homeland Security, has been mentioned, as has Denis R. McDonough, the current White House chief of staff. Those names are to be expected. They’re both high-ranking administration officials with strong national security credentials. (Mr. Johnson is a former Pentagon lawyer, and Mr. McDonough was a deputy national security adviser.)

But former Senator Joseph I. Lieberman? His name was floated this week by Senator Ted Cruz, the Texas Republican, as a strong option from “the president’s own party.”

But as Talking Points Memo points out, Mr. Lieberman “became an independent in 2006 after his alienation from the party amid his steadfast support of the Iraq war.”

Our own Helene Cooper reports that Louis R. Chênevert’s name was batted around on Monday when he left United Technologies Corporation, where he was chief executive.

One problem: He’s Canadian.

— Steve Kenny

President Obama pardons a Thanksgiving turkey. Yes, again.

The Labor Department releases weekly jobless claims, the Commerce Department releases new home sales for October and Freddie Mac releases the weekly mortgage rates.

The winter storm that threatens to lock down the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic for Thanksgiving. Check your planes, trains and automobiles before leaving home.

Thanksgiving’s on Thursday, and you’re invited to share it with someone who is nearly as addicted to political prognostication as you are and you don’t know what to bring as a gift. How about one of these First Draft-approved recipes, culled from decades of New York Times political coverage?

Try the White House apple cake. Consider Laura Bush’s corn bread dressing. Or Nancy Reagan’s monkey bread. (We’ll pass, this holiday season, on Ann Romney’s meatloaf cakes.)

And if you’re in charge of the centerpiece dish, we have a look at the brine recipe Speaker John A. Boehner has come up with for his turkey, which deploys two cups of (presumably Ohio-tapped) maple syrup in addition to salt, garlic and a lot of bay leaves. Set that up tonight, roast in the morning and follow the speaker’s lead in pulling the bird when it reaches an internal temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit. That number will rise as the bird rests, leaving you time to check the latest political news before dinner.

For other ideas, you can visit our Thanksgiving page for nonpartisan help on your turkey, dressing, side dishes, gravy and pies.

— Sam Sifton

The key witness in the grand jury’s Ferguson decision was the officer who fired the fatal shots.

President Obama’s immigration action has infused the Tea Party with new energy.

The Environmental Protection Agency plans to introduce its long-delayed ozone regulations.

The Americans held hostage in Iran watch with dismay as the nuclear talks with Tehran go on and on.

The arguments over each state’s Thanksgiving recipe favorites are not close to being over.

George Stephanopoulos of ABC News interviews Darren Wilson, the Ferguson, Mo., police officer who killed Michael Brown.

President Obama isn’t the first American leader to be called an “unaccountable monarch.” Politico Magazine says it’s the oldest insult in American politics.

The Christian Science Monitor discusses speculation that President Obama will move unilaterally to improve relations with Cuba.

The Food and Drug Administration’s new calorie-counting rules will be of no help in reducing Americans’ waistlines, The New Republic says.

Bon Appetit shows just what Julia Child could do with a Thanksgiving turkey.

With that, First Draft wishes you a Happy Thanksgiving. We will return with a new edition on Monday morning.



Correction

An earlier version of this article misstated the title of Denis R. McDonough. He is the current White House chief of staff, not the former chief of staff.