CINCINNATI, Ohio – The majority on a three-judge federal appeals court panel that will decide the fate of gay marriage bans in Ohio and three other states is considered conservative.

But legal experts caution against trying to predict how they will rule in the cases scheduled for oral argument Wednesday in the 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.

Two of the judges are from Ohio and were appointed by President George W. Bush: Jeffrey Sutton of Columbus and Deborah Cook of Akron. The third member of the panel, Senior Judge Martha Craig Daughtrey of Tennessee, is a Bill Clinton appointee.

All three have handled high-profile cases, have ruled on topics involving gay rights, have been mentioned as potential Supreme Court justices, and are apt to surprise court prognosticators who attempt to pigeon-hole them into predictable political positions, the experts say.

"It would be hazardous to predict what they're going to do," said Pierre Bergeron, a Cincinnati lawyer who writes a blog dedicated to the 6th Circuit Court.

"All three are generally very well prepared, and not prone to hide the ball as to their perspectives on cases. So I would think we'll get a sense of their leanings during the oral arguments," Bergeron said.

Sutton should be familiar to Northeast Ohioans, having written the majority opinion in a 2-1 decision earlier this year rejecting former Cuyahoga County Commissioner Jimmy Dimora's request to have his racketeering and corruption convictions overturned.

Sutton, 53, was appointed to the appeals court in 2003. He graduated first in his law school class at Ohio State, and former Ohio Sen. George Voinovich praised him as "the brightest lawyer we've got in the entire state."

Seventy rights groups opposed his appointment, yet he wrote the first federal appeals court decision upholding Obamacare. He also wrote the opinion reinstating a lawsuit filed by a graduate student at Eastern Michigan University who was expelled after she refused to work with counseling clients in same-sex relationships.

"His conservative supporters were surprised by that," said Carl Tobias, a professor at the University of Richmond School of Law.

"He's made some public statements that he's not going to expand constitutional rights that don't exist. He has that conservative reputation, but what is a conservative position on this case? I can't tell you how he will rule," Tobias said, noting that judges from both parties have struck down the same-sex marriage bans under consideration.

Cook, 62, a graduate of the Akron Law School, was appointed to the court in 2003. She had an easier road to Senate confirmation than Sutton, but was criticized by the late Sen. Ted Kennedy who urged her rejection, labeling her the "leading dissenter" on the Ohio Supreme Court.

Cook responded, "My work is to follow the law, not my personal preferences. And I will continue to do so."

Daughtrey, 72, of Nashville, graduated from Vanderbilt Law School and worked as a federal and state prosecutor before serving as a judge on the state appeals court and Supreme Court prior to her federal appointment in 1993.

There was speculation in Washington, D.C., that had Vice President Al Gore won election in 2000 he would have nominated her to the U.S. Supreme Court, although some thought she might be too liberal.

Daughtrey is known for opposing the death penalty and supporting affirmative action. In 2006, she joined a court ruling that a chaplain at the Madison Correctional Institution in London in central Ohio could not stop an openly gay inmate from leading a band at a Protestant service just because he was gay.