If commissions are out, will savers win?

Posted: 12 pm ET

The retirement savings rules are expected to change Wednesday when the U.S. Department of Labor releases new regulations aimed at forcing stockbrokers and other investment advisers selling on commission to adhere to a fiduciary standard, recommending to retirement savers only those products that are in their best interest.

Until now, brokers' recommendations had to be "suitable," a much more lenient standard that allowed them to sell products that were sometimes more favorable to their own pocketbooks than they were to customers investing for retirement.



'Gut-based trading is out'

This rule change has been 6 years in the making. During the past year, the financial industry ramped up its opposition. You might have seen some of the TV ads suggesting that this change would endanger the existence of the financial advice industry. But as it has become increasingly likely that the new standards will be adopted, brokerages of all sorts are introducing new programs to comply with the rules and to attract and explain to customers the new way of the world. As Mark Elzweig, writing on the investment research platform, Seeking Alpha, says: "Fee-based is in, commissions are out; more paperwork is in and gut-based trading is out."

The implementation of these new rules will affect both IRAs and employer-sponsored 401(k)s and other plans, which, according to the 2015 Investment Company Fact Book, held $7.4 trillion and $6.8 trillion, respectively, at the end of 2014.

Retirement savers severely impacted

What will these new protections mean for the average person saving for retirement? The White House Council of Economic Advisers, or CEA, estimated in a recent report that conflicted advice costs average investors:

"1 percentage point lower annual returns on retirement savings.

"$17 billion of losses every year for working and middle-class families."

That percentage point difference in return would cause the savings to lose a quarter of its value over 35 years, according to the report. So a $10,000 retirement investment, which otherwise could have grown to more than $38,000 (after adjusting for inflation), would accumulate just over $27,500.

Chris Carosa, chief contributing editor at FiduciaryNews.com, says people rolling over money from their 401(k)s and those saving primarily in IRAs are most likely to feel the effect of the changes.

"The best-case scenario is that the new rules thwart conflicts of interest," he says. "The worst-case scenario is that the definition of conflict of interest is so broad that it will be nearly impossible for the business of providing advice to continue."

The rules are unlikely to take effect until fall, and Carosa thinks that one very real possibility is that the implementation will be delayed until after the election. If there is a Republican victor, it is likely that the new rules will be undone.

If they do take effect, Carosa believes they'll be here to stay. And like the Affordable Care Act, the new rules will have pluses and minuses, with the biggest downside being a shrinkage of affordable services for individuals. "Are your retirement savings about to be Obamacare-ized?" he asks, only a little facetiously.

Follow me on Twitter @jennielp.