Brookhaven Memorial Hospital Medical Center’s board of directors has taken the next step in the purchase of the former John J. Foley Skilled Nursing Facility with a directive: Negotiate a contract with Suffolk County.

“We’ll notify them later this week or early next week,” confirmed Richard T. Margulis, chief executive officer and president of BMHMC. “Our expectation in negotiating a contract is that it contains the major pieces for us, that the county and town resolve their differences for the county to deliver the building zoned and the impact fees paid for the uses we’ve stated publicly. My board has authorized me to negotiate a contract. That’s the latest news from the board.”

BMHMC, who offered $15 million for the Yaphank property last September, currently has a letter of intent with the county. The county agreed to a due diligence period with the hospital, which has taken place since October.

“The time period that has elapsed was to allow us to do a thorough due diligence,” Margulis said. “We had to look at the building from physical plant aspects, its architecture, engineering and potential tenants. And there needed to be an economic financial plan. Also, we had to consider the expansion of some hospital services that could go into it, like our hemodialysis services.”

The $15 million purchase price remained. “We haven’t altered it,” he said.

One of the dominos in the hoped-for sale was the move of the hemodialysis and transitional care unit on West Main Street in Patchogue to the Foley building. Margulis had commented in the past it would include back office functions and possible cardiac care rehab, including Medicaid assisted living or a nursing home, picking up the spirit of its former use.

When asked if FEDCAP, which acquired Easter Seals New York last May, was in the running regarding partner services in providing adult day care services for Alzheimer’s and dementia patients, as well as medical rehabilitation, Margulis said he couldn’t be specific.

“I can’t get into tenants,” he said. “We don’t have firm leases.”

“The vision is for us to have space to expand outpatient services,” he said. “We feel that in order to better serve our community, whether through a new healthcare regime or the Affordable Care Act, we need access to assisted living or residential beds.” Margulis said the hospital also saw an opportunity to provide in-patient services for substance abuse in helping to address the county’s major drug problems.

“First services we would offer, we would look to finalize our relationship with the two service lines and would look to expedite hemodialysis, potential assisted living and substance abuse to get it online as soon as possible,” he said.

Margulis was asked about offering veterans services. Last fall, BMHMC announced the hospital’s registration with the Veterans CHOICE program, allowing for local veterans to receive care. At that press conference, Margulis announced intentions to designate space within the new Knapp Cardiac Care Center for creative therapy and community outreach programs geared to veterans and their families.

“We’re working with a group to offer a veterans group at the hospital, that’s separate from Foley,” he said. “I’m not saying we won’t have it there, but right now we’re looking at starting it this year for needy people to have services in their community.”

Margulis said he couldn’t affix a number to renovation costs. “From what I understand, the building has minor roof issues and there were some mechanical issues with the heating and ventilation system, but it seems to be in pretty good shape,” said Legis. Rob Calarco (D-Patchogue).

Legis. Kate Browning (WF-Shirley) commented in an earlier interview that infrastructure grants could help with renovation modifications.

It costs the county $700,000 a year in maintenance costs, said an official.

The John J. Foley Skilled Nursing Facility at 14 Glover Drive in Yaphank is 181,749 square feet with five floors. It was closed on June 30, 2013.

Browning said she had received calls from former employees hoping for jobs there.

“If they waive the impact fee, everyone benefits and Brookhaven Hospital can take it over,” she said of the $580,000 figure. “I’ve had some people call, former employees, asking when it will open.”

Reaction to the proposed contract negotiations was positive.

“If it happens, it provides us with the opportunity to move forward with one of our goals, a hotel, but also additional retail space if the hotel doesn’t make it, and it moves an active Main Street further west,” said Patchogue Mayor Paul Pontieri. “Also there are 170 additional parking spaces behind Brookhaven Hospital’s dialysis building on Lake Street.”

Pontieri said he had a handful of inquiries for a hotel in the village “and that spot has been the primary one,” he said.

“I am very pleased to hear that the hospital is going forward with the process of getting the contract together and I understand they would want the county to deliver the building with the zoning in place,” Calarco said. “We can figure it out.”

Browning, who fought against Foley’s closing, said she would push for the contracts.

“Someone needs to get moving and make this a reality, because I can’t think of a better organization taking it over,” she said. “It’s a community hospital and they know what the residents need.”

“We’re very happy the hospital is going forward,” said Brookhaven Town Attorney Annette Eaderesto. “It’s excellent news. The supervisor has been a big proponent of taking over the building.”

Eaderesto said efforts had been made to facilitate the hospital’s move. “We met with the two attorneys for the hospital a couple of weeks ago that included [County Attorney] Dennis Brown, [Deputy County Executive] Jon Schneider, [Deputy Chief of Staff] Lisa Keys, myself and [Planning Commissioner] Tullio Bertoli. It was a very friendly meeting and we provided the county with all the issues of what it would take to occupy the building. We would do a stipulation of settlement on the existing use of the building, we would do a change of use without a hearing, and we’d rezone the property on the town board’s own motion.”

Schneider said in an email, “We are eager to move this process forward in order to improve healthcare options for Brookhaven residents and provide relief to Suffolk County taxpayers. We look forward to working out a fair contract.”