By Frank Petrulla

For many in the insurance broker community, there’s little surprise the federal government is struggling to meet its quota of young people signing up for health insurance. The Obama administration and its supporters are hopeful that more Americans ages 18 to 34 will enroll by the March 31 open enrollment deadline to meet the Affordable Care Act’s forecasts.

The problem, which many of my colleagues in the New Jersey Association of Health Underwriters see, is the changing perception of health insurance. While many middle-aged people consider health insurance to be something we can’t live without, we’re seeing disinterested shrugs among millennials in New Jersey.

The reasons are valid. When we started our careers, health insurance was easily accessible and — dare we say — affordable for employers. Fully paid health insurance under a so-called "Cadillac" plan was as common a perk as paid sick time. We grew up with health insurance; we feel it is a safety net that any growing family should have.

Younger workers see it a bit differently.

In a world of high deductibles, high co-pays and high cost-shares with employers, many see health insurance as an out-of-reach luxury, an unrealistic expense that seems a waste of hard-earned income. Young people feel healthy and indestructible; the mere concept of spending upward of 20 percent of a paycheck on a "just in case" scenario seems silly and, for some, even reckless.

Also, under the Affordable Care Act, the penalties for just staying uninsured are minimal — $95 for the first year. And the penalty only applies to people who file taxes and are owed a refund, further evidence that perhaps the law wasn’t completely thought out before enactment.

Young people ask why they should be insured if the nation’s health care system will care for them anyway. If someone breaks an arm and heads to the emergency room for care, would they really be thrown out in the street? This is America, they say, and that won’t happen.

With that type of thinking, can we ever expect to get a handle on health care costs? We are creating a generation of people who question the importance of insurance, or who feel foolish for paying enormously high premiums for care that continues to escalate. Why contribute to a system filled with out-of-network doctors and co-pays that make it seem as if all those payroll deductions, with all that sacrifice, went down the drain?

The system desperately needs young people, as older Americans continue to put a strain on the system. The Affordable Care Act — for as long as it is the law of the land — must create a system of fairness and transparency that young people can recognize and appreciate.

Those who pay for policies must be offered insurance they can actually afford, in a system where everyone is playing by the same rules. Sure, there can be annual premium increases. But they should be based on inflation and other sane metrics. Our youngest generation needs to understand how health insurance works, why they pay what they do and how they can maximize benefits vs. costs.

For millennials who consider themselves invincible, the system should allow for high-deductible plans in the small group market, with tangible benefits they can actually afford. And, to control further costs on this generation, we need to eliminate the requirement that all policies must include pediatric dental coverage.

We also need to make it easier for young people to buy health insurance, and should do what we can to direct them to licensed health insurance brokers who understand the policies, as well as the law. We can’t expect millennials to embrace our health insurance system if they don’t understand it.

For many millennials, the greatest expense they have incurred, to date, was leasing their first new car. They were told the price, they were shown what they were getting and they made a decision based on what they could afford. The future of health care relies on the same premise.



Frank Petrulla is the president of the Monmouth-Ocean chapter of the New Jersey Association of Health Underwriters and chair of the State of the State in Healthcare Symposium. Share your opinion at njvoices.com.