Vote Now:

Do You Approve or Disapprove of President Obama's Job Performance?



Urgent:

What Do You Think of President Obama's Job Performance? Vote Now

5. Jonathan Gruber, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist and an architect of Obamacare, didn’t think he was so transparent Jonathan Gruber, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist and an architect of Obamacare, didn’t think he was so transparent when he told a University of Pennsylvania audience the passage of the health care act was partly due to American stupidity. Taxing insurance companies, who would have higher prices, would just pass the impact of taxes onto Americans.



Vote Now:

How Do You Rate Obama Compared to Other Presidents?

The Affordable Care Act won’t elude the scandal tag for President Barack Obama for some time. There remain many staunch defenders and critics of Obamacare through its ongoing failures and controversy.Eight key figures involved in the Obamacare controversy include:President Obama promised all Americans health care and that families making less than $250,000 a year would have significantly lower costs. Neither promise was true. Many Americans lost their health care plans due to cancellations or because they couldn’t afford them. Many people either had higher premiums or higher deductibles.Kathleen Sebelius resigned as the U.S. Health and Human Services secretary in 2014 following the fiasco resulting from the unveiling of the Affordable Care Act. During the enrollment period in October 2013, millions of Americans couldn’t even sign up because the HealthCare.gov website kept crashing. It took months for technicians to fix it. More problems were to come.Nancy Pelosi stuck to her guns years after telling folks Congress had to pass the Obamacare bill in order to know what was in it when she was the U.S. House speaker. Later, as the Democratic minority leader in the House, she said the Affordable Care Act was “beautiful,” and added: “We need to improve it, but the website didn’t work, and now it’s well.”Todd Park, former White House Chief Technology Officer who was involved in fixing the HealthCare.gov website, took a year before he appeared in front of Congress. The House Science and Technology Committee issued a subpoena. Park said he “didn’t have the kind of comprehensive, detailed, deep knowledge” of a project manager and was not part of a Barack Obama scandal. Some committee members accused him of hiding information or not taking accountability for the website failure.Sen. Jeff Sessions, a Republican from Alabama, brought a shocking revelation to the table for Congress through 2013 Government Accountability Office report. Obama claimed the health care transition would not increase the deficit, but the GAO report showed a possible $6.2 trillion increase over the next 75 years, proving “that the promises made assuring the nation that the largest new entitlement program in history would not add one dime to the deficit were false,” Sessions said.Darrell Issa, Republican Congressman from California, is another figure trying to get to the bottom of the “repeated transparency failures and outright deceptions” Obamacare claims. Issa, the chairman of the House Oversight Committee, discovered that nearly 400,000 dental plans were included in enrollment figures of 7 million signed up for the first year of Obamacare.The American doctor may slowly become a vanishing player in the Obamacare controversy. A survey of 699 doctors nationwide taken in 2013 by the Doctor Patient Medical Association found that 83 percent had considered leaving their practices because of Obamacare. Increasing demands for doctors, along with expanded health insurance coverage, threatens to dramatically impair the quality of medical care, which could be the biggest scandal for Barack Obama.