A controversial meeting of the nation's lawmakers is happening this week in San Diego and government reform group Common Cause Pennsylvania is keeping tabs on what's on the agenda.

The annual meeting of the American Legislative Exchange Council brings together thousands of legislators and business leaders from across the country to discuss policy in an effort to "advance the common goals of limited government, free markets and federalism," according its website.

But the organization has come under fire in recent years for lack of transparency and conservative agendas.

"It's a gathering whereby some of the most powerful corporations in America get together with legislators to draft legislation and create joint strategies for moving it to passage," said Barry Kauffman, Common Cause Pennsylvania executive director. "Legislators and corporations have equal votes and some of them behind closed doors and the public is not permitted to see or know what they're doing."

Kauffman said the meetings and events held at the ALEC conference are activities defined as lobbying under Pennsylvania's lobbyist disclosure law but ALEC does not register or report to the state.

"Let's make sure they're not hiding their activities," Kauffman said. "And they're very influential. The public needs to understand that."

But Rep. Brian Ellis, R-Butler, one of ALEC's Pennsylvania chairs, said there is no secrecy involved.

Ellis said due to the budget impasse and scheduling issues, only he and Rep. Seth Grove, R-York, are attending the conference this week out of the 32 ALEC-registered members within the state Legislature.

Ellis said he was paying for his travel and registration this year out of his own pocket, though he has accepted some "scholarships" from ALEC in the past, which he has disclosed.

"The whole experience has been invaluable to me, meeting colleagues in other states, seeing how things are done in other states," he said.

Steve Miskin, House Republican spokesman, said most legislators pay their own way to attend conferences, though they can be reimbursed afterward if they wish.

Some legislation Kauffman said has been linked to the meetings "behind closed doors" at ALEC in the past including voter ID legislation and the "stand your ground" guns rights law.

Kauffman said some larger tech companies -- such as Google, Facebook and Yahoo -- have dropped out of sponsoring the event in the past because of the controversy surrounding it.

Jay Riestenberg, a Common Cause research analyst, is in San Diego this week protesting outside the conference alongside labor unions, public interest organizations and environmental groups outside the conference that started Wednesday and runs through Friday.

Riestenberg said the conference has resulted in anti-labor bills and efforts to redefine state pension plans from defined benefit to defined contribution plans, which was the core of a Senate Republican pension reform bill recently vetoed by Democratic Gov. Tom Wolf.

"Additionally, ALEC has been the leading organization [for Republicans] to stop, block and try to repeal the Affordable Care Act through all kinds of different legislation," Riestenberg said. "They're also one of the leading groups opposing any kind of environmental protection."

Common Cause submitted a complaint to the Internal Revenue Service in 2012 and supplemental materials in recent years in an effort to increase ALEC's transparency. Riestenberg said the organization has made efforts to change, but it still does not release lists of corporate sponsors or legislative attendees.

Several attempts to get comment from ALEC representatives were not successful on Wednesday and Thursday.

Riestenberg said his group will be following up after the conference by going through disclosure reports from various corporations to see if they reveal what they paid for at the conference. They'll also check legislators' disclosure forms as they become available, but that can take three to six months, he said.

Jennifer Kocher, spokeswoman for Senate Republicans, said she wasn't aware of any members of the Senate Republican caucus who had registered for either the ALEC or NCSL conferences. However, legislators would not need pre-approval to get reimbursed at a later point, she said.

No House or Senate Democratic members are attending ALEC as the event attracts more Republicans than Democrats, according to caucus spokespeople.

Another major conference for lawmakers, the National Conference of State Legislators, will convene Aug. 3 to Aug. 6 in Seattle, Washington. It was unclear on Thursday how many, if any, legislators would be attending that conference.