— At age 4, Frank Viveros left Colombia to join his father in New York City for a better life — but one shrouded in secrecy because the family lived as illegal immigrants.

Twenty-eight years later, Viveros has done more than emerge from the shadows. He has taken center stage as a cast member with the traveling production of the musical “The Phantom of the Opera,” which opened Wednesday at Tampa’s Straz Center.

“I came like any other immigrant,” Viveros said. “My dad had come to America a year before my mom and myself. My dad saved money for us to travel to the United States.”

Their immigration status remained the same — illegal immigrants — until Viveros was in high school. Reflecting back on the time of that status change, he still can feel the relief.

“I had kept it a secret for many years,” he said. “My parents were afraid that if I told anyone they would tell immigration about us. So, finally, that fear was gone.”

Viveros and his mother became naturalized American citizens the same day. But they didn’t turn their backs on their Colombian past, he said. His parents insisted they speak Spanish and remember their heritage while embracing the world around them.

Persistence and ambition are values Viveros inherited from his parents, he said, adding that music always was a part of his life.

“I do not remember Christmastime without carols and singing them to everyone,” he said. “I do not know a dinner or a family party without dancing with my aunts.”

He also has vivid memories of his mother salsa dancing while doing chores.

“And when I was doing my homework, I always listened to music,” he said. “Even when we watched television, we’d put on music. Unknowingly, all this instilled a love of music in me, so I decided that’s what I wanted to do professionally.”

The first step, however, was an audition at the LaGuardia High School in New York, which specializes in the performing arts. The same school was featured in the Broadway hit “Fame.” There, his voice and his command of several languages came together.

“It’s different to have a love of music and slowly start training the voice,” he said, “while also learning to sing in three languages. Initially, I wanted to be an opera singer, then I decided to do musical theater,” Viveros said.

His studies continued at the State University of New York. There, while performing in musicals, he spotted the supporting role of Ubaldo Piangi he now plays in “Phantom.”

“Ubaldo is a character so unbelievable, the principal tenor,” he said. “I had moved to Los Angeles because I wanted to start a career on TV, but when I was offered this role I couldn’t say no.”

Viveros said his high point on stage came a year ago.

“I was in Philadelphia, when my grandparents, my aunts, my brothers, my whole family got to see ‘The Phantom of the Opera,’ he said. “They had all seen Frank, the singer who travels, before, but they had never seen anything like this production. That day, I saw my mom and my dad smiling. It was an achievement for them because I would not be here without them.”

Viveros, who communicates with fans via Twitter at @Frrankly, said this production of “Phantom” has been modernized somewhat. It includes the latest in high-tech stage presentation.

“The story has not changed and the music is the same, but the way the story is being told has changed,” he said. “There is new technology that did not exist in 1988. It is a new ghost.”

mwarren@centrotampa.com

(813) 259-8037