Local chapter expands mission to help area homeowners

Habitat for Humanity volunteers Roger Hebbert and Debby Olson begin to repair a wall at the home of Ted Abbate on Wade Court Friday. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

Floodwaters destroyed the Soto family's Longmont mobile home in September, washing away everything that was not at least three-feet off the ground, including the family's truck.

During the past six months, the family of six has drained most of their savings buying a new truck that Jose Soto needs for his construction job and replacing basic necessities.

"We had to buy uniforms for the girls to go back to school," Florina Soto said through a translator. "That was an immediate expense that couldn't wait."

The unexpected costs brought on by the flood drained about 75 percent of the family's savings, she said.

Limited funds and housing in Longmont have made it nearly impossible for the family to find housing, but a new Habitat for Humanity program will allow the family to purchase a brand-new home with their limited funds.

Rebuild the St. Vrain Valley was launched last year and utilizes the organization's expertise and volunteers to provide critical repairs for low-income homeowners.

For 25 years, the local Habitat for Humanity chapter has been promoting homeownership among low-income families in the area by building new, affordable houses. The new program expands the local chapter's mission to include assisting homeowners outside of the organization's client base, executive director David Emerson said.

The program includes minor repairs, costing less than $5,000; major repairs, costing more than $5,000; and new construction for families whose homes are beyond repair.

Three minor repair projects have been completed, and four more are underway. No major repair applications have been received so far. And the Sotos' home, which will break ground March 16 in Longmont's Poplar Grove neighborhood, will be the program's first new construction project.

For more info Visit: http://stvrainhfh.org/ To volunteer: for flood repair or construction projects click on "volunteer now" To get an application for assistance: click on the "flood response" and download a form. To sign up for a weekly e-newsletter: detailing flood repair volunteer opportunities, click on the green "sign up" button.

Three minor projects were completed before the flood, including building a wheel chair ramp for a senior homeowner, but the organization was able to expand the program in December with grants provided through local flood recovery funds.

Rebuilding the St. Vrain Valley has received about $190,000 in grants since the flood including awards from the Longmont Community Foundation and the Foothills United Way, said John Lovell, the chapter's director of development.

Funding has paid for repair materials and a critical repair manager to lead the efforts.

The program does not cater only to families impacted by the flood, Emerson said. But that is where the biggest need currently is in the area, he said.

Other Habitat for Humanity chapters launched similar rehabilitation programs following Hurricane Katrina; the 2011 Joplin, Mo., tornado; and Hurricane Sandy.

A basement wall is repaired by Habitat for Humanity volunteers at the home of Ted Abbate on Wade Court Friday. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Flatirons Habitat for Humanity, which serves the Boulder Valley School District, launched a similar program, http://flatironshabitat.org/, following the flood.

Since their home was destroyed, the Soto family has stayed in various shelters and with family before moving into an apartment at the Inn-Between, which promotes stability through temporary housing for low-income and homeless residents.

After throwing away most of her things that were soaked and covered in mud following the flood and bouncing between shelters, 14-year-old Denise Soto is excited to have a home again.

"I'm excited to have a better home and more space to live in than we used to have," Denise said. "We're all excited to just have a place to live."

Construction is expected to be complete by October and the family is hoping to move into their new home by December.

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com