South Dakota Gov. Dennis Daugaard speaking at the State of the State address on Tuesday, Jan. 13, 2015 in Pierre. (Photo: AP)

An advisor to Gov. Dennis Daugaard says a plan to expand Medicaid in South Dakota earned an initial “go ahead” Tuesday from a top federal health administrator.

Daugaard’s Senior Advisor Kim Malsam-Rysdon said the governor felt confident about the potential for expansion after meeting with U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Sylvia Burwell in Washington.

“Secretary Burwell expressed an openness to consider some of the options we’re looking at,” Malsam-Rysdon said in a phone interview from Washington. “Her staff will continue to work on the specifics of what they can do at the federal level.”

Details of the proposal have not been made public, but the governor’s office has said it would extend the program eligibility to 48,500 additional South Dakota residents.

The expansion could cost the state between $30 and $33 million a year beginning in 2020, Malsam-Rysdon said. She said Daugaard’s chief concern at this time is determining how much state funding the expansion would require.

Medicaid is a jointly funded federal and state health insurance program for needy people. The Affordable Care Act offered incentives for states to expand Medicaid to residents earning up to 133 percent of poverty, which is $15,521 for an individual or $31,721 for a family of four.

South Dakota initial balked at the plan, citing potential costs to the state. In 2014, federal officials quashed a proposal that would have partially expanded coverage in South Dakota, covering residents earning up to 100 percent of poverty. That came out to about $11,670 for an individual or $23,850 for a family of four.

About 26,000 South Dakotans earn less than 100 percent of the poverty line. Another 22,000 uninsured South Dakotans are between 100 percent to 133 percent of the poverty line.

National Press Secretary Ben Wakana confirmed the federal government’s desire to partner with the state on expanding access to the program.

“The administration is willing to work with any state interested in expanding Medicaid,” Wakana said in a statement.

Wakana said the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services are working to update guidance over the program’s policy so that they could make 100 percent of federal Medicaid reimbursement funds available to be used for health care in Native American communities.

The plan is still in its early stages, Malsam-Rysdon said. The state’s tribes, Indian Health Service and others must still be consulted before it could take effect.

Dr. Tim Ridgway, president of the South Dakota State Medical Association, Tuesday said the association applauded Daugaard for being open-minded to the expansion. Some Republicans have resisted expansion of the program.

“It is a budget issue, but it’s more than that. It’s a broad issue, it’s a human issue,” Ridgway said. “Medicaid expansion for the state of South Dakota would mean a healthier South Dakota.”

Follow Dana Ferguson on Twitter @bydanaferguson

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1FCzGUR