ALLENDALE, MI - To explain what a value-based payment system means for health care, Greg Loomis, president of Mercy Health in Muskegon, asked educators to imagine they were given the goal of making sure their community was educated.

But that goal comes with a catch - they have to do it in a way that would not require people to come to their colleges and pay tuition.

The educators attending Mercy Health West Michigan's annual talent conference laughed. But it captures the essence of the change from a fee-for-service model in health care to one in which hospitals and health care providers are paid for value and charged with promoting a healthy community.

"We have to figure out how to promote the health of the population and keep them out of our hospitals," Loomis said. "We work really hard every day to keep people out of our hospitals. That is the right thing to do - for our community and for our country."

Mercy Health leaders met with area educators Thursday, March 26, at Grand Valley University at Building Talent Bridges, a meeting to discuss how to collaborate in building a pipeline of diverse students with the skills to meet the needs of health care organizations.

That shift to value-based payments, promoted by the Affordable Care Act, comes in response to the steady rise in health care costs. The U.S. spends $2.8 trillion a year on health care, about 18 percent of the GDP, Loomis said.

"Health care is going through tremendous change right now," he said. "The talent needed in the future is different from the talent needed in the past."

Mercy Health hires about 1,000 employees a year, but Loomis said those new hires increasingly are not working in the hospital, but in ambulatory care settings or in doctor's offices. Primary care physicians, in particular, are increasingly working with a health care team to help patients stay healthy or care for chronic conditions.

"The physician will still be very important. But the team they now must work with is changing rapidly," he said. "Medical assistants, pharmacists and social workers are needed at numbers like we have never seen before."

Participants in the conference included representatives from Grand Rapids Urban League, Michigan Works, University of Detroit Mercy, GVSU,

Muskegon Area Intermediate School District, Muskegon Community College, Grand Rapids Community College, Goodwill Industries, Baker College

Michigan State University College of Human Medicine and West Michigan Center for Arts and Technology.

Sue Thoms covers health care for MLive/The Grand Rapids Press. Email her at sthoms1@mlive.com or follow her on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.