SPRINGFIELD, Mo. -- What if your health insurance worked like your car insurance? And instead of paying an insurance company y ou paid your doctor a flat monthly fee like you did for a gym membership or Netflix? It's called Direct Primary Care and it's catching on.

Direct Primary Care works similar to the way you pay for a gym membership or Netflix and does not involve traditional insurance companies.

"The Affordable Care Act made health insurance absolutely unaffordable for me as a small business owner," said Shawn Kirkbride who pays of Direct Primary care

So Kirkbride said he was thankful to find Dr. Luke Van Kirk and his direct primary care services clinic, Command Family Medicine, which doesn't deal with or take insurance.

"It makes things a lot cheaper taking insurance out of the equation," said Dr. Luke Van Kirk with Command Family Medicine.

For a flat monthly fee that ranges from about $50 to $150 patients get a full-range of primary care services.

"It simplifies my practice. I have a lot less overhead and a lot less staff," Dr. Van Kirk said.

But patients get greater access to the physician through texts, email, even Facetime.

"The process is just far simpler, for setting appointments, getting your appointment taken care of and then the followup afterwards. It's just a more efficient way of doing it," Kirkbride said.

It's also a growing healthcare trend.

In downtown Springfield, doctors and staff formerly with major local hospitals put the finishing touches on their soon-to-open clinic, Equality Healthcare that they say will provide patients with direct primary care and more.

"Which is somebody they know, somebody who knows them, knows their health history that they can get into see and access when they need that instead of that being a few days or even a few weeks down the line," said Dr. Shelby Smith with Equality Healthcare.

And when they do price transparency will be key, Dr. Smith said.

"So that people know what they're paying for and how much they're going to pay," Dr. Smith said. "Yes, it's elegantly simple."

But Direct Primary Care does not meet the federal health insurance requirement or cover major medical events such as cancer or surgery.

"But we're able to provide affordable transparently priced primary care services so that hopefully these other downstream things aren't going to end up occurring," Dr. Smith said.