In the wake of the Supreme Court’s Hobby Lobby decision, both conservative and liberal commentators have been up in arms to either commend or criticize the Supreme Court’s 5-4 ruling.

It was FOX News’ Megyn Kelly taking on the comments of contraception-rights activist Sandra Fluke Monday night — and Kelly didn’t hold back.

Kelly was played a clip during her appearance on “The O’Reilly Factor” of Fluke characterizing the decision as a government attempt to limit women’s access to healthcare. “What this is really about at its base is trying to figure out as many ways as possible to limit women’s access to reproductive healthcare,” Fluke said in the video.

Kelly wasn’t having any of it.

“That’s not true. Don’t believe that. She doesn’t know what she’s talking about,” Kelly began.

Kelly passionately stated her case that Hobby Lobby will still have to cover 16 out of the 20 birth-control drugs that are available.

“Hobby Lobby, which is an evangelical company, came out and said, ‘Alright we’ll do it. We’ll do it for all of them except for four that end a fertilized egg from going forward.’ ”

O’Reilly, who could barely get a world in edgewise, noted that the media opts to ignore this important detail and report that the ruling allows exemption from funding “all birth-control.”

Kelly then turned her rant on Kathleen Sebelius, former United States Secretary of Health and Human Services.

“What happened was we passed Obamacare. And then Kathleen Sebelius had some of her HHS minions go down in the basement and write a regulation that said as part of Obamacare, you have to cover 20 out of 20 birth-control drugs.”

The Supreme Court sided with Hobby Lobby and used the Religious Freedom Restoration Act as the basis of their decision. The law was passed nearly unanimously during President Clinton’s administration.

“That law protects you Hobby Lobby,” Kelly concluded, “and Kathleen Sebelius’ minions in the basement don’t get to take your rights away from you.”

Video via The DC.