By Nick Bilton

My resolution for 2015 is not going to be focused on eating healthier or to start going to the gym every day of the week or even to save more and spend less.

In 2015, I’m going to stop texting while walking.

The realization that I may have a problem hit me smack in the face when I was strolling through Kennedy International Airport, avoiding obstacles with my peripheral vision as I hammered out a text message. Without any warning, I was involved in a head-on collision with another man also texting while walking.

The thud sent both of us off balance and we almost fell. As we both regained our footing, we looked at each other with disgust and embarrassment.

According to a 2013 research report compiled by Liberty Mutual Insurance, 70 percent of people in the United States admit to texting and walking.

“So much attention has been paid, and rightly so, to distracted driving that we have ignored the fact that distracted walking and crossing can be just as risky,” wrote David Melton, a driving safety expert with Liberty Mutual.

YouTube is home to thousands of compilation videos of epic texting-and-walking fails. Like the people who slam into glass doors, closed elevators and parked cars. The zombies who head-butt streetlight poles and phone booths.

According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, distracted pedestrians are involved in thousands of accidents and even fatalities each year.

Dr. Dietrich Jehle, a professor of emergency medicine at the University at Buffalo in New York, estimates that of those tens of thousands of pedestrian-related emergency room visits, 10 percent are a result of texting while walking. People end up with broken legs and concussions, to name a few serious injuries.

If you’re one of the people who pride yourself on being an expert at this task, there is lot of research that shows you’re actually not. A 2014 study in the medical journal PLOS One found that walking and using your smartphone at the same time affects people’s posture and balance, causing them to swerve and walk slower. (In other words, you look like a person who’s had six too many drinks.) A few weeks after my JFK incident, I was walking through San Francisco with my colleague David Carr, and as people neared us typing on their phone, heads pointed to their navel, Carr did something I hadn’t seen anyone do before. Instead of moving out of these people’s way to let them pass, he would go forward and tense up like a linebacker, becoming a brick wall for people to walk right into.

As he aptly noted each time, what these people were doing was rude and inconsiderate; it wasn’t his responsibility to get out of the way. And he’s absolutely right.