Giannis Antetokounmpo drives around Houston’s Trevor Ariza during their game Monday. Antetokounmpo had a triple-double in the game. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

TOP BUCKS PLAYER

Giannis Antetokounmpo nearly tripled his pleasure twice in one week. The 6-foot-11 playmaker posted a triple-double against Houston on Monday when he contributed 18 points, 16 rebounds and 11 assists in a 128-121 Bucks victory. He had 22 points and six rebounds in Milwaukee's 104-99 loss to Indiana on Wednesday before falling just one rebound shy of another triple-double Friday. Antetokounmpo scored 27 points and added 12 assists and nine rebounds as the Bucks beat the Minnesota Timberwolves, 116-101.

BUCKS LOOK AHEAD

Milwaukee opens the week with a back-to-back set, hosting Oklahoma City for a Sunday matinee game before traveling to Chicago to face the Bulls on Monday night. Then it's back home to meet the Miami Heat on Wednesday night (the Heat leads the season series, 2-1) and Anthony Davis and the New Orleans Pelicans on Saturday night.

BUCKS QUOTE

Jabari Parker, on his progress this season: "In the beginning I was second-guessing myself. Right now I'm just trying to cause a problem."

TOP NBA PLAYER

San Antonio's Kawhi Leonard scored 30 points and hit a crucial three-pointer late in the game to lift the Spurs to a 94-86 victory at New Orleans on Thursday night. Leonard also grabbed 11 rebounds in the team's seventh straight victory. Before Saturday's game against Sacramento, Leonard had at least 25 points on better than 50% shooting in four straight games. The last Spurs player with a streak longer than that was Tim Duncan in 1998. Leonard scored 27 points in a 97-81 Spurs home victory over Detroit on Wednesday night.

TOP NBA TEAM

Boston completed a sweep of its five-game home stand and extended its TD Garden winning streak to 13 games with a 105-104 victory against the New York Knicks on Friday night. Celtics coach Brad Stevens drew up a play for Avery Bradley, of all people, and the Boston guard made it work by scoring the winning basket. Former Marquette star Jae Crowder continues to shine for the Celtics. He had 20 points on Friday while playing tough defense against Knicks star Carmelo Anthony. Earlier in the week the Celtics beat Utah, 100-95, and Portland, 116-93. Isaiah Thomas scored 30 points against the Trail Blazers.

NBA RANKINGS (through Friday's games)

Top 10: 1. Golden State, 2. San Antonio, 3. Cleveland, 4. Toronto, 5. Los Angeles Clippers, 6. Oklahoma City, 7. Boston, 8. Miami, 9. Memphis, 10. Atlanta.

Middle 10: 11. Charlotte, 12. Indiana, 13. Dallas, 14. Portland, 15. Detroit, 16. Houston, 17. Chicago, 18. Utah, 19. Washington, 20. Milwaukee.

Bottom 10: 21. Orlando, 22. Sacramento, 23. New York, 24. Denver, 25. New Orleans, 26. Brooklyn, 27. Minnesota, 28. Phoenix, 29. Los Angeles Lakers, 30. Philadelphia.

ONE MAN'S OPINION

It will be time for a bench overhaul when the season is over.

The Bucks subs have been so bad that coach Jason Kidd moved Greg Monroe and Michael Carter-Williams to reserve roles so he could get something off the bench.

Jerryd Bayless, in the final year of a two-year contract, has been the exception with steady play and timely three-point shooting. He has missed time with a sprained left ankle and sprained left knee joint but still has played in 39 games.

John Henson and Greivis Vasquez, both expected to be prime contributors off the bench, have been sidelined by injuries. Henson (sore lower back) sat out his 15th consecutive game Friday. Vasquez has been out since undergoing surgery on his right ankle in December.

Now Carter-Williams has missed the last three games with left patellar tendinitis and a sore left hip.

Rookie Rashad Vaughn has been inconsistent, not surprising for a 19-year-old and the league's second-youngest player. Johnny O'Bryant and Tyler Ennis have played small roles, and 20-year-old Damien Inglis has played in only eight games. He recently returned from the NBA Development League.

Even when the Bucks tried to bolster their bench by signing veteran Steve Novak, he was hurt in just his third appearance with the team and lost for the rest of the season with a sprained left knee.

Whether it can be blamed on injuries or poor play, the bench contribution has been marginal. Much more production will be needed to build a winning team and give adequate support to the Bucks starters.