Urgent:

Do You Think the Minimum Wage Should Be Raised?

Vote Now:

How Do You Feel About the Minimum Wage?

Tell Us:

Should the Government Raise the Minimum Wage?

Increasing the federal minimum wage is a way to raise the standard of living for lower-income people, according to proponents. Many Democrats try to come up with solutions that will work economically to achieve that goal.Here are eight quotes from Democrats on the controversial issue:"The minimum wage has become a poverty wage," said former Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin when introducing a bill in 2013 for a minimum wage hike, according to The Washington Times . "This shouldn't happen in the richest nation on earth.""Why did we settle on $10.10 an hour?" former Iowa Sen. Harkin asked, according to The Huffington Post "Some people say, 'Why $10.10? Why not $9?' I've heard that bandied about a lot. Well, here's why ... Because we know where the poverty line is. That's why we picked $10.10 — it gets you above the poverty line."Former Rep. George Miller says it was "immorally" and "economically" dangerous not to raise the minimum wage, according to The Washington Times. "It's time to grow our economy from bottom up."Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia looked at compromising methods to raise the federal minimum wage from its $7.25 an hour level:"I would like to think that if you believe $7.25 is not acceptable and you're willing to move forward — put politics aside and sit down and try to help people and that's what we're going to do," he told MSNBC's Morning Joe program, according to The Washington Times. "I'm willing to sit down and talk about anything that will raise it off of seven-and-a-quarter."Sen. Barbara Mikulski of Maryland offered to work with Republican Sen. Susan Collins of Maine for a proposed $9 effort in steps:"I think we definitely have to raise the minimum wage," she said. "I think how we achieve it on a bipartisan basis is subject to negotiations … " reports The Huffington Post President Obama pointed to successes of several state minimum wage measures passed by voters:"That should give us new reason to get it done for everybody with a national increase in the minimum wage," he said at a White House press conference."The more Republicans obsess on repealing the Affordable Care Act and the more we focus on rebuilding the middle class with a minimum-wage increase, the more voters will support our candidates," said U.S. Rep. Steve Israel of New York, according to The New York Times. "We've always believed if you work hard you will get ahead, you will make it to the middle class," said New York Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand. "Well it's not true if you're working 40 hours a week and you're still in poverty," reports WBFO.