The fifth annual Hugs for Brady Winter Gala, For The Love of A Child, is gearing up to take place on Feb. 7 at The Palace at Somerset Park, in the Somerset section of Franklin

Sherrie Wells holding Brady. Following Brady’s death at 23 months, the Hugs for Brady Foundation was started with the goal of ending pediatric cancer. (Photo: Courtesy of Hugs for Brady Foundation) Story Highlights Every year, more than 13,500 children are diagnosed with cancer in the United States.

Foundation's mission is to ease the pain of the children who have cancer and their families.

Hugs for Brady Foundation has developed into one of the state's largest sponsors of blood drives.

Foundation has funded the region's first sedation-free MRI project.

Every year, more than 13,500 children are diagnosed with cancer in the United States.

The loss of a child to cancer is one of the worst tragedies a family can face. Sherrie and Michael Wells know the pain. Their 23-month-old son, Brady died of Non-Differentiated Acute Leukemia, a very rare form of leukemia, in 2010, a disease he bravely battled for 10 months.

Shortly after Brady's death, the Hugs for Brady Foundation (HFBF) was started.

"Our mission is simple. To ease the pain of the children who have cancer and their families, in any and every way. We pledge that every dollar donated to the Hugs for Brady Foundation will be spent in the pursuit of finding a cure for pediatric cancer," Sherrie said.

It's a pledge the family keeps. Together with countless volunteers, the fifth annual Hugs for Brady Winter Gala, For The Love of A Child, is gearing up to take place on Feb. 7 at The Palace at Somerset Park, in the Somerset section of Franklin.

A few days, before Brady's death, Michael, wrote, "Brady continues to have a few 'good' hours. In between frighteningly high fevers (104 degrees) and everything that goes along with this horrible illness our baby is still bright, happy and energetic beyond my belief. When going for a walk, Brady will select the stuffed animals that will accompany him, he will ask you to pick a leaf from a tree, or perhaps a flower and always place them in his cup holder. He is just a wonderful part of us."

Of the not-so-good days, Michael said, "Nurse Robin adjusted Brady's pain meds and hopefully this will help him sleep through the night. Last night, every hour or so, he would cry out in apparent pain. I think I gave him no less than 6 boluses of dilaudid. While Nurse Robin was at our home, she took blood samples and soon we got the results; white blood count 3.7, hemoglobin 8.3, platelets 5,000 and cancer blasts 87%. Awful results, as normal ranges are; hemoglobin 13.2 — 16.9, platelets 140,000 — 390,000 and white blood count 3,900 — 10,000. And of course, cancerous blasts should be zero!"

Today, the Hugs for Brady Foundation is providing funding for New Jersey's first pediatric hematology/oncology young investigator program at at the Rutgers Cancer Institute of Central New Jersey — bringing together some of the best young researchers to work on childhood cancer research. "Funding of a research program such as this, at the Cancer Institute of New Jersey, is a critical step in helping to find a cure," said Dr. Richard Drachtman, medical director at Bristol Myers-Squibb Children's Hospital and Brady's primary doctor.

The Hugs for Brady Foundation has also funded the region's first sedation-free MRI project at New York Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital; helped families defray the costs of having a child in the pediatric oncology floor, provided kid friendly furniture, computers, TVs, video games, for the remodeling of the children's game rooms at Robert Wood Johnson-Bristol-Meyer Squibb Children's Hospital's Hematology/Oncology unit and designed custom built "Brady Buddy" wagons (which come in shapes such as an elephant, caterpillar, alligator) specifically for use in pediatric care settings. The wagons provide children with a safe, familiar means of transportation within a hospital and include a trailer hitch to tow the children's IV poles — allowing children to be mobile — even during chemotherapy treatments. Custom built "Brady Buggy" wagons have been donated to virtually all of the children's hospitals in New Jersey and have been placed in Maine, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts and Tennessee. The goal is to provide a Brady Buggy to all children's hospitals in the United States.

The Hugs for Brady Foundation has also developed into one of the state's largest sponsors of blood drives.

Support the Hugs for Brady Foundation's fifth annual Winter Gala, "For the Love of a Child," on Feb. 7 at The Palace at Somerset Park in the Somerset section of Franklin Township. You can make a difference in the lives of the children and families battling pediatric cancer, by attending the event and/or becoming a sponsor. To learn more https://hugsforbrady.afrogs.org/#/index.

The Hugs for Brady Foundation was established to help children battling cancer and assist in research to ultimately find a cure for pediatric cancer. We are a 501 (c)(3) nonprofit corporation. All donations are 100 percent tax deductible. An amazing 90-plus percent of every donated dollar goes directly into the fund. The Hugs for Brady Foundation has more than 500 volunteers and only one paid part-time administrative assistant. Visit the Hugs for Brady Foundation website for more information http://hugsforbrady.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1BvlM1L