The Citadel’s Eric Goins kicks the game-winning field goal as time expires to lift the Bulldogs over Coastal Carolina on Saturday.

His first attempt at a game-winning field goal blocked with just 88 seconds left in the game, The Citadel’s Eric Goins trotted slowly off the field. At best, it looked like the Bulldogs were going into overtime. At worst, Coastal Carolina would pull out an FCS playoff win in regulation.

But somebody on the Bulldogs’ sideline saw it differently.

“General Rosa was there on the sideline,” Goins said of Citadel president Lt. Gen. John Rosa. “And he said, ‘Hey, you are gonna have to kick another one.’ And I believed him.”

Rosa, a former Citadel quarterback, was right. Goins got another chance on the game’s final play, and came through with a 43-yard field goal as time expired. The kick lifted the 18th-ranked Bulldogs to a 41-38 win over No. 9 Coastal Carolina before a stunned crowd of 6,751 at Brooks Stadium, and set off a wild celebration among the Bulldogs on the Chants’ teal-colored field.

The Citadel, 9-3 after its first FCS playoff win since 1992, advances to a rematch next Saturday against No. 8 seed Charleston Southern. After three straight losses to the Buccaneers — including a painful 33-20 defeat to the broom-wielding Bucs on Sept. 26 at Johnson Hagood Stadium — The Citadel is eager for a rematch.

“I’m definitely pretty excited about this one,” said Citadel quarterback Dominique Allen, who ran for 174 yards and two touchdowns against Coastal (9-3). “We let that one get away from us in the second half, so I’m pretty happy we get another shot at them.”

The Citadel has won seven of eight games since that loss to Charleston Southern, including last week’s 23-22 upset of South Carolina.

The Bulldogs piled up 524 rushing yards on Saturday, the most ever given up by Coastal Carolina. Three Citadel backs ran for at least 100 yards, with fullback Tyler Renew rushing for 129 yards and a TD and Cam Jackson getting 113 yards and a score. It was the first time since 2012 that The Citadel had three 100-yard rushers in one game, and Vinny Miller almost made it four — he finished with 93 yards.

“They just kept coming at us,” said Coastal defensive end Calvin Hollenhurst of the Bulldogs. “They are relentless as a team.”

The Bulldogs’ defense was equally relentless, even though the Chanticleers piled up 577 yards, with Summerville product De’Angelo Henderson rushing for 101 yards and a score and catching three passes for 60 yards and another TD.

The Citadel forced four turnovers, including two huge takeaways in the second half. Cornerback Shy Phillips’ 32-yard interception return for a TD, forced by pressure from end Joe Crochet, gave The Citadel a 38-28 lead with 13:06 to play.

And after Coastal Carolina rallied to tie the score at 38-38 — and after Goins’ 47-yard field goal try was blocked by Marcus Williamson with 1:28 left — linebacker Tevin Floyd came up with the play of the game.

On third and 7 from the Coastal 47, Floyd sacked Chants quarterback Alex Ross and forced a fumble, recovered at the Coastal 41 by Mitchell Jeter.

Three runs and two timeouts later, Goins booted the game-winner from the right hash.

“They never doubted each other and never hung their heads,” Citadel coach Mike Houston said of his defense. “And then they came up with two big turnovers, so I’m proud of them.”

Ross, a senior playing in his final game for Coastal, hit 21 of 31 passes for 415 yards and three touchdowns, but was picked off twice. Kailik Williams’ interception on the third play of the game set up The Citadel’s first score.

“We let one slip away tonight, and that’s on me,” Ross said. “I had the pick-six, turnovers. That’s on me.”

And now, the Bulldogs are one of 16 teams left with a shot at the FCS national championship. Sweet 16, indeed.

“Just time after time, a gutsy comeback from our kids,” Houston said. “They never gave up, they stuck together and kept believing in each other. And we found a way in the end.”