Imagine not having access to deodorant or your own tooth brush every morning.

That's the reality for many children in Bay County.

And one local group is trying to do something about it.

One Panama City Beach home was filled to the brim Sunday with volunteers getting into the giving spirit.

But they weren't wrapping ordinary presents.

"I said, 'Y'all, I need hygiene items. I need basic necessities. I want shampoo, conditioner, body wash, toothbrush, toothpaste," founder of the Self Esteem Bags Project Allison Smith said.

"We've got lip gloss, we've got makeup, we've got chap-stick for the boys," volunteer Shannon Richmond said.

To most people, they're everyday items.

But many Bay County children include hygiene products on Christmas lists through the Gulf Coast Children's Advocacy Center.

Opening one of those lists two years ago inspired Smith to create these Self Esteem Bags.

"The first thing is what you thought from a 13-year-old girl: Pretty clothes," she said. "The second thing said, my own toothbrush. The third said, deodorant. And one, I cried. I was in the store crying."

"When I heard that story, I left, and called somebody at the chamber and said, 'I need to get her phone number. I need to get involved.' It touched my heart," Richmond said.

The project's been booming since then.

From 42 bags in its first year, to a goal of 200.

For Smith, working with the CAC provides the perfect opportunity to give back during the holidays.

"I love kids. I'm not going to have any of my own, that's just kind of a decision that we made. But it kills me to think that kids are in need throughout the year anyway, but especially at Christmas," Smith said.

After sorting through hundreds of items donated by complete strangers, both women say it's all worth it to see the project come together.

The group will meet up to make the second round of Self Esteem Bags in Lynn Haven on December 7.

So far, they've compiled 130 bags. Smith says they're running low on boys' items, such as shaving cream, body wash, combs and cologne