JACKSONVILLE, Fla. - The upcoming deadline for healthcare enrollment has some community members soaring to new heights.

They want to make sure everyone is aware that Sunday is the last day for open enrollment in 2016. Those who don't enroll could face a hefty fine.

To spread the word, community members are using an unconventional method: They're lifting off in a hot air balloon.

"We're not talking hot air. We're talking let's soar to new heights and get covered,” said Mincy Pollock with the First Coast Care Team.

In big blue letters, "Obamacare Here" and a local number floated across the sky Friday.

With ballooning health care costs, supporters said the Affordable Care Act may be the best option for families.​

"With all the political debates going on, folks say Obamacare is full of hot air,” Pollock said. “We're saying, 'No, getting covered with health insurance helps you soar.'"

Those who don't get covered by Sunday could be hit with inflating costs. Penalties could range from about $700 per person to more than $2,000 per household.

A "Last Chance" event will be held at the Lampkins Patterson Memorial Center starting at 11 a.m. Saturday for those who want to know what options they have or need help enrolling.

A funeral home might seem like a strange place for such an event, but Pollock said the reason is simple.

"This is a life-and-death situation,” he said. “It's important that you come out and get covered."

About a dozen navigators with the First Coast Care Team will be on-hand to help with enrollment and any questions community members might have, even if they're already insured.

"People don't really think they need insurance sometimes or they put it off,” said Tony Penna, regional director of Enroll America.

Darryl Patterson with Lampkins Patterson Memorial Center said being covered is important so citizens can get the care they need and maintain good health.

"Me being a retired firefighter in the city of Jacksonville, being in the area of people needing help when they get hurt, and we encounter a lot of people who don't have insurance,” Patterson said. “To be able to get insurance now would prevent them from not getting help."

"If you're healthy, you're there for your family, your loved ones,” Pollock added.

Those who don't want to wait for Saturday's event can call the Help Line on Friday at 904-828-9995 to speak to a navigator who can answer questions about healthcare enrollment.

Copyright 2016 by WJXT News4Jax - All rights reserved.