One of those 'once-in-a-lifetime, generational' things

In Colorado, weed and tech start-ups go together like bees and honey.

Legal marijuana was a $700 million industry for the state in 2014, with $313 million coming from recreational users alone. And it's expected revenue will only grow as licensed businesses race to meet public demand, reaching $1 billion by 2016.

It should come as no surprise, then, that the marijuana industry has caught the attention of many local tech-minded entrepreneurs who stand to profit even more than the dispensaries with the right tools.

"It's one of those once-in-a-lifetime generational things where we get to see an industry start from nothing," said Christian Nitu.

Nitu is the CEO and co-founder of Weave, a new software-based platform that aims to connect cannabis users with the appropriate product for their needs.

Their flagship product is a search engine that seeks to recommend products based on a number of generated queries, said Nitu. Employers at dispensaries offer up their own wisdom, while people who buy the products are able to create verified reviews and help guide those searching for a specific strain to treat insomnia or PTSD, for example. Finally, inventory data collected through cloud-based point-of-sale systems lets users know which dispensaries have the product in stock.

Eventually Nitu, a 2011 University of Colorado graduate, hopes they can partner with test labs to provide chemical profiles.

More importantly, he and his co-founders hope to be able to build a database that will be able to clearly demonstrate how different strains affect different people.

"The idea is that if I try a strain it will affect me differently than it will affect you — everything is subjective," he said. "I think there is going to be a day where we know exactly what the strain does to every person, but we need to bring quantitative research to that."

Right now, though, there's a marked lack of information surrounding the industry.

"In Colorado, specifically, people don't have access to knowledge on what's been tested or what is the exact dosage to take, and what products are better than others for specific needs," Nitu noted.

Moreover, governmental organizations face the same information dearth when trying to establish policy.

"The technology we want to build is going to answer those questions," Nitu said.

In March, phase one of the search engine will go live in Boulder, allowing local users to scroll through marijuana menus of a handful of stores in real time and pre-order from their favorite head shop. Soon after, Weave will add a mobile app for iOS and Android that focuses on popular products trending in specific geographic areas. By May, Nitu hopes the advanced query-based (for example, 'what will offer pain relief?') search engine will be complete.

Nick Martinez is manager at Native Roots Boulder, located on Pearl Street, one of Weave's participating dispensaries.

"I think what's really going to be important is the ability to pre-order," he said.

With their popular location, Martinez said they already receive a lot of calls from out-of-state tourists looking for information on different varieties of marijuana.

"People definitely call the shop more than looking at Weedmaps or Leafly," he noted, citing two of the most popular online legal marijuana communities that allow users to review and discuss cannabis strains and dispensaries.

If people still prefer the good old-fashioned telephone, Weave may have some trouble getting out of the gate in terms of its search engine's popularity.

But Nitu remains optimistic Weave will take off.

"Our goal is to nail Boulder first," he explained. "Once we understand what users are doing in Colorado, which is ground zero for this industry, I'm going to take it to the West Coast."

Within the next 12 months, Nitu hopes to bring the platform to California, Nevada, and Oregon.