The Ben Roethlisberger-less Steelers found yet another way to victory, this time via someone who had never played in a regular NFL game.

Quarterback Landry Jones, playing for the first time in his three seasons with the Steelers, replaced an injured Mike Vick in the third quarter. He threw two touchdown passes to Martavis Bryant, playing in his first game this season, and led them on two field goal tries in his first four series as they defeated the Arizona Cardinals 25-13 at Heinz Field.

It was their second straight come-from behind victory. They are 2-1 since Roethlisberger left their game in St. Louis with a knee injury and 4-2 overall. Arizona slipped to 4-2.

Tomlin: 'Tremendous effort' against Cardinals Steelers head coach Mike Tomlin discusses the Steelers' win over the Cardinals at Heinz Field. (Video by Matt Freed; 10/18/2015) Steelers Report: Ed and Gerry talk about the Steelers' win over the Cardinals Steelers beat writers Ed Bouchette look back on the Steelers' 25-13 win over Arizona. (Video by Peter Diana; 10/19/2015)

Safety Mike Mitchell, who earlier recovered a fumble that led to a touchdown, intercepted Carson Palmer in the end zone with 2:20 left to virtually seal the victory. The Cardinals had a first down at the 20 when Palmer threw his second interception of the game.

Two plays later, Jones threw a pass from his 12 that Bryant caught 10 yards down field and turned it into an 88-yard touchdown.

And for yet another game without Roethlisberger, the Steelers’ defense came through. James Harrison, making his first start for the injured Jarvis Jones, forced that fumble Mitchell recovered that led to their first touchdown. He also had the team’s only sack of Palmer, who passed for 421 yards.

There was some bad news for the home team, however, as left tackle Kelvin Beachum’s season came to an end with a torn ACL. Alejandro Villanueva replaced him and likely will remain their starter.

Chris Boswell, playing in just his second NFL game, made all four of his field goal tries and is now a perfect 5-for-5 since replacing Josh Scobee. Bryant also scored the only other Steelers touchdown on a 10-yard reception from Jones in the third quarter.

Jones completed 8 of 12 passes for 168 yards, no interceptions and no sacks. He had a passer rating of 149.3. Bryant, suspended for the first four games and not yet added to the roster for the fifth, exploded into the game as he did his rookie season with six receptions for 137 yards and those two scores.

Vick, who has a hamstring injury, completed just 3 of 8 passes for six yards. He rushed five times for another 47.

Chandler Catanzaro kicked a 39-yard field goal on the first play of the fourth quarter as the Cardinals came within 15-13 of the Steelers.

But Boswell responded with his fourth of the game, from 28 yards, to put the Steelers back on top by five at 18-13 with 7:19 left in the game.

The Steelers, trailing 10-3 at the half, scored three times in the third quarter to leap in front of Arizona, 15-10.

Boswell kicked two field goals in the quarter, and Jones came on for injured Vick to throw a touchdown pass to Bryant.

Boswell kicked his second field goal of the game with 11:14 left in the third quarter to pull the Steelers within 10-6 of Arizona on the first drive of the second half.

Harrison then forced a fumble when he crushed John Brown, and Mitchell recovered for the Steelers at Arizona’s 32.

Jones entered the game at that point for Vick. He handed off on the first play to Le’Veon Bell, who picked up 22 yards. On third down from the eight, Jones found Bryant in the back of the end zone for the touchdown, just his second NFL pass. The two-point conversion pass failed but the Steelers had pulled into their first lead of the game at 12-10 with 8:46 left in the third quarter.

With Jones still at quarterback, Bryant caught another pass of 23 yards to move the Steelers into Arizona territory, where Boswell kicked his third long field goal of the day, from 51 yards.

That improved the Steelers’ lead to 15-10 with 2:32 left in the third quarter.

The Cardinals led the Steelers 10-3 at halftime after the teams traded field goals in the second quarter.

It was a tough first half for the Steelers offense. Vick completed just 3 of 7 passes for 6 yards and lost five on a sack. He also was their leading rusher in the first half, with 30 yards on 3 carries.

The Steelers scored for the first time when Boswell kicked a 47-yard field goal in the second quarter after Michael Floyd caught a 3-yard pass from Palmer to stake Arizona to an early 7-0 lead.

Ed Bouchette: ebouchette@post-gazette.com.