Photos by Nellie Doneva/Reporter-News Jennifer Miller, claims processor at Blue Cross Blue Shield, works on her computer March 31.

SHARE Blue Cross Blue Shield workers process claims at the facility March 31.

By Dan Carpenter, Special to the Reporter-News

For nearly 20 years, the precise goings-on behind the secure doors at 4002 Loop 322 in South Abilene have been known only to those who show up for work on a daily basis. What has emerged in those 20 years has been what Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas calls one of its "most vital" call center operations.

"The Abilene FSU (full service unit) is a key part of our organization, supporting both BCBS Texas' local and statewide lines of business, and services we provide to our five million members in the Lone Star State," said Gustavo Bujanda, senior manager for BCBSTX's Media and Community Relations Division.

Opened in February 1997, the Abilene center started with an initial cadre of 250 people, chosen from more than 1,000 applicants. An additional 250 started in April of that year. Today, the Abilene center boasts a staff of more than 1,000, all uniquely trained and qualified to answer the myriad questions that come in daily from BCBSTX's members.

One of those hired in the initial employee group was Jackson Boen, who started as a customer advocate, and has risen through the ranks to the position he currently holds: Divisional Senior Vice President in the Service Delivery and Operations Division of Health Care Service Corp., BCBSTX's parent company.

"Abilene was the first full service unit we opened," said Boen, who noted that the Abilene FSU is also the largest operation outside of the regional headquarters in Richardson. "The company made a decision to expand beyond the regional headquarters into communities; and hired people from the local communities to better serve our members."

The facility BCBSTX operates from is owned by the city of Abilene, and Boen said the collaboration with city agencies has been key in BCBSTX's sustainability and growth over the years.

"DCOA (the Development Corporation of Abilene) was key to getting BCBS here," he said, noting that BCBS pays very low rent in exchange for the jobs. "Over the years, Abilene employees have been able to earn wages and salaries totaling in the tens of millions of dollars. The foresight of the DCOA and the half-cent sales tax were not only key in the initial decision to move to Abilene, but the continuing partnership we enjoy has helped us keep costs low; and the lower our costs, the lower we are able to keep our premiums."

In addition to customer advocates, the center trains and employs claim adjuster/examiners, and case managers (typically registered nurses or nurse practitioners), Bujanda said.

"Our Abilene FSU team is comprised of individuals with varying degrees of training and levels of expertise, but all equipped to excel at their job roles and functions," he added. "All of our training programs and tools are designed to equip our team members to excel, and are in compliance with State and Federal requisites."

Boen said the Abilene center has become recognized as a center of excellence for BCBSTX's Federal employee program; so much so that they've consolidated all FEP operations into Abilene. In 2014, Montana FEP operations were added to the Abilene center.

"We won the University of Texas account in 2000," Boen said. "We opened up that operation for UT with Abilene staffing. And when we decided to get into the ACA (Affordable Care Act) marketplace, we added a considerable staff in Abilene to help support the retail line."

In 2009, BCBSTX piloted a "work from home" model with several of its employees, Boen said. These "more senior" employees have demonstrated an ability to meet production and quality standards in the main facility, and were given the opportunity to work from home, answering customer questions and providing claim service.

"We've gotten a lot better at this model, and as we continue to leverage technology, we are able to maintain the culture through email web chats, webinars, etc.," he said.

In addition to serving their customers, BCBSTX employees are active in the local community, Bujanda said.

"We are very proud of the active role our Abilene team members play in the community, donating both time and resources to a variety of community organizations," he said. "In 2015, our employee volunteers donated more than 4,000 service hours locally, supporting 22 community organizations. From building playgrounds for kids and distributing turkeys during Thanksgiving, to driving Meals on Wheels to senior citizens and mentoring youth, our Abilene team members reflect the culture of social responsibility we try to foster at Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas."

"We are committed to the Texas communities," added Boen, "keeping us close to the grass roots fabric of the people we desire to serve."