Jeff Swanty

Jeff Swanty Election: Thompson school board, District A. Age: 65. Family: Wife, Ruth, four children, the youngest who is a senior at Thompson Valley High School. Years in Loveland: 21. Education: Criminal justice degree from Arizona State University and a chartered finance degree from American College of Financial Services in Pennsylvania. Professional background: Served four years in the U.S. Navy; eight years in law enforcement in Arizona; 36 years with Allstate Insturance, now as owner of his own agency; two decades of volunteer experience including the Rotary Club, 8th Judicial District Nominating Commissioner, Loveland Rural Fire District Board, three years on the Thompson School Board, and is currently chair of the Loveland Fire and Rescue Authority Website: www.swantyforschoolboard.com.

Jeff Swanty wants to move the Thompson school board away from partisan politics and from taking sides.

"We need to create an environment where we stay focused on kids and public education," said Swanty, who stressed that he is an independent candidate who wants to bridge the chasm that currently exists on the school board.

He wants to return to an environment where teachers feel respected, valued and heard.

Previously, when Swanty served on the school board from 2003 to 2006, members felt lucky if a few people attended the meetings.

"Now people are deeply interested in education, and we're not listening," he said.

Advertisement

"We should be finding a venue where everyone has an opportunity to speak."

Swanty is seeking the District A seat on the Thompson School District Board of Education against Aimie Randall. The current representative, Donna Rice, is not running for re-election.

Here is what Swanty had to say about several issues facing the district:

1.How would you solve the financial crisis facing the Thompson School District?

Teachers are underpaid, classes are full and there is a backlog in needed maintenance, but the first step in addressing these needs is to delve deeply into where the money is being spent and look for alternatives. Swanty does not want to close schools or take other drastic measures, and he also recognizes the importance of being careful with taxpayer money.

"That is going to be an interesting question, to see where we are spending and where we can make changes," he said.

2.The current board is very split, and the meetings are often contentious. If elected, what would you do to heal the rift and begin to work together to address issues that affect students in Thompson schools?

With his past work on the school board, the Loveland Rural Fire Board and the Loveland Fire and Rescue Authority, Swanty believes he can help create a board in which everyone can share their opinions in a civil way and collaborate

"I have a reputation and background showing that I'm a team player and I can work from all points of view and compromise and be a bridge," he said.

"Like everybody else, I see sides, and we shouldn't have that," he said. "This is nonpartisan politics."

3. How would you have voted on the following issues and why?

• Opening of High Plains School: Yes, because the school is needed in a growing part of town. He noted that the majority board voted no the first time the school as up for approval, wasting hundreds of thousands of dollars because construction costs rose during the time they delayed construction.

• Addition of an early childhood center at that school: Yes, because early childhood classes are necessary for some students to have the foundation they need for success. It is easy to say this is the parents' responsibility, but not all families can provide that to their children. "It's pay now or pay later," he said.

• The negotiated teacher contract: Instead of looking back, Swanty chooses to look forward and believes the district has to negotiate and work with the Thompson Education Association. "It's a must do," he said. "We have disrespected our teachers. The courts have confirmed that the school board has not acted in good faith."

When he previously served on the board, the elected officials and not district administrators actually negotiated with the teachers, whom he described as "selfless people."

• Additional funding for charter schools: While he supports charter schools, he believes the district needs to look specifically at the costs and services at each school, including the charters, to spread out the funding. They need to consider transportation, special education and other services. "I don't think equity, I think fair is the answer," Swanty said. "They're public schools. We need to be fair with them. Fair is fair. My thing is we need to avoid a two-tier system, the haves and the have-nots."

• Hiring Brad Miller as an attorney for the school board: "I've never understood why they needed a second attorney," Swanty said, because the board and the district should be on the same page and not at odds.

• The addition of a career center for the high schools: Swanty said he pushed for this during his previous time on the board to have support to meet all different students needs. "We have to have lots of paths available."

4. We often hear people talk about choice in regards to public education. What does that mean to you?

The district has been great at adding many different programs through the neighborhood and charter schools, including those with arts focus, Core Knowledge, International Baccalaureate and now dual immersion, something Swanty tried to bring in 10 years ago.

"Choice is extremely important," he said.

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/RHPamelaJ.