Health What This Election Could Mean For Your Reproductive Rights CREDIT: AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin

As candidates shift to talking about reproductive rights in the context of economic issues, this election cycle hasn’t been as dominated by the “war on women” rhetoric as the 2012 election was. Nonetheless, abortion rights are certainly still up for vote. As Americans head to the polls on Tuesday, they’ll help determine the future of reproductive health policy in several key states, as well as potentially across the country.

First of all, voters in three states — Tennessee, Colorado, and North Dakota — will have the opportunity to vote directly on abortion rights. The issue is the subject of controversial ballot initiatives in those states; the anti-choice community will be dealt a significant victory if any of those measures succeed.

The measures in Colorado and North Dakota fit into the radical “personhood” movement that’s seeking to define fetuses as people. Colorado’s would update the state criminal code to include “unborn human beings,” while North Dakota’s would amend the state constitution to protect “the inalienable right to life of every human being at any stage of development.” Meanwhile, Tennessee’s ballot initiative would roll back the protections for reproductive rights that are currently in the state constitution, which would give lawmakers there an opportunity to further restrict the procedure.

The latest polling indicates that the measure in Colorado will likely be defeated. The vote is expected to be much closer in Tennessee and North Dakota, where large portions of voters remain undecided.

And even in the states where abortion isn’t on the ballot, voters will still indirectly affect the issue depending who they elect on a local level. More than 6,000 state legislative seats are up for election this year. As Vox’s Sarah Kliff points out, those seats may have the greatest practical influence on women’s reproductive rights, since abortion is largely restricted on a state level while Roe v. Wade still stands.

It’s easy to see the recent evidence illustrating how much these races matter. The 2010 election, during which Republicans picked up hundreds of legislative seats and essentially took over the states, ushered in a new era of harsh anti-abortion laws. Between 2010 and 2013, more abortion restrictions were enacted than during the entire previous decade. The successful advancement of an indirect strategy known as the Targeted Regulation of Abortion Providers, or TRAP, has forced dozens of clinics to close over the past three years. If voters keep electing right-wing state lawmakers who oppose abortion, those trends will continue.

Plus, on a national level, Republicans are expected to take control of the U.S. Senate, and women’s health advocates are concerned about the types of anti-choice legislation a GOP-dominated Congress could force through. Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC) introduced a 20-week abortion ban last fall, and Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-KY) — who is expected to become the majority leader — has already promised that legislation will be one of his top priorities.

“We are taking very seriously the threat that Mitch McConnell has repeated, that he is eager to take on the 20-week ban,” Donna Crane, the vice president for policy at NARAL Pro-Choice America, recently told RH Reality Check.

Although President Obama can veto the abortion restrictions that come to his desk, some reproductive rights experts are concerned that the GOP may attach an anti-abortion bill to a larger piece of must-pass legislation, like a bill to avert a government shutdown.

And even aside from legislation, GOP advances in Congress could have a big influence on whether stringent abortion laws are enforced, since the party that controls the Senate also controls judicial appointments. A GOP-controlled Senate could prevent the president from confirming any additional progressive judges, which could tip the political landscape of the courts further in favor of Republicans. As demonstrated by the deeply conservative U.S. Circuit of Appeals for the 5th Circuit, which recently allowed an extremely harsh abortion law to take effect in Texas, conservative courts are not necessarily sympathetic to arguments about women’s eroding access to abortion.

This is exactly why Planned Parenthood’s political arm launched its largest campaign offensive ever this election season, attempting to influence the outcome of key races in favor of abortion rights. Many Democrats have also adopted the group’s framing, speaking out about why it’s important to protect women’s health.

But it remains to be seen whether those messages will be successful in mobilizing pro-choice voters. As the New York Times recently reported, the tight races in battleground races for Senate seats and governor’s mansions has some strategists “second guessing” Democrats’ recent push to focus on abortion and birth control — something that could affect the way the party approaches women’s issues far after the polling places close on Tuesday.