Topics: 610 Magnolia, Books, Dana Goodyear, Editor's Picks, Food, New Yorker, Life News

Dana Goodyear is the author of the much anticipated “Anything That Moves: Renegade Chefs, Fearless Eaters and the Making of a New American Food Culture,” a journalistic window into the current food movement of extremely fringe groups pushing the boundaries of what we deem as edible.

I’m in Los Angeles for one night and the New Yorker writer is nice enough to meet me for dinner and a conversation. Considering the subject matter of the book, it seemed a bit wimpy for us to meet over caffè lattes, so we head to a traditional Oaxacan restaurant buried deep in the heart of Koreatown that is known for their crispy grasshoppers.

The evening starts with a Mezcal served in a gourd with a side of sliced oranges and chili powder.

Edward Lee: You are going to have to pronounce this restaurant name for me.

Dana Goodyear: Gay-lah-GHET-sah.

Yes, Guelaguetza and we are eating grasshoppers or chapulines, which are very crispy and delicious. Thanks for coming and having dinner with me. And thank you for all these dishes you ordered, the mole, the goat tacos and the chile rellenos are all perfect. First of all, this is a fascinating book and it’s an incredible window into the underground foodie world. So my first question is simply how did you gain access to this world?

I find that people in the food world are amazingly willing to talk about what they are doing even when those things are quasi-legal or taboo. I don’t know if that is the hospitality culture of dining or if it’s the thrill of presenting something that hasn’t ever been presented as food or if it’s the culture of the current food movement and its outlaw sensibility. I had to be careful occasionally and take out the names of people who were perfectly willing for me to put their names in, because I felt like they might get themselves into more trouble than they realized. But people were really eager to share their secrets with me –

Even knowing that you were a journalist and you were writing about them.

Oh yes.

So their ego trumped potential jail time?

I don’t think it was ego. I think it was the thrill of saying: You can eat this and if you’re not allowed to eat this, you should be. The people that were the most anxious were the raw dairy people because the stakes there are pretty well established. I was writing about a community that had been recently busted and so there was a lot of secrecy and credential checking. At one point somebody asked me if I was a government agent.

(Dana orders a hot chocolate and I order a flan)

The raw milk people are just one fringe group out of many that you write about in your book, but there are many from very diverse backgrounds. The common thread between them all seems to be a sentiment of anti-government. You also mention books like Upton Sinclair’s “The Jungle,” so is there a historical precedent for this kind of thinking or is this something that is brand new?

Thank you for perceiving that common thread because that really is what unites these disparate people. Each group champions a different, very specific approach to eating, but what they have in common, and what makes it a movement, is the sense that we can be eating and should be eating more broadly than we are now. There is a notion that American sensibilities, which are formed in large part by American laws, need to be changed. The anti-government sentiment is strong both among marginal groups doing things that are blatantly illegal and among very high-profile chefs who are saying it’s absurd that I can’t serve foie gras in my restaurant.

Do you take a political stance in the book?

I don’t personally. I see the value of regulation but I also sympathize with the frustrations of a lot of these people. For me, I look at it case by case and in some instances, the laws do seem onerous or overly sensitive to certain risks that aren’t so great while completely ignoring other risks. So it’s inconsistent. But the great irony around “The Jungle,” which was a novel, is that the regulatory framework that was set up in 1906 as a result of its revelations enshrined big business in food. It gave us the official food culture that this current movement is fighting against.

Still to this day?

Yes. What defines this new period of obsession with food is a sense of “how did we stray so far from the original intent of these laws?”

There are so many diverging groups that you interview from all walks of life, as you mentioned. But they don’t seem like they communicate with each other. So is it accidental or intentional that all of this is happening right now?

You are right, they don’t. Sometimes they are at odds with each other. But I see the occasion for this movement as an anxiety about America’s future. It’s related to what people have come to understand as the unsustainability of the American way of eating. There’s this interesting flip-flop where the avant-garde of the food movement is now starting to look at, and emulate, long culinary traditions that have come out of poverty. It is fascinating to me that the dominant ideas in fine dining now derive from poverty.

The last 10 years have seen America become insecure about its place in the world and its role in history. The rise of the food movement during this period of insecurity is not a coincidence. I think there’s an emphasis on being personally resourceful and even though it sounds ridiculous to talk about that in terms of what you might eat on a $250 tasting menu, it’s being reflected there. Food is a lens for culture.