Pope Francis’s remarks before Congress Thursday included a plea that politics “cannot be a slave to the economy and finance.”

In his address to a joint meeting of Congress, the pope urged lawmakers to ensure that all Americans are boosted by their policies and can “live as one.”

ADVERTISEMENT

“If politics must truly be at the service of the human person, it follows that it cannot be a slave to the economy and finance,” stated the pope’s prepared remarks.

“Politics is, instead, an expression of our compelling need to live as one, in order to build as one the greatest common good: that of a community which sacrifices particular interests in order to share, in justice and peace, its goods, its interests, its social life.”

The remark about being “slave” to the economy was in the pope’s prepared remarks, but he did not actually deliver the words before Congress.

Francis went on to say that business itself is not bad and actually can serve a critical social role by providing economic opportunity. But he did not mince words when it came to criticizing economic activity that he saw as encouraging other problems in society. For example, he criticized the arms trade harshly and the “shameful and culpable silence” of those that let it continue.

“We have to ask ourselves: Why are deadly weapons being sold to those who plan to inflict untold suffering on individuals and society? Sadly, the answer, as we all know, is simply for money: money that is drenched in blood, often innocent blood,” he said.

Francis has not shied away from criticizing capitalism and finance in the past, arguing that pursuit of economic gains above all else contributes to society’s ills. In his “Laudato Si” encyclical, released in May 2015, he chastised the growth of finance, making the case for a more equal distribution of wealth rather than a “winner take all” system.

“Finance overwhelms the real economy,” he wrote. “By itself the market cannot guarantee integral human development and social inclusion.”

Francis acknowledged Thursday that pushing for more equitable economic treatment will run into powerful opposition, but he urged lawmakers to make it a priority.

“I do not underestimate the difficulty that this involves, but I encourage you in this effort,” he said.