FORMER first bloke Tim Mathieson has launched an extraordinary attack on Margie Abbott saying the first lady is not doing enough charity work.

Despite Mrs Abbott maintaining her part-time job as director of a Sydney childcare centre and attending dozens of recent charity and community events, Mr Mathieson still thought it fair to rebuke her performance as first lady.

“I’m disappointed that she is not doing any charity work,” Mr Mathieson told the Sunday Herald Sun.

“What is she doing? Because I did 60 charity events. I went out for three full years.

“She has not contributed to any of them.

“The spouse of every Prime Minister since Barton has done charity work.”

But the Prime Minister’s office hit back last night, releasing details of the gifts and corporate hospitality afforded to Mr Mathieson when his partner Julia Gillard was Prime Minister — including valuable sporting memorabilia and tickets to major sporting events.

Mrs Abbott’s spokeswoman last night outlined a host of charity and community events the first lady had attended in recent months.

“Since the election last year, she has increased her community work and has attended a range of recent events for organisations including: KidsExpress children’s charity, the Royal Easter Show Society charity lunch, personally launching the story of breast cancer advocate Mrs Krystal Barter “The Lucky One”, the Deb Bailey Motor Neurone Disease Foundation, two charity bicycle rides, a citizenship ceremony, a commissioning service for religious teachers and volunteers, three local ANZAC Day service, an ethnic business awards dinner and a local multicultural festival,” the spokeswoman said.

“These events are in addition to those she attends with the Prime Minister.”

The spokeswoman said Mrs Abbott had a long history of community involvement and supported organisations including the Royal Blind Society and Girl Guides.

“This community involvement has been part of her life as she has worked part-time at a local Sydney childcare centre and, along with Tony, raised their three daughters,” she said.

“Those familiar with Margie Abbott know her quiet and understated approach is part of her genuine desire to draw attention to the charities and organisations she is involved with rather than herself.”

Mr Mathieson, who did not work when Ms Gillard held the office of Prime Minister, appeared to relish his role as first bloke, travelling extensively, attending functions and supporting charity events.

He is an ambassador for Kidney Health Australia, a patron of the Australian men’s Sheds Association and is involved with the Indigenous Diabetes Association in Alice Spring and mental health group beyondblue.

He was also one of the former government’s Men’s Health Ambassadors.

In January last year he was forced to apologise after making a joke to the West Indies cricket team about prostate cancer and Asian women.

“I was attacked for every charity event I did, I was just trying to do my best as a men’s health ambassador,” Mr Mathieson said.

“I tried to do the best I could as a country boy from Shepparton, I didn’t have much time to have garden parties.