It seems impossible to believe that smoking is even more harmful to health than we had thought. Yet that is exactly what a large and authoritative study published last week has revealed.

The findings provide stark evidence that the need to reduce smoking is more important than ever. Some 42 million American adults, 15 percent of women and 21 percent of men, still smoke. On average, they die more than a decade before nonsmokers. Poor people and those with less formal education are most likely to smoke.

For the past 50 years, the evidence about tobacco’s dangers has been mounting. The landmark surgeon general’s report in 1964 first declared that smoking caused lung and laryngeal cancer and chronic bronchitis. A succession of later reports by the surgeon general kept adding to the list of smoking-related diseases.

The latest surgeon general’s report in 2014 estimated that there are 480,000 deaths each year in the United States from 21 diseases caused by smoking, including 12 types of cancer, acute myeloid leukemia, diabetes, heart disease, stroke and atherosclerosis.

Now comes evidence that the toll is actually much worse than that. A study by researchers at the American Cancer Society, the National Cancer Institute and four universities — published in The New England Journal of Medicine on Wednesday — adds several more diseases and 60,000 deaths a year to the total. The added diseases include kidney failure, infections, a rare intestinal disease caused by inadequate blood flow, and heart and lung ailments not previously attributed to tobacco. The study also found small increases in the risks of breast and prostate cancer among smokers, although more research will be required to establish their significance.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

One obvious imperative is for governments to ramp up their efforts to help smokers quit, including with programs like Medicaid. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported last year that only seven states cover all approved cessation medications and in-person counseling, and that all states impose some barriers to getting these treatments. That is a disservice to smokers who want to quit or could be persuaded to quit.

For people who earn too much to be eligible for Medicaid, the Affordable Care Act requires most health insurance plans to cover preventive services, including tobacco cessation programs. That could help millions of Americans, but it is not clear how well these services are working so far.

The new study followed more than 900,000 men and women, 55 years of age or older, for 10 years.

The 60,000 additional deaths a year from smoking that the researchers found could bring the total number of deaths caused by smoking each year in the United States to 540,000. And the researchers suspect that may be an underestimate because they didn’t count deaths from diseases like breast and prostate cancer where the evidence is compelling but not quite strong enough to be certain that smoking was the cause.

Either way, this huge number of deaths provides ample reason to use every possible tool to help smokers quit.