The chart above, which comes from Republican lobbyist Bruce Mehlman's latest (and much-coveted) PowerPoint presentation on the state of American politics, reinforces an idea I've written about quite a bit over the last few years: Increasingly we live in two different Americas, bifurcated by partisan politics.

As Mehlman documents, on a variety of major issues -- from taxes to trade to healthcare to the minimum wage -- there are vast differences between how Republicans and Democrats view each one. The Obamacare numbers above may not be all that surprising -- the Affordable Care Act has become synonymous with peoples' feelings about Obama -- but I, for one, was surprised at the massive gaps on raising the federal minimum wage and using U.S. combat troops in the fight against ISIS.

What the chart shows is that the sort of person that Jeb Bush or Marco Rubio or Ted Cruz is talking to in this primary season is vastly different than the one that Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders is targeting. Yes, they are all Americans but the distance between how they see most issues is vast. And that difference of opinion extends to how partisans on each side perceive each other.

These two charts -- courtesy of Emory political science professor Alan Abramowitz -- tell that story vividly.

The first, using data from the American National Election Studies (ANES), shows how partisans view their own party and the other party using a 0 (very cold/negatively) to 100 (very hot/positive) rating:

Views of one's own party have generally stayed steady but the way people perceive the opposing party has fallen off a cliff -- particularly over the last decade or so.

Then, there's this chart that shows how positively or negatively people view the two parties over the last four decades:

In the space of three decades, the percentage of people who feel positively about one party and negatively toward the other has DOUBLED. People seeing both parties in a positive light has dropped five-fold in that time.

Not only then do people living in our two partisan Americas come down on totally opposite sides on virtually every issue but they also dislike and distrust people on the other end of the ideological spectrum. Reasonable disagreement, which can occasionally lead to common-sense compromise, is not possible in such a climate. Compromise requires trust. There is none.

The formula for a politician to win a primary in this sort of divided America is simple: Play up your conservative/liberal credentials. It's less clear how any politician can appeal to the middle in a political world split so starkly along partisan lines. Heck, it's not even clear there is much of a middle left to appeal to.