In news that would surprise no one, a new poll has come out that shows that America remains deeply divided over abortion. According to CNN, in their most recent polling over divisive political subjects, abortion continues to lead as one of the top polarizing partisan topics, along with immigration and gun control.

But how divisive is it really? Even though anti-abortion activists have been pushing their ongoing campaign against Planned Parenthood since they began releasing undercover “sting” videos back in July, the general public still continues to support the reproductive health care provider.

“About 71% say it’s more important for Congress to approve a budget agreement that would avoid a government shutdown than to defund Planned Parenthood, 22% say it’s a bigger priority to eliminate the organization’s federal funding. That’s more saying it’s important to avert a shutdown now than in September 2013, just before a budget fight over federal funding for some portions of the Affordable Care Act led to a partial government shutdown,” reports CNN.com. “In the new poll, 87% of Democrats and 74% of independents say avoiding a shutdown is the key priority, while Republicans are just about evenly divided, with 48% saying avoiding a shutdown is more important and 44% saying ending Planned Parenthood’s funding is most important. Even among those who say abortion should be illegal in all or most cases, however, 63% say it’s a higher priority for the government to approve a budget and avoid a shutdown than to eliminate funding for Planned Parenthood.”

While that’s some good news for Planned Parenthood, some of the other news in the poll is a bit more alarming for those who support the right to terminate a pregnancy. Here are four other takeaways from the CNN abortion poll:

1) Nearly one in five Americans think abortion should be illegal in all circumstances. The good news is that the number of people who believe that abortion should be absolutely illegal has gone down slightly since 2014. The bad news is it hasn’t gone down much. According to the poll, 18 percent of respondents think abortion should always be illegal, down slightly from 20 percent in 2013 and 2014, but still higher than just 15 percent in 2012.

2) The number of people who believe a pregnant person should still give birth even if her life is in jeopardy is increasing. In 2012, just 9 percent of respondents said abortion should still remain illegal, even if “the woman’s life is endangered.” Today, that number has increased to 12 percent. That’s a disturbing and frankly dangerous trend, and one that is unfortunately illustrated in a number of “no exceptions” bans coming out in the last few years.

3) Less people are supporting rape and incest exceptions, too. In 2012, 83 percent of respondents said abortion should be legal for someone impregnated by sexual assault, and 14 percent said it should be illegal. Today, that number has shifted to 80 percent saying it should be legal and 18 percent illegal. That’s a seven point shift in favor of forcing rape survivors into carrying a pregnancy to term and giving birth against her will – all in just three years.

4) Millennials are the most likely to think abortion should always be illegal. When you break down the age groups for who believes abortions should be illegal in all circumstances, the biggest group in favor of that stance is the 18-34 age group. According to polling breakdown, 23 percent of all 18- to 34-year-olds think abortion should always be illegal, twice as high as those in the 35 to 49 age bracket and even higher than those over 65. That could be a troublesome trend as those voters age and begin running for office, creating a new generation of politicians opposing all abortions and voters ready to support them in their campaigns.

Photo credit: Thinkstock