The American College of Radiology and Massachusetts General Hospital will leverage the Nuance Communications' PowerShare Network, Nuance announced Monday at the Radiological Society of North America's annual convention.

Nuance, a speech recognition technology provider, bills PowerShare as the industry's largest cloud-based medical imaging exchange. Nuance executives say the exchange is capable of bringing clinical guidelines to the radiologist's workflow and automating the process of collecting and reporting quality measures to meet industry regulations and guidelines.

[See also: Nuance makes strides in image sharing.]

Nuance's new PowerShare Innovation Program opens up the entire network platform to other innovators and third parties to leverage the power of PowerShare and Nuance PowerScribe, according to Nuance, which adds it enables reporting through an easy-to-use cloud model to deliver clinical content and value-added services to a much wider audience.

The program was unveiled at the RSNA Annual Meeting to accelerate collaboration within the radiology community and promote advancements in overall patient care and financial integrity.



"By leveraging the more than 2,000 provider organizations that use PowerShare to share (three) billion medical images and the 1,600+ provider organizations that use PowerScribe to produce diagnostic reports, the PowerShare Network connects radiologists, other clinicians, patients, government agencies, specialty medical societies and other organizations with the information needed to support improved clinical decision making and enhanced patient outcomes across the continuum of care," said Peter Durlach, senior vice president of marketing and strategy, Nuance Communications, in a news release.



"The ACR is making it easier for radiologists to participate in national registries and federal regulatory programs, which are so important for demonstrating value in healthcare," said Mike Tilkin, chief information officer and executive vice president, American College of Radiology, in a statement. "By providing a connectivity framework that leverages tools such as PowerShare, we automate the process of collecting and submitting Physician Quality Reporting System, PQRS, on behalf of radiologists. Also, by integrating our nationally recognized clinical guidance with tools such as PowerScribe, we enhance the reporting process by providing critical information to the radiologist when it is most useful – in-context and during interpretation. These two programs are a huge step forward for the practice of Imaging 3.0."

[See also: Nuance makes strides in image sharing.]



In partnership with the ACR and Nuance, MGH will deliver an initial set of radiology clinical decision support guidelines to the broader radiology community by integrating them into the PowerScribe workflow so that radiologists can access these evidence-based guidelines at the point of interpretation to improve clinical documentation consistency and quality. As these clinical guidelines are updated and expanded, Nuance will share these guidelines digitally to providers across the industry using the Nuance PowerShare Network.



"Our goal is to provide the highest quality patient care that is consistent with recognized national guidelines and standards," said James A. Brink, MD, radiologist-in-chief, MGH. "Mass General has long been committed to developing, adopting and leveraging innovative systems and technology to achieve this goal."



To integrate decision support with best practices in reporting, the ACR is also collaborating with RSNA and standards organizations to align the radiologist's decision points with standards-based reporting frameworks.