Corinne Domahidy was in the Democratic Republic of Congo when the deadly Ebola virus was reported in the country last month.

“I was really scared. I am the mother of two boys,” said Domahidy, 37, who is the director of clinics for Centennial-based Project C.U.R.E.

On Tuesday, Domahidy was back at the nonprofit’s warehouse in Centennial, helping load a container of medical supplies for Sierra Leone, where health workers have been battling the virus for six months.

In Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, where the virus has been most widespread, the disease killed 2,288 people as of Saturday, according to the World Health Organization.

The shipping container bound for Sierra Leone holds disposable gowns, masks, boots, duct tape and other materials to protect health workers treating the victims.

Medical facilities in the countries where the virus is raging are crude and underequipped, said Domahidy, who helps to set up mobile clinics and does other work for the aid organization.

While in a rural area of Congo, where Ebola has not been reported, she saw a disposable gown that Project C.U.R.E. had delivered a year ago drying after being washed. “These clinics are underserved and have nothing. They were washing and reusing disposable gowns and gloves,” she said.

Because of the danger of transmission, the gowns, gloves and other protective gear are supposed to be disposed of after being worn. “They want to do good work and save lives, but they don’t have the equipment and supplies,” she said.

One hundred volunteers from Valor Christian High School in Highlands Ranch helped to sort materials bound for Sierra Leone.

“I think it is really cool that I’m touching something that is going to save somebody’s life,” said Mia McLaughlin, a 15-year-old sophomore.

The container, which will travel by freighter, is expected to take 30 to 45 days to arrive in Sierra Leone and be unloaded, said Jan Mazotti, spokeswoman for Project C.U.R.E., which works in 132 countries.

The container will leave Centennial on Wednesday.

Domahidy will go to Tanzania the next time she leaves the country in two weeks for a different project.

Project C.U.R.E. works with partners who unload and distribute the supplies in countries where there are deadly outbreaks. It doesn’t send personnel into those countries.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee