By Liz Freeman

Southwest Florida residents insured through the Affordable Care Act are likely to see higher premiums next year compared with elsewhere in the state, according to rate proposals.

The Florida Office of Insurance Regulation said premiums for individual coverage will go up next year an average of 13 percent statewide but the dominant insurers in Southwest Florida project increases of 17 percent or more.

Jacksonville-based Florida Blue, which was the only insurance provider in Collier County to offer plans this year under the federal law, also known as Obamacare, is seeking a statewide premium increase next year of 18 percent, according to state records.

In Lee County, Florida Blue and Cigna were the only insurance carriers under the Affordable Care Act this year. Cigna is proposing an average rate hike of 17 percent statewide next year.

Details about which carriers will be marketing plans in different counties next year isn’t yet available.

“Our 2015 individual and family rate requests are based on continuing our competitive, quality, value-added offerings in our Florida market,” Cigna spokesman Joe Mondy said in an email. “The proposed 2015 pricing is based on our customers’ 2014 early clinical experience and claims payments, expected medical trend, along with other factors such as the phase out of the government reinsurance program and expectations on the changing risk pool in 2015.”

Florida Blue representatives couldn’t be reached for comment about next year’s premium increases. Florida Blue signed up 339,000 people for coverage in 2014 through the federal health program.

The state insurance office has no rate approval authority over the insurers who are offering plans under the federal marketplace exchange for the Affordable Care Act.

All told, 14 insurers are offering an array of plans in Florida with different levels of deductibles and other out-of-pocket expenses in categories known as bronze, silver, platinum and gold plans. The Florida list includes three new insurers to the marketplace exchange — United HealthCare, Health First Health Plans and Time Insurance.

Lynne Thorp, a plan consultant for the Health Planning Council of Southwest Florida who served as the lead navigator to help people sign up for plans for this year, said it’s hard to judge how people will react to premium increases.

“For many people we enrolled, this is the first time in years they have had access to regular health care,” she said. “Knowing they are covered is a big deal (and it) makes families feel protected. I don’t know that people are going to walk away from that security.”

Matt Dinkel, a health and benefits professional with the independent Alan Williams & Associates in Fort Myers, said he isn’t surprised by the rate hikes for next year because people who signed up for plans have medical conditions.

“For four out of five applicants, we had a conversation about a condition,” Dinkel said.

In general, people will deal with premium increases of 10 to 15 percent but after that, they start to look at other plan options, he said.

The state insurance office offered premium comparisons from this year to next year, which take into account subsidies from the federal government to help offset the expense, based on income and family situation. The examples are based on average silver plans, which typically cover 70 percent of medical expenses and which have been popular with consumers.

In Collier, an individual earning $27,000 a year paid an average monthly premium of $190 this year after the subsidy, and will pay $214 a month next year after the subsidy, according to the state.

For a family of four in Collier earning $51,000 a year, the average monthly premium this year has been $365, after the subsidy, and will increase to $450 a month next year after the subsidy.

A statewide consumers’ group, Florida CHAIN, said the state’s analysis, released Monday, was rushed and doesn’t give consumers any meaningful information about rates.

“It’s essential that Floridians understand that the numbers in these scenarios tell them very little or nothing about the premiums that they will actually pay next year,” Florida CHAIN said in a statement. “Rather, what nearly all of the almost one million Floridians who purchased coverage in the marketplace will continue to pay is a price that is based mainly on their income and on the specific plan they choose.”

Open enrollment begins Nov. 15 and runs through Feb. 15, 2015.