by

Compiled by Kevin Coughlin

Okay, let’s try this again.

Last weekend’s Preview can be summed up in one word: CANCELED. You can thank a certain blizzard named Jonas for that. So here goes; the weather must be better this weekend, right?

Atrium Art is just the start.

Classical lunchtime, evening Ragtime, Downton chatter, water matters… from Central America to the Civil War, Greater Morristown boasts all this, and so much more. Forget your troubles with a double dose of Mega Bubbles!

Crave more fun? We’re not done. Our handy calendar has more ideas– and add your own events, please.

THURSDAY, JAN. 28, 2016:

Music At Noon concludes its lunchtime series at the Morristown United Methodist Church with classical Themes and Variations featuring Pauline Lederer, piano; Nancie Lederer, violin; Marnie Kaller, cello; and Rick Kaller, piano. Suggested donation: $7 for adults, $6 for seniors; students, free. A light luncheon can be purchased before or after the concert. At 50 Park Place, on the Green. Read more here.

Downton Abbey is in the home stretch…which means the Downton Abbey Support Group is needed now more than ever! All are invited to the Morristown & Township Library at 7 pm for scones, show talk, and maybe, a few musical surprises. Admission: Free. At One Miller Road, Morristown.

Could Flint happen here? Grow It Green Morristown hosts a 7 pm Food for Thought talk about our water supply. Featured speaker: David Peifer, Highlands Project Director for the Association of New Jersey Environmental Commissions. Admission: $10. At the Hyatt Morristown, 3 Speedwell Ave.

The North Jersey Civil War Round Table features talks by four members about the role of railroads, the 1st NJ Light Artillery (Clark’s Battery), and northern presidents who favored the South. At 7:14 pm, in the Haggerty Educational Center of the Frelinghuysen Arboretum, 353 E. Hanover Ave., Morris Township (across from the Morris County Library). Admission: $5; members and students, free.

The musical Ragtime comes to Morristown’s Mayo Performing Arts Center at 7:30 pm. Cheer for the hometown scene-stealer, 4-year-old Nehemiah Timothy Lewis of the Calvary Baptist Church, making a special guest appearance. Admission: $49-$79. At 100 South St. Call 973-539-8008 for more.

FRIDAY, JAN. 29:

Art in the Atrium, New Jersey’s largest exhibit of African American art, showcases the work of Alonzo Adams, whose Code Blue series examines threats to black men — from police, racism and economics. Works by nearly 20 other artists also will be on display. The public reception runs from 6 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. at the Morris County Administration & Records Building on Schuyler Place in Morristown. Admission is free. Read more here.

David Roth headlines at The Minstrel in Morris Township, with opener No Strings Attached. Roth’s fans include Peter Yarrow of Peter, Paul & Mary fame; the opening act comprises local members of the Folk Project. Admission: $9, children 12 and under, free. At the Morristown Unitarian Fellowship, 21 Normandy Heights Road.

The wait is over for fans of 2Cellos. Croatian cellists Luka Sulic and Stjepan Hauser had to cancel last April’s visit to Morristown, but they’re back, at 8 pm in the Mayo Performing Arts Center. Tickets start at $29 but the show is SOLD OUT. Touch base with the box office; you never know: 973-539-8008. At 100 South St.

SATURDAY, JAN. 30:

The Center for Spiritual Living Morristown is sponsoring a Red Cross blood drive from 10 am to 3 pm at 331 Mount Kemble Ave., Harding, in the first floor sanctuary. Make an appointment here, and enter code: CSLMorristown.

BeWell.Morristown is celebrating its grand reopening with free yoga, reiki and acupuncture, along with free nutrition and psychology workshops, from noon to 6 pm at its new studio at 16 Bank St. Drop a line here or call 973-975-0280 for more details. The Morristown Unitarian Fellowship hosts its 30th annual Benefit Concert for Central America, at 7:15 pm. Featuring John Forster and Ken Galipeau. Chili cook-off, decadent desserts, BYOB. Tickets: $25 in advance, $30 at door. Reserve tickets here. At 21 Normandy Heights Road, Morris Township.

Livingston Taylor (I’ll Come Running, Boatman, I Can Dream of You) performs at the Sanctuary series in Chatham at 8 pm, with opener Chelsea Berry. Admission: $30. At the Presbyterian Church, 240 Southern Blvd.

SUNDAY, JAN. 31:

The Morris County Winter Farmers Market has a new home, Morristown’s Alexander Hamilton School, from 10 am to 2 pm every Sunday through April. Organized by the Foodshed Alliance andSustainable Morristown, the market aims to present up to 25 vendors of locally grown produce. At 24 Mills St.

Temple B’Nai Or is hosting a blood drive for Community Blood Services from 9 am to 2 pm, at 60 Overlook Road in Morristown. Type O negative blood and platelet donors are especially needed. Call 201-251-3703 for an appointment or schedule online. Donors must be healthy, age 16 through 75 (16- and 17-year-olds need parental permission), and weigh at least 110 pounds.

Studio Yoga in Madison is offering 16 free classes, starting at noon, culminating in a singing bowl concert at 5 pm. The open house is at 2 Green Village Road. Call 973-966-5311 for more.

Johan Fernandez, a Certified Affordable Care Act Application Counselor, will provide free information and assistance with Affordable Health Care Act enrollment, between 1 pm and 4:45 pm at the Morristown & Township Library. At One Miller Road, Morristown

Bubbles! Lasers! Lighting! It’s Fan Yang’s Mega Bubble Show, at Morristown’s Mayo Performing Arts Center at 1:30 pm and 4:30 pm. For all ages. Tickets: $20-$40. At 100 South St. Call 973-539-8008 for more.