Photo

WASHINGTON — As Americans race to sign up for health insurance in the final days of open enrollment, many consumers and consumer advocates say the names of plans are unhelpful, confusing and in some cases misleading.

A number of insurers sell their plans under names like Select, Preferred, Premier, Exclusive, Enhanced, Essential, Essential Plus, Prime, Ultimate and Deluxe. Multiple offerings from one company may have the same benefits and cover the same share of a consumer’s costs, but go by different names.

“Sometimes the names are downright deceptive,” said Betsy M. Imholz, a lawyer at Consumers Union. “Calling a plan ‘exclusive’ makes it sound super-duper, but it may mean that you have a very limited choice of doctors or hospitals.”

Hubert B. Gesenhues of Las Vegas, a computer technician who has been researching his insurance options, said the names were, for the most part, “marketing gibberish.” They obscure the fact that many plans do not pay for treatments until consumers have spent thousands of dollars of their own money, he said.

Danielle M. Carpenter, an insurance counselor at the Center for Family Health in Jackson, Mich., said she and her clients did not find the names of health plans particularly useful. The large number of options with similar names “causes confusion,” said Ms. Carpenter, whose organization has helped 1,400 people choose plans since October.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

One insurance industry official, Jon R. Urbanek, a senior vice president at Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Florida, acknowledged that “a lot of product names are confusing and hard to navigate.” In many cases, he said, “they mean more internally to a company than they do to a customer.”

To help consumers, Mr. Urbanek said, Florida Blue has held 3,000 town-hall-style meetings since July and has greatly expanded its team of agents and brokers.

Karen M. Ignagni, the president of America’s Health Insurance Plans, a trade group, said companies did not sell their plans based on one- or two-word names. Online, she said, “insurers display detailed information about their benefits, premiums, deductibles and co-payments, data that consumers need at the kitchen table to make their decisions.”

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina offers plans with names like Blue Advantage Silver 3000, Blue Select Silver 3500 and Blue Advantage Silver 5000. The numbers refer to the amount that a policyholder must pay as a deductible before the plan begins to pay for covered services.

“Silver” plans all have roughly the same value, paying 70 percent of the average overall cost of providing essential health benefits to members. But Shoshanna Sofaer, a professor of health care policy at Baruch College, part of the City University of New York, said the names were “just branding, just marketing,” and were not used in a consistent way.

The federal government runs the marketplace for North Carolina, and Michelle Douglas, a spokeswoman for the local Blue Cross and Blue Shield insurer, said: “We have no control over the way our products are presented on the federal exchange. On our own website, we provide more information in a more intuitive way.”

Other insurers name their products differently.

In a number of states, Humana sells a Gold 2500/3500 plan, with a $2,500 deductible and a $3,500 limit on a consumer’s out-of-pocket costs for covered services.

On the website of the California insurance exchange, each plan has a number indicating what percentage of costs it normally covers — but that might not be clear to the average consumer.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For example, the Health Net Silver 70 H.M.O. is a health maintenance organization that covers 70 percent of costs for a typical consumer. On the company’s website, the same plan has a different name: Community Care H.M.O. Silver $45/$2,000, indicating that it charges $45 for doctor’s visits and has a $2,000 annual deductible.

The California exchange devised a chart with three columns showing, for each plan, the name on the exchange website, the name on the company website and the name on the insurance card issued to policyholders.

Thomas G. Ellison, a nurse in rural Lafayette County, Fla., supports the health care law as a step toward universal coverage and knows more than most people about insurance, having worked in hospitals for three decades. But, he said, the names of the plans available to him are “insurance doublespeak.” They include Essential, Everyday Health, Predictable Cost, Predictable Cost Plus, All Copay and Everyday Health Premier.

David Sandor, a vice president at the Health Care Service Corporation, which offers Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans in Illinois, Texas and three other states, said, “Regardless of the specific name of an insurance policy, it’s important for consumers to dive in deep and look at the value, which we define in terms of price and the network of doctors and hospitals associated with a plan.”

Health insurance is complicated even for people who have had it for years. Many people seeking coverage under the new law have not had insurance, and for them, the choices can be particularly challenging.

Rebecca Lambert, who owns the Calico Country Store in Martin, Ga., signed up for a plan offered by Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, found it was “not correct for me” and then enrolled in a different plan with a very similar name, Silver Direct Access.

“I don’t know anything about health insurance,” Ms. Lambert said. “I’ve never had health insurance. I don’t know all the terminology.”

The Affordable Care Act helps consumers compare health plans by classifying them in four categories, from least to most generous: bronze, silver, gold and platinum. In some markets, like Miami, consumers have dozens of choices in the same category.

“Too much choice is no choice at all,” said Jay Angoff, a former Obama administration official who set up the office that regulates health insurance markets. “People won’t select the best value if they have to choose between dozens of plans at different metal levels.”