"The stakes are high for borrowers due to the draconian government collection powers, including the seizure of earned income tax credits and Social Security payments."

The Reason Foundation and NCLC both focus on the Federal government's role in making the student loan market safe for the Sallie Mae-Navient enterprise. The NCLC attributes this lender/loan servicer's excesses to both Big Government and market capitalism. The Reason report doesn't punt on the failings of the free market.

Sallie Mae was created in 1972 during the Nixon administration, originally with the modest aim of providing a secondary market for student loans that would increase liquidity and attract investors. The Reason report claims Sallie Mae played Uncle Sam from the gitgo—obtaining cheap money from the Federal Financing Bank while leveraging low capital requirements as a government-sponsored enterprise (GSE)

"As a GSE, Sallie enjoyed lower capital requirements and could operate at a higher leverage than its competitors," Reason said. "And Sallie Mae was exempt from state and local taxes on its franchise, capital and income."

Reason contends that after the 2009 crash and the exit of the non-bank lenders, Sallie Mae has used its political influence to build and maintain its profitability in spite of post-crisis attempts to reform the industry. "It has used this influence recently to secure massive servicing contracts from the expanded Direct Loan Program, acquire a multi-billion dollar bailout of the student loan industry, and to procure the removal of significant debtor protections from privately-issued student loans, of which the company is the largest originator," Reason said.

Perhaps the biggest blow to people with student loans they couldn't re-pay was the 2005 Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act, where borrowers lost the ability to charge-off all student loans, Federal and private, in a BK filing unless "undue hardship" could be proved. No one with less than a severe disability can meet that standard. Reason states that the Act effectively "moved private student loans into the same category as debt obtained from fraud, drunk driving and neglected child support."

A 2010 story in the American Bankruptcy Law Journal found that Sallie Mae hired lobbying firms affiliated with Democrats while working with the GOP to fight proposals that threatened profits. Reason said this led to "crony capitalism," which if defined as "the collusion of government with the private sector to provide economic benefits to a narrow interest group."

Sallie Mae has been extremely profitable since going private in 2004. NCLC's Loonin writes, "For example, Sallie Mae's return on equity was over 30% in 2006, one of the highest among American companies. Their executives reaped the rewards. From 1999 through 2004, former CEO Albert Lord took home over $200 million."

The NCLC report noted that federal government relies on private companies like Sallie Mae to administer its loan programs. "Given a for-profit company's imperative to do what is best for its investors, it is especially critical that the government conduct rigorous oversight of its private contractors." But numerous investigations by Federal and state governments plus consumer watchdog organizations have not changed the game.

And while the federal government has made what critics say are half-hearted attempts to reform the industry, it was also becoming one of Sallie Mae's best customers. In 2009 it was named one of the four servicers of newly disbursed Department of Education (ED) loans that replaced the Federal Family Education Loan Program (FFELP). If loan origination is lucrative, so is loan servicing.

The NCLC report stated, "Sallie Mae became one of four companies that won contracts with the U.S. Department of Education to service about $550 billion in federal loans. Since then, the company's federal loan servicing business has continued to grow. The number of federal student loans Sallie Mae services increased about 39% since 2012 to 5.7 million loans as of September 2013."

And the Department of Education re-upped with Sallie Mae as a servicer for its student loans this spring—despite the withering criticism from student and consumer groups that it has failed to put borrowers into affordable payment plans or explained payment options adequately. Its recent bad behavior has only added fuel to the fire: Sallie Mae was found to have violated the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (SCRA), by over-charging some 60,000 military veterans on their student loans as far back as 2005. But Sallie Mae settled Justice Department charges by paying a $97 million fine and continues to be in the Federal student loan business.

Playing both sides of the public-private divide and both political parties has worked for Sallie Mae. The brain trust in Newark, Del. most likely believes it will work for Navient also.

--Written by John Sandman for MainStreet