Waiting in line outside the Greater Killeen Free Clinic earlier this month, Michael Porter said the clinic is his only viable option for health care.

Adding up monthly premiums, a deductible and the cost of medications, the Killeen resident said purchasing health insurance through the Affordable Care Act is simply unaffordable.

“There’s people who have good jobs who can’t afford it,” said Porter, who receives Supplemental Security Income and lives on a fixed income.

The free clinic saw an increase of 5,200 patient visits in 2013 to 6,800 in 2014 — the first year “Obamacare” went into effect. Clinic officials said it’s not clear if the Affordable Care Act is related to the increase.

Elsewhere in the line at the free clinic was a Harker Heights family who looked into getting an insurance plan and found the same outcome — they can’t afford it.

For their family of six, it would have been $550 to get insurance, said the family member who requested to not be identified. The father, like many with low or fixed incomes, opted to not have insurance.

“If you pay penalties, it’s a cheaper price,” he said.

And it isn’t a local problem.

“The high cost of insurance has been the main reason why people go without coverage,” according to a report from the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit that analyzes U.S. health issues. “In 2013, 61 percent of uninsured adults said the main reason they were uninsured was because the cost was too high or because they had lost their jobs.”

In 2013 — the year before health care law insurance became available — 41 million Americans were without health insurance, including more than 6 million in Texas.

As of Feb. 15, 1.18 million Texans signed up or re-enrolled for an insurance plan under the Affordable Care Act.

However, for the millions of Texans who remain uninsured — many say cost is a big factor.

For a family of four making $40,000 per year in the Killeen area, health insurance plans on the federal website, HealthCare.gov, ranged from a “bronze” plan of $366 per month with a $12,500 deductible to a “platinum” plan of $972 per month with a $0 deductible. Bronze plans have a cheaper per-month premium, however, require more out-of-pocket expenses with each visit to the doctor.

Add in subsidies and tax credits, however, and those prices can drop significantly — something HealthCare.gov is quick to point out. With tax credits, that same Killeen family of four now pays $49 per month for the bronze plan, and $654 per month for the platinum.

Insurance agents

From an insurer’s point of view, while the cost may seem a little steep, it’s better to have the insurance and not need it than to need it and not have it, said Trey Axe of GW Global Insurance LLC and media relations chairman for the Austin Association of Health Underwriters.

“There is certainly a lot of confusion out there. The buzz is that people are having a lot of problems with the HealthCare.gov website,” Axe said. “People are confused — if they are just purchasing a policy online they are probably not being set up for success, because they will probably just look for the lowest-cost plan.”

The government needs to properly educate people about their choices concerning the health care act, said Albert Pomales of Kind Health, president of the Austin Association of Health Underwriters.

“One of the key things about the ACA is it has given access to coverage. Whether it is affordable or not is up to the customer,” Pomales said. “What is needed is more education. ... They are making uneducated decisions that could end up costing families $15,000 to $20,000 a year.”

Everyone who is looking for health coverage should seek the services of a licensed health insurance agent, Axe added.

Lower enrollment

So far, enrollment among younger Americans has been poor due to the likelihood of paying about $170 per month with a $6,000 deductible. It means healthier Americans could end up paying $8,000 before seeing any medical benefits kick in, Axe said.

The Affordable Care Act has imposed limitations on age-rating for individual plans, however, carriers may only increase rates on their oldest members by three times as much as their youngest members. While this is great for older participants, it substantially increases rates for younger consumers.

“The messaging has been fairly ineffective. Younger members balk at the premium costs for coverage, citing the fact that they rarely go to the doctor,” Axe said. “The truth is likely that they don’t truly need health insurance for the doctor visit — they need insurance for the potential financial devastation that would come with a catastrophic event, (such as) a cancer diagnosis, major surgery or a trip to the ER with a corresponding hospital stay.”

In order to make an educated decision, it is always best to talk with someone who understands the nuances of the law, Pomales said.

Navigators

Similar to the health insurance agents are what the federal government refers to as health care “navigators.”

Navigators serve as unbiased assistants to help applicants understand what questions mean and explain the difference between polices without endorsing certain plans, said Alyson McMillian, lead navigator for the Consumer Health Insurance Marketplace Enrollment Services program, which covers Bell County.

They also assist with finding a plan if someone has a preferred doctor or hospital, and check if their medications are covered or have any other specific concerns.

“There’s no one size fits all, and it’s not a single plan,” McMillian said. “That’s a common misconception. People say, ‘I just want to get on that government health plan.’ Well there’s so many that are tailored to meet an individual’s needs.”

The amount of the subsidy or the amount of copay and deductible are usually contingent on income level and family size, she said, explaining Bell County has more than 80 plans that can be customized based on individual needs.

“Every person’s going to have a different situation, and especially when you’re talking about health and taxes,” McMillian said. “We really want people to call because it’s so individualized.”

Although Feb. 15 was the deadline to start a new plan, McMillian said life-changing events could qualify them for special enrollment periods. The deadline was extended to today for people who had trouble enrolling with the HealthCare.gov website or over the phone due to technical problems or long wait times.

“A change in income, a change in family size, divorce, marriage, big raise, change in jobs, etc., those can qualify them to come back through,” McMillian said.

Taxes and exemptions

Subsidies are available to help those who make between 100 and 250 percent of the federal poverty level. That 250 percent or less equates to a family of four making less than $59,625.

In states that did not expand Medicaid, which includes Texas, tax credit eligibility ranges from 100 percent to 400 percent of the poverty line, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. In the nearly 30 states that chose to expand Medicaid, the maximum income requirement to get on Medicaid is increased, allowing more people to qualify for the government-paid health coverage.

If the lowest-cost federal health plan is more than 8 percent of an individual or family’s income, they will qualify for the subsidies, said David Kowaleski, a volunteer tax assistant with AARP Tax Aid, located at the Lions Club Park Senior Center in Killeen.

“Before the (tax) season started, we didn’t think we would see more than 10 percent of our customers have to worry about the penalties. Right now it’s closer to 15 percent of those we see who have insurance issues,” Kowaleski said. “We’re seeing more on the lower end of the penalties because of the type of people we assist — primarily seniors and lower income people, although we can help nearly anyone — a lot of lower income people can qualify for exemptions.”

According to HealthCare.gov, those who did not have health insurance in 2014 will be assessed a penalty of 1 percent of annual household income, or $95 per adult and $47.50 per child, with a household max penalty of $285, whichever is greater. For 2015, it will be 2 percent or $325 per adult, $162.50 per child, with a maximum penalty per family of $975.

Pricing

In the line outside the free clinic, Porter said insurance through the Affordable Care Act should cost a flat rate of about $75 to $100 without extra fees, or be free for people who truly can’t even afford that amount.

Killeen resident Stefanie Clark also said a rate of $100 a month would be a fair rate for health insurance. Clark hasn’t signed up for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act because she said she hasn’t seen enough information.

Delsa Byrd just moved to the area from Missouri. There, she had MO HealthNet, which is a spin-off of Medicaid.

“Once I came to Texas, it was no longer good,” Byrd said. “So, now I’m a little afraid because of my prescriptions. One of them is $56.”

Part of the reason deductibles and coinsurance is higher in Texas is because hospitals that write off millions in unpaid debt “cost-shift” that debt on to those Texans who have insurance, making everyone’s premiums and copays higher.

“Not just in Texas, but the industry; what hospitals have done for years is, in order to offset this, we do what’s called cost-shifting,” Matt Maxfield, CEO of Seton Medical Center Harker Heights, told the Herald in December.

“We charge those who have insurance more to make up for the fact that we’re not collecting from this very large percentage of patients. Here in Central Texas, particularly the Killeen, Harker Heights, Copperas Cove market, we have a large number of young adults that often go uninsured, that fall into those gaps. ‘Hey I’m healthy. I don’t need coverage.’ So, they just choose not to. We see a lot of that,” he said.

Another Killeen resident waiting outside free clinic who is going to be 51 this year said Medicaid doesn’t cover well woman care because of her age.

When attempting to sign up for the Affordable Care Act, she said she couldn’t afford the $300 price she saw.

She said if it weren’t for places like the Greater Killeen Free Clinic, she doesn’t know what she would do.

“I’m going to try donating to the clinic,” she said. “Because people need it.”

Herald staff writer Clay Thorp contributed to this report.