How do you find a rock-star physician who has a gentle bedside manner, fantastic surgical skills and great patient outcomes? Most patients rely on word of mouth and the recommendations of family and friends.

Hospital for Special Surgery (HSS) in New York, one of the top ranked hospitals for orthopedics and rheumatology in the country by U.S. News & World Report, has decided to make it easier for potential patients to read first-hand recommendations from other patients who have experienced a similar condition or injury. The online forum, Back in the Game, launched earlier this month and already features more than 400 patient stories that patients can search by condition or treatment, doctor, patient name or location.

In an exclusive interview with FierceHealthcare, John Englehart, vice president and chief marketing officer for HSS, talks about the organization's patient engagement initiative--which snowballed into what he believes is the largest public online forum of orthopedic and rheumatological patient stories that currently exists.

Next to each patient's story is a photo and contact information of the physician who treated the patient with a link to schedule an online appointment, as well as an opportunity to share the patient's story via Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, Google or email.

"The essence of it, from the hospital standpoint, is to make affinity visible and provide a real service to potential future patients or those considering care so they can hear directly from patients they can relate to," says Englehart, pictured right.

Patient Juli-Anne Sabino of Garden City, New York, is one of hundreds of patients who agreed to share her story. She writes that she sought help from a surgeon for a labrum tear repair, a fairly new surgery, after she fell over a turtle while running in the park one morning and standard treatment offered no relief. She found Brian T. Kelly, M.D., an orthopedic surgeon at HSS, and says the surgery changed her life. What's more, she was back running three months later.

"Although Dr. Kelly treats professional athletes, Olympians and high level college athletes, he treated me like I was the only patient he had," she writes, adding later that the doctors at the hospital are the "Bruce Springsteen of doctors."