Rev. Susan Guy (Photo: Provided)

When I was ordained more than 21 years ago, climate change was not an issue that was even remotely on my mind. Throughout my years of ministry in local churches and as an organizer, there was one key issue that occupied my heart and mind, and which led me to specific acts of charity and justice. That issue was hunger.

I encouraged the congregations I served to engage in local hunger ministries, such as support for food pantries and feeding programs. I encouraged participation in community gardens. I encouraged support for global relief efforts to alleviate hunger and poverty. I advocated for federal budget dollars to be directed to anti-poverty and hunger efforts both domestically and globally.

And then I learned about climate change. I remember reading an article on the geo-politics of food that connected the dots for me between the loss of crops (due to heat waves and wildfires caused by drought) and rising temperatures, the resulting food shortages in the Middle East and the rise of conflict in that region. The realization that hit me was that if I care about hunger, I need to care about climate change.

Climate change is a threat multiplier for so many issues about which people of faith care deeply: not only hunger, but clean water, refugees and immigrants, poverty, disaster relief efforts, and issues of war and peace.

It's also an issue that disproportionately affects the most vulnerable among us — the poor, the sick, the disenfranchised, and even our children and future generations, those for whom Jesus implored his followers to care. President Barack Obama, in his State of the Union address, said that "No challenge poses a greater threat to future generations than climate change." I couldn't agree more, especially when we consider all of the ways that climate change exacerbates other global challenges.

The prophet Micah asks the question: "What does the Lord require of you? To do justice and love kindness and walk humbly with your God." (Micah 6:8) Doing justice, loving kindness and walking humbly with God can take many forms, even the form of taking action on climate change.

One thing I have learned in working with people of diverse religious traditions is that we share at least three things in common: a calling to care for Creation, a calling to care for our neighbors both locally and globally, and an abiding hope that by acting together we can find solutions to climate change.

We have seen first-hand how innovation in renewable energy can be a benefit to the economy of our state and create opportunities for good-paying, permanent jobs for Iowa workers. We know that advances in energy efficiency technology create jobs and help lower energy bills for families. And we also know that cutting carbon pollution is a benefit to the health of Iowans, while at the same time lowering the amount of greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to climate change.

We are not powerless. We are powerful beyond our wildest imaginings. Let's use that power for good and work together to create lasting solutions that benefit the Earth and all of its inhabitants.

REV. SUSAN GUY is the Executive Director of Iowa Interfaith Power & Light. Contact: director@iowaipl.org. Visit the Iowa IPL website at www.iowaipl.org.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Jx4KRG