'Cures' struggles in the Senate

CURES’ FACES UPHILL STRUGGLE IN THE SENATE — The HELP Committee is expected to release a draft of its Innovations for Healthier Americans Act in the next few weeks after missing a series of earlier targets in September and October. But it will be flying into a political reality far different from the one that helped speed the 21st Century Cures bill through the House last summer. The debate over drug prices, and complaints from consumer advocates about safety concerns, have fueled Senate Democratic resistance to pharma-friendly provisions that sailed through the House, sweetened by billions in new funding for NIH and FDA.

… HELP ranking member Patty Murray is insisting on mandatory agency funding in the bill, but HELP can’t just tap the Strategic Petroleum Reserve like the House Energy and Commerce Committee did, for reasons of committee jurisdiction. “You have a House bill that has many negative aspects from a public health point of view and has one big positive aspect — a lot of additional money for NIH,” said Diana Zuckerman, president of the National Center of Health Research, and a critic of the Cures bill. “You have a Senate that cannot create that same big pay-for. You can see why it’s not moving that quickly.”

Story Continued Below

… Committee aides are working hard to find money, but lobbyists said straightforward, mandatory Cures-like funding is a long-shot. More likely is a deal that would boost NIH funding through an agreement with appropriators, who on the Senate side have already demonstrated their desire to give NIH $2 billion in a Labor-Health subcommittee bill earlier this year. But no decision has been made. It’s unclear what such a deal would look like or whether it would be enough to bring along reluctant Dems.

… What is clear is that the Senate draft is going be much narrower than Cures, and will be modified through the markup and on the floor, if it makes it that far. Some perks for the drug industry and controversial FDA reforms will not be included. “You’re likely to have a pretty skinny, milquetoast draft package that [Chairman Lamar Alexander] brings with Murray,” one lobbyist told Prescription PULSE, reflecting the sentiments of several interviewed. The full piece here. http://politico.pro/1jJ7UMD

PUSH FOR NIH FUNDING REVIVAL MEETS DYSFUNCTIONAL CONGRESS — A summer of love for the NIH has quickly faded. “We’re in a pause right, now,” Kansas Republican Rep. Kevin Yoder said of his effort to ramp up NIH funding. The enthusiasm to help NIH out of a long drought — 12 years of flat funding — is still there, NIH Director Francis Collins told POLITICO. But first Congress must tackle a host of other issues, leaving his agency facing more uncertainty than in the summer. In addition to the drama around picking a new House speaker, lawmakers must address the looming debt ceiling deadline and try to strike a budget deal that lifts strict spending caps. Meanwhile, the government is operating on a temporary spending bill that is slowing key NIH projects like work on Alzheimer’s, a universal flu vaccine and an HIV vaccine, Collins said. Sarah’s story

… As NIH advocates rein in their expectations, they point to a few new glimmers of hope. Vice President Joe Biden’s decision to not run for president is a “plus for NIH,” said Pat White, president of Act for NIH and former associate director for legislative policy and analysis at NIH under Collins. The VP has played a critical role in helping cut budget deals before and Biden called for a “moon shot” push in the United States to cure cancer in his speech last week announcing he would not enter the race. He plans to use his last months in office to accomplish this goal. “I can’t think of a better use of political clout and personal prestige,” White said. “A powerful new actor has taken the stage here."

Happy Monday and welcome to Prescription PULSE, where this week marks the 101st birthday of Jonas Salk, who developed the first polio vaccine and later founded the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif. A bit of Salk trivia: His second marriage was to Francoise Gilot, an artist and former mistress of Pablo Picasso. Salk died in 1995. http://bit.ly/1GvDFTj

** A message from Healthcare Education Project: Everyday millions of Americans rely on hospitals to survive. But with $121 billion in cuts in the past five years, many hospitals are fighting for survival. Now Washington is threatening more cuts. Tell Washington to protect our hospitals, so they can continue to protect us. No more hospital cuts. Visit: NoMoreHospitalCuts.com **

CMS TO RELEASE FINAL RULE ON BIOSIMILAR PAYMENT THIS WEEK — Will the agency bend to the will of biosimilar companies and a slew of lawmakers who have protested CMS’s proposal for reimbursing biosimilars? We should know this week (or next Monday at the absolute latest) as CMS has to release the final 2016 physician payment rule, which includes its proposal for reimbursing biosimilars under part B. CMS has proposed giving all biosimilars that reference the same biologic product the same reimbursement code — meaning all those drugs will be reimbursed at the same rate. Biosimilar companies say this is contrary to the legislative history of the Affordable Care Act, which established the biosimilar pathway. They also argue the reimbursement policy could discourage companies from investing in the field and may create safety issues by making the drugs harder to track. Senate Finance Committee Chair Orrin Hatch was the latest lawmaker to join the industry in pushing CMS to reverse course last week: http://politico.pro/1W97Q4y

DRUG INDUSTRY READYING PRICING DEFENSE — The pharmaceutical industry is preparing a “thoughtful presentation,” on the industry’s perspective on the value of innovative drugs. That's according to Biogen CEO George Scangos, who is next in line to chair PhRMA’s board, on the company’s quarterly earnings call last week, according to UBS financial analyst Matthew Roden. Eli Lilly made a similar statement on its earnings call last week, Evercore ISI financial analyst Mark Schoenebaum noted. And PhRMA is planning to sit down with reporters this week to discuss the cost and value of drugs and barriers to patient access.

… Meanwhile PhRMA is making it clear it doesn’t represent drug companies like Turing and Valeant, which have added to the PR woes for the industry by engaging in exponential price hikes of older meds. “Valeant Pharmaceutical’s strategy is more reflective of a hedge fund than an innovative biopharmaceutical company,” PhRMA spokesperson Robert Zikelbach wrote in a blog post: http://onphr.ma/1MGYqIy.

… Valeant is addressing accusations made against the company last week that it was using specialty pharmacies to store its drugs and record its transactions as sales. The situation put the entire industry under the microscope with many companies issuing statements about their relationship with specialty pharmacies.

HOUSE PANEL TO LOOK AT LDT PROPOSAL — The Energy and Commerce Committee holds a hearing Thursday on a proposal to create a separate unit inside FDA that would deal with most lab developed tests, rather than putting them through the traditional medical device approval process, as FDA proposed in draft guidance last year. GOP lawmakers on the HELP Committee have also been working on an LDT proposal for months, but lobbyists say FDA and Democrats are not engaged so it’s a long shot for being included in any Cures-Innovations legislation. The E&C proposal: http://1.usa.gov/1RsBh09

UPDATES IN FDA FIRST AMENDMENT BATTLES COMING — Amarin and the FDA have until Friday to advise the U.S. District Court of the Southern District of New York as to the next steps in their free speech fight over a closely watched pharma issue: off-labeling marketing. The parties have been trying to work out a settlement after Amarin won a preliminary victory this summer allowing it to begin marketing its prescription fish oil pill for uses not approved by the FDA without fear of government prosecution — assuming it engages in truthful and non-misleading speech. Late last week FDA and Pacira Pharmaceuticals also moved to try and reach a settlement in a case being reviewed by the same court. Pacira alleges FDA violated its First Amendment rights by restricting its exchange of truthful and non-misleading information regarding its postsurgical pain drug Exparel. PhRMA and The Medical Information Working Group, a collation of a number of big pharma companies, have filed amicus briefs in support of Pacira. PhRMA’s brief: http://bit.ly/1jZ2Rax MIWG’s brief: http://bit.ly/1kA7cl2

TUFTS CALLS FOR MEDICARE DRUG NEGOTIATIONS — The outgoing CEO of Tufts Health Plan, which operates in Massachusetts and Rhode Island, is calling for more transparency from pharmaceutical companies on their R&D costs and for empowering Medicare to negotiate lower drugs prices. James Roosevelt Jr. wrote in an op-ed that despite costly treatments for cancer and hepatitis C, it’s the price hikes for older drugs that are “the major factor” driving rising health care costs. PhRMA flagged the column to reporters as an example of insurers arguing for price controls, which AHIP has avoided. Government negotiations are currently forbidden under Medicare Part D and allowing them would cause a major overhaul of that market. Tufts is an AHIP member. The op-ed for the Boston Business Journal: http://bit.ly/203Pwie

... AHIP spokesperson Clare Krusing said the trade organization continues to opposes price controls but does believe "transparency around drug pricing is an important first step towards a solution that will benefit patients and the health system."

DOJ’S PHARMA ENFORCEMENT FOCUS — The Justice Department has a renewed commitment to ensuring individuals who engage in fraud and wrong-doing are held accountable, the DOJ’s Benjamin Mizer, told the Pharmaceutical Compliance Congress last week. If a company wants credit for cooperation,it has to identify all individuals involved in the wrongdoing regardless of their positions in the company. That will apply to both criminal and civil investigations.

… Pharma companies should also expect more government use of health care data to identify trends and outliers in charging practices and reimbursement. And Mizer, the principal deputy assistant attorney general for the civil division, said Justice is focusing on how scientific information is presented in the sales and marketing of medical products. The government is increasingly encountering instances where companies fail to present risk and benefits in a fair and balanced manner, he said. Mizer’s full remarks: http://1.usa.gov/1OMq258

PERSONNEL UPDATES: FDA AND NORD — Jonathan Jarrow will transition from FDA’s acting director of the Office of Medical Policy to the Office of the Center Director today, FDA’s drug center director Janet Woodcock told agency staff Thursday. He can’t hold the Office of Medical Policy position due to conflict of interest issues with his spouse’s employment. Denise Hinton, OMP’s current deputy director, will take over as acting director. Woodcock credited Jarrow with playing a vital role in advancing initiatives related to antibacterial drug development, expanded access, drug labeling, and first amendment challenges and drug promotion during his time directing the Office of Medical Policy.

… The National Organization for Rare Disorders hired Catherine Blansfield as vice president of patient services and Lisa Terrizzi as general counsel. Blansfield, a nurse, is currently overseeing the launch of NORDs Patient Referral Portal, which connects patients with medication. Terrizzi joins from Harvard, where she oversaw a labor and employment compliance project. The announcement: http://bit.ly/1MzLZyf

HOUSE VOTES TO REPEAL MEDICAL DEVICE TAX — For the fifth time, the House voted Friday to do away with the tax and for the first time, it might actually get to the president’s desk. That’s if the Senate approves the reconciliation bill that strikes down some key Obamacare mandates along with the excise tax on medical device sales. Three GOP senators – Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz and Mike Lee – already said they won’t support it, however, after Heritage Action opposed it for not going far enough. If any moderate Republicans defect over the language striking at Planned Parenthood, it may be back to the drawing board for Hill Republicans. President Barack Obama will veto it if it makes it through.

CRUZ CALLS FOR FDA OVERHAUL — GOP presidential contender Ted Cruz weighed into the drug price debate last week. Sort of. He offered an overhaul of the FDA as an alternative to Democratic candidate's proposals for “price controls.” In a National Review column, he wrote that the agency “stifles new treatments, operates with decades-old methodology, and discourages scientific development.” Cruz previewed a bill he plans to introduce that would allow for reciprocal drug approvals for medicines already approved in other countries and generally make the agency more “accountable to Congress … so that the FDA’s risk-averse approach does not stand in the way of medical advances.” The column: http://bit.ly/1NrITiP

QUICK HITS

— U.S and EU negotiators on a transatlantic trade pact made progress on pharmaceutical issues including mutual recognition of drugs and medical devices, our EU PRO health team reported Friday. They aim to avoid duplicative inspections of medical products and also want to facilitate increased generic drug use.

— 23andMe and FDA are all made up now: the direct-to-consumer genetic testing service re-launched its personal genome offering last week, with FDA approval for a suite of tests focused on the “carrier status” of its users, our eHealth colleagues wrote. With these tests, a user can assess the risk of passing on an inherited genetic disease to his or her children.

— Hedge fund manager Kyle Bass was unsuccessful in using the PTO’s inter partes review process to challenge a patent covering AbbVie’s cancer drug Imbruvica, BioCentury reports. http://bit.ly/1GmO047

— Millennium Health will pay $256 million to settle DOJ allegations that it violated the False Claims Act by billing for unnecessary drug and genetic testing and for providing free supplies to doctors who agreed to refer testing business to the company. http://1.usa.gov/1GiID63

CATCHING OUR ATTENTION: AMGEN HELPS DEFER DRUG COSTS IN EXCHANGE FOR PATIENT DATA – Amgen will provide patients with financial assistance to pay for its costly new cholesterol drug Repatha, but it comes at a different cost. Patients have to surrender their rights to their personal information, including health information, to the company. The agreement allows Amgen and third parties to use the data for 10 years, Larry Husten writes on his Cardio Brief blog: http://bit.ly/1NrQwpt

** A message from Healthcare Education Project: Everyday millions of Americans rely on hospitals to survive. But with $121 billion in hospital cuts in the past five years, many hospitals are fighting for their survival. Now Washington is threatening more cuts. These cuts drastically reduce the money hospitals need to train tomorrow’s doctors. In fact, by the time today’s newborns are 10 years old, experts predict a shortage of 90,000 doctors—which makes for a national health crisis. We must tell Washington to protect our hospitals, so they can continue to protect us. No more hospital cuts. Visit: NoMoreHospitalCuts.com . **

** A message from The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association: PBMs are projected to save employers, unions, government programs, and consumers $654 billion - up to 30 percent - on drug benefit costs over the next decade. PBMs reduce drug costs by: · Offering Amazon-style home delivery of medications and creating select networks of more affordable pharmacies; · Encouraging the use of generics and more affordable brand medications; · Negotiating rebates from drug manufacturers and discounts from drugstores; · Managing high-cost specialty medications; and · Reducing waste and improving adherence. Learn more at: http://thatswhatpbmsdo.com **