Guard towers loom over the administrative maximum security facility, the highest security area at the Federal Prison in Florence, Colo. Is Congress ready to reform a criminal justice system that has produced mass incarceration? ( Not Provided / Denver Post )

In 1977, I was preparing to enter first grade at my (mostly white) neighborhood school. And then, my birthday appeared on a list — I was being "force bused" across town for school integration. My new school was named for Toussaint L'Ouverture, the black liberator of Haiti. Our school song went this way:

The ink is black, the page is white.

Together we learn to read and write.

A child is black, a child is white.

Together we learn to see the light.

At age six, I had no idea of the significance of these details. What I did know with utter certainty was that my black friends and I were equal in every way. We lived in the same country and had the same opportunities.

I've spent the past 25 years being educated by my friends of color that nothing could be further from the truth. As a white person, I could live in the illusion of racial equality that they all knew was false through their day-to-day experiences. More recently, I've come to understand that the war on drugs and the mass incarceration that has resulted from it are major ways in which racial inequality has been entrenched and institutionalized in our country.

Advertisement

The United States has the highest incarceration rate and prison population in the world. We hold 5 percent of the world's population, yet house 25 percent of those imprisoned worldwide, more than 2 million people. In the past 30 years, our prison population has increased by 500 percent, mostly due to mandatory minimum drug sentences. Just 3 percent of federal inmates are imprisoned for murder, assault, or kidnapping, while half of federal inmates are serving time for drug offenses. Nationally, we spend $80 billion a year to incarcerate people, and the federal prison system eats up a quarter of the Department of Justice budget.

In addition to its huge price tag, this system is also incredibly ineffective. One in 2.3 inmates returns to prison within three years of release. Our system is mostly focused on putting people in prison, not on preventing crime and reducing recidivism. This system of decades-long incarceration for non-violent drug crimes doesn't make us any safer and to make matters worse, it tears apart families and entire communities.

People of color are disproportionately affected by this system. One in three African-American men and one in six Latino men born today will be imprisoned, while the rate for white men is one in 17. While white and black people use drugs at similar rates, African-Americans are far more likely to go to prison for drug-related offenses. For perspective, more black men are imprisoned in the U.S. today than were enslaved in 1850. And, instead of being truly free after they serve their time, released inmates are marginalized by barriers to getting housing, jobs, health care, and education, and in many states, by the inability to vote.

I am happy that the Colorado legislature is working on several bills to start reversing the unjust laws passed over the last few decades. And, I'm especially heartened that in this age of extreme congressional dysfunction, that there is a strongly bipartisan effort in Congress to dismantle this costly, ineffective system. Sen. Charles Grassley (R-Iowa), chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, has put together a powerful, bipartisan coalition of senators to support the Sentencing Reform and Corrections Act (S. 2123). The House Judiciary Committee has passed similar legislation, the Sentencing Reform Act (H.R. 3713) and the Recidivism Risk Reduction Act (H.R. 759). Passing these bills is the first, best step in reducing mandatory minimums, restoring judicial discretion in sentencing, reducing recidivism, and shrinking the prison population.

I support these efforts by the legislature and Congress, because it is a concrete way that I can help bring about the country that my 6-year-old self believed she lived in — one with equality and justice for all. I am grateful to Rep. Jared Polis for co-sponsoring the House legislation. I hope that Sens. Michael Bennet and Cory Gardner will co-sponsor the Senate legislation and that all three will urge leadership to bring these bills to a vote soon, so that we can begin to dismantle this expensive, ineffective, and destructive system of mass incarceration that has only exacerbated many of our country's worst problems.

Sara Avery lives in Lafayette.