AMA President Ardis Dee Hoven on changes in America's health care system

While the American Medical Association has its laundry list of things it wants to change in the American health care system — medical malpractice reform, fixing Medicare physician reimbursement and cutting unnecessary regulations — Ardis Dee Hoven, M.D., the AMA’s outgoing president, said she wants to focus people’s attention on three main areas during the next year.

In a recent interview with Crain’s at the Detroit Athletic Club, the internist from Lexington, Ky., said the AMA’s top priorities are accelerating change in medical education to teach more young physicians about practice management issues, improving patient health outcomes for diabetes and cardiovascular disease, and making sure physician practices are sustainable for the future.

Hoven, who became AMA president in June 2013, also talked about the recent Medicare billing dump on doctors, the Affordable Care Act’s impact on physicians and the trend of nurses seeking more independent practice opportunities.

“The gaps in medical education have been apparent” for years, said Hoven, who was in Detroit earlier this month visiting the Wayne County Medical Society of Southeast Michigan and Mohammed Arsiwala, M.D., its immediate past president.

“There isn’t an understanding of business models and how to practice in outpatient settings,” as the majority of medical residents are still trained in acute-care hospitals, Hoven said.

To stimulate progress in medical education, the AMA’s Accelerating Change in Medical Education initiative has enlisted the University of Michigan Medical School and 10 other medical schools to develop ideas and recommendations on performance improvement, team-based care, population health, chronic health management and community.

Over the next five years, the AMA will work with the medical schools to identify best models to change medical school education, Hoven said.

“We have made progress already, but do medical students really need to wait two years to touch a patient?” she said.

Traditionally, the first two years of medical school education are spent mostly in the classroom on didactic medical teaching. Medical students begin rotations in clinical areas, including hospitals, private practices, clinics and nursing homes, during their third and fourth years.

Jack Billi, M.D., associate vice president for medical affairs at the University of Michigan Health System in Ann Arbor, said some medical schools, like Michigan’s, have changed their curriculums to add patient-care experiences in the first two years.

Billi said patient contact includes learning physical diagnosis and a concept known as the family-centered experience. Using family volunteers, students learn to see patients as whole persons and how various illnesses affect their daily lives.

Shortage of doctors needs a federal solution

Hoven said another problem the AMA has recognized is the 17-year freeze on Medicare payments for resident training at teaching hospitals.

“We are supporting a bill (Resident Shortage Act) in Congress to add 15,000 slots over the next five years,” she said. “We not only want to open up slots, but we want to look at alternative ways to pay for residency training.”

Hoven said some teaching hospitals and states currently pay to expand residency slots to meet patient demand. She said insurance companies could chip in more, as well.

Despite predictions that the U.S. by 2025 will face a shortage of more than 100,000 physicians, including up to 8,000 in Michigan, Congress has not lifted the cap on Medicare-funded residency slots since 1997.

Arsiwala, who also is president of Michigan Urgent Care Centers in Livonia, said a good thing is that Michigan has increased the number of medical schools to train students.

“But graduate medical education (residency) slots have decreased, so the students graduating from our medical schools are doing their residency outside the state, and most of them don’t return,” Arsiwala said.

Practice sustainability threatened by regulations, growing practice costs

While the AMA supported the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Hoven said the rollout of the law hasn’t helped physicians manage the financial side of their practices.

“We are getting killed with regulations” from government and private insurers, Hoven said. “The more regulatory burden the government and insurers put on physicians in practice, the more difficult it gets” to financially sustain practices.

Last year, the AMA funded a study conducted by the Rand Corp. that showed doctors were unhappy whenever things interfered with their delivering high-quality care to their patients, Billi said.

“They were very concerned that new electronic health records took too much time away from their focus on the patient,” said Billi, who is on the board of the Michigan State Medical Society and also chairs the society’s committee on quality.

The Rand study on physician satisfaction showed that EHRs, long hours, loss of ability to practice as they think best for the patient, rigid schedules, and bureaucratic rules from their practice leaders, including hospitals, are other causes of burnout, Billi said.

One of the unintended consequences of Obamacare, said Hoven, is the resurgence of the limited, or narrow, provider networks in state and federal health insurance exchanges.

To cut costs, health insurers have created health plan products with hospitals and physicians that have agreed to lower prices in exchange for expected higher volumes.

“Narrow networks or tiered networks are not being done for quality purposes,” Hoven said. “It is for cost reasons. Access to specialists (and specialty hospitals) is getting difficult. We are seeing that.”

Another way to ensure practice sustainability is to offer patients a variety of care and treatment options at the doctor’s office, including a comprehensive team-based approach.

Hoven said the AMA supports “physician-led health care teams” that include nurses, pharmacists and other health care providers to improve patient outcomes.

Billi said the team works to manage the needs of the patient.

“The nurse might do care coordination for a complex patient seeing multiple physicians, and the pharmacist might help a diabetic patient with his/her medications,” Billi said.

Hoven said: “Patients have been getting care, but it is often at the wrong time and at the wrong place.” Too many patients still use the hospital emergency department as their primary care delivery site, she said.

When asked if Hoven believes advanced-practice nurses should be granted more independence to improve patient access, as many in Michigan have been trying through the legislative process, the AMA president said she has been unimpressed.

She said expanding the independence of advanced-practice nurses and other allied health providers has not solved primary care access issues, improved health outcomes or lowered costs.

“We have demographic studies that show these facts,” she said, noting a report that showed little difference in Michigan between where physicians and nurses are located.

In a similar study, Hoven said a 2013 Robert Graham Center for Policy Studies report showed that the geographic distribution of nurse practitioners and physician assistants is similar to that of physicians.

The AMA and state medical societies, including the Michigan State Medical Society, has consistently opposed expanding nurses’ scope of practice to give them more independence.

Last year, Senate Bill 2 in Michigan, narrowly approved in the Senate, would have allowed for the licensure of advanced practice registered nurses. The House never took up the issue.

The bill would have allowed advanced-practice registered nurses to diagnose and treat patients, and prescribe certain drugs, without physician supervision. About 6,500 nurses might have qualified, according to the Michigan Nurses Association.

On advanced-practice nurses providing high-quality care and increased access in underserved areas, the MNA cited research that shows there is “extensive, consistent evidence that nurse practitioners provide care of equal or better quality at a lower cost than comparable services provided by other qualified health professionals.”

Improving care of heart disease and diabetes

Most physicians treat patients who either have heart disease or diabetes at some time in their lives, Hoven said. Together these diseases cost more than $500 billion to treat annually, a number that could be reduced with coordinated and preventive care.

As a result, the AMA has agreed to work with Johns Hopkins University on an initiative to reduce the incidence of hypertension, with a goal of bringing down the blood pressure of more than 10 million Americans by 2017.

The AMA is working with Hopkins’ Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality to find clinical solutions and share best practices.

On diabetes, 33 percent of Americans have pre-diabetes symptoms, but only 11 percent are aware they might develop the disease.

Hoven said the AMA is trying to increase educational efforts in communities by encouraging physicians to increase primary care diabetic screenings.

As a primary care physician, Arsiwala said he is encouraged that the Accountable Care Act places a focus on health care outcomes, encouraging improved care of such chronic diseases as diabetes, hypertension, heart disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Medicare 'data dump'

In April, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services released Medicare billing data for 2012 on nearly 900,000 physicians. The release, which Hoven called a “data dump,” angered some physicians, including those in leadership positions at the AMA.

“We believe in data transparency, where appropriate, but this data was not quality, risk-adjusted data,” Hoven said. “Practices were hurt by this release. There was an oncology practice I know that was negotiating a contract with a hospital. When the data was released, that stopped.”

Hoven said the AMA has been working with Medicare to correct many inaccuracies in the data and make it more useful to the public.

“Misinterpretation of the data could hurt some physicians,” she said. “Some physicians with large billing numbers were actually representing their entire practice.”

But Ewa Matuszewski, CEO of Medical Network One, an 800-physician independent practice association, said the data release provides patients with additional information to help them select physicians or create opportunities for conversations about medical care.

“Whether intentionally or not, the public posting of provider claims will also provide Medicare with an additional means of policing itself while also helping achieve The Triple Aim of increased patient satisfaction, reduction in the cost of care and an increase in the quality of care,” Matuszewski said in a letter to Crain’s.

“The Greater Detroit Area Health Council has been posting quality scores of select physician groups for several years, and the knowledge of such postings has certainly driven member groups such as ours to increase quality measures and improve our outcomes,” she said.

While some patient advocates, including Medicare officials, said making Medicare billing information publicly available could alert the public and authorities to the possibility of fraud, Hoven dismissed that potential benefit.

“Medicare (and the Department of Justice) knows who the high physician billers are,” said Hoven, adding that publicizing billing data will not reduce health care fraud.

Hoven said she did not believe publishing billing information on Farid Fata, M.D., an Oakland Township oncologist who was arrested last year for Medicare fraud, would have alerted his patients to report him.

According to the Medicare billing data report, Fata was paid $10 million by Medicare in 2012. He allegedly falsely billed Medicare for more than $35 million.

Fata was one of a small group of physicians who billed Medicare for more than $3 million. Overall, Medicare paid doctors $64 billion in 2012.

In a statement, CMS said one of the goals of the physician billing data release was to reduce fraud, waste and abuse within the Medicare program. Click here to read a variety of comments about the billing data release.

“The department concluded that the data to be released would assist the public’s understanding of Medicare fraud, waste and abuse, as well as shed light on payments to physicians for services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries,” CMS said in a letter to the AMA.

Last week, the nonprofit Health Care Cost Institute announced it is working with UnitedHealthcare, Aetna and Humana on making a health care claims database available to the public in 2015. Other health insurers are expected to join.

Like Medicare’s decision to release physician billing data, health insurers are realizing they have to be more transparent to consumers about payments they make. At least 11 states have mandated creation of all-payer claims databases to share such information, and six other states are developing online systems.

Experts say cost transparency is being spurred by a number of developments in health care. One is the trend toward consumer-driven, high-deductible health plans that transfers risk and medical decision-making to insured patients.

The offering of health plans on federal health insurance exchanges under the Affordable Care Act also requires greater understanding of health care costs by consumers.

“We believe the Medicare data has to provide value to patients. We don’t think raw billing data does that,” Hoven said.

Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene