WASHINGTON -- Lawmakers should consider simplifying the rules for health insurance subsidies if they want more people to apply for coverage under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), a witness said at a House hearing on Wednesday.

Avik Roy, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research, a right-leaning think tank in New York City, told the House Energy & Commerce Health Subcommittee that in order to apply for a subsidy on an ACA health insurance exchange, consumers must first estimate how much income they are going to make in the following year -- something that can be very difficult for part-time or contract employees to do.

"If they have to estimate their income for the next month and they happen to estimate inaccurately, the Treasury Department by law is supposed to go after them; that's an incredibly burdensome system," he said. "This is a serious problem, and the best way to deal with it is through a statutory change that would use the previous year's taxable income as basis for whatever assistance you provide in the following year."

Roy's suggestion was one of many suggested "tweaks" for the ACA made at Wednesday's hearing, which was a change from the House Republicans' usual focus on ACA repeal. That shift wasn't lost on the subcommittee's Democratic members.

"I'm hopeful this is genuine step to getting back to the business of legislating," said Rep. Gene Green (D-Texas), the committee's ranking member.

"When you take a massive bill like this, of course there are going to be problems with it," said Rep. Eliot Engel (D-N.Y.). "You see how the bill works and then you tweak things, you improve things. We should all put our heads together and do some common-sense fixing, not repealing."

Scott Gottlieb, MD, resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, a right-leaning think tank here, suggested that the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) needed to allow for more flexibility in plans' benefit designs. "More flexibility would allow [more] options like value-based insurance design," in which, for instance, patients can get access to medications for chronic illnesses with little or no co-pay.

In addition, Gottlieb said, lawmakers should "contemplate policies that offer incentives for new [health insurance] plan formation ... There has been no new net plan formation since 2008" -- a problem Gottlieb said was due to caps placed on plans' operating margins, including the ACA's medical loss ratio requirement.

"On the provider side, we need to consider policies to create alternatives to consolidating physicians around single hospitals. Healthcare reform should be aimed at increasing choice and competition."

Sabrina Corlette, JD, of the Center on Health Insurance Reforms at Georgetown University here, said states should be given more incentives to expand their Medicaid programs. "Congress should adopt the president's proposal to allow any state that expands Medicaid to receive a 100% match for the first 3 years."

She also pushed for spending more money on getting people to enroll in marketplace plans. "A relatively small investment in funds could ensure that more people are enrolled in coverage that's right for them. And make the plan shopping experience as easy as possible."

Rep. Leonard Lance (R-N.J.) was concerned that a recent study found only one-third of exchange participants kept their plan year to year. "I think that reveals significant market instability," he said.

Roy responded that while shopping around is "quite natural," it would be good if insurers were permitted to offer longer-term insurance contracts -- say, for 5 years instead of just 1 year.

"The insurance company doesn't reap the economic reward from making you healthy long-term if you're switching plans year over year," he said. "It would be nice for there to be an option in the individual market for people to shop with plans for longer time horizons, so the plans could say, "If you sign up with me for 5 years, your insurance will cost 20% less, but we will be able to work together to make sure you stay healthy in the long run."

Corlette said she thought the focus should be on changing the healthcare delivery system. "The average premium for an employer-based [family] plan is in the neighborhood of $17,000 a year ... The federal government can't pick up that entire tab," she said. "The key is to get at what's driving $17,000 cost for a family policy ... and that goes to fact that we have an inefficient delivery system, spending 30% of the healthcare gross domestic product GDP on wasteful and unnecessary care. My proposals ... would really target the delivery system and the way we pay for delivery of healthcare services."

Roy and Gottlieb both spoke in favor of using tax credits. "Congress should put patients back in charge of their healthcare dollars wherever possible," said Roy. "The ACA should replace its convoluted subsidy system with transparent ... tax credits," and encourage the use of health savings accounts.

But Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D-Ill.) didn't like that idea. "This idea that if only people had more control [is ridiculous] ... People can't afford the healthcare that they need," Schakowsky said, adding that one reason premiums are too high is that the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) currently only has the ability to review insurer rate increase requests, but can't deny them. Schakowsky has introduced H.R. 3727, the Health Insurance Rate Review Act, which would allow the HHS secretary to deny rate increases at his or her discretion.