Would you like to know how much GlaxoSmithKline spent on food for doctors? Or what Pfizer paid for physicians to travel to meetings and other destinations? How about the amount of money that Johnson & Johnson shelled out for doctors to give promotional talks?

Well, thanks to this new interactive graphic, you can locate some of this hard-to-find data that is stored in the Open Payments database, which was launched last week by the federal government in order to provide insights into the financial relationships between industry and health care providers.

The database was created in response to growing concerns that payments by drug and device makers to physicians and teaching hospitals may unduly influence medical practice and research. But the initiative has been marred by glitches and, in particular, a rather poor design.

So we’re trying to simplify the process for you, or at least some of it. By going to this link, you can find a breakdown of some of the payments made by drug and device makers during the final five months of last year, which is the only data made available so far by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

By doing so, you can find what was spent by 1,035 companies that submitted data to CMS as required by the Sunshine ACt provision of the Affordable Care Act. There are some caveats, however, which you should keep in mind as you hunt and peck.

For instance, our Medical Money tool includes payments totaling approximately $2.5 billion, not the $3.5 billion that CMS posted last week. The difference represents a separate database that the agency created for collecting data on financial ownership in companies, such as stock.

Moreover, this tool does not allow you to search by physician. Why? CMS has acknowledged $1.1 billion in transactions were not included in its database, mostly because numerous physicians disputed reports and these remain unresolved. So we will look to update the tool as that situation gets rectified.

Another issue is that our tool did not group transactions reported by a parent company and its subsidiaries into one easy-to-find figure, because the CMS database did not do so and teasing out the information is not so easy. Instead, there are multiple listings for a company and its various entities.

Here is one such example: the company that reported the smallest payment made – just $22 – was BD Rx. However, this is actually a subsidiary of Becton Dickinson, the device maker, which paid nearly $3.8 million, mostly for research and royalties.

Despite these limitations, we hope you find the tool useful. For the first time, a wealth of payment information is available and, until CMS reworks its own website, we believe this tool should make it possible to gain some insights into what drug and device makers do with some of their money.