Robert Mielke (Photo: Photo supplied)

Many have asked why I want to be our next mayor. The simple answer is: I love Wausau and want it to succeed.

Wausau is at a crossroads and we have an opportunity to use this election to move away from a decade of business as usual and toward exciting new things. We have great potential for growth in jobs and tax base as our economy recovers. Seizing these opportunities will demand leadership and team-building with a professional approach. I bring those skills to the table with the experience I have gained on the City Council and as the president of the council.



Since 2012 I have learned what works and what does not work in local government. The mistakes of the past were rooted in unclear leadership and poor communication. As mayor I will make sure all communications with my management team are clear and that the goals and objectives are met. I will work with the council to set goals and stay on track with them. I will ensure communication with the public is maximized through the increased use of our website and social media. Traditional media and public access television will also be maintained.



Wausau must grow its tax base by creating an environment that attracts new businesses and encourages the expansion of existing ones. This will create employment opportunities for all workforce levels. We can develop new opportunities in multiple areas such as our riverfront and business campus as well as the near west side. This will create great places to live work and play. We will continue fighting drugs and crime in our city by building on our success of controlling blight in our core neighborhoods.



Our city needs to create more positive outcomes. A mayor who promotes Wausau and manages City Hall well can create new positive outcomes and expand upon the successes we have had. I will be that mayor. I can bring people together to solve problems and work toward progress within City Hall and with neighboring communities.

It is a key goal of mine to move Wausau in a positive direction by rebuilding trust between the mayor’s office and the City Council along with communicating with the citizens in an open and transparent way.



Wausau can move forward when local leaders and its citizens work well with the mayor. Help me move the city of Wausau forward so it can continue to be a great place to live and work.

I ask for your vote on April 5.

Robert Mielke is a candidate for Wausau mayor. His website is www.mielkeformayor.com.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1pvWhvv