SAN FRANCISCO — The baseball beat found me.

I wanted to work at The Denver Post since I was in middle school, but didn’t set out to write about the national pastime. Failed attempts to reach The Post left me flexible. In 2002, the Rockies beat opened.

I wanted the job badly.

I wasn’t the favorite candidate.

As is often the case, life requires help. An editor put in a good word. Former Denver Post sportswriter Adam Schefter telling the bigwigs that I wrote the Dante Bichette-to-the-Reds trade story from a wedding reception (not my own) didn’t hurt either.

I landed the job. And I acquired a mentor in national baseball writer Mike Klis. He was terrific. Mike told me to think in terms of covering baseball for a decade. This was during the Denver newspaper war, when seasons aged reporters in dog years. They do now as well, but for different reasons: blog posts, Twitter, Touts, earlier deadlines.

I had no idea what I was getting into in 2002. After my first spring training, which featured frequent verbal sparring matches with management and getting screamed at by then-Rockies manager Buddy Bell, I was exhausted. Then came the season. Bell, a good man who was miserable because of a bad back and a rift with management, was fired a few weeks later.

The journey had begun. Twelve seasons and change. Two playoff berths. Todd and the Toddlers. Tulo, Holliday, CarGo, Ubaldo, Giambi and a cast of hundreds. I learned on the job from readers, owners, front-office executives, media-relations staffers and scouts. I received a doctorate from coaches and players. I love writing about baseball because of the pace, and the absolutes the sport creates. I never thought I would cover another sport.

That day has arrived.

I am leaving the Rockies beat and joining Klis as a Broncos beat writer, effective Monday. We should complement each other well, because I have an incurable social-media addiction. Patrick Saunders and Nick Groke will lead the Rockies coverage in The Post. Direct all complaints about the team and your fantasy team to them.

Was this my choice? Yes.

I have written a lot of baseball, including three books — among them is “Magical Season,” about the Rockies’ rocket-fueled ride to the 2007 World Series. I achieved Marriott platinum status for life. What is left to accomplish? (I kid, because I care.)

I sought a new challenge, and cover- ing the Seattle Seahawks as part of The Post’s Super Bowl XLVIII coverage opened my eyes to this possibility. I covered the Broncos extensively during their Super Bowl title seasons in 1997 and 1998, so this isn’t totally unfamiliar territory.

Football brings something new, both in schedule (16 games, compared with 162) and travel. Last month, my wife showed me a sign from a novelty shop that read: “This Marriage Interrupted for Baseball Season.” It’s a relentless beat.

The NFL is wildly popular, and in few places is it so loved as in Denver. I will do my best to make you think, make you smile, make you mad and, hopefully, make you read.

The move to football, ironically, is connected to my passion for baseball. Switching to the Broncos frees up my schedule in the summer, allowing me to follow my sons as they play on diamonds across Colorado and the country. I am ready to watch as a father, not a writer. Plus, they know football personnel better. (Thank you, Madden.) I can learn from them. They love that idea.

So it’s time for an audible — no, not Omaha — and the next chapter.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck