Shoppers look for the perfect holiday gifts for family, friends.

Ruth Ann Krug and daughter Karen Murray shop for bargains during the Black Friday event Friday morning at Alco. ( Katherine Garcia / Special to the Daily Record )

This year's holiday shoppers have been scooping up early deals left and right during Black Friday. Main stores including Hastings, Walmart and Alco have pulled out all the stops to kick off this year's holiday spending spree.

Hastings has arranged five major sales over the course of the weekend, starting Thanksgiving evening from 7 p.m. to midnight, picked up again Friday morning at 6 a.m. until noon, extending from 6 p.m. Friday until close and finishing off with an all-day sale today.

"I'm browsing for great deals on DVDs especially, this is usually when I stock up on my favorite movies for the year" said Keelan Nemick, a Hastings shopper.

Parents intent on finding the perfect gift have taken advantage of deals on everything from electronics and toys, to pajamas and coats.

"My daughter is six, and she loves the movie 'Frozen.' She has to have Elsa everything — bedspread, clothes, toys, you name it. Black Friday is a great way for me to find gifts I know she'll love at affordable prices, even if it means getting up early. It's worth it Christmas morning" said Walmart shopper Cassidy Bailey.

Black Friday is also a great time for shoppers who have already found the perfect gifts for their loved ones to pick up some extra stocking stuffers.

"I've purchased all the big stuff already" said Walmart shopper Marriah Peffers. "I'm just getting extras for under the tree today before work."

With doors closing soon after the holidays, Alco's "everything must go" attitude has drawn shoppers looking for low prices and great products.

Advertisement

"I've only been with Alco for three months, but it's still sad to see the store go" said Alco employee Beverly Eaks. "This is Alco's last holiday hurrah."

First time Black Friday shoppers like Marla Lopez are also enjoying getting the jump on gift buying.

"This is my first time holiday shopping during Black Friday. My husband got off work and said 'OK, let's go!,'" she said. "It's not as hectic as I thought it would be, it's pretty good."

Black Friday shopping is also a great way for families to bond while picking up gifts for each other.

"Black Friday shopping is a big occasion in our household," said Mary Ann Garcia. "By buying locally in Cañon as a family, we spend time together while supporting our town."