Lake Loveland trees have been at center of neighborhood dispute

Lake Loveland residents are upset about unexplained damage to these two cottonwood trees, seen Friday, at the southeast side of the lake. The trees could die from the deep gashes cut into the trunks. ( Jenny Sparks )

LOVELAND -- The future of two cottonwood trees at the southeast end of Lake Loveland is unclear after the trees were seriously injured by a recent act of vandalism.

Deep rings have been cut around the trunk of each of the native cottonwoods, located near the boat ramp on the south shore and have provided a popular parking and relaxation spot for years.

"We've been told by a couple of arborists that there is no saving the trees," Lake Loveland Recreation Club President Rob Woodward said.

In the past months, the trees have been the subject of a neighborhood dispute. Ron Brinkman, general manager of the Greeley-Loveland Irrigation Co., said he was contacted last year by the previous owner of the house across the street from the boat ramp with a request to cut the trees down. At that time, Brinkman said he granted permission based on the property owner's claims that the trees were diseased.

That was the last Brinkman heard about it until Brian Schumm purchased the Lake Drive home this summer and began to cut branches off the trees, which resulted in a September confrontation with a neighbor in which police were called and work was halted.

Just before the flooding conditions started around the region last month, Brinkman said he learned that the condition of the trees had been misrepresented to the company.

"I was prepared to contact the new owner and rescind permission, but then the flood started," Brinkman said.

There was no direct communication to Schumm from the Greeley-Loveland Irrigation Ditch Co., but Woodward said a board member did deliver the news personally to Schumm that the company had rescinded permission, and the matter was left amicably.

Advertisement

Schumm declined to comment for this article.

On Oct. 23, Woodward reported the tree damage to the Loveland Police Department.

"Because we don't have any proof of who did the girdling, there's not much they can do," Woodward said.

A question of ownership of the trees has also been raised. They're positioned in a complicated area -- the property is owned by the ditch company within an easement that's owned by the city but which the Lake Loveland Recreation Club also has rights to. City of Loveland spokesman Tom Hacker said Thursday that legal and geographical information staff have determined that the trees are clearly in the area that's owned by the ditch company.

"The city has no role to play," Hacker said.

The ditch company's role is also unclear going forward. Brinkman said Wednesday that he was neutral on the trees themselves and thinks they should have either been cut down completely or left alone.

"I'm not passionate about growing trees along ditches, but this was handled very poorly," he said.

Boyd Ledbeda, district forester for the Colorado State Forest Service Fort Collins district, said there is no real treatment for tree girdling, which is the forestry technique that aims to interrupt the photosynthesis process. But after looking at photographs of the saw-blade width damage and in using the health of the trees as a gauge, Ledbeda is not convinced that the trees are doomed.

"It's a damage and they're injured for sure," he said. "But in my opinion, that damage is not enough to kill them outright right now."

Rob MacDonald, the forestry specialist in the city's Parks and Recreation Department, is more skeptical. While it's possible for a tree to recover from minor girdling, he thinks that in the spring, the trees may begin to show stress and lose branches.

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 516, or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaMaherRH.