4432782

Like two once-great heavyweight fighters from the 1970s stalking the same title belt one last time, Hillary Clinton and Jeb Bush are grabbing headlines as they mull running for the presidential bids of their respective bids.

Conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh is not impressed. He blasted both Bush and Clinton on his program Monday for, in his opinion, agreeing about “leftist control of the Common Core education curriculum.”

“It was long ago on this program, ladies and gentlemen, that I was being a little facetious, but I made the point that when you compare three of the most important issues facing the country today: amnesty for illegal immigrants, the full implementation of Obamacare, and leftist control of the Common Core education curriculum, Jeb Bush and Hillary Clinton are aligned perfectly,” Limbaugh said on his Jan. 12 radio radiocast.

“I said they’d make a hell of a ticket,” the radio giant added. “That between the two of them, they would decide who’d be on top of, of course — uh, who would be the candidate for president, who would be the candidate for vice president. But it was to illustrate a point.”

The Common Core State Standards Initiative is a set of K-12 math and language arts curriculum benchmarks and high-stakes standardized tests that state education bureaucracies was quietly implemented in over 90 percent of the country at one point. Massive public outrage resulted. The standards remain in use in public schools in an ever-dwindling number of states. (RELATED: Bill Gates loves Common Core for your kids, BUT NOT HIS)

No Republican is tied to Common Core in the way Jeb Bush is. The governor, through his leadership of the non-profit Foundation for Excellence in Education, played a notable role in the creation and promotion of the standards and he has stood by them ever since. At an education reform conference in November, his keynote address included a firm defense of the Core, which he said ought to represent “the new minimum” for academic standards in the U.S. (RELATED: Will Common Core Doom Jeb Bush?)

As with many other political issues, Hillary Clinton appears to have her finger still firmly in the air concerning Common Core as she mulls a second run for the Democratic presidential nomination. Should she decide to run, she would likely be forced to take some sort of position.

Follow Eric on Twitter. Like Eric on Facebook. Send education-related story tips to [email protected].