Sioux Falls, SD

The roads in South Dakota can be dangerous for bicyclists. Lawmakers are discussing House Bill 1030, which requires motorists to give a certain amount of space to cyclists as they pass them.

The city of Sioux Falls continues to grow, and so does the number of cyclists on city streets.

"We're seeing cycling growing as business. We've grown tremendously over the last three, four years," owner of Spoke n Sport Chad Pickard says.

A bicycle bill is looking to make those streets safer for cyclists. Chris Parsley, President of the Falls Area Bicyclists, to testify about this bill to both the House and the Senate Transportation Committee. He wanted to make sure the cyclist's voice is heard in Pierre.

"There's a lot of people that make decisions on certain things like this three-foot passing law that might not be avid cyclists," Parsley said.

The bill lawmakers are discussing states that if the speed limit is under 35, you need to give at least three feet of space to a cyclist as you pass them. If the speed limit is over 35, six feet of space is required.

"I think the one message that would be nice to everybody is there's no law anywhere, any country on the planet that says you have the right to unimpeded travel from point a to point b," Parsley said

From 2010 to 2013 in South Dakota, 390 cyclists were injured and three died in collisions with vehicles. Last summer, there was a fatal crash on 49th Street in Sioux Falls. While this bill won't stop all crashes involving bikes, Pickard believes if this bill passes into law, it can make more drivers aware of the cyclists on the road.

"This draw attention to what is safe passing. This particular law is for cyclists and as a cyclist yeah I've been buzzed before," Pickard said

To stay safe, Parsley says it's up to cyclists and motorists to be aware of each other on the streets.

"Just like any other mode of transportation, there's people that don't obey the speed limit and yes there are some cyclists that don't obey the laws," Parsley said.

No matter what law is in place, if people don't follow them, the road can still be a dangerous place.

Parsley says he and three other certified instructors will be holding four classes this summer to help cyclists better understand how to be a part of city traffic in Sioux Falls.

Legislature {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.