The Senate confirmation of Dr. Vivek Murthy has come under fire for some groups and politicians that are concerned about his support of Obamacare, as well as his statements on gun safety.

“Much of [Dr. Murthy’s] work has been devoted to electing the current president and advocating the new health care law," Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn., said in a statement released Monday. "I’d be reluctant to put into the surgeon general’s office someone who would use that as a bully pulpit to promote a law I think is an historic mistake."

But Dr. Georges Benjamin, executive director for the American Public Health Association, says supporting the Affordable Care Act would certainly come under the purview of a surgeon general. "If you're going to work the administration, you're going to support the administration's policies," he says.

The post of surgeon general, or the "nation's doctor," has been vacant since July 2013. It involves leading the Commissioned Corps of the U.S. Public Health Service, a group of 6,800 public health officers across various departments of government, including the National Institutes of Health, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The assignment usually lasts four years, and typically a surgeon general would pick two or three public health issues to tackle, Benjamin says. A surgeon general reports to the assistant secretary for health, Karen DeSalvo, who in turn reports to Sylvia Burwell, the secretary for the Department of Health and Human Services.



Though Murthy has been vocal about gun violence as a public health issue in the past, tweeting about it and signing on to the issue in a letter to Congress, he testified to the Senate in February that if selected as surgeon general he would be focusing on obesity, and said he would not use his position to promote gun control.

[READ: A State-by-State Look at Exchanges As Obamacare Deadline Looms]

Burwell said in a statement that Murthy would be working on "challenges facing our nation's public health." She cited efforts to reduce obesity, lower smoking rates and to keep Americans healthy during the flu season. Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.), who voted in favor of Murthy, cited Ebola efforts as part of his expected role. The White House released a statement confirming he would be involved in the Ebola effort, in addition to stopping new diseases, (which it didn't specify) and "helping our kids grow up healthy and strong."

There still could be some issues regarding gun safety and violence that Murthy chooses to tackle, advocates believe. The American Public Health Association sees gun violence as a public health threat. Last week the World Health Organization released a report on global violence prevention efforts, in which it determined that more could be done to address key risk factors, including gun ownership. "Firearms are highly prevalent in the Region of the Americas and are the predominant weapon used in violent encounters, including intimate partner homicides," the WHO report stated.

Actions to prevent gun violence tend to receive most media attention during mass shootings such as at Sandy Hook Elementary School in 2012, but most recent data from the CDC show that 11,068 people die each year as a result of firearm homicides. "There is no question that firearm-related violence and injury is a public health problem," Benjamin says.

Dan Gross, president of the the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, says he is hopeful that Murthy will look at gun violence issues. "The bottom line is that we now have a surgeon general who clearly looks at the gun violence issue as an issue of public health and public safety," he says, adding that there are ways for pediatricians to address guns in the home in the same way that they would address car safety or swimming pool safety. But that only works in certain places; in Florida, for example, it is illegal for doctors to ask patients whether they keep guns in their home.

[ALSO: Barbara Bush Wants to Help Improve Nutrition Worldwide]

Gun rights advocates are reluctant to portray gun ownership as a health concern. "Given that they are neither gun safety nor firearm storage experts, doctors ought to focus the limited time they spend with their patients focusing on their health and well-being instead of nosing around on private matters that do not concern them or engaging in political debate of a fundamental constitutional right," Andrew Arulanandam, spokesman for the NRA, told U.S. News in an email.

Benjamin says the fundamental service of a surgeon general is to improve the health of the nation. "They have to try to communicate the best science to the public, and have to try to ignore the political forces that would have them go one way or another," he says. Former Surgeon General Dr. C. Evertt Koop, for example, tackled the nation's HIV/AIDS issue when it was largely taboo in the U.S. during the 1980s. Dr. David Satcher, who served as U.S. surgeon general from 1998 to 2002, tackled mental health issues and supported needle exchange programs as a way to prevent HIV transmission among drug users.

"This isn't about banning guns or controlling them, but about starting a reasonable national conversation about health and safety risks," Gross says. "There is a difference between gun control and gun safety, but neither term speaks directly to the term of the goal of preventing gun deaths and injuries."

Murthy, 37, will be the first surgeon general of Indian descent. He received his bachelor's degree from Harvard University, and has both an MD and an MBA from Yale University. He is replacing Dr. Regina Benjamin, who resigned in July 2013 and endorsed Murthy's nomination. Dr. Boris Lushniak was the acting surgeon general in the interim.

Murthy narrowly won the confirmation for the post, with a 51-43 vote. Only one Republican – Sen. Mark Kirk of Illinois – voted in favor of him. Democratic Sens. Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota, Joe Donnelly of Indiana and Joe Manchin of West Virginia voted against the nomination.

[MORE: Most Americans With HIV Aren't Treated]

“After meeting with Dr. Murthy, I don't question his medical qualifications,” Manchin said in a written statement prior to the vote. “I just question whether the public will believe that he can separate his political beliefs from his public health views.”

Murthy's record does indicate support for President Barack Obama and his health care policies. In 2008 Murthy started a group named Doctors for Obama that supported the president. Then in 2009 he formed another group, Doctors for America, which bills itself as a national movement of doctors and medical students who work together to "improve the health of the nation and to ensure that everyone has access to affordable, high quality health care." Among the issues that it tackles, it lists Medicaid expansion, enrollment and "race for coverage" – all of which are staples of the Affordable Care Act.

But his position on gun control may overshadow even his support for Obamacare. "America's next surgeon general should not be a political operative whose professional inexperience has been a source of bipartisan concern," NRA spokesman Arulanandam said in a statement.

Murthy has not yet been sworn in as surgeon general. He currently works as an attending physician at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and as an instructor at Harvard Medical School. In 2007 he founded TrialNetworks, a software start-up company, to help drug developers collect information from clinical trials. In 1995, he founded VISIONS Worldwide, a nonprofit dedicated to AIDS and HIV education in India. Obama had also appointed Murthy in 2011 to the U.S. Presidential Advisory Council on Prevention, Health Promotion, and Integrative and Public Health, which is within the Department of Health and Human Services. The group advises the National Prevention Council on developing strategies and partnerships to advance the nation's health.







Murthy was endorsed for surgeon general by more than 100 health organizations, including the American College of Physicians, the American Heart Association and the American Diabetes Association.

Corrected on Dec. 17, 2014: An earlier version of this story misspelled the name of Karen DeSalvo and incorrectly stated that Dr. Vivek Murthy was the youngest surgeon general in history. John Woodworth and John Hamilton, the first and second surgeons general, were younger.