Batteries have been flying off the shelves at the Family Dollar on DeRenne Avenue on Christmas Day.

WTOC drove around this afternoon looking for open stores and all we had to do was look at parking lots. At this store, there were a lot of people buying last minute gifts.

One customer needed to buy food but since all of the grocery stores were closed they ran to this store to get anything they could, WTOC even ran into someone buying charcoal to put something on the grill in December.

One employee said customers were grateful.

"We’ve been extra, extra busy you know you wouldn’t expect this many people to come in here on Christmas, but I guess people forget things. Plus you know the kids need to open their toys you know they need batteries so that had been a high selling item today,” said Andrea, employee.

Andrea says she also ran into some customers that were shocked they were open.

Many places, like fast food restaurants and grocery stores, closed their doors for the day. But some have welcomed customers with opened arms, like the Huddle House on Abercorn Street. Not only are the open every day the owner said, Christmas is actually their busiest day of the year.

Some customers said they just wanted to get some breakfast, others saying they don’t celebrate Christmas, and for others it is a Christmas tradition to get out of the house after opening gifts to eat at Huddle House or Waffle House, which was also crowded.

“It feels good to support the community that doesn’t have family to go to and visit. And being the only one out here you know were 24 hours every single day not just Christmas, Christmas Eve, New Year’s, New Year’s Eve, so were always here for the community just in case they don’t have a place to go,” said Sam Ali, Huddle House owner.

There are plenty of other stores open on Christmas including pharmacies like Walgreens, Rite Aid, and CVS. The movies are open and there are also plenty of restaurants open until late Christmas night.

Copyright 2015 WTOC. All rights reserved.