Man arrested after trying to sneak knife past checkpoint, authorities say

Authorities say a man tried to sneak this knife past an airport security checkpoint in his underwear (Photo: Courtesy of TSA)

A man was caught at Newark airport with a knife in his underwear.

Monday, a man entered a security checkpoint at Newark Liberty International Airport with a knife among his carry-on items, according to a release from the Transportation Security Administration.

Authorities told him he couldn't bring the knife past the checkpoint. So the man said he’d put it in a checked bag. He returned a short time later, only to be caught with the same knife tucked in his underwear, the release said.

Officers detected the two-bladed pocket knife after the man set off scanning equipment. A TSA officer conducted a pat-down, finding the knife in the man's underwear.

TSA officers notified Port Authority Police who arrested the man, the release said.

Sean M. Curry, 29, Maumelle, Arkansas (Photo: Courtesy of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey)

The man was identified as Sean M. Curry, 29, of Arkansas, according to Joe Pentangelo, spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Curry was charged with unlawful possession of a weapon.

Passengers who arrive at TSA checkpoints with prohibited items are given a choice to put the items in their checked baggage, return the items to their cars, hand them off to someone who isn't traveling, mail the item to their home or destination (when that airport has a mailing center) or to surrender the item to TSA.



Travelers who are unsure whether an item is prohibited past the checkpoint can visit www.tsa.gov.

In the upper right-hand corner site there is a feature called “Can I bring my ___?” Type in the item and it will let you know immediately if the item is allowed in carry-on baggage, checked baggage, either or neither.

Andrew Ford: 732-643-4281; aford3@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1j6l599