Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., leads the polls over all three of her Republican competitors, according to a conservative-commissioned poll released Monday. Manuel Balce Ceneta/AP

Who dat say they gonna beat dat senator? Plenty, apparently.

Louisiana's Senate race has been described by The Washington Post as the contest that “worries Democrats the most” and nearly every ranking of the Senate's most vulnerable incumbents has Sen. Mary Landrieu listed. She’s often lumped together with other red state Democrats like North Carolina Sen. Kay Hagan and Alaska Sen. Mark Begich on the 2014 map. She’s already had millions of dollars in attack ads from outside Republican groups spent against her, and no Democrat has won a statewide race in Louisiana since her 2008 campaign.

She’s definitely in danger. And the Republicans know it.

Thanks to a strong shift in the political winds since 2008, conservatives maintain this race is their best chance in decades to beat Landrieu.

“She’s in trouble,” says Timmy Teepell, a GOP strategist in Louisiana who worked briefly for the Senate campaign of Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-La., widely seen as Landrieu's top opponent. “This is the worst environment that Sen. Landrieu has ever run in. She voted for Obamacare and people don’t like Obamacare.”

The last time Landrieu won re-election, she had the coattails of a history-making presidential election to swing in on. Even though President Barack Obama lost Louisiana by 20 percentage points in 2008, his presence at the top of the ticket mobilized blacks, women and Latinos to get out and vote. In a midterm election like 2014, those key Democratic constituencies have a history of staying home.

Yet, in an election cycle dominated by Republican attacks against Obama's signature health care law and the Democrats who rubber-stamped it, Landrieu has displayed a knack for effectively changing the subject. And while many other Democrats in red states are tied or lagging behind their Republican competition, Landrieu is managing to break away, despite all the political naysayers.

A Republican-leaning poll released Monday found the Louisiana Democrat has a strong lead in a four-way race over all three of her Republican competitors. In the survey, commissioned by a conservative businessman, Landrieu earned 39 percent support, a sizable advantage over Cassidy, who sits at 26 percent. In head-to-head matchups against Cassidy she has not fared as well.

But Landrieu is hoping to wield her new committee chairmanship and an unsettled Republican field to her advantage and surprise her detractors.

It's true that with anti-incumbent sentiment high across the country, lawmakers can no longer bank on a committee chairmanship to have the luster it once did. Yet, there is no denying Landrieu’s new position as chairwoman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee may just make Louisianians think twice before throwing her out.

An offshore oil rig stands in the Gulf of Mexico off the coast of Louisiana. (Greg Lovett/Palm Beach Post/Zuma)

Gavel in hand, Landrieu has a better shot at delivering for her state’s powerful (and growing) energy industry. Louisiana is one of the country’s leading producers of gas and oil. The most recent estimates suggest the industry employs more than 300,000 Louisianans and generates more than $77 billion in state revenue.

“Even people who are not in love with her would acknowledge that she is a ferocious fighter for the state,” says Robert Mann, a journalism professor at Louisiana State University who served as a spokesman for high-profile Louisiana Democrats, including former Sen. John Breaux. “The federal money we got to rebuild the gulf coast after Katrina was, in large part, due to her tenacity.”

In the two months since she’s taken the reins, Landrieu has already used her position to build her brand back home. In a hearing last month, Landrieu pushed to increase exports of liquefied natural gas, a move that would add more than 200,000 jobs in Louisiana.

“New discoveries in oil and gas have fortified our national economy in the last few years, buffering us from an even deeper recession,” she said at the hearing. “Nowhere is this more evident than in my home state of Louisiana and all along the Gulf Coast – America’s energy coast.”

Her position on energy also comes with its share of financial advantages.

Since 2009, Landrieu has collected more than $520,000 from people and political action committees tied directly to oil and natural gas; it’s more than double what her GOP rival Cassidy has tallied. Even Republicans in the state admit the money is sure to continue to pour in on her behalf as the race heats up as they continue to want to stay in the now-powerful senator's good graces.

Her role even gives her a chance to more visibly go head-to-head with unpopular President Barack Obama, another advantage for supposedly-beleaguered Landrieu.

“She gets to look like she is banging on the White House door,” Mann says.

Landrieu’s long been at odds with the White House. She held up the 2010 nomination of Jack Lew to serve as head of the Office of Management and Budget until the Obama administration lifted its moratorium on offshore drilling. She blocked the president’s climate guidelines for power plants. Now, that she’s chairwoman, she can even further distance herself from the unpopular president.

Rep. Bill Cassidy, R.-La., is widely seen as Landrieu's top opponent.

Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

On the other side of the aisle, Republicans are still scrambling to find their guy to go up against Landrieu. Unlike her Democratic neighbor in Arkansas, Sen. Mark Pryor, who is fighting it out with one Republican challenger, the Republican support in Louisiana, is still in flux.

The establishment support is no doubt coalescing around Cassidy who is leading in early fundraising. But observers note he’s failed to spark the enthusiasm of the conservative base.

“Republicans by and large are kind of lukewarm about Bill Cassidy who is seen as maybe not a true believer, maybe not as conservative as he could be,” says Pearson Cross, a political science professor at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette. “He has not been embraced by the very conservative faction of the party here.”

In the race, state Rep. Paul Hollis and veteran Rob Maness, have jumped on that sentiment and uncertainty and muddied the waters by jumping in the race.

“It’s no one’s race,” says Kevin Carroll, a member of the Louisiana Republican Party's state central committee. “I realize it would be an uphill battle for anyone other than Cassidy, at this point with months to go. I personally support Rob Maness, wholeheartedly,”

Tony Perkins, the president of the conservative Family Research Council who once served in the Louisiana Legislature, told The Hill newspaper in January that Cassidy was not up to snuff.

"He's been pretty weak on the issues," Perkins had said. "If the Republicans want to win, they actually need to find a stronger candidate."

The deep-pocketed, anti-establishment Club for Growth is even watching the race.

This turmoil also bodes well for Landrieu. The longer the Republicans remain in a disarray, the more likely it could be anyone’s race in the “jungle primary,” when all candidates – Republican and Democrat – compete on one ballot. With multiple Republicans but only one Democrat on the ballot, it almost guarantees that no GOP-er will get the 50 percent of the vote needed to win the race straight up, per the state's quirky election rules. Landrieu would face off with the top Republican vote-getter in a December runoff if she failed to meet the 50 percent threshold.

“There is considerable pressure for Republicans to unite behind Congressman Cassidy in order to maximize our chances of defeating Sen. Landrieu,” says Jason Dore, the Louisiana Republican Party’s executive director.

Yet, the Republican Party has tried and failed three times to unseat Landrieu throughout her career.