The same month the 2014 elections brought to power a new Republican U.S. Senate in Washington, University of Denver political science professor Peter Hanson released a book investigating the power held by the majority party. “Too Weak to Govern,” published by Cambridge University Press, analyses this question through a look at the budget process.

Now with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell at the helm, we reached out to Hanson to preview the term ahead in Washington.

Question: You worked on Capitol Hill for Democratic U.S. Sen. Tom Daschle for six years, so you’ve seen Washington first hand. How would you characterize the current state of the U.S. Senate — order or dysfunction?

Answer: One way to measure the Senate’s effectiveness is to ask whether lawmakers have a full opportunity to deliberate on the important issues of the day, make a decision and then move on to the next issue. By this standard, the Senate has grown deeply dysfunctional. The Senate is frequently unable to bring important pieces of legislation to a vote, or sometimes even to call them up for debate. It has become the choke point in our constitutional system and its inability to address serious problems should make us all concerned.

Q: Why is it so difficult for Congress to pass a budget, like we see here at the state level in Colorado?

A: As I explain in my book, the regular budget process in Congress has collapsed. Historically, Congress debated and passed around a dozen appropriations bills each year to fund all “discretionary” spending. That’s the third of the federal budget that has to be provided every year for national defense, student loans, scientific research and other programs. The rest of the budget goes to programs like Medicare and Social Security and is provided automatically.

Appropriations bills are important because they allow Congress to shape the budget. The normal process calls for these bills to be brought to the Senate floor one at a time so that all members can debate spending levels or issue directives to federal agencies. That’s how we provide accountability and transparency in the budget process.

Today, leaders bundle appropriations bills into a single package like the $1 trillion “CRomnibus” that was passed last December. They call it up with just days left in the session or before government funding is about to expire, and then push it through the floor with little debate or amendment. They count on fact that fear of a government shutdown and time pressure will lead members to approve whatever is put in front of them.

Think about this remarkable fact: Congress just passed a $1 trillion spending bill without the opportunity for a single senator to offer an amendment. Not one. This is a terrible way to pass a budget that is guaranteed to lead to poor decisions and wasteful spending. It has to change.

Q: Is our polarized political world — particularly when it comes to spending bills — to blame, or is there something more?

A: The two parties in the Senate are farther apart ideologically than at any time since just after the Civil War. They aren’t being disagreeable. They disagree. That’s a problem in the Senate, because the Senate’s rules permit unlimited debate and amendment, and the minority can easily block a vote on a bill by filibustering it. Legislation can only pass the Senate when both sides compromise. It’s genuinely much harder to reach those compromises today.

This creates an enormous problem for the budget. Appropriations bills that are brought to the floor under the normal process are swamped with hostile amendments designed to embarrass the majority or they are filibustered. Leaders have concluded that it isn’t worth bringing appropriations bills to the floor under the normal process at all.

Omnibus bills are a response to the fact that the Senate floor has become unmanageable. Leaders know that they can avoid most amendments by bringing up an omnibus late in the session just before the government is about to shut down, and that most members won’t risk blocking a bill containing all the discretionary funding for the government. It’s a terrible legislative process, but they do it because it gets the job done.

Q: Looking to the new Republican majority in the Senate, what prospects do you see for change under Mitch McConnell?

A: Mitch McConnell has said he wants to return to the Senate’s tradition of having open debate and allowing amendments on legislation. That’s a worthy goal, but he’s going to face exactly the same problem Democrats did if he tries to follow the normal budget process.

The real problem is that the Senate’s rules no longer make sense in today’s environment. We need to abolish the filibuster so that a simple majority of senators can end debate and pass a bill. The majority party would be more willing to bring bills to the floor for debate and amendment if they knew they could keep debate under control.

That’s what happens in the House, where the majority has strong tools to manage debate. Members of the House voted on 121 amendments to appropriations bills last year. Senators voted on zero. It’s ironic. The Senate was intended to be the chamber where the great issues of the day were debated. Today, the typical member of the House has a much better opportunity to shape spending bills than a senator.

Today’s Senate can only play its intended role if senators recognize that their rules, which were designed to protect debate in the Senate, are actually undermining it.