Rabat – The MENA region, as never before, is in total turmoil. In the Middle East, the situation is out of hand, in the full sense of the word.

The Hamas-Israel war might flare up, again, any time, if Cairo marathon negotiations fail. Further north, the Islamic State of Da3esh is threating Kurdistan while proceeding to an unprecedented ethnic and religious cleansing, since the Caliph Omar of the Rashidun Four, in the early years of Islam, promised the Christian the respect of their religion and the protection of their families and property. In North Africa, Sisi continues unabated his repression of the Muslim Brotherhood and Libya has turned from a state on paper into a failed state controlled by the Islamists, who might be tempted to unite with al-Qaeda of the Maghreb, for the worse.

In the face of this volatile situation, the western intelligence has informed Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia of possible Kamikaze attacks of the 9/11 type using Airbus passenger aircrafts that have fallen into the hands of the Libyan Islamists during the recent fighting. The Libyan Islamist militias might not use them themselves, but they might be tempted to sell them to al-Qadea in the Islamic Maghreb (AQMI) who have many issues to square with North African governments, which they consider kafir staunch allies of the Christian West, arch enemy of Islam.

Acting on this serious information, the governments of North Africa are readying themselves militarily for the worst.

In Morocco, back on July 10, the Minister of the Interior Mohamed Hassad, made mention of these terrorist threats in the parliament. In the last couple of days, the Moroccan Army proceeded to the deployment of radars, air missiles and other military hardware in many parts of the country and put the air force and the navy on maximum alert alongside all security forces, to foil any possible terrorist air attack.

In the possibility of any security threat detected by military radars and civilian ones, the air force will immediately scramble its military jets, which will first persuade the incoming aircraft to turn back, according to the international protocol in use in such situations. If the aircraft ignores the orders, then warning shots will be fired and if there is no compliance, the fighter jets will fire their missiles and down the airliner. If for some reason this fails, then the navy missiles will be fired in the direction of the aircraft. The ground air defense system is activated, in the last resort, just in case everything else fails.

The Moroccan people in Casablanca and various other cities were flabbergasted at the sight of the military hardware deployed and were asking questions, but receiving no answers from the officials, for fear of causing unnecessary alarm that might create some sort of panic. As a matter of fact, the concerned number one party i.e. the army, as usual, is keeping quiet acting on the golden rule: “no news, good news.”

It must be said, with strength, that no country of the MENA region is secure anymore, as terrorism is going unfortunately global and insecurity with it.

© Morocco World News. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, rewritten or redistributed

Join the Conversation. What do you think?