WASHINGTON–Relief for the long-term unemployed was put on pause again today as an extension for unemployment benefits fell two votes short of moving forward in the Senate.

Sens. John Cornyn and Ted Cruz and 38 other senators, mostly Republicans, voted against cloture, a procedural motion that requires 60 votes to move a bill to final consideration. 58 senators voted for the measure, while two did not vote at all.

Cruz blamed the president’s policies for the nation’s high — but subsiding — unemployment rate. And he suggested a range of conservative policies to increase job creation, including repeal of Obamacare, easing regulations on small businesses and moving forward with the Keystone XL pipeline.

“Instead of continually extending unemployment benefits, we should instead work together to bring back economic growth and jobs,” Cruz said in a statement. “Unfortunately, President Obama and Senate Democrats refuse to do anything to address the underlying problem: crushing taxes and regulations from Washington that have killed growth and produced economic stagnation.”

The proposed three-month extension on unemployment benefits represented a compromise between Republicans and Democrats over an earlier attempt that also stalled. That extension, proposed in January, didn’t offset the $6 billion cost of the extension with cuts elsewhere in the budget.

The latest bill payed for itself by adjusting government pensions. It also adjusted some elements of the unemployment insurance program to prevent abuse. Despite these concessions, Democrats still couldn’t win over enough moderate Republicans to move the bill forward. After the vote, Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., promised to keep trying to pass an extension.

Update:

David Alameel and Maxey Scherr, both Democratic challengers for Cornyn’s Senate seat, chided Cornyn for voting against the extension.

“Shame on you, John Cornyn,” Alameel said in a statement. “While thousands of Texans are out-of-work and struggling to make ends meet, your response to them is: you’re on your own.”

Both Scherr and Alameel accused Cornyn of standing up for “Wall Street executives and millionaires” over Texans.

“Today, John Cornyn joined Ted Cruz in turning their backs on working people when they voted to cut unemployment benefits,” Scherr said. “Sadly, this isn’t the first time this has happened.

Time and time again Senators Cruz and Cornyn have shown that they are not on the side of Texans. This is just one of the many battles in the ongoing war on working people led by the millionaire majority in Congress today.”