Did Mike McCoy wimp out late in the Chargers’ game Sunday against the Titans? Or was he playing wisely conservative? You make the call…

Here’s the situation: The Chargers were leading 17-13 with 2:25 remaining in Tennessee. Philip Rivers and crew faced a third-and-9 at their own 36.

Chargers coach Mike McCoy — who parlayed his job as Broncos offensive coordinator last season into this, his first year as an NFL head coach — decides to run the ball, essentially giving up the possession. The Chargers run Ryan Mathews off the left end for a four-yard gain. They then punt on fourth-and-5.

San Diego gets a good punt from Mike Scifres that pins the Titans to their own 6-yard-line. But they still have 2:05 remaining. And, sure enough, Tennessee drives 94 yards over 10 plays and scores the game-winning TD on a Jake Locker 34-yard TD pass to Justin Hunter.

Titans win 20-17.

So did Mike McCoy wuss out?

Here are some stats:

Since 2000, there have been 1,578 plays in the NFL on third down with four minutes or less remaining and exactly 9 yards to go. Of those plays, 78.8 percent were pass plays and 21.2 percent were runs. And 27.9 percent resulted in a first down.

So the odds are 2-1 against gaining a first down. But the odds are also slim that you’ll cause a turnover. Only 3.1 percent of plays resulted in an interception. So the chances of a first down are about 10 times great than a turnover.

In McCoy’s case, the chances of failure with a pass were slim. An incomplete pass or a sack would not significantly punish the Chargers — they’d just have to punt, same as they did after running for four yards.

In other words, why not attempt to gain a first down by passing, when the stats say the risk isn’t very severe?

According to Advanced NFL Stats, the Chargers on that third down had a very healthy 81 percent chance of winning the game. But after running the ball, it dipped to 74.

In a semi-related note, the Broncos last season under McCoy and coach John Fox took some heat after calling for Peyton Manning to kneel down at the end of regulation in a loss to Baltimore.

In that game, Fox appeared to have overestimated the risk in running a play. It might be that Mike McCoy is now overestimating the risk in San Diego.