4528862

Continuing his support of Rand Paul after his 2016 announcement, conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh lashed out at DNC chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz after the two traded barbs over abortion on Wednesday.

On his Thursday program, Limbaugh blasted Wasserman Schultz for her response to the Kentucky senator, in which she said there should be no government restrictions on abortion, “period.” Paul challenged the DNC chair earlier Wednesday to say “whether it is okay to kill a 7-pound baby in the uterus.”

Limbaugh said Debbie “Blabbermouth” Schultz did not “break a sweat” or “think twice” with her response, while adding that she would “do everything she could” to talk a pregnant woman into having an abortion.

“She said in response to Rand Paul’s question, ‘Do you think it’s okay to kill a baby, a seven-pound baby in the uterus?’ And she essentially said, ‘I support letting women and their doctors make this decision without government getting involved.’ She does not support that. She’s like every other extreme feminist, she would do everything she could to talk any woman who was gonna have the baby, put it up for adoption, out of it.

“Don’t doubt me,” Limbaugh said. “I imagine it sounds kind of shocking to hear me say that every abortion, every lost abortion, every abortion that does not happen is a loss of momentum politically. It is, if it’s publicly known. It’s a political issue to ’em, folks. It’s not about women’s rights. That’s just what they say it is.”

“Let me quote her get up,” Limbaugh said. “‘I support letting women and their doctors make this decision without government getting involved, period, end of story.'”

Limbaugh ensued to contradict Wasserman Schultz’s Wednesday claim, saying government intervention is essential in cases she supports, specifically Obamacare and Planned Parenthood.

“But in these two examples, the Obamacare contraception mandate or government funding Planned Parenthood, Debbie ‘Blabbermouth’ Schultz wants maximum government involvement,” Limbaugh said. “And, by the way, notice that Debbie Schultz doesn’t even think twice about aborting a seven pound baby. It didn’t even give her pause. It didn’t even become a moral question to her. She did not break a sweat. She did not break stride.”