Anne Bavier became dean of UT Arlington’s College of Nursing on August 1, inheriting a program that has a graduation rate of nearly 95 percent and is angling to boost its research efforts while expanding its international partnerships.

Expectations are high. When she was announced as the college’s newest leader, UTA President Vistasp Karbhari proclaimed she “will lead us into a new era of national recognition and influence.”

First, however, Bavier is zeroing in on a more immediate issue: Making sure the College of Nursing and the Department of Kinesiology merge smoothly. Last year, school officials gave the OK to join the two focuses, creating a school with more than 350 faculty members and nearly 12,000 graduate and undergraduate students.

“We’ve just had a wonderful launch because the faculty are so excited about the opportunity to be together,” Bavier said. “They’re sitting on doctoral committees and talking about cross-assignments for teaching, it’s just been one of the nicest things I’ve ever done.”

Considering her resume, that’s high praise. Bavier is the president-elect of the National League for Nursing, which includes more than 39,000 members. She was a program director at the National Institutes of Health, where she authored or co-authored 40 publications on topics like nursing education and oncology nursing.

She is a former dean at both the University of Connecticut School of Nursing and of the nursing program at Saint Xavier University in Chicago. By the end of her tenure, each was named a National League for Nursing Center of Excellence in Nursing Education, an honor awarded to just 17 other universities throughout the country.

“She has a proven track record of engaging her stakeholders and building collaborative relationships that lead to establishing a nationally recognized academic program,” said Kirk King, president of Texas Health Arlington Memorial Hospital when she was hired. King helped in the university’s national search for a new dean.

One of the challenges for the incoming dean was that merger, concerns and all. As The Shorthorn—UTA’s student newspaper—reported at the time, staff in both departments questioned search candidates regarding how they would ease the transition.

Her tone brims with confidence and excitement. It actually makes sense these two are joining, she argues. They’re complimentary paths, she says, as each deal with care to the individual patient. Bavier says she hopes to have the two “fully integrated” by the end of the first semester.

“If you think about kinesiology, it’s all about movement and motion and how it affects muscles and bones and vascular systems,” she said. “Part of what nursing does is care for the whole individual, and it’s got to care for them in such a way that maximizes that motion, that movement.”

It will also provide another research lane for the college. Collaboration between nursing and kinesiology researchers is possible and encouraged. In the end, Bavier is confident merging will make for more well-rounded students and faculty.

“By pairing with scientists and professionals in that field, it enriches each other’s disciplines,” she said. “There are core courses they can embrace—anatomy and physiology—and it’s just a natural partnership and a delightful one.”

When Bavier looks into what lies beyond for the College of Nursing, she sees a program that dedicates time and resources to rigorous research. She hopes to publish papers about the changing face of nursing amid the Affordable Care Act and the development of new delivery systems. The baby boomer population is aging—what does this mean for nursing during end-of-life care?

“You can’t just go by what you used to do or what you thought you knew,” Bavier says. “You have to research data that says X, Y, and Z is the best treatment for the patient. And we’ve got to find out what that is.”

The dean spent more than a month in Lithuania this summer as a Senior Fulbright Specialist, working with nurses and teachers who are now teaching classes in English. She said the experience gave her new ideas about engaging students and overseeing other professors.

International study has always been important to her. While at the Connecticut School of Nursing, Bavier secured $14 million for capital projects and created a full-semester study abroad program. Next month, Bavier will travel to Geneva for the International Council of Nurses. She was selected to sit on its leadership board and says she will use the opportunity to network with nurses in other parts of the world.

“(The faculty) come home with an ability to look at people differently and can be very sensitive to asking questions that could expose and share the cultural beliefs that may be underpinning the practices,” she says.

But back home, after analyzing what she has, Bavier says she’s found a trove of talent in the program. The nursing school has boosted its enrollment by offering online classes. More than 90 percent of its students pass the state licensing exam on their first try and 94 percent of them graduate.

“When a dean really does the job, you open the door and get out of the way of good faculty,” Bavier says. “Boy, has this been a joy for me to do.”