Buy Photo About 80 people attended a Senate finance committee meeting to express their opposition to a resolution that would require Tennessee to sue the federal government for noncompliance of the Refugee Act of 1980. (Photo: Joel Ebert / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

A panel of lawmakers passed a Senate resolution Tuesday directing Tennessee’s attorney general to sue the federal government despite the fact that one senator said it could have a “chilling effect” on the state’s refugee community.

About 80 people, many of whom held signs in protest, watched as the Senate Finance Ways and Means Committee approved a resolution that orders Attorney General Herbert Slatery to sue the feds for noncompliance of the Refugee Act of 1980.

Passage of the resolution, sponsored by 23 Senate Republicans, would ensure that Tennessee is the third state to sue the federal government over the matter but the first state to do so on the grounds of the 10th Amendment.

Senate Majority Leader Mark Norris, R-Collierville, said the resolution is necessary in order to get a court to settle an issue that has left Tennessee in a confusing place as it relates to refugees.

“The purpose of Senate Joint Resolution 467 is to initiate legal proceedings for declaratory relief in light of the federal government’s failure to consult regarding the relocation of refugees in Tennessee and the mandatory expenditure of state funds under a federal program from which the state has formally withdrawn,” he said.

Norris said despite the fact that Tennessee opted out of the refugee resettlement program in 2008, under then-Gov. Phil Bredesen, the federal government has required the state to participate in the program in some capacity.

Citing the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in National Federation of Independent Business vs. Sebelius — the landmark decision that upheld Congress’ power to enact the majority of the Affordable Care Act — Norris said, “In that case, the Supreme Court said a state cannot be compelled or coerced to participate in a federal program at which it has chosen not to participate.”

He explained that the state has been forced to appropriate state funds for as many as 11 programs, including Medicaid, to support the refugee resettlement program.

The resettlement program is being administered by Catholic Charities, which says it is fully funded by the federal government.

Norris said if the state does not expend funds to those 11 programs, the entire program is at risk.

“We find ourselves sort of in that catch-22 — wondering what it is we are constitutionally and legally able to do,” he said.

While some members of the Senate committee expressed safety concerns as it relates to the refugee resettlement program, the majority of the discussion centered on Norris’ point about solving what he previously described to The Tennessean as a “constitutional quandary.”

“The take home point is for us to be able to discharge our duties to the people of Tennessee,” Norris said while answering a handful of questions from Sen. Steve Dickerson, R-Nashville, during a nearly hour-long discussion on the resolution.

Dickerson wondered what the impact of passing such a resolution may be.

“I’m afraid this might be perceived as unwelcoming,” he said, noting that Nashville receives about three refugees every day. “This might have a chilling effect on that.”

Norris tried to dispel the notion that the resolution would send a negative message.

“It’s not designed to be welcoming or unwelcoming,” he said, adding that the resolution was not intended to be “mean-spirited” or a “fear-mongering” tactic.

Norris noted that the resolution, which heads to the Senate floor, would not immediately halt refugees from coming into Tennessee. He said it would likely maintain the status quo of having refugees come into the state, until a court decides on the matter.

While many on the committee defended the resolution, which passed with a 9-1 vote — Dickerson was the sole member to vote against it while Sen. Thelma Harper, D-Whites Creek, did not vote — there were many in attendance who rebuked the committee’s action.

Stephanie Teatro, a co-executive director of the Tennessee Immigrant and Refugee Rights Coalition, called the resolution “one of the most extreme anti-refugee” efforts in the United States.

She took issue with the claims that the resolution is centered on the 10th Amendment, saying that is “just smoke and mirrors.”

“This legislature has been considering anti-refugee policy for the last several years,” Teatro said. “This isn’t about keeping anyone safe. It’s really about creating an unwelcoming and hostile environment.”

Several opponents of the resolution provided lawmakers with a copy of a petition expressing their opposition.

Buy Photo William Mwizerwa, a former Rwandan refugee and the director of Legacy Mission Village, said the passage of SJR 467 could push refugees away. (Photo: Joel Ebert / The Tennessean)

Although Teatro said she doesn’t believe the lawsuit will succeed, she said it creates a climate of fear for refugee families.

“This fear-based, discriminatory measure would have us turn our backs on families fleeing violence and terror,” said Hedy Weinberg, American Civil Liberties Union of Tennessee executive director. “Closing our doors in the faces of people in crisis is not who we are as Tennesseans — it undermines our very values of justice, fairness and aiding those in need. Refugee resettlement is the sole responsibility of the federal government. Not only is this resolution ethically wrong, denying refugees violates the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution and federal law.”

Norris said the resolution is not simply about success or failure. It is necessary in order to have a court settle the issue, he explained.

“It’s a situation where the federal court would declare our rights as a state under these various situations ... what we can and cannot pay for, and what we must and must not do,” Norris said.

Among those watching the actions of the committee was William Mwizerwa, a former Rwandan refugee and the director of Legacy Mission Village, a Brentwood-based nonprofit organization dedicated to helping refugee families in Tennessee.

He said the resolution appears to be an attempt to push refugees away. Mwizerwa said that many refugees have had to flee their country because of violence, and that they are grateful for being welcomed to the United States and Tennessee.

“We are very concerned what will happen next,” he said.

Reach Joel Ebert at 615-259-8379 and on Twitter @joelebert29.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1ToDu0U