What was billed as a wheat tour perhaps should have been billed as a unity tour as Colorado’s two U.S. senators, Democrat Michael Bennet and Republican Cory Gardner, traveled the Eastern Plains together Saturday.

They fielded questions about the Environmental Protection Agency at a Fort Morgan restaurant, visited wheat fields surrounding the Akron Central Great Plains Research Station, and met with Gardner’s parents, John and Cindy, at the family’s 100-year-old, farm-implement dealership in his hometown of Yuma.

“My hat’s off to you,” said Dennis Coryell, a Republican River District board director. “It’s refreshing you came together to address agricultural issues in our community.”

Colorado’s agricultural commissioner, Don Brown, who spent the day on the bus with the senators and members of the Colorado Association of Wheat Growers, also lauded their cooperation. A wheat tour of the Eastern Plains has been a tradition in the 4th Congressional District since 1991, when it was started by then new U.S. Rep. Wayne Allard. Gardner kept up the tradition when he was in Congress. And after being elected to the Senate in November, he wanted to do a Senate tour and invited Bennet.

The group visited Holyoke and Fleming and other small towns in northeastern Colorado. Gardner, who lives in Yuma, seemed to know everyone on the way. He rattled off strains of wheat and talked about other crops, too.

“We’re going to talk about hard red and hard white,” Gardner said, referring to strains of winter wheat, “rather than hard left and hard right.”

Both senators said Colorado’s economy is booming because of agriculture. Eighty percent of the wheat grown in Colorado is exported.

“Rural Colorado has really dragged Colorado out of the recession,” Bennet said.

Bennet pointed out he was one of the 13 Senate Democrats who voted for a controversial trade bill, and he did so because of what trade means to rural Colorado.

He also talked about his work with the “Gang of Eight,” a bipartisan group that crafted an immigration reform bill that passed the Senate but then died. It was the first immigration bill to be endorsed by farm workers and growers.

“There was a ton about that bill that made sense,” Bennet said. “We have to find a way to get it done.”

During the trip, conversation often turned to the recent heavy rains that had hit there — especially Washington County. Garner pointed out high water in a creek bed he said had been dry for 20 years.

Bennet, who was appointed to the Senate in 2009, serves on the Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry Committee. He was elected in 2010 and is up for re-election in 2016.

Gardner was elected to the Senate in 2014, becoming the first Coloradan in 36 years to defeat an incumbent senator. Bennet presented Gardner’s parents a framed copy of their son’s first Senate speech.

Lynn Bartels: 303-954-5327, lbartels@denverpost.com or twitter.com/lynn_bartels