Pew Research Center recently conducted the largest political survey in the center’s history, questioning more than 10,000 adults between January and March of this year.

The study is incredibly thorough, tracking partisan shifts to both the left and the right while segmenting out different demographics and noting their tendencies to vote for either Democrats or Republicans. Pew notes the “Partisan Anchors,” those who always vote for one party over the other, are “Steadfast Conservatives” and “Business Conservatives” for Republicans and “Solid Liberals” for Democrats.

Pew then broke out “Less Partisan, Less Predictable” voters, charting a path to victory for Republicans through a demographic known as “Young Outsiders,” who are skeptical of big government and socially more progressive, but who tend to side with the Republican Party overall.

Pew defines “Young Outsiders” this way:

Young Outsiders lean Republican but do not have a strong allegiance to the Republican Party; in fact they tend to dislike both political parties. On many issues, from their support for environmental regulation to their liberal views on social issues, they diverge from traditional GOP orthodoxy. Yet in their support for limited government, Young Outsiders are firmly in the Republicans’ camp.

POLITICO’s coverage of these results give Republicans — particularly those who are reaching out to young voters — electoral hope:

Republicans’ greatest opportunities — and challenges — may lie with the “young outsiders,” according to the report. It’s a group that potential 2016 hopefuls such as Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky are already making overtures toward. They lean Republican 53 percent to 33 percent on the generic midterm ballot but are not consistent voters and are wary of government spending. “However, the young outsiders’ generational imprint on issues like homosexuality, diversity and the environment make the Republican Party an uncomfortable fit,” Pew said.

Pew’s results give Republicans at 53%-33% edge over Democrats among this demographic in the 2014 election. Moreover, Pew reveals:

Nonetheless, Young Outsiders may present an attractive opportunity for the GOP. They are younger and more diverse than Republicans generally. Nearly half are under 40, compared with just 33% among all Republicans… Young Outsiders share Republicans’ deep opposition to increased government spending on social programs. About three-quarters of Young Outsiders (76%) say the government can’t afford to spend more to help the needy.

When asked whether “Young Outsiders” trusted government or not, a whopping 84 percent responded with “Only some of the time/Never” compared to 16 percent who said “Always/Most of the time,” and when asked about their feelings about the federal government, 88 percent said they were “Angry” or “Frustrated,” while just 12 percent said they were content.

The results also revealed “Young Outsiders” are skeptical of Big Business, whose cozy relationship with Big Government gives them a competitive edge over other businesses.

When it comes to military intervention, only 12 percent of “Young Outsiders” believe the United States should play an active role in world affairs, compared to 85 percent who believe we should focus more on domestic affairs. Interestingly, “Steadfast Conservatives” (what are known as “traditional” or “social” conservatives) tend to agree with “Young Outsiders” on this, while “Business Conservatives” are much more supportive of military intervention.

A full 59 percent of “Young Outsiders” actually believe U.S. involvement overseas tends to make world problems worse. “Young Outsiders” break from both “Steadfast Conservatives” and “Business Conservatives” in supporting good diplomacy (73 percent) over military strength (20 percent) as the best way to ensure peace.

Other interesting findings about “Young Outsiders” include:

They disapprove of Obamacare 71%-25%

They support marijuana legalization 67%-31%

They support gun rights over gun control 63%-35%

The wide-ranging survey sheds a lot of light on the partisan breakdown of Americans and allows Republicans to chart a course through “Young Outsiders” toward political victory.

Republican focus on young voters through pro-liberty Republicans like Sen. Paul, Congressman Amash and others can maintain a winning coalition that translates to political victory nationally. The GOP should take heed and continue to reach out to young Americans.