John Bel Edwards may not officially have the badge just yet, but clearly there's a new sheriff in town. How else do you explain the warp speed reversal by legislators on the subject of Medicaid expansion in Louisiana?

Edwards, the governor-elect who loses the "elect" title Jan. 11, has made it clear he wants to expand Medicaid to more than 300,000 uninsured state citizens, and legislators — as they're wont to do — are doing everything necessary to make the Democrat's campaign pledge a reality.

So after years of just saying "no" to the expansion of Obamacare under the rule of Gov. Bobby Jindal, the Republican-controlled Legislature is now screaming, "hurry up and go."

On Monday (Dec. 7), Senate Finance Committee members chastised the Department of Health and Hospitals for wasting time and ordered the department to produce a report by Jan. 1 on the state's options for expanding Medicaid.

As remarkable, committee chairman Jack Donahue, a red-blooded Republican from Mandeville who has steadfastly opposed legislative expansion efforts in the past, told The Advocate he now believes Medicaid could be fabulous for Louisiana.

Not since Michael Jackson have we seen such moonwalking.

Who knows, maybe Republican legislators have secretly harbored a desire to expand Medicaid in an embarrassingly poor state where one of every four residents are already in the program. Maybe they saw no point in waging a futile fight since Jindal made clear there'd be no expansion on his watch. Or, as the more cynical might suggest, perhaps these lapdogs are merely out to please their new owner.

Edwards, who unsuccessfully tried to expand the program as a state legislator, could, as governor, simply order it, but he needs legislators to approve the funding of various related costs.

It's easy for those not tied to strict GOP ideology to make the case for expanding Medicaid. The concept of giving government-backed medical care to those not poor enough for traditional Medicaid but too poor to afford private market insurance has wide support. For perspective, those who qualify under the expanded plan are adults earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level, or roughly $33,500 for a family of four.

Even in Louisiana, a bastion of anti-Obamacare sentiment, all four major candidates, including the very right wing David Vitter, said expansion is worth considering.

The debate — in all but the reddest of states, like here under Jindal — has been over the details. Twenty-two states, mostly blue or purple, and the District of Columbia have gone all-in on President Barack Obama's version of expansion. Eight others, including Arkansas, have embraced the gist of expansion, but requested "waivers" to the federal law in order to meet special circumstances or political realities in their state.

No doubt, the issue in Louisiana is a complicated one. On one hand, Louisiana is one of the nation's poorest states — with a million residents already on Medicaid — and it makes sense to provide insurance for as many as 500,000 additional people, including some 300,000 currently without any insurance. On the other, is cost. DHH is already facing a $500 million shortfall in this year's budget (made larger after a Jindal money raid to patch other holes in the state budget) so finding the money to cover costs related to expansion is problematic. Then there's this little nightmare in waiting: The feds are gradually cutting the money the state had been using to fund the old Charity hospital system.

Legislators are punting that problem to DHH officials, who, along with Edwards, will have to come up with a solution. Until then, Republican members of the state House and Senate seem to be getting comfortable with the prospect of having the expansion of Obamacare on their voting record.

Arkansas may be the only Deep South state to adopt Medicaid expansion, but Louisiana is on track to become the second.

*****

JR Ball is a columnist with NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune in Baton Rouge. Email him at jrball@nola.com. You can also keep up with his local updates on Twitter (@jrball35), Facebook (jrball) and Google+ (+JRBall).