LOS ANGELES — Avalanche defenseman Tyson Barrie missed Colorado’s game against Los Angeles Sunday as he began a three-game NHL suspension.

“I’m disappointed with the decision, but I respect it,” Barrie said before the game at the Staples Center.

The league’s player safety department announced the suspension late Saturday night. It extensively explained the ruling in a video release, declaring that Barrie — though unpenalized — had been guilty of both charging and interference, launched himself with both skates off the ice and made initial contact to Anaheim defenseman Simon Despres’ head at the Honda Center Friday.

Despres didn’t return to the game after the second-period hit and the Ducks said he had an upper-body injury. Barrie went through a hearing by phone with the league Saturday afternoon.

“I didn’t even really think about it the rest of the game,” Barrie said. “Then when I found out (it was an issue), I was a little surprised. Going through this process and dealing with all of this has been new to me and interesting.”

Barrie added, “Once you slow any hit down, it looks worse than it is. I think in real time it was a split-second decision, and I was under the impression the puck was in his feet or whatever. . . I don’t consider myself a dirty player or an overly physical player. I don’t think I need to change the way I play or anything like that. It was just an unfortunate situation, and it was unfortunate that Simon got hurt.”

Avalanche coach Patrick Roy quibbled with the ruling and suspension.

“When you show video, you can make whatever on your side,” Roy said. “You control the circles and whatever it is. From my perspective, for me first of all it was not interference. I think the guy had the puck and it was less than one or two seconds before (Barrie) finished his check on him. Two, the first point of contact was the shoulder. And three, on my view, his skates were touching the ice. But I guess you you can use the image at the moment you want and make it look to your advantage.

“Basically, I’m not happy.”

Did he believe three games were too much, then?

“Yes, I think it’s too much,” Roy responded. “It’s a lot for that type of check, yes.”

Roy said he also believed Barrie’s lack of history on the supplemental disciplinary front — he never has been suspended — should have been a consideration. Barrie was on the other side of the equation when Minnesota’s Matt Cook was suspended for seven games for a knee-on-knee hit on Barrie in the 2014 playoffs.

“For me, that should have been a factor, yes,” Roy said.

Said Barrie: “I get it. There’s a job that the league has to do to protect the players from the players. If I were on the other end, I’m sure we’d be upset by it. I’m not thrilled. Three games is a lot and it’s going to be tough to sit out and watch. But at the end of the day, you respect the decision.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFfei