On Sept. 1, Karen Ignagni started a new chapter in her career far from Washington, D.C., where she spent two decades as one of the country’s most powerful lobbyists. As the head of the lobbying group America’s Health Insurance Plans, she was the voice of the industry as it grappled with Obamacare. Now she leads EmblemHealth, which insures 3.2 million people as the parent company of Group Health Inc., better known as GHI, and HIP Health Plan of New York, known as HIP.

As EmblemHealth’s president and chief executive, Ms. Ignagni, 61, is returning to her labor roots. From 1982 to 1993, she was director of the AFL-CIO’s Department of Employee Benefits. EmblemHealth provides health coverage for about 95% of city employees, retirees and their families.

Her first challenge is to address the insurer’s red ink: HIP and GHI reported combined net losses of $40 million in the first quarter, following a drop of $494 million in 2014 on $7 billion in revenue. In sharp contrast, HIP and GHI were profitable from 2010 to 2013, with combined net income averaging $152 million.

Let's tackle this one first. Is Emblem going to convert to a for-profit insurer?

No. Our board has made a very clear decision [that] we are, and will be, a nonprofit plan. We have a wonderful tradition to build on. I’m very comfortable with the decision they made.

You spent 22 years lobbying at AHIP and shocked Washington and the insurance industry by leaving. Why did you ditch the policy arena for the operational side of health insurance?

I’ve spent the last three or four years working intensely on the operational issues of implementing the Affordable Care Act. Meeting the best and brightest leaders of health plans allowed me to work under the hood, so to speak. I still enjoy broad policy issues. But to have the opportunity to shift gears and make the promise of affordable coverage a reality is very exciting.

Any trepidation about that decision?

This will sound insincere, but I was focused on the upside and opportunity. Emblem has this mission of affordable coverage—city workers, unions, Medicaid, special populations—that’s our tradition. I feel like the luckiest person in the world being offered this job.

It's no secret that EmblemHealth is unprofitable. This is your first job running an insurer. Do you feel equipped to turn this ship around?

PLAY/LIST BRONX IS UP, BATTERY’S DOWN:

"I moved to the city at the end of July. I’ve been traveling to neighborhoods and learning the subway, minimizing the potential for getting lost in the city, which is high for a newbie.”

FIRST STOPS:

The Museum of Modern Art, the Met and La Traviata, performed by the Metropolitan Opera outdoors at Lincoln Center Plaza.

DINING:

“What I find really interesting in New York is the number of family-owned restaurants—Greek, Chinese, Spanish. I really enjoy them. Going to one of the wonderful fancy restaurants in the city: That’s not relaxing to me.”



On day one, I confronted those issues with our employees. I laid out our challenges and opportunities. We have a very clear strategy on the administrative side to address issues in ways other plans address those issues.

That sounds like layoffs and restructuring.

Every plan looks to make sure it is always right-sizing its workforce. Emblem was doing that before I walked in the door, for administrative efficiencies. We’re looking at our corporate management structure and how to support our mission.

Insurers are consolidating. How can an independent nonprofit be successful as the top five health insurers morph into three?

The answer revolves around the people who work at Emblem. I’ve been so impressed by the training and commitment of the 4,000 workers at Emblem and another 2,500 at Advantage Care Physicians. We’re a significant employer in the region.

But how will you differentiate EmblemHealth?

Paying for quality and value has to be real. We have an incentive structure for hospitals and clinicians. And having Advantage Care Physicians, an embedded physicians’ practice, mobilizes the mission. I’m very enthusiastic about discussions with hospitals to engage in new contracts with quality and performance standards. We can move to a very different set of offerings in the market to tell our story to everyone. For example, we can provide a tristate strategy for employers.

How will your background working in heated national politics play in New York?

I’ll leave it to others to judge how my background fits in with this company. I have significant experience in working with various stakeholders and building consensus. I will be very involved with policy in the city, Albany and Washington.

Who are your lobbying targets?

There is a very strong concern—not only among health plans—about hospital consolidation. When a system purchases a community hospital, that increases costs. It is a broad issue for employers and individual purchasers. I was stunned on my arrival to find out one of the hospitals we contract with was being purchased by a system. Our costs will rise 60%. That’s a tangible example of how consolidation affects the market. It is a serious policy issue.

And that is your growth strategy?

Our plan is to achieve this promise of affordability. How do you work with physicians on paying for value? Picking your partners is a start. We will look at how to structure benefits. We have an embedded medical home through Advantage Care. The city, labor and employers know the value of that. Emblem is the East Coast version of Kaiser Permanente. We have an opportunity to add value. We need to tell that story.

Will EmblemHealth continue operating in all its current market segments?

We will stay in the individual and small-group markets. In the commercial market, we will continue offering affordable, effective coverage. That’s what we are known for. That’s what people expect. That’s what we will deliver.

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments