The majority of sexually active adults have at least one sexual fantasy that they play out in their minds but rarely have the bravado to put into action. Coinciding with National Orgasm Day last Thursday, results of a survey conducted by Durex were released showing the average American’s fantasy vs. reality orgasm experience. While most Americans own up to their sexual fantasies that include sex on a rooftop or in the middle of public transportation, very few actually perform their kinky escapades.

Durex included 1,000 survey participants who were over the age of 21, the NY Daily News reported. Although performing sexual acts in public is considered illegal in most parts of the United States, Durex felt their survey was necessary to facilitate communication among partners. Regardless of where they were hoping joint “sexploration” would take them, 93 percent of respondents said a more intense orgasm was synonymous with a trusted partner.

A large portion of adults participating in the survey were perfectly content with having sex under their own roof. Around 54 percent of survey respondents said they were satisfied with sex in the shower while 35 percent ventured into the kitchen to achieve a worthwhile orgasm. For other respondents, sex at home wasn’t enough to fulfill their sexual desires. In fact, most Americans seemingly dream about the prospect of being caught in the act publically.

When it comes to the Mile High Club, 30 percent of Americans fantasize about having sex on an airplane, but only five percent admit to actually having an orgasm midflight. Other forms of public transportation included the back of a cab where 16 percent hoped to conquer and the subway, which was the destination in 10 percent of fantasies. Apparently the prospect of germs and bacteria leads people to second guess their desires, seeing as only two percent admitted to sex on a train.

Interestingly enough, it seems that fewer people daydream over sex in their car than the number of people who actually have. While 23 percent of respondents confessed that they often thought about sex in a car, 36 percent said they had already turned their car in to their bedroom. Not even the work place is sacred. Around 28 percent of respondents said they would like to experience an orgasm at their office.

Proving the quest for sexual exploration has no bounds for some: Seven percent of Americans dreamed of one day having sex in a church and eight percent hoped to orgasm in a cemetery. Some other desired locations for sexual opportunists included clothing store fitting rooms for 22 percent of Americans and a roof or balcony for 20 percent.