Katy Kozhimannil is an assistant professor at the University of Minnesota School of Public Health where she teaches and conducts research on health care policy and women’s health. She is on Twitter.

In 2006, New Jersey took a monumental step, becoming the first state to require screening for postpartum depression. Although I believe this was right thing to do, this policy did not improve treatment of postpartum depression for Medicaid recipients. The lesson learned: Mandating screening isn’t sufficient without consistent access to care.

Bridging the gap between postpartum depression screening and treatment requires attention to patient-level barriers to care.

There's no question that New Jersey was on the right track: Postpartum depression is too often undetected, and thus, untreated. In research settings, with effective referral and seamless access to appropriate services, screening can improve diagnosis and care. But New Jersey's experience with Medicaid recipients suggests that more extensive policy-level changes may be required to move the dial on this incredibly complex challenge.

Specifically, bridging the gap between screening and treatment requires attention to patient-level barriers to care. Many new mothers have unstable insurance coverage. Almost half of all pregnant women get health insurance through Medicaid programs, but for women whose income exceeds 133 percent of the federal poverty level ($31,721 for a family of four) Medicaid eligibility ends 60 days after giving birth. Affected women must switch health insurance plans, juggle new benefits and find covered providers, right when onset of postpartum depression is most common. States can help by ensuring consistency in mental health benefits and overlap in provider networks between Medicaid and exchange-based plans.

Even insured women face serious challenges accessing appropriate care. Providers are not always located nearby and they do not always accept new patients, have appointments available or speak a woman’s language. The Affordable Care Act provides new mechanisms that may help address these barriers, including the use of community health workers or care coordinators to better link women with medical, social and community services.

The tough reality is that addressing these challenges requires financial investment: adequately paying providers for screening and treatment services, and recruiting and retaining a diverse mental health work force in rural and urban areas. Detection doesn’t matter if the system can’t help afterward. States should seize this opportunity for system-level changes to facilitate access to appropriate care for women and families.



Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.