CLEVELAND HEIGHTS, Ohio -- Grocer John Zagara figures that if the Walmart Supercenter opening on Wednesday wants to steal away his customers, he's going to fight just as tenaciously to keep them.

Over the past nine months, he's spent more than $350,000 renovating and modernizing his family's 77-year-old business, Zagara's Marketplace, from installing self-serve organic bulk food dispensers and reach-in beer coolers to upgrading to gleaming energy-efficient freezer cases.

He has also stepped up his social-media marketing efforts, tried to make his 125 employees more customer-focused, and launched a new ZMPreferred shopper loyalty program that just gave away a 32-inch flat-screen TV.

Zagara ticks off his competitors on his fingers: "I've got CVS down the street, Marc's down in Coventry (Village), Walgreens, Family Dollar, Dollar General, Whole Foods, Trader Joe's, Target with food -- and now Super-Walmart."

He knows and expects that his shoppers will go check out the Walmart, maybe even shop there a few times, but he's banking on the fact that once they've seen it, they'll come back to his store. "We're trying to give people a reason to shop here," he said, gesturing at his aisles.

A giant from day one

By all accounts, the Walmart Supercenter in South Euclid will dwarf his efforts the first day it opens. The 180,000-square-foot store will employ 300 people (all but 85 are moving from the Cleveland Heights Walmart at Severance Town Center), and be open from 6 a.m. to midnight seven days a week.

In addition to a grocery department larger than Zagara's store, Walmart will also sell clothing, electonics, toys, sporting goods, and lawn and garden items. It will have a pharmacy, a Subway restaurant, a Vision Center, a digital-photo processing center and an enormous parking lot with electric-vehicle charging stations.

"We're expecting to take a 10-percent cut, and then we'll see how things develop after that," Zagara said. "Will it stay at 10 percent? Will it go to 5 percent? We don't have an unlimited number of people living and shopping in the Heights. The question is how much do they take from me to make up their supermarket sales?"

"Will people still like it when they're standing in line to check out? When they can't find anybody to help them? We get people in here all the time who say, 'I just left a full cart of groceries in line at Walmart.'"



"I don't expect that we're going to lose the heart and soul of our customers," he said. "I think the ones we're going to lose are the ones who are going their periphery shopping here. They're going to Aldi's , Marc's and Save-A-Lot and just buying the things that are on sale. That's Walmart's customer."

Zagara has given his store at 1940 Lee Rd. a floor-to-ceiling once-over, from clearing out the displays that vendors used to plop in the middle of his aisles to buffing the floors until they shine. He is converting all the light bulbs in his refrigerated displays to cool-to-the-touch LED lights that emit a brighter light on 40 percent less electricity.





Where he used to have the old-fashioned reach-in "coffin" freezers, he's installed four aisles of energy-saving door cases that keep the cold air in and the ice cream rock-hard.

The new cases also increased his capacity to stock new items because they're taller and deeper than the old cases, but take up less floor space.

His new products include: Luna & Larry's Organic Coconut Bliss, a dairy-, soy- and gluten-free version of ice cream; Rising Moon Organics vegetarian Basil, Asiago & Pine Nut Pesto Ravioli; certified humane uncured apple-smoked bacon; certified humane whole roasted chickens; and all-natural ground bison.

He has increased the selection of organic, vegan and minimally-processed foods at his 42,500-square-foot store to try to make Zagara's more of a food destination.

Zagara said Walmart takes the opposite approach, by focusing on items that have mass appeal and will sell quickly. "It comes in the back door and out the front door, that's what they're concerned about," he said.

A focus on meats "cut and produced here"

Zagara steps into the meat cooler, where one employee is slicing and trimming steaks and another is preparing to wheel out a display of freshly shaped burgers. His meat is wrapped in plastic film, not brought to the store already vacuum-sealed.

"All of the food that we put in this case comes out of our department," he said. "It's all cut and produced here, not at some plant in the middle of Walmart's distribution center."

"Walmart's meat program is very similar to what Tops tried to do, remember that? That's what killed them," he said, referring to Tops Friendly Markets' decision to replace its in-store butchers with pre-cut, prepackaged meat to save money. Tops, once Northeast Ohio's second-largest grocer with 55 stores, checked out of Ohio at the end of 2006.

"Five years ago, I would've said, 'There's no way they're going to settle for that.' But now, since the recession, I don't know."

In July, Zagara installed the self-serve organic bulk foods display, where customers can buy as much as they need of grind-your-own peanut butter to trail mix to sushi-grade organic rice. "We've been debating it for years, and we finally did it," he said.

Similarly, his new walk-in beer cooler has signs that tell buyers where the beer was made, what category of suds it falls into, its alcohol-by-volume percentage and Beer Advocate rating.

"I think the Heights mentality is in our favor"

Mary-grace Healy, Zagara's younger sister and the store's customer service specialist and all-around ambassador, said that while her brother has overhauled the store physically, a lot of what he does hasn't changed a bit.

"Any of the Cleveland Heights schools, whatever they need, he will give it to them," she said. "The Salvation Army, the veterans selling poppies, if there's a local group doing a fundraiser, he'll either donate to that or he will give them the vestibule so they can come in and raise money." She said local preschoolers regularly take tours of the bakery to watch cakes being decorated and the produce department to watch cardboard boxes being flattened.

Healy said that not only do she and her brother know many of their customers by name, their store also supports other area businesses, from Stone Oven Bakery and Mitchell's Fine Chocolates to knife and scissors sharpener Steve Buttorff.

"I think that for the most part, there will definitely be people from here who go to Walmart," she said. "With every new business, people are going to be curious, they're going to want to see what it's like."

"But they're quickly going to realize that they're not getting the selection of fresh fruit and vegetables. They're not getting fresh meat, it's all prepackaged. The discerning customer is going to notice the difference in that meat. The fresh seafood department. We have people call every day, 'Is this fish in yet?'"

"I think the Heights mentality is in our favor," she said. "They are discerning customers and they like the personal touch. I don't like to badmouth, but you get what you pay for."

Zagara used to be more certain about his business model, until he struck up a conversation with a woman in Pittsburgh. She told him that after her husband lost his job, she started shopping at Aldi, and even though he's now working full-time again, she's never gone back to her regular grocery store.

He shakes his head. "They have bananas at 16 cents a pound, and I can't get them for less than 30 cents a pound," he said.

"I'm relying on the heart and soul of the Heights customers not to be converted," he said. "There's a segment of people who want high quality and high service."



Strawberry Purple Carrot juice

Healy said she sees new faces in the store every day, and longtime customers say they've definitely noticed the improvements. Beth Karr of Cleveland Heights said: "I'll always shop here. I am not going to Walmart."

She says she decides where to shop based on quality, the friendliness of the people who work there and the kinds of things she can buy from that store. "If you want something and they don't have it here, they will get it for you," she said.

"I'd like to think that Cleveland Heights supports our local businesses," she said. "If you look up and down Lee Road, you see a lot of small businesses, and when my husband and I go to dinner, we like to go to local restaurants."

Terry Jackson of Cleveland Heights, reaching into a display of fresh muffins in Zagara's bakery department, said: "I think it's a good thing that Walmart is opening up, because I'm sure the prices are going to be better. But I'm sure they won't have everything. I come out here for some things -- I love their muffins."

"I've shopped here for over 30 years, but there are some things that I get at Zagara's, some things I get at Aldi's, some things I get at Save-A-Lot, and some things I'll get a Walmart," she said. "That won't change."

But Victoria Parratt of Cleveland Heights doesn't think Zagara's has anything to worry about from Walmart.

"You're in the Heights, and there's a culture here that isn't Walmart-friendly," she said. "We definitely try to only shop Heights stores, and we definitely want to keep businesses like Zagara's open."

"He's safe with us," her husband, John, agreed. "We're not going over there."

She pulls a bottle of RAAW 100-percent Pure Fruit and Vegetable Strawberry Purple Carrot Juice from her canvas shopping bag.

"See this? I called them and said: 'Every time I come in, I'm going to buy half a dozen bottles of this, so I need you to stock more,' and they did. And every time I come, there's half a dozen bottles waiting for me," she said.

Follow @janetcho