Clinic expansion accommodating newly insured under Affordable Care Act

CORRECTION: This story originally reported that the Salud Clinic sees 20 to 28 patients per day. The clinic sees 200 patients per day. The original number is how many patients each physician sees per day.

A metal plate across the floor of the main hallway of Longmont's Salud Family Health Clinic marks the entrance to the facility's addition that opened early this summer.

For more info Visit: saludclinic.org

Community members stepped over the metal plate Wednesday evening during an open house where more than 100 visitors came to gawk at the new space.

The expansion adds about 11,000 square feet to the facility at 220 E. Rogers Road, including 13 new exam rooms, two shared medical rooms, two procedure rooms and six dental operatories. Construction began in May 2013, and staff moved into the space this spring.

In two weeks the clinic will open an in-house pharmacy as part of the expansion, adding convenience for patients and making the center a one-stop-shop for medical, pharmaceutical and dental care, said clinic director Danny Norton. Integrating services will also streamline communication between clinic and pharmacy staff, increasing information sharing and elevating patient care, Norton said.

The $6 million expansion was needed to accommodate thousands of newly insured Colorado residents following the passage of the Affordable Care Act. The expansion was funded by federal grants allocated by the Affordable Care Act and from Boulder County's Worthy Cause tax.

Since the beginning of the year, Norton said, the center's nine physicians, three physician assistants and two nurse practitioners are seeing an average increase of two to four new patients a day. Right now, Norton sees an average of 20 to 28 patients a day, he said, and the clinic sees about 200 patients per day.

Medical assistant Carmen Prospero talks on the phone with another clinic while trying to obtain a patients medical records on Wednesday. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

Hans Elzinga, founder of the Longmont Surgical Mission program that offers free procedures for local uninsured a few times per year, said patients in the program have decreased by 50 percent since the Affordable Care Act went into effect.

Elzinga, who is also a physician at Salud, said the facility expansion will increase access to medical care for area residents who have recently become insured and those who still do not have insurance.

"We're seeing a lot of patients who have been waiting for years in some cases to have things taken care of because they didn't have insurance," Elzinga said. "The expansion is about increasing their access, which will take care of the need that has been there in a more timely fashion."

The new space includes a room and equipment for in-house cardiac stress testing, which Elzinga said, is rare for a clinic. Right now, stress tests are performed on as many as four patients per day at the clinic, he said.

Two new shared medical rooms will allow physicians to hold group care sessions with multiple patients at once, increasing the number of patients who can be treated in a day and expanding information to those patients, Norton said. The program will be implemented by the end of the year for prenatal, diabetic and fit family weight-loss patients, he said.

"Now we can treat several prenatal patients in the time it would normally take to treat only one or two," Norton said. "It also increases the amount of information that those patients receive since the physician is taking up less time by talking to the group."

Qualified patients will be automatically enrolled in the sessions but can opt out.

The center's dental services have also expanded with the new space.

All medical patients under 21 are receiving dental checkups, said Jody Davis, who heads up the center's dental care.

While addressing the crowd at the open house Wednesday, Davis estimated that dental patients will increase by about 33 percent this year.

In September, the clinic saw more than 200 new dental patients, Davis said, many Medicaid patients.

Now that the facility has more room for patients and staff, Norton said, he expects to bring on additional physicians soon to accommodate newly insured patients.

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com