Sen. Ted Cruz speaks at a campaign event in Kalamazoo. (Oct. 5, 2015)





KALAMAZOO, Mich. (WOOD/AP) — U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, who is among a big field of Republican presidential candidates, was in Kalamazoo on Monday to tell voters that he is the person for the job.

It was Cruz’s second trip to Michigan in as many months — he was at the Mackinac Republican Leadership Conference in September. The trips here appear to be part of a longer range plan to get past primaries in Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina and the rest and then into the big March block, in which Michigan will figure prominently.

“Michigan is a big state. It’s an important state,” Cruz said. “I’ll tell you, the core of our campaign are working men and women. Michigan is a state that we are competing vigorously in in the primary and we intend to compete vigorously in Michigan and win Michigan in the general election.”

Cruz, 44, is nothing if not confident. The last time Republicans won Michigan in the general election, he was 17.

Speaking before a crowd of hundreds at the Wings Event Center, he also laid out a litany of things he would do on day one if elected president, taking aim at the Obama administration in nearly all of them.

“I will go to Congress and we will repeal every word of Obamacare,” he said.

In addition to targeting the Affordable Care Act, he also voiced opposition to Common Core education standards and Planned Parenthood. If elected, he said, he would undo executive actions of President Barack Obama and order the Department of Justice to investigate and prosecute Planned Parenthood.

When asked if voters could count on him to do what he says he will, he replied, “Yes, yes and hell yes.”

He also presented himself as someone who will take on Washington as an outsider. That field of outsiders has grown with names like business mogul Donald Trump, retired neurosurgeon Dr. Ben Carson and former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina and others playing the outside game in the primary race. They are picking up support from those who think current leadership in both the Democratic and Republican parties doesn’t represent them.

Cruz moved forward with scathing reviews of the Obama administration and Washington. Upon his visit to Michigan, which came following a week in the nation’s capital, he said it was great to be back “in the United States.”

He said that constitutional rights are under attack, but that “help is on the way.”

Cruz invoked the name of President Ronald Regan and — as he did on Mackinac Island — said that the “Reagan Revolution” in some ways started in Michigan with “Reagan Democrats.” He said he thinks he can launch a similar movement here as well.

He ended by saying that “freedom isn’t some abstract concept we learn about in school” and talked about his father fleeing Cuba in the 1950s to achieve the freedom that he says is under attack.

SYRIAN REFUGEES

Cruz also called the Obama administration’s plan to accept refugees from war-torn Syria “nothing short of crazy,” because he believes some are Islamic State terrorists.

“There is a reason the director of national intelligence said among those refugees are no doubt a significant number of ISIS terrorists,” he said, using an acronym for the Islamic State group. “It would be the height of foolishness to bring in tens of thousands of people including jihadists that are coming here to murder innocent Americans.”

In fact, National Intelligence Director James Clapper has not confirmed that the refugee wave includes significant numbers of terrorists. He has spoken of the risk of terrorists mingling in, saying last month: “We don’t obviously put it past the likes of ISIL to infiltrate operatives among these refugees.” ISIL is an alternative acronym for the Islamic State group.

Clapper said the U.S. was aggressively screening the small number of Syrian refugees it has accepted.

The Obama administration said it intends to accept about 10,000 Syrian refugees and increase the overall number of refugees allowed into the country from around the world to 85,000 in the next 12 months. That total would increase to 100,000 by 2017. The U.S. now accepts up to 70,000 refugees per year.

Gov. Rick Snyder, also a Republican, is talking with federal officials about what the state can do to accept more Syrian refugees.

“Isn’t it part of our nature as Americans to say, ‘How can we help people in need?'” he asked last week.

The Detroit area has one of the largest Middle Eastern populations in the country.

Dr. Carson also has said the U.S. should bar refugees from Syria because they are “infiltrated” with Muslim extremists. Another rival, Donald Trump, has pledged to send Syrian refugees home.

Cruz said the Islamic State rose to power “in the face of American weakness.” The refugees should be resettled in the Middle East in majority Muslim countries, he said.

Cruz made his visit to Michigan polling sixth nationwide in the Real Clear Politics average of polls.

Gregg Stephenson, a 59-year-old former automotive technician from Gowen, northeast of Grand Rapids, said he likes Cruz’s combative tactics and stance against illegal immigration.

“We need somebody that stands up for us,” he said.

Michigan’s primary is scheduled for March 8.

Share this: Email

Print

Facebook

Twitter

Google

Pinterest

More

LinkedIn

Tumblr



Reddit