Please enable Javascript to watch this video

IONIA COUNTY, Mich.-- Not only is this week National Breastfeeding Week, Governor Snyder declared August as Breastfeeding Awareness Month.

In honor of the month-long recognition, supporters in Ionia County chatted over ice-cream on issues surrounding breastfeeding and the difficulties that come along with it.

Wednesday afternoon, several supporters came out to explain just how vital breast feeding is.

"This is very natural, this is the way God intended you to feed your baby. If people knew the benefits of breastfeeding over formula feeding they would probably have better opinions," said Sara Hyland a breastfeeding peer councilor.

Whether women do it to save money, or to improve their baby's health, the Ionia County Health Department tells us that nursing protects babies from illnesses like diarrhea and allergies, all while contributing to your baby's growth.

When it comes to mother's health, experts say there's a decreased risk of breast and ovarian cancer in nursing women, that it can burn up to 500 calories a day, and it can cut major costs.

With the Affordable Care Act, federal law states women at work must be granted time to 'express' their milk for one year after the child's birth every time they need to, and in a place other than a bathroom that people can't see.

Governor Rick Snyder even signing a law last year, protecting those mothers from discrimination if they choose to breastfeed in public.

But many mothers face barriers when it comes to breastfeeding, whether it's not having the time, or simply being afraid.

"It's hard when you come from a community where it's not the normal thing and you don't see moms breastfeeding," said local Dula, Kelsey Ingvartsen.

"My first son I didn't breastfeed, I breastfed him for six weeks and stopped because I didn't have support and I didn't know where to look," Ingvartsen said.

The Ionia County Health Department says those concerns could fade if women had more support.

"To have people around them say you're doing a good job, that's so important for a mom to hear especially in those early days," said Laurie Brinks a Certified Lactation Councilor.

The CDC suggests breastfeeding exclusively for the first six months of life, then up to a year with baby food blended in.

The Ionia County Health Department has a Certified Lactation Counselor and a Breastfeeding Peer Counselor on staff to support anyone who might have questions about breast feeding, you can call them at (616) 527-5341.