By the numbers Approximately 49,000 applications are pending from HealthCare.gov Approximately 19,000 of those are past the 45-day deadline 36,000 applications came from other sources 4,700 of those are past the 45-day deadline Source: Oregon Health Authority

The Oregon Health Authority has delayed launching a new public website that promises to give first-time Medicaid applicants instant feedback on eligibility and enroll them.

The launch had been set for Saturday, and the delay means that applicants will continue to face a time-consuming application process that is often followed by weeks of waiting for word from the state. Applicants have access to health care in the meantime, but their providers are paid retroactively, Oregon Health Authority spokeswoman Stephanie Tripp said.

State workers are using the new system, Oregon Eligibility, nicknamed “ONE,” to process approximately 85,000 applications for renewed and first-time membership in Medicaid, Tripp said. More than a quarter, about 24,000, of those applicants have been waiting 45 days or longer for a determination.

Under federal rules, the state is supposed to process applications within 45 days.

“OHA has a dedicated team of operations staff to ensure on-time and accurate processing of these applications and expects to be inside of the 45-day window by the beginning of March,” Tripp said in an email.

The health authority declined to make officials available for an interview about the process and the new software, which the state acquired last year. The ONE system is a modified version of the software used by Kentucky. The state budgeted $62 million and spent $58 million on the software transition project, according to a Portland Business Journal article last year. OHA did not respond to The Bulletin’s inquiry about the amount spent on the project.

Medicaid is the federal and state-subsidized insurance program for low-income people. Oregon expanded eligibility for its program, the Oregon Health Plan, in January 2014 under the Affordable Care Act, to cover adults earning up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level, about $16,000 per year for a single adult. The eligibility limit for children is even higher. Kids can be covered if their parents earn up to 300 percent of the federal poverty level.

Oregon saw a huge, unexpected surge in applications to the Oregon Health Plan which now has more than 1 million members.

About 49,000 of the applications OHA is processing were referred from the HealthCare.gov site, as uninsured people were required to obtain insurance from the federally sponsored marketplace by Dec. 15. That is also the biggest source of backlog: About 19,000 of those applications are past the 45-day deadline, Tripp said.

State workers began using the ONE system in December, and it was supposed to make for seamless data sharing between the HealthCare.gov site and the state. Oregonians who went to the federal site to buy insurance had to enter income data, which could have triggered a notice that they or their children might qualify for Medicaid. The final determination, however, has to come from the state.

The Oregon Health Authority is blaming a change in data format by the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for the backlog. “There is one basic reason for the delay in processing account transfers from HealthCare.gov,” Tripp said in an email.

The ONE system wasn’t set up for the new data format, so it couldn’t accept account transfers from HealthCare.gov, Tripp said. The health authority has made changes over the past few weeks that enable it to process those transfers, she said.

Unlike this time last year, when about 43,000 people were awaiting word on their eligibility, the Oregon Health Plan is not requiring them to pay for care out of their own pockets and hope to be reimbursed.

“That was a problem, and especially if they have a situation that was more urgent,” said Charla DeHate, CEO of La Pine Community Health Center, where a large portion of patients are OHP members.

La Pine Community Health is one of several health care providers that employ enrollment specialists, also known as “assisters,” who walk patients through applications, which can take an hour to complete. The assisters report that processing takes five weeks to 12 weeks, DeHate said.

The assisters in La Pine often call Oregon Health Plan offices while the applicant is present, and that can result in an instant determination, or one that takes a couple of weeks, DeHate said.

Another factor that’s slowing turnaround is the fact that all data, even for renewals, has to be manually entered into the ONE system, said Lindsey Hopper, vice president of Medicaid at PacificSource Community Solutions, the coordinated care organization for Central Oregon. “OHA has said existing data is junk data, basically,” she said.

The health authority acknowledged in a September presentation to the Legislature that setting Feb. 6 as the date for the applicant portal to go live was a “tight schedule.” The first step of the public launch will occur as early as next week when community-based organizations begin to use ONE to enroll their clients, Tripp said.

“We’ll listen to their feedback and decide the right time to make ONE available for Oregonians to use themselves to apply for OHP online,” Tripp said in an email. “We expect ONE will be directly available to the public in coming months.”

In the long run, the health authority and coordinated care organizations, which manage Medicaid funds and members, hope the ONE system will make life easier for OHP members, Hopper said. Currently, health care providers don’t have access to data on patients’ OHP status, so they can’t remind patients to get an eligibility determination or plan visits and procedures around plan enrollment, she said.

“We’re optimistic the ONE system will help with that,” Hopper said.

PacificSource has 52,625 OHP members in Central Oregon assigned to its network. Because of federal rules designed to maintain competition among coordinated care organizations, PacificSource and other CCOs aren’t allowed to help members with their Medicaid applications.

“We wish there was more we could do to help members navigate this process,” Hopper said. “It takes a tremendous amount of diligence, health care acumen and time to make it through this process.”

—Reporter: 541-617-7860,

kmclaughlin@bendbulletin.com