WASHINGTON–Sen. Ted Cruz and a handful of House conservatives want to make sure Congress doesn’t vote on any bill that keeps Planned Parenthood funded, even if it means a government shutdown.

But Cruz is having trouble getting his Senate colleagues on board, according to Politico. Conservative allies who backed his similar fight to defund Obamacare in 2013 haven’t joined him, and Cruz has marginalized himself after accusing Majority Leader Mitch McConnell of lying.

Senate Republicans say it’s unlikely they’ll be able to defund Planned Parenthood after a failed attempt before recess. McConnell said the votes aren’t there to override President Obama’s promised veto.

“I don’t want to use a failed tactic for political purposes knowing that it’s not going to succeed,” Sen. Dan Coats, R-Ind, told Politico. “It will certainly get Sen. Cruz a lot of attention, which is obviously something that anybody running for president would want to get.”

New Hampshire Republican Sen. Kelly Ayotte, running for re-election in 2016, told Politico it’s “obvious” Cruz is doing this for attention and she thinks the strategy is destined to fail.

But Cruz will keep pushing along. It’s another chance for him battle Republican leadership and endear himself to a Republican electorate that’s pushed Washington outsiders to the top of primary polls.

“President Obama has embraced the radical position … to try to shut down the entire federal government if this one private organization does not get taxpayer money,” Cruz told Politico. “It is only in the twisted, inverted logic of the Washington Beltway that anyone other than Barack Obama would bear responsibility for that shutdown.”

Even if the ploy fails, Cruz and his House allies can take solace in influencing something else: “The Tortilla Coast Caucus” is officially a thing.

It’s not an official caucus, but it’s the name given to Cruz and House conservatives who plotted the Obamacare shutdown in the basement of Tortilla Coast, a Capitol Hill Tex-Mex joint. The group huddles there often, and the nickname has caught on.