Wipro to acquire US-based HealthPlan Services for $460m

Wipro Limited, India’s third largest software service provider, has announced that it will acquire 100% shares of HealthPlan Services for US$460 million (approximately Rs3150 crore) from US-based Water Street Healthcare Partners. The company employs around 2,000 people located across its offices in Florida and Ohio. By this acquisition, Wipro will be hoping to offer a more integrated suite of services in its healthcare vertical and thus boost growth. It provides technology platforms to health insurance companies in ancillary, group and individual markets.

It connects its payer shoppers to over forty public exchanges and over one hundred fifty personal exchanges within the US.

Chicago-headquartered Water Street Healthcare focuses exclusively on the heath care industry in the segments like medical and diagnostic products, specialty distribution, outsourced healthcare services, and specialty pharmaceutical products and services.

The patient protection and affordable care act (Obamacare) has altered the health insurance market in the US. “Together, Wipro and HealthPlan Services will give payers the power to accelerate growth strategies while providing both business platform as a services (BPaaS) and competitive administrative service solutions”, said Jeff Bark, CEO and president, HealthPlan Services. It is also an opportunity for the company to expand its payer portfolio.

The acquisition strengthens Wipro’s place within the medical insurance change market whereas providing synergies with its presence within the managed medicare and business group insurance coverage markets, he added.

The article-change marketplace that is person keeps growing in a fast-paced and it is likely to proceed to develop in coming decades. “This will help us lower the cost of healthcare and transform the quality of the member experience”, the release said quoting Jeffrey Heenan Jalil, senior vice-president and head – Healthcare Life Sciences and Services, Wipro. Finance solutions accounted for 26.2 per cent of Wipro’s revenues in the October-December 2015 quarter, while healthcare, life sciences and services contributed 12 per cent. This is Wipro’s first major acquisition under the new leadership, and the second-biggest acquisition in the company’s history. In November this past year, it obtained two businesses – Cellent of United States and Malaysia for $77 million -centered Viteos Team for $130-million.