"Keep Calm and Fight On" isn't just a slogan on 12-year-old Sean Bartolucci's neon yellow T-shirt.

It's been his strategy in dealing with neuroblastoma, a cancer that develops from young nerve cells that he found out he had in February. As the back of the shirt says, "I've got this" is Sean's approach to his next challenge - a stem cell transplant Sept. 30.

Helping him "kick cancer's butt" is a community-organized kickball tournament Aug. 24 that has a goal of raising $5,000 for Sean's medical expenses and for his family. There are still slots available, said organizers. The tourney will be followed by a concert Aug. 28 at the Pollock Center in Camp Hill by Ben Gallaher and Taylor Perry, which will also raise money for Sean.

He's feeling pretty good right now, after a grueling year of surgeries, chemotherapy, radiation. To friends who want to catch up and see how he's doing, Sean says, "Come to the kickball tournament. I'll be there – ill be emceeing."

Sean will be starting the school year as usual, heading into seventh grade at Camp Hill Middle School, where his favorite subject is math. Sean said his "fabulous" math tutor helped him keep up during last school year through homebound instruction three times a week. But he'll be out of the classroom in October after the stem cell transplant keeps him in the hospital for a month.

His health battle started in February, just a week after his dad, Chris, suffered a severe shoulder injury in a fall.

"I woke up at 2 in the morning with horrible hip pain," Sean said. "I got an ice pack and took a Tylenol, and the next morning the pain was back," he said.

His mom, Michele Bartolucci, thought it could be appendicitis, or something related to his asthma. They headed to the emergency room, where scans showed something in or around his stomach.

They were soon at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, where doctors found he had a nine-inch tumor that required a biopsy.

"It sucked to recover from that," Sean said, but there was more pain to come. But before doctors could operate, they had to shrink the tumor. "I had four rounds of chemo, and they all were just terrible," Sean said. June 11, after the tumor had shrunk to 4.5 inches, doctors were able to remove it. Fortunately, Sean said, his doctor kept his promise to spare his belly button.

Next was a radiation infusion treatment in July that included six days of solitary confinement in a lead-walled room line in plastic. "Sean was a trooper," Michele said.

Even better news was that the cancer didn't shown up in his bone marrow, Michele said. They took out some of his healthy stem cells, which they'll transplant back into his body Sept. 30, which will require a month's hospital stay. In all, doctors said it would be a year-and-a-half of treatment, they told the family at diagnosis.

There were no signs Sean had a tumor growing inside him until that night in February, Michele said, when it must have started pressing on a nerve. "With this kind of cancer, it could have grown in a week," she said doctors told them.

Michele said Sean's patience with hospital life amazes her. "He couldn't be more polite to the doctors, the staff. He even thanks the people taking the garbage out."

Still, Sean admits "why me" thoughts have entered his head now and then. "Then I think someone else may have gotten sick and not have the same support I do. If I didn't get this and someone else got it, then I'm happy I got it before someone else," he said.

So, Sean's had a lot of down-time this summer, with a lot of healing and a few back and forth trips to the hospital for a fever, a transfusion. But he's got in some quality Xbox time playing his favorite Minecraft and BattleBlock Theater.

Boosting his spirits Sunday night was the appearance of a 10-foot-tall cardboard cutout of "Noisy Boy," a robot character from one of his favorite movies, the 2011 sci-fi action movie "Real Steel."

Sean and his 17-year-old brother Chris have also grown closer through the ordeal, Michele said.

Chris said he's impressed how Sean is doing what his shirt stays – staying calm. "My track record is I haven't had a shot in four years – I'm afraid of needles – and he used to be too," Chris said.

"It's opened your eyes to the big picture," Michele said. What's the worst for her and her husband is "the sense of being totally helpless and watching your child suffer."

"It's hard putting our son's life in someone else's hands and having to trust what they tell us," added her husband Chris.

Michele said Sean is what's inspiring them to push through the hard times.

"That kid – his spirit, his strength, his love, his positive energy gets us through it," she said. "If this kid can put a smile on his face every day, that's saying a lot."

Support from the community has been "overwhelming," Michele said, ranging from meals to donations of gas and gift cards to a hair-shaving fund-raiser at Moxy Salon in March.

"Oh my gosh, this community has just embraced us, embraced Sean," Michele said. "It's all for Sean, to help this kid get through it. We can't put it into words."

Finances are tight, since Michele is currently unemployed and Chris is still recovering from shoulder surgery.

They reached the $10,000 deductible on Sean's Affordable Care Act policy in the first few weeks of his treatment.

Traveling back and forth to Philadelphia, and staying there when Sean is at CHOP is also an expense they must absorb. Michele said the Ronald McDonald House is often full near CHOP, and at least one of them has to stay with Sean.

That's where the upcoming fund-raisers will help.

Ben Gallaher, a 2010 Cedar Cliff High School grad who's in the midst of his first nationwide tour, planned his Camp Hill concert before he heard anything about Sean Bartolucci's illness, but said he was happy to "rally my fans together to help out Sean's family...I'm excited we're able to give back some and help out."

Likewise, Camp Hill High School junior Taylor Perry, 17, who will also be performing at the concert, is glad she can do it for Sean.

"He's a fellow student at Camp Hill. It's really awesome to take something I love, and also help him. I'm really happy to be a part of it."

Likewise, Camp Hill residents lined up the kickball tourney to do what they can to help Sean. "Sean's a Fighter" is the mantra heard around town but there is so much more to this young man. Not just his fight, but his attitude and joy of life has become an inspiration to our small community," said Emily Ibanez, one of the organizers.

HOW TO HELP

To contribute to The Sean Bartolucci Foundation, contact the Lemoyne Branch of Metro Bank at 717-972-2875.

EVENTS TO BENEFIT SEAN

What: "Kick Cancer's Butt – Sean Bartolucci Kickball Tournament"

When: Aug. 24, 11 a.m. - 5 p.m.; no rain date.

Where: Eisenhower Elementary School, Camp Hill

Tickets: $225 per team of 16 ($15/player). Sign up at http://kickcancersbutt.myevent.com.

What: Ben Gallaher and Full Speed Ahead Tour featuring Taylor Perry of Camp Hill. A portion of ticket sales will benefit Sean, and donations will be collected.

When: Aug. 28, 7 p.m. concert; VIP event 5:30 p.m.

Where: Grace Milliman Pollock Center, 340 N. 21st St., Camp Hill

Tickets: General admission, $10, $12.50, $15, available at http://www.showtix4u.com. VIP tickets are $25 and include a pre-concert Q & A with Ben, photo opportunities and more.