The number of clever monikers connected to holiday shopping just keeps growing. First there was Black Friday, so named because of its role in determining whether retailers are profitable or not. Then came Cyber Monday and Small Business Saturday. Can Sustainable Sunday, dedicated to the purchase of green products, be far behind?

Editorial Agenda 2015

Make Portland a city that works Get pot right Smart choices for education Help rural Oregon Keep people and goods moving Foster small business growth Track health reforms

_______________________________ Read more about the editorial board's priorities for Oregon.

The truth is that the value of most of these days is somewhat overstated. Black Friday isn't always the busiest shopping day of the year. It depends in part on factors such as weather and where Thanksgiving and Christmas fall on the calendar – and regardless it takes more than one day to make a business profitable. Similarly, Cyber Monday doesn't stick out all that much since major online retailers pepper inboxes with promotions throughout the year.

Of the holiday theme days, Small Business Saturday is the one that has the most potential to make a real difference in consumer habits. That's because regardless of how many sales participating retailers ring up, the real value of the special day is exposure. Compared with large national retail chains and online retailers, small businesses have a more difficult time getting their message to potential customers. And Small Business Saturday has given them a big boost.

The day started in 2010 as a promotion by American Express. The credit card company is still a driving force behind the day, creating and airing commercials to help drive shoppers to so-called Main Street businesses as well as making personalized advertising available to participating retailers. Others, including the Small Business Administration, have also joined in to promote the annual day.

In many ways, Small Business Saturday is an ideal fit for the Portland area. The Yelp website ranks Portland, home of a strong downtown retail core and neighborhood shopping districts such as Hawthorne and Multnomah Village, as the fifth best U.S. city for shopping local.

The city and the business community work together to promote both Black Friday and Small Business Saturday. If you see downtown sculptures adorned in knitted attire, that's part of this year's promotion. Small businesses citywide will participate in Little Boxes, a promotion on Friday and Saturday that features discounts and a prize raffle. Other Oregon cities have variations of Portland's promotions. Gresham, for example, has a variety of downtown activities planned Saturday to draw shoppers to the city's small businesses, culminating with the city's annual tree lighting.

For retail businesses that usually rely primarily on word-of-mouth advertising and social media for marketing, the opportunity to reach new customers is truly a holiday gift. And for consumers throughout Oregon, Small Business Saturday is an opportunity to show that shopping at local businesses is more than just a part of the community's image. It's something we do.

--The Oregonian/OregonLive editorial board