Donald Trump offered which might have been his most spirited denunciation yet of last year's nuclear deal with Iran Saturday, throwing insults at "baby" President Obama and "mentally abused" Secretary of State John Kerry for what Trump claimed was poor negotiation.

"I hate seeing President Obama today saying that 'Iran has violated our agreement,'" Trump said Saturday evening during his third campaign event of the day in Wisconsin.

The president on Friday said at a nuclear security summit in Washington that while Iran has so far followed the agreement to the letter, the "spirit" of the agreement has been violated. He faulted provocative signals Iran sends to the world community and businesses

"I mean what did he think? He's now complaining about Iran violating the agreement," Trump continued. "What the hell did he think?"

Subscribe today to get intelligence and analysis on defense and national security issues in your Inbox each weekday morning from veteran journalists Jamie McIntyre and Jacqueline Klimas. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for the Daily on Defense newsletter. You should receive your first issue soon!

"He's like a baby," Trump said to cheers. He also called Obama incompetent.

The $150 billion in Iranian assets unfrozen through the deal went "right out the tubes," Trump said.

He excoriated Kerry, who led negotiations with Tehran, for his negotiating aptitude.

"They abused him mentally. They abused him like he was a child. They took advantage of him like he was a baby," Trump said.

Trump said "stupid" leaders allowed Iran to get away with the nuclear deal. During the same speech Trump suggested he had been surprised recently to learn that the United States keeps tens of thousands of troops in Germany, Japan and South Korea.

Also from the Washington Examiner 'Mosquitos are ravaging': Dems demand GOP cancel recess to pass Zika bill Democratic leaders in the House and Senate called on Republicans to cancel next week's Memorial Day recess in order to pass legislation to deal with the Zika virus, and vote on other issues, including President Obama's Supreme Court nomination. "You know, mosquitos are ravaging for the first time of the history of mosquitos, and they've been scourges for generations and generations," Reid said at a press event outside the Capitol. "But they've never, ever caused birth defects. They do now." Zika, which has been transmitted through mosquito bites, has been tied to birth defects in infants, and the Obama administration has warned that the virus could spread through mosquitos in the U.S. this summer.