On Friday, Sept. 12, a hospital in Boston will hold a fundraiser in an effort to continue its goal of helping Latinos in America get access to health care.

According to Fox News Latino, Latinos are among those most affected by the difficulties Americans face in getting medical services.

In order to fight this indiscretion, Latino professionals launched Boston Children's Hospital's Milagros para Niños (Miracles for Children) initiative five years ago. The program aims to help Latino children by aiding their parents and caretakers get access to proper medical care.

"Milagros para Niños is a Latino initiative at Boston Children's Hospital with a mission to improve the health of children in New England and around the world," the initiative's official website explains. "Led by the Latino Advisory Council at Boston Children's Hospital Trust, it raises funds for underserved children, with a focus on Latino patients and families."

Every year, the hospital holds a black tie gala to support funding, according to FNL. Since the initiative was launched in 2009, the gala has raised almost $2 million to support its efforts. According to the Boston Children's Hospital, host of ABC's "What Would You Do?" John Quiñones will be the master of ceremonies at this year's gala.

"There is definitely a need for the services and the funds that we generate on behalf of the hospital," Monica Neuman, a founding member of Milagros para Niños, said.

The Milagros para Niños initiative tackles various threats to the Latino community, including mental health issues, asthma and obesity, its website says.

"Milagros para Niños improves the lives of all kids with a focus on Latino kids by raising funds for Boston Children's programs that impact underserved children with a focus on the Latino community," the website continues. "Programs in community health offer wraparound care to local families struggling to get by ..."

Assistance in obtaining health care may become more imperative soon, as thousands of immigrants -- many of which are Latino -- are in danger of losing health insurance they acquired through the Affordable Care Act this month. As of Sept. 3, 239,000 immigrants were in jeopardy of having their coverage end on Sept. 30 if they did not submit proof of legal residence by Sept. 5.

---

Follow Scharon Harding on Twitter: @ScharHar.