Topics: Editor's Picks, Michele Bachmann, Paul Ryan, Republican Party, roadtrip, Steve King, Politics News

Janesville is boring.

It’s Nov. 4, just after 11 a.m. The sky is the color of steel, the air hibernal. I’m walking past Rep. Paul Ryan’s district office. Except for some people waiting for a bus, there’s nobody else outside.

I’ve come here from Chicago on a sort of anthropological mission: Over the next four days, I’ll see Paul Ryan’s congressional district in southern Wisconsin, Michele Bachmann’s district in the suburbs of the Twin Cities, and Steve King’s district in western Iowa – a 1,200 mile drive across the Midwest in search of the region’s secrets. I’m not sure what I expect to find, but I hope visiting these places, and trying to understand them, will shed some light on the political right wing currently waging war on the federal government — or at least paint a portrait of the culture they were birthed from.

Tall order for a road trip, I know.

Ryan’s Janesville office is wildly unassuming, considering the breadth of his influence. Elected to the House in 1998, he rose to national prominence in 2011 when he became chairman of the House Budget Committee, and quarterbacked the GOP’s much-loathed 2012 budget proposal — seeking to slash government programs and repeal the Affordable Care Act, while of course leaving Bush-era tax cuts for the wealthy untouched. Though the Ryan Budget proved unpopular with the American public, it instantly became the right’s economic blueprint, catapulting the representative from Wisconsin’s 1st district to A-list status in the GOP.

Ryan became the party’s fastest-rising star since She Who Must Not Be Named – a young, attractive conservative who was able to translate the right’s addled rage into measured, level-sounding politico-speak. When the party needed someone to give a shot of adrenaline to Mitt Romney’s beige presidential bid, they tapped Ryan. And his home office is right here, on the main drag of a suburban city, just down the block from an Edible Arrangements and a sports bar.

I’m not sure what I was expecting. People casually sporting tri-cornered hats? Mobs burning copies of the Nation and Mother Jones?

I’m from Illinois, which means virtually every vacation I ever took as a kid was to Wisconsin. Janesville, where you still see Bears flags outside some of the houses, isn’t all that different from the area near Chicago I grew up in. It’s mostly white, middle-class and – in true Midwest fashion – completely unassuming. The streets are tree-lined, the pavement a mosaic of autumn leaves. The houses are old and still cobwebbed from Halloween. Occasionally, you’ll see a “PROUD UNION HOME” sign in a front-room window or a car with a “ROMNEY 2012″ bumper sticker, but that’s about it for overt political gestures.

The town is hilly and the hills are real climbers. Big parks are verdant even in mid-fall. Bars and restaurants and churches and strip malls; there’s nothing about Janesville that particularly jumps out at you, but that’s sort of the point. Places like this are retreats from metropolitan stimulation, the buzz of the city traded for the halcyon still-frame of suburbia. Janesville is boring, but kind of on purpose.

It is, above all else, comfortable.

* * *

People in the country drive like assholes. City drivers have a reputation for being aggressive, but this is of a different kind entirely. The city’s aggressive drivers squeeze in front of you in bumper-to-bumper traffic, or blaze past the evening commute on the shoulder of a highway. It’s all part of the Busy Professional self-centeredness thing that leads people to talk on their cellphones while ordering at Starbucks, or convert their train seats into mobile offices. In short, it’s all about getting there quicker and filling in the quiet moments of the day with some form of stimulation. The country’s aggressive drivers, on the other hand, all but bully you with their vehicles, which seem bigger and more threatening out here. They ride your tail relentlessly but don’t pass when you slow down. For miles, snarling pickups match my speed, close enough in my rearview to see the creases on the face of each driver.

I’m not actually positive this is the country, though. It’s entirely possible it just seems like the country to my untrained eye. I once worked as a reporter for a newspaper in a small town about 70 miles southwest of Chicago, and told everybody I worked in Central Illinois. People I grew up with from the Chicago area would invariably take this at face value, but people who were actually from Central Illinois — small towns etched into map-flat fields of corn and soybean — would invariably laugh me off. That’s not Central Illinois, they’d say. I might as well have been working in the Loop.

Anyway, it feels to me like the middle of nowhere, even though I can’t be more than an hour away from Milwaukee. I pass through towns like Darien (pop: 1,580), which appear like a Bruce Springsteen song: two rows of old storefronts whose main drag terminates into two huge grain elevators. The road twines through expansive farmland; this is dairy country and cows are everywhere. They lay on their stomachs in an almost-feline way, with their front legs tucked underneath them and their back legs sprawled to the side. An old wives’ tale holds that a pasture of supine cows portends a coming rainstorm. Explanations abound, ranging from the semi-anthropomorphic (cows lie down to claim a dry patch of grass) to the dubiously scientific (something about the pores in their legs), but only the most deeply superstitious really give them weight. Still, the cows are lying down as I listen to predictions of heavy rain across the region, so perhaps our bovine meteorologists are onto something.

Every town I pass through feels more or less the same. Each features a bucolic downtown hub surrounded by strip malls, chain restaurants and big box stores. In one sense, the sameness is sort of depressing: Nothing, you realize, is as unique as you think it is. And yet, another part of me feels an odd comfort in the familiarity — the sense that, no matter where you go, you’re never too far from a place that feels kind of like home.

* * *

I’m staying with my friend Guillermo in Madison tonight. One of my best friends since high school, he’s getting his master’s at University of Wisconsin — a full-on Wisconsin resident now — which still seems surreal to me. By 25, I no longer bat an eye when save-the-dates arrive in the mail, but seeing the out-of-state driver’s licenses of childhood friends still weirds me out. Long-term monogamous relationships, I’m used to. People I grew up with slowly morphing into Seattle Seahawks fans? That I am not.

As a liberal, I’ve always loved Madison, even if it’s probably coasting to some degree on the lefty bona fides it earned during the ’60s. In many ways, it’s similar to San Francisco and Greenwich Village — places that once served as the center of counterculture, then gradually became bubbles for wealthier white liberals to live in. It’s still a progressive city — still a hub of progressive thought — but it no longer feels like a place of progressive action. This is an important distinction.

I could be completely wrong, though. In 2011, 100,000 people descended on the Capitol building here to protest Gov. Scott Walker’s anti-union budget plan. It was a losing battle, but they fought it hard. I’m standing outside the Capitol building now. Night’s fallen, and under the ink-black sky, the lit rotunda is indescribably beautiful. It’s the tallest building in Madison — a city ordinance forbids any structure within a mile from being taller — and atop its central dome is perched the “Golden Lady” statue, looking down over the city and pointing forward, into the future.

* * *

Tuesday, 8 a.m. Two hours on I-90 so far, northwest toward the Minnesota border. It’s cold and sunless and foggy enough that seeing the car immediately ahead becomes somewhat difficult. I’m approaching a billboard for an adult store, which promises to make “it” better. That the pronoun “it” is just understood to mean “sex” says a lot about our culture, doesn’t it? The French have la petite mort, which is plenty aggrandizing in its own right, but at least it’s poetic. “It,” simultaneously concealing the subject and putting it on a pedestal, makes us sound like a country of randy teenagers. Which I suppose isn’t that far off.

Adult stores are advertised with great frequency out on the highway. The road is lonely, and it’s easy to view sex as the ultimate panacea to loneliness. It’s connection with another person. It takes you outside yourself. That’s what makes it a “little death” — for its duration, you cease to exist.

Obviously, though, adult video emporiums aren’t selling you sex – they’re selling you the idea of sex. The idea of connection, of getting away from yourself. We’ve put so many constructs in place to stave off loneliness: We check our email on our cellphones, engage constantly on social media. I sometimes wonder if we installed radios in our cars not to eliminate boredom, but to keep the quiet at bay, afraid of what we might find in the solitude.

* * *

Driving gives a person plenty of time to think about what they believe in.

I believe, for one, in compromise. I believe liberals and conservatives agree on more than we realize, and that much of today’s hyper-partisanship stems from our having retreated into the comfort of our own camps, where if we’re liberal we can watch MSNBC or if we’re conservative we can watch Fox, and each listen all day to opinions we already agree with. I believe that, for the most part, people are good and want what’s best for the country we all love, but have different approaches to solving our most complex problems, that we would find common ground through respectful, sober discussion. I believe getting out of our comfort zones, and not just dismissing the other side as evil or crazy, would move the country forward.

But what if the other side doesn’t want to compromise? What if they’ve actually campaigned on a refusal to compromise? And what if someone’s views aren’t just different than yours, but abhorrent, or just plain silly?

This is what I decided to call the Bachmann Conundrum.

Michele Bachmann, since her election to Congress in 2006, has been a greatest-hits collection of outrageous right-wing talking points. She doesn’t believe in global warming, arguing that carbon dioxide is a “harmless gas.” She also shamelessly traffics in race-tinged paranoia: In 2008, she was concerned then-candidate Barack Obama “may have anti-American views”; and in 2012, she suggested that the Muslim Brotherhood had begun a “deep penetration into the halls of our United States government.” And of course, she’s a career homophobe, terming homosexuality “personal enslavement” and “sexual anarchy.”

Where do you start coming to a compromise with someone who believes homosexuality is a disorder and opposed anti-bullying legislation on the grounds that there have always been bullies and to legislate against it would force “boys to be girls”?

That’s the Bachmann Conundrum.

* * *

Minnesota’s 6thCongressional District covers the northern suburbs of the Twin Cities. The district is upwards of 95 percent white and largely middle- to upper-middle class. If you’ve seen a suburb you’ve seen these. Historic downtowns surrounded by a sprawl of car dealerships, office parks, malls. Target, Wal-Mart, K-Mart – the same stores as Wisconsin and Illinois, and everywhere else for that matter. Stately old houses, ugly cookie-cutter subdivisions. Nothing particularly mesmerizing about them.

Bachmann’s district office is in her hometown of Anoka, about half an hour north of Minneapolis. People here, like everywhere I visit during the course of the trip, tend not to volunteer their deepest-held political opinions to random passersby, such as myself, in the middle of their daily routines.

I meet both Republicans and Democrats, and ask general questions about their views on national politics. Sample response: “They all need to grow up.”

And yet, despite disenchantment with politicians as a whole, gentle prodding frequently reveals partisan sentiments lurking below the surface. People all seem to want the same things – fairness, stability – but often have different ideas about what those qualities entail, and what sorts of legislation can steer us there. In settings where they feel comfortable talking politics, people occasionally give off the affect of talking points. Still, most of those I encounter — say, at a gas station in Ham’s Lake, Minn. — politely inform me:

“I’d prefer not to be interviewed.”

In Anoka, folks are much more keen to discuss Halloween. The town bills itself as the “Halloween Capital of the World,” and features Halloween iconography on its permanent signage. Houses are still completely decked out nearly a week into November, which is all – needless to say – extremely cool.

Michele Bachmann, it turns out, hails from the Halloween Capital of the World.

A coffee shop owner tells me the town earned its distinction by hosting what apparently was America’s first Halloween parade in 1920. As the story goes, some local civic leaders were brainstorming a way to keep the youth of Anoka free of mischief, and decided that a structured celebration would cut down on pranks and vandalism. The strategy worked, and now the yearly celebration has grown to include two parades, a house-decorating contest, and a slew of other events relating to the holiday.

“You missed out on all the decorations,” a lady who works at the coffee shop tells me as she prepares a sandwich. Above my head, ghoulish figures are still dangling on wires from the ceiling.