The number of people without health insurance has declined by 15.8 million since ObamaCare’s coverage expansion took effect, according to a new report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

ADVERTISEMENT

The National Health Interview Survey finds that the number of uninsured people has declined from 44.8 million in 2013, before ObamaCare’s coverage expansion took effect, to 29 million in the first quarter of 2015.

The uninsured rate fell from 14.4 percent in 2013 to 9.2 percent in 2015, according to the CDC.

The CDC report follows other studies that have found similar drops in the uninsured rate under ObamaCare.

The Obama administration estimated in March that 16.4 million people had gained coverage under the law, using Gallup survey data.

On Monday, Gallup released a survey showing the uninsured rate had fallen from 17.3 percent in 2013 to 11.7 percent.

The survey also found that there are now seven states with uninsured rates at or below 5 percent: Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Vermont, Minnesota, Iowa, Connecticut and Hawaii. Before this year, only Massachusetts had a rate that low.

The CDC report Wednesday also found a larger drop in the uninsured rate in states that expanded Medicaid, the government health insurance program for the poor, under ObamaCare.

In those states, the uninsured rate fell from 18.4 percent to 10.6 percent from 2013 to 2015. In other states, there was a smaller drop, from 22.7 percent to 16.8 percent.

Thirty states have expanded Medicaid eligibility, but other states have held out, often citing the cost of expansion. The federal government initially pays the entire cost and then scales back to covering 90 percent of the cost.

“We’ve still got states out there that, for political reasons, are not covering millions of people that they could be covering, despite the fact that the federal government is picking up the tab,” President Obama said after the White House’s victory on the law at the Supreme Court in June.