I knew Hillary Clinton was in trouble when I got to my polling place. The same-day registration line was long and full of students from Dartmouth. Students do not register in New Hampshire and then line up to vote for Hillary. They were there to "feel the Bern." The numbers later validated my anecdotal snapshot.

People are anxious and fed up. What we saw last night was just two variations on that political disgust. Young people would like to see a fairer society, a less-corrupt political system and meaningful efforts to deal with climate change. They would like to leave college without crushing debt.

As a professor of public policy, I can say that most of Sen. Bernie Sanders' policy ideas make little sense at all, either because they would not have their intended effect or because there is absolutely no chance of getting them implemented in the current political environment. But that's a 50-year-old writing. I admire Bernie's idealism and the sentiment it inspires among my students, even as I despair as to how it might ultimately turn out. If I were 18, I would have voted for Bernie, just to send a message to the rest of us: You've made a mess of things. Stop it. My daughter turned 18 three days before the primary. That was the vote she cast.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

Hillary is part of that system. She is too much of a politician to inspire idealism, but not a good enough politician to mobilize people to action. This feeling for me crystallized as I watched her concession speech last night. The content was carefully tailored to appeal to African-American voters in South Carolina. I felt none of the emotional resonance that I did when Bernie Sanders described the life of his Polish immigrant parents; or when John Kasich spoke about the pain and travails of some of the people he had met during his long campaign slog in New Hampshire. Hillary Clinton is the system, and people are fed up with the system.

Over on the Republican side, Donald Trump surprised me once again. I thought this was going to be the moment when he finally fell off the stage. Trump polls very well with people who do not typically vote. After his disappointing finish in Iowa, I figured his supporters would stay home. They did not.

Donald Trump is offering a different flavor of political disgust than Bernie Sanders, but it's in the same family. He taps into a deep sense of economic anxiety, especially among less educated white voters who are watching the world move away from them. He promises a stronger America. His assault on the campaign finance system, ironically, sounds a lot like Bernie Sanders.

[READ: Granite State Trumper Tantrum]

The populists are winning. That's the headline from New Hampshire. Here's how we got to that point. The two political parties have progressively become more politically dishonest. Their diagnoses and policy proposals grow steadily more simplistic.

The Democrats speak rightfully about poverty and the plight of working Americans. But rather than tackling the tough underlying issues, such as the rise of technology that displaces low-skill workers or the steady erosion of two-parent households, they offer up fake villains like trade and Wall Street. (Let me be clear, trade does have adverse effects on parts of the country, and Wall-Street types did ridiculously stupid things in the run up to 2008 – but neither is the fundamental cause of America's growing income inequality.)

If you would like to read the very best assessment of poverty and inequality in America that I have seen in years, check out this report jointly issued by the American Enterprise Institute and the Brookings Institution (two think tanks with very different ideological outlooks). And then ask yourself if any Democratic politician is speaking about these issues.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Donald Trump]

The Republicans are peddling their own intellectual nonsense. They speak, rightfully, about our growing fiscal challenges while proposing tax plans that are ridiculously irresponsible. They vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act without offering any meaningful plan to restrain America's unsustainable growth in health care costs. They are dishonest and irresponsible on climate change. And so on.

Enter the populists. If you are going to fib to the American people, then go big! The "establishment" wings of the parties have created their own populist Frankensteins. If you promise everyone a free pony, then of course the candidates offering unicorns are going to look even better.