Things have gotten slightly better for John Nutt’s 48-year-old sister since a trooper with the Florida Highway Patrol knocked at his door about two weeks ago.

They couldn’t have gotten much worse.

Christina Nutt fractured her skull, ribs, hip and pelvis and lost her left arm and right leg at the knee in a St. Johns County motorcycle crash on Florida 207 June 13. She’s expected to recover but is still in intensive care at UF Health Jacksonville.

“We’re just lucky that she’s alive,” her brother said.

Christina Nutt moved to St. Augustine about two years ago from Michigan after quitting her job. She wanted to own a business and work for herself. She had worked as a pet groomer for about 20 years and it made sense to open a similar business.

Portable Pooches Spa brought the dog groomer to the customer. She quickly had success with her outgoing personality and professionalism, said Melissa Kramer, whose dog, Belle, was often groomed by Nutt.

John Nutt said his sister had a three-month waiting list for new clients.

The well-liked dog groomer always found time for her current clients, Kramer said. She remembers once forgetting to make the appropriate appointments and how Christina Nutt still groomed her dog even though it was past when she made house calls.

“You can just tell she has a good heart and she’s very friendly,” Kramer said.

Christina Nutt had bought the 2015 Harley-Davidson motorcycle about three weeks before she crashed it. She did take a few classes to learn how to operate the vehicle as she had plans to ride across the state with her boyfriend. On June 13 her boyfriend was ahead of her on his motorcycle and a mutual friend was riding behind her. She wobbled to the right, then veered left before smashing into the guardrail, John Nutt said.

She does have health insurance as the self-employed business owner gained coverage through the Affordable Care Act. But there’s still going to be thousands of dollars in medical bills.

Family in Michigan and friends in Florida have posted parts of Nutt’s story on fundraising websites and trying to raise money to help her.

“We want to stand with her and support her through the community,” Kramer said. We don’t want her finances to fall apart while she’s dealing with her health.”

The two websites have already raised about $4,000.

Anyone can donate at youcaring.com/christina-nutt-372378 or youcaring.com/christina-nutt-371921.

Derek Gilliam: (904) 359-4619