Topics: 2016, AlterNet, Burlington, sanders, Trump, VT, Elections News, Social News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Donald Trump’s dysfunctional presidential campaign was on full display Thursday night in Bernie Sanders’ hometown.

Trump alternately bragged that he would make America so great people would be bored with his successes and aggressively ordered security to kick out hecklers who interrupted him more than a dozen times. Then he boasted that’s how you handle misguided people.

“Did you get him out of here? Did you get them out?” Trump repeatedly said. “Pretty soon they’re [his security] going to get so nasty, that we will not have any protests.”

The see-saw between Trump’s endless boasts, his smearing of critics and competitors, and his strongman treatment of protesters to show he would do whatever it takes to stay in control, continued throughout his 80-minute speech. Trump briefly attacked Sanders in much the same way he went after the protesters, saying he would love to run against him in the general election—that it would be “a dream come true”—but then said he lost respect for Sanders after the incident in which the senator was interrupted onstage by Black Lives Matters protesters and allowed them to take over the microphone.

“I would never let that happen,” Trump said. “I lost so much respect for Bernie. We can’t let anybody take over our mic. We can’t let it happen.”

Whether it was holding onto the microphone or anything else Trump deemed important—building a wall on the Mexican border, taking Iraq’s oil—he said that only he has the reasonable and strong position, while everyone else is weak, stupid and incompetent.

In many respects, Trump’s criticism of Sanders was muted in comparison to his harsh words for congressional Republicans, who he said caved badly during the just-passed federal budget deal with President Obama. But that may not have been the point of Trump’s visit to Burlington, where Sanders was mayor for eight years in the 1980s. The Vermont media coverage from Burlington is also broadcast in New Hampshire, where the first GOP primary is held. With Ted Cruz looking like he will win in Iowa, where candidates favored by Republican evangelicals have repeatedly won the first-in-the-nation caucuses, Trump used the Vermont appearance to portray his GOP competitors as weak for not venturing into Sanders’ backyard.

Meanwhile, Trump used his well-honed sense of stagecraft to ensure the event would draw maximum attention. On Wednesday, his staff announced they had given away nearly 20,000 tickets for an event in a theater with only 1,400 seats. That caused local police to fret about crowds, some committed supporters and protesters to get in line as early as 4:30am, and TV crews to be present during the day. The anti-Trump protests in a park across the street from the event included silent vigils, marchers chanting, “Racist, fascist, anti-gay, Donald Trump, stay away!” and “Don’t give in to racist fear, refugees are welcome here.” The pro-Trump side countered from the sidewalk, “Build a wall!” and “USA! USA!”