There’s a 2-acre backyard somewhere in McComb, Miss., with a hand-built clay pitching mound bumping up from the weeds and grass. It’s right near the dirt basketball court. But if a game’s going on, and you want to call strikes or fouls, you had better earn them.

That’s where Corey Dickerson, the Rockies’ breakthrough young outfielder, learned his trade — not baseball, but family turf war. It was Corey against Craig. Little brother against big brother.

Admire a home run a little too long? Get yelled at and pitched inside. Tackle on a layup? No foul.

“We’d get to pushing and shoving. A bunch of our games led to fights,” Craig said. “But he always worked harder than anybody I’ve ever known. And played harder. I’d do anything in this world for him. And I know he’d do the same thing.”

Long before he was overlooked by big-college recruiters and many pro scouts, Corey Dickerson, an otherwise easygoing Southerner with a sweet tooth for ice cream, had a chip planted on his shoulder.

“It’s in my nature, ever since I was young. Any kind of sport, I want to win,” Dickerson said. “I’m really laid-back, but once I get in that position where it’s me against him or me against whoever, I try to win. It’s like a switch. I always turn it on.”

In his first full season as a major-leaguer, the 25-year-old Dickerson has emerged as a future key for Colorado. With veteran Carlos Gonzalez and Michael Cuddyer injured, Dickerson was thrown into a Rockies lineup desperate for hitting.

Now, approaching the all-star break, he’s one of Colorado’s most explosive hitters — his 1.020 OPS (on-base plus slugging percentages) ranks second on the team.

And with Gonzalez openly acknowledging the possibility of a future trade from the Rockies, Dickerson’s timetable for stardom — and Colorado’s need for his production — is quickly approaching.

“He’s got a great mentality for this game. He’s the epitome of unflappable,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. “He accepts every challenge matter-of-factly. He doesn’t care who you are on the mound. He expects to beat you. I don’t think you can teach that. That’s just the way he’s wired.”

Earning more at-bats

Dickerson, a replacement in left field after Gonzalez had a tumor removed from his finger, has become the Rockies’ second-best hitter, behind Troy Tulowitzki — with a .340 batting average, .402 on-base percentage and a .618 slugging percentage. In 65 games, he has 11 home runs and 14 doubles.

“You find at-bats for a guy like that who can impact the game like ‘Dickey’ has,” Weiss said. “You find a way to get him in the game.”

Dickerson’s numbers, although over an abbreviated sample size, are approaching those from Gonzalez’s best year, in 2010, when he finished third in National League MVP voting. Dickerson’s numbers for the slash line (AVG/OBP/SLG) are nearly identical to Gonzalez’s from four years ago.

“It’d be nice to have them both,” Weiss said. “Corey’s playing virtually every day now. And everybody’s seeing the type of hitter we’ve talked about for a year. He’s a pure hitter. He has that rare ability to hit for very high average and power.”

When Gonzalez returns — likely sometime within the next two weeks — Dickerson may move to right field, Weiss said, or back to a part-time role.

With a crowded, six-deep Rockies outfield to start the season, Dickerson’s role was situational. Weiss used the left-handed hitter primarily against right-handed pitchers. But with Gonzalez and Cuddyer out, the team’s depth was tested. And Dickerson became a regular.

He has excelled, taking advantage of Coors Field’s outfield. The lefty Dickerson has shown he can pull hits for power to right field and hit for average to center and left — his opposite-field average (.380) is well above the rest of the league (around .250).

“I think Walt, with a young guy, he wants to get your feet wet and get you comfortable,” Dickerson said. “And not just throw you to the wolves and get you beat down so you have to build yourself back up. He wants you to test the waters and know how the game works.

“He knows I can handle that now.”

Pingpong power stroke

Back in McComb, in between tackle basketball games, Corey and Craig would play ball on the homemade diamond with a broomstick and a pingpong ball.

“Believe it or not, you can make a pingpong ball do crazy things,” said Craig, 27, who works off-shore on an oil rig near Mississippi. “I’m pretty sure that’s where he got his eye for baseball from.”

But it’s fair to say Dickerson was overlooked on scouting boards coming out of Meridian (Miss.) Community College in 2010. The Rockies drafted him in the eighth round, 260th overall, and he is one of only three in that round to play in the majors so far.

“He’s always had to prove people wrong, because he didn’t come from a high-profile college program; he’s a small-town kid,” Weiss said.

“He probably heard a lot of people talk about the things he couldn’t do. That’s been a great motivator for him.”

Scouts told Dickerson he could go as high as the third round, and the Philadelphia Phillies phoned him in the fifth round before passing. But Colorado, which had drafted him a year earlier in the 29th round (871st overall), went for him again.

“I feel like I’ve never been given that much credit, even though I’ve put up numbers everywhere I’ve been, better than most players,” Dickerson said.

“I haven’t been talked about, and that’s fine. But it keeps a chip on my shoulder. It keeps me wanting to get better. I just try to hold a chip on my shoulder no matter what. I just like to play the game hard.”

Dickerson returned last week to Washington, where he doubled twice against the Nationals in his big-league debut in 2013. A year later, Dickerson, once a little brother, is next in line to be a big-bat Rockies slugger.

“I just kept the same routine, and be the same player I’ve always been,” Dickerson said. “Whatever role I’m in, I’m going to compete no matter what. I’m just going to take the chances I get and go with them.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke

Corey vs. Cargo

Corey Dickerson’s numbers in his first full big-league season are approaching those of the player he replaced after an injury. How Dickerson’s stats compare with those in Carlos Gonzalez’s best year, in 2010, when he finished third in NL MVP voting:

Player, season G AB Avg OBP SLG HR RBIs Dickerson, 2014 65 191 .340 .402 .618 11 34 Gonzalez, 2010 145 587 .336 .376 .598 34 117

Nick Groke, The Denver Post