LONG BEACH >> The weeks of delays, technical difficulties and waiting to speak to an actual human being that culminated with the revelation that he was not included among the ranks of the newly insured drove Fred Pontzloff to do what many others have done and protest the Affordable Care Act.

Except his protest took him to Pacific Coast Highway at rush hour.

And if things work out, as a representative of the state’s new health insurance exchange says it will, that may have been just what was needed to solve Pontzloff’s problem.

“I took to the streets. That was my Howard Beale moment,” said Pontzloff, 62, a writer and acting teacher, who says he needs his coverage to go into effect as soon as possible to pay for open-heart surgery.

Howard Beale is the fictional news anchor who in the classic 1976 film “Network” declared on a national broadcast, “I’m mad as hell and I’m not going to take this anymore.” It wasn’t TV, but Pontzloff staged a one-man protest a week ago at Pacific Coast Highway and Redondo Avenue, where he carried a sign declaring that he was not receiving the health care he expected.

“I’m pretty aggressive. I don’t take no for an answer, and I try to get to the right person,” Pontzloff said at his home.

Pontzloff said he was moved to protest after visiting a Lakewood cardiologist on Jan. 3 and getting the unwelcome surprise of being unable to verify his health insurance despite receiving a confirmation email from Anthem Blue Cross on New Year’s Day. That message came, he said, at the conclusion of about a month’s work to get signed up for insurance through the state’s insurance exchange, Covered California.

“I came home and I was just furious,” said Pontzloff, who said his days of protesting go back to street theater displays against the Vietnam War. “I was so angry I was starting to get dizzy, and I thought. ‘You’ve got to do something. You can’t be a victim.’ ”

With that attitude, Pontzloff bought a thick black marker at ACE Hardware and made a sign with white poster board. His message, in part: “After enrolling in Covered CA and paying Anthem Blue Cross, I was denied service by my doctor.”

“I thought. ‘Where’s the most traffic? PCH.’ ” he said, deciding upon a location about two miles from his home.

Advertisement

That thought took him to Plaza Zaferia, a grassy spot between the northbound and southbound lanes on Redondo Avenue. He said several motorists and passersby honked their horns or stopped to speak with him during the roughly four hours of his protest.

But more importantly, Covered California personnel also learned of his protest.

Anthem Blue Cross could not be reached for comment. As of Thursday, however, Covered California reported that Pontzloff is in Anthem Blue Cross’ system as an insured patient.

“He’s been notified of the outcome,” Covered California spokesman Roy Kennedy said. “We’ve provided him a telephone number of his provider, and we’ve confirmed his enrollment.”

Pontzloff plans to find out whether his insurance problems are solved when he visits a doctor’s office on Monday.

Covered California is the health insurance exchange created as a result of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. The exchange is intended to provide an avenue for people who meet income eligibility requirements to obtain subsidized health insurance. The law imposes a tax penalty on Americans who forgo health coverage. Last weekend, the deadline for Covered California enrollees to pay their first premium and be covered as of the new year was extended to Jan. 15.

Pontzloff started his quest for health insurance in late November. He last had insurance about two or three years ago but decided to drop insurance after weighing the comparative risks of foregoing coverage or adding to his debts by paying for premiums with a credit card, he said.

He was unable to complete an online application and resorted to hiring a broker to get through the process, which was further complicated due to his being self-employed and needing to estimate his 2014 income.

What’s more, his heart condition was unknown to him until after he started the enrollment process, and he has spent more than $500 of his savings on doctor visits.

The Affordable Care Act has been the subject of frequent criticism from conservatives who have spoken against the law’s insurance mandate as well as the much-reported enrollment foul-ups. Pontzloff, by contrast, said his politics are informed by the radicalism of the 1960s, and he does not object to the prospect of government-provided health care as much as what he deems to be the poor execution of policy.

“I wanted a single-payer plan. I wanted Medicare for all,” he said. “I fault the insurance companies, because they knew this wave was coming.”

Pontzloff’s Long Beach-based insurance broker, David Neckanoff, said he has worked with 20 to 30 people who have wanted to enroll through Covered California but have experienced difficulties with the process. Covered California’s website refers people who want help enrolling to insurance agents in their area.

“That part of the whole system is the only part that’s working well,” Neckanoff said. “If someone needs help, it funnels them to an agent pretty quickly.

“I have had people that have applied five different times because they’re not sure it was effective.”

As for the Affordable Care Act, Neckanoff said the law has potential to help people who could not otherwise get insurance due to pre-existing conditions or financial difficulties, but he thinks it’s too early to declare whether the law is a success or failure.

“I don’t know if it’s the right one,” he said, “but I definitely think something needed to change from the way it was.”

For professional purposes, Pontzloff spells his name Ponzlov. His filmography as an actor includes appearances in “L.A. Law” and “Murder She Wrote,” among other shows. He is also the screenwriter of the 2002 comedy “Undertaking Betty.”

Contact Andrew Edwards at 562-499-1305.