A presidential election in which the dominant figure is a blustery billionaire developer who never before sought public office can hardly be called normal.

Still, one traditional pattern of presidential politics — rejection of ideological extremes — is likely to be part of the outcome, even in this most untraditional year. In both parties, voters are choosing more centrist contenders over their more ideological rivals.

It might not always seem that way — Republican front-runner Donald Trump has spouted the campaign’s most extreme rhetoric. However, his positions on Obamacare and Planned Parenthood are less doctrinaire than those of his two main rivals, even as he confounds some GOP conservatives by winning so many conservative votes.

Meanwhile, the most outspokenly conservative contender, Sen. Ted Cruz, has largely failed to expand the evangelical support he used to win Iowa caucuses into the broader backing needed to be nominated — just like Mike Huckabee in 2008 and Rick Santorum and 2012.

Despite winning his home state of Texas, along with Oklahoma and Alaska, and finishing second in four other states on Tuesday, he failed to score the Southern breakthrough he once counted upon. Cruz actually helped Trump by keeping Marco Rubio from doing better while remaining almost as unacceptable to party leaders as Trump. Now, it’s on to turf less favorable to Cruz in the north.

On the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton’s overwhelming victories over Bernie Sanders in seven of the 11 states make clear that, barring a self-inflicted wound or some legal barrier, Democrats will reject the Pied Piper of Burlington and his effort to mobilize the young, the Left and the disaffected with his message of free education, free health coverage and other governmental goodies.

In the past, rejection of extremes has enabled both parties to win presidential elections. It’s why Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton succeeded where George McGovern and Walter Mondale failed, and why Richard Nixon won just four years after Barry Goldwater lost.

Cruz has cited Ronald Reagan as an example of how an avowedly conservative candidate can win. But Reagan brought to his presidential campaign a patina of pragmatism from eight years as California’s governor.

The philosophically flexible Trump is clearly a less-rigid conservative than Cruz. But the contrast between the tone of the Democratic and Republican campaigns might offset any potential benefit as we look toward the summer and fall.

The respectful way with which Clinton and Sanders have focused on issues differences should enable the former Secretary of State to preside over a united party at this July’s Democratic convention.

On the other hand, the way Trump has denigrated his rivals in highly personal terms, attacked such groups as Mexicans and Muslims and mishandled such matters as last week’s stumble over repudiating Ku Klux Klan support has created havoc within the GOP that will shadow his campaign, even as the party’s nominee.

At a time when Republicans need to broaden their appeal, Trump could win even fewer votes from non-white Americans than the candidates who lost the past two elections to the nation’s first African-American president.

Trump has, though, shown a greater ability than some past Republicans to attract lower-income, less-educated white voters and many independents or Democrats who are suffering economically. Though white voters are a decreasing portion of the electorate, these voters could help him in some northern industrial states.

At Tuesday night’s victory celebration, Trump and his new ally, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, sought to set a tone of GOP and national unity. The tone of the Republican campaign will make that a task to test all of the billionaire developer’s salesmanship skills.

Trump remains something of a philosophical mystery. His anti-immigration and anti-abortion rights stances fit the current GOP, but he has also called for health insurance for all, even as he proposes to scrap Obamacare. And he continues to praise Planned Parenthood’s efforts to help women’s health.

Both Cruz and Rubio would clearly pursue more rigidly conservative policies, just as Sanders is avowedly to the left of Clinton.

Once again, the American people seem to be heading for a choice between two more centrist courses — even though the rhetoric indicates otherwise.

Carl P. Leubsdorf is the former Washington bureau chief of The Dallas Morning News. Reach him at carl.p.leubsdorf@gmail.com.