Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital. | Memorial Sloan-Kettering website MetroPlus offers insurance to Health Republic cancer patients

New York City's public hospital system is offering to cover Memorial Sloan-Kettering patients who live in the city and are set to lose their health insurance because of the collapse of the nation's largest co-op.

The demise of Health Republic Insurance of New York has created tumult for hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers and headaches for the state's other insurance companies. There are calls for investigations into the company and into whether the Cuomo administration should have seen this coming, as the collapse could jeopardize the otherwise lauded state health insurance exchange.

Story Continued Below

One of the most pressing concerns is the fate of the roughly 200 patients receiving treatment at Sloan-Kettering, which contracted with no other insurer offered on the state's health exchange, created by the Affordable Care Act.

The de Blasio administration will announce later Wednesday afternoon an agreement with the renowned cancer center that allows patients who are losing their Health Republic coverage at the end of this month to continue to receive coverage for care for as long as they require treatment if they enroll in MetroPlus, the insurance offered by New York City Health + Hospitals (formerly known as the city Health and Hospitals Corporation).

“The collapse of Health Republic left many New Yorkers scrambling to find new coverage and providers," de Blasio said in a statement. "Today’s deal ensures that the most vulnerable of this group continue to receive high-quality treatment.”

The agreement means Sloan-Kettering will accept MetroPlus insurance for 114 New York City patients, but it does not cover the approximately 135 Sloan-Kettering patients living outside New York City, where MetroPlus does not offer insurance.

Officials with the state's Department of Financial Services announced on Sunday that they are in discussions with Memorial Sloan-Kettering to ensure access for up to one year, although how exactly that will be paid for has not yet been resolved.

Providers across the state are being asked to accept, and expect, "modest payment" for their services for Health Republic customers, a consequence of the company's inability to pay claims through the end of the year.

State and federal government officials had originally proposed winding down Health Republic at the end of 2015 but abruptly changed course and said the company would shut down on Nov. 30 because its finances were "substantially worse" than had been reported.

That left patients with little time to enroll in a new insurance plan for coverage beginning Dec. 1, and presented a challenge for those looking for a network of similar size at a comparable price.

The state is working to automatically enroll patients who do not pick a new plan by the end of the month into a comparable plan, though the details of how the state will do that have not yet been released.

The Sloan-Kettering deal is good only for patients currently receiving treatment. The other 20,000 New York City residents about to lose their Health Republic insurance may still enroll in MetroPlus but they will be subject to the insurer's regular network.

The de Blasio administration could not estimate what this would cost MetroPlus because it will depend on each individual's treatment and how many enroll, but the mayor was lauded for giving patients the option.

"The only thing that makes hearing the words ‘you have cancer’ even more disturbing is the thought of losing your health insurance while undergoing treatment,” Michael Davoli, director of New York metro government relations for the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, said in a statement. “We are pleased to hear that NYC Health + Hospitals, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and Mayor de Blasio have stepped up to help these patients when they need it the most.”

Authors: