This file photo shows the HealthCare.gov website, where people can buy health insurance, on a laptop screen. (Photo: Don Ryan, AP)

Insurance plan deductibles under Obamacare vary so wildly across the country for 2015 that many consumers are left confused and, in some cases, sticker shocked.

The addition of new insurers selling on Healthcare.gov reduced the amount people in many areas would have to pay out of pocket for care, and consumers in other places saw minimal change. But a lack of competition in some areas leaves those shopping on the federal health care exchange with what could be prohibitively high-deductible plans for the coming year, a USA TODAY analysis found.

More than one in 10 of the counties on the federal exchange saw deductible increases — often limiting consumers' choices to high-deductible plans that stretch to $13,000, the maximum amount allowed by law for a family.

HealthCare.gov handles the insurance sales for the 37 states that didn't set up their own marketplaces for individual insurance. The deadline to get insurance by Jan. 1 has passed, but enrollment continues until Feb. 15 to avoid penalties at tax time in 2016 for not having insurance.

"Everybody is sticker shocked and can't believe the prices; every single one of them," said Texas agent Aaron Shinn, who works in Van Zandt County, where the analysis found some of the highest deductibles in the U.S. "They'll say, 'I've got to pay this much and my deductible is still $6,000?"

While high-deductible plans have many fans, some consumer and medical experts worry that the people who are lured by the low premiums are often unprepared for the out-of-pocket costs. That can lead to debt problems, or worse, the postponement of critical medical tests or treatment.

"I don't like them," Fall River, Mass., surgeon and author Paul Ruggieri said of high-deductible plans. "You're just hoping you don't get sick."

Paul Ruggieri is a surgeon who sees a lot of hernia and gall bladder patients who put off care until it becomes an emergency. (Photo: Josh T. Reynolds for USA TODAY)

Many of Ruggieri's patients who have high-deductible plans delay treatment for issues including hernias and gallstones and wind up needing far more expensive and risky emergency procedures later on.

Consumers face huge differences in their choices depending on what county they live in, a situation that Anne Gauthier, senior program director for the National Academy for State Health Policy, said has always been present in private insurance but now is more transparent in the HealthCare.gov data.

"There has always been — and particularly in the past 10 years — an enormous variation in deductibles" from one area to another, she said. "That's been true in the individual market for a very long time."

In some areas, insurance companies are less willing to take risks depending on the health of residents, she said. In other situations, companies are only offering high-deductible plans because consumers have shown a willingness to trade off high deductibles to get lower monthly premiums.

Department of Health and Human Services officials have emphasized throughout open enrollment this season that there are 25% more insurers on HealthCare.gov and that almost everyone who was already enrolled could save money if they went back onto the exchange to shop around in the save tier of coverage. Nearly all consumers would be able to find choices of plans with high or low deductibles, HHS principal deputy administrator Andy Slavitt said this fall.

Most consumers will have their out-of-pocket costs subsidized, as well. About 80% of those who bought insurance plans on the federal and state exchanges last year got subsidies that offset the amount of out-of-pocket costs they would have to pay, including for the deductible. But those who make more than 250% of the federal poverty limit in most parts of the country would have to pay for all of their non-preventive health care up to $6,600 for a single person or even $13,200 for a family. A single person who earned about $30,000 a year would be over 250% of the federal poverty limit.

The Affordable Care Act requires physicals, blood screening tests, mammograms and other preventive care to be fully covered by insurance. But doctor visits for illness, injuries and tests to diagnose problems have to be paid by consumers until deductibles are met — making deductibles most important to those who are seriously sick.

"Some people who have chronic illnesses or have conditions, who are getting a lot of referrals — that's when deductibles become a deciding factor," said Lawrence Lewis, a Colonial Life agency development manager in Gibbsboro, N.J.

In more than 300 counties across 11 states in the federal exchange, the deductible choices are less competitive this year. In some cases, the minimum deductible cost inched up only a few hundred dollars. But in several areas, deductibles are much higher, especially across much of Kansas and parts of Texas.

In most counties in Kansas, for example, a zero-deductible plan offered in 2014 coverage went away for 2015, leaving consumers with no choice below a $5,000 family deductible.

Considering that Blue Cross/Blue Shield already has about 80% of the individual insurance market in Kansas, "looking at this and considering for business purposes, I question whether (other insurers) would want to be on the exchange due to the high cost," says Kerri Spielman, executive director of the Kansas Association of Insurance Agents.

Similarly, in Texas areas where competition is lacking, consumers have few or no low-deductible choices. In Dallas, city consumers shopping at the most popular silver plan level have their choice among seven insurance companies and 26 plans, with deductibles as low as zero. But head an hour east to Van Zandt County, and it's a different story -- the only insurer there is BCBS, and the lowest deductible on a family plan at the silver level is $9,000, while most are $12,700.

Clyde Clubb, the lead navigator at Special Health Resources for Texas, says a lot of the people he and the other navigators help enroll in insurance qualify for premium and cost sharing assistance that can bring the deductible down to $500 or even zero. But others who don't will often say, "Even if you gave me the insurance, I couldn't afford the deductible."

People who were willing to take a risk and have a $10,000 deductible used to be able to get their premiums to $400 or less, says Shinn. Now, he says, the premiums on the exchange are nearly twice that.

Those trade-offs also can be seen elsewhere. In New Jersey, where insurance consultant Scott Hafetz describes monthly premiums as "notoriously higher" than in neighboring states, the HealthCare.gov data show deductibles are far lower than in neighboring Delaware.

The highest silver-level deductible for a family plan in southern New Jersey is $5,000 -- while the lowest available across the river in Delaware is $5,500. Monthly premiums for a family with two children, however, are $110 less in Delaware than they are in southern New Jersey.

Hafetz, owner of Hafetz and Associates outside of Atlantic City, says even a $5,000 deductible can seem overwhelming to consumers, especially those whom he sees -- laid off casino workers and others who previously had insurance through their employer.

"The ones not qualifying for any kind of subsidy, they do complain," he says. "There's a lot of sticker shock."

An earlier USA TODAY analysis showed how competition is increasing in many parts of the country. About 75% of the counties on the federal healthcare exchange have at least one more insurance plan this year than last, and many states have far more.

The ACA sets the maximum out-of-pocket costs consumers can face, but doesn't dictate the combination of deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance that plans must use to meet what's known as the actuarial value. Plans on the federal and state ACA exchanges must have certain actuarial values ranging from covering 90% of medical bills for the highest priced platinum plans to 60% for the lowest priced bronze plans. The most popular level, silver, covers 70% of medical costs.

Without subsidies, the most a person has to pay a year for medical care under the ACA is $6,600 for an individual and $13,200 for a couple or family. With a subsidy, that drops to $2,250 to $5,200 for an individual, or $4,500 to $10,400 for a family in 2015.

Dan Mendelson, CEO of consulting firm Avalere Health, said it will take a new way of thinking and behaving for high deductible plans to work as intended.

High deductible plans "are good if consumers understand that what it requires is saving to make sure they have adequate resources to get the things they need taken care of," he said.

"People who have illness should not be penalized for it, what sits on other side of that is that anyone, whether they have a chronic illness or not, makes better decisions if they have more exposure to cost," Mendelson said.

He said the maximum out-of-pocket limits are absolutely critical, and despite the fact few people have $6,000 in the bank and despite the increase in high deductible plans, the limits will keep "a lot of middle income people from hitting bankruptcy."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1zrEAKA