Dennis Olmstead knows access to health insurance doesn't always equal access to care.

With the state's physician workforce facing critical shortages and many doctors offices nearing capacity, he wonders if the state's supply of providers will be able to meet the demand of the hundreds of thousands newly insured Pennsylvanians in 2014.

"It's going to vary by market and vary by specialty," said Olmstead, vice president for practice economics and payer relations for the Pennsylvania Medical Society. "But clearly, I think it's always been a concern from the get go. Not just in Pennsylvania, but other states, too.

"You already have potentially multi-week waits … and trying to become a new patient at a primary care practice isn't always the easiest thing because people (offices) are full."

Starting Oct. 1, nearly 900,000 Pennsylvanians can apply for health coverage through the federal health insurance marketplace and receive some financial assistance, according to an analysis by Families USA, the national organization for health care consumers.

A key provision of President Barack Obama's signature law, the marketplace provides eligible Americans access to discounted health coverage, whether through tax credits or reduced cost sharing.

Under a full implementation of the Affordable Care Act including the Medicaid expansion, the nation's uninsured would drop by 23.1 million starting in 2014, the Kaiser Family Foundation found.

Following the same guidelines, about 34,000 uninsured Scranton/Wilkes-Barre area residents receive affordable health insurance as soon as Jan. 1.

While the wave of newly insured residents could cause the area's uninsured population to plunge by 56 percent, the new consumers create a heightened demand for care at a time when the nation's and region's health care systems face a deepening shortage of physicians, particularly primary care doctors.

Boomers loom

By 2020, the nation could be short about 90,000 doctors because of aging baby boomers and too few physicians.

Five years later, the shortage could balloon to more than 130,000, the Association of American Medical Colleges predicted.

"I think it's fair to say that the paradigm of medical care in the 20th century isn't going to be adequate in the 21st century," said Steven J. Scheinman, M.D., president and dean of The Commonwealth Medical College.

Scheinman and other medical experts cited the challenges seen in Massachusetts after the state passed a comprehensive health reform in 2006 meant to provide near-universal health insurance coverage for state residents.

While Massachusetts saw the percent of its uninsured nonelderly residents drop from 10.9 to 5.5 in 2007, it initially struggled to meet the demand for health care - primarily in underserved communities - as the amount of enrollees skyrocketed.

About 20 percent of Massachusetts adults reported problems finding a doctor who would see them in 2009, either because the provider reached its full capacity or didn't accept the patient's insurance, according to an analysis published on the Kaiser Family Foundation.

"It was more of a problem at the start (in Massachusetts) because there were a lot of people who newly got coverage and went out and had check ups and had all their symptoms looked at for the first time," said Robert Field, Ph.D., a professor at Drexel University's Earle Mack School of Law and an expert on health policy and public health law.

"A lot of that worked its way out. The situation became a lot less severe, and that's likely to happen here."

Welcome wave

Despite a sizeable patient list, Ariane Conaboy, D.O., an internal medicine physician in Scranton, said she welcomes the wave of newly insured residents.

While acknowledging the region's shortfall of physicians, she said it's critical to get more residents in for regular checkups and screenings, so physicians can treat and monitor an illnesses or injuries before they develop into something more complicated and severe.

"I really think that there are a lot of eager physicians, like myself, coming to the area who really want to be busy and want to provide the best health care," said Conaboy, the vice president of the Lackawanna County Medical Society. "Ultimately, it will improve their health and the health of our community."

To help combat shortages, health care providers and medical experts advocate reconfiguring the practice of medicine to a patient-centered, team-based approach, where the flow of information is facilitated and patient care is streamlined.

Just as important, experts argue the state needs to expand the number of residency slots. Gov. Tom Corbett on Sept. 16 unveiled details about his "Healthy Pennsylvania" initiative, which included plans for an increase in state funding to expand the number of in-state physician training or residency slots by 24.

"We're concerned about the potential influx (of newly-insured residents), although I think it certainly does not constitute a crisis," said Pennsylvania Medical Society President C. Richard Schott, M.D.

While tens of millions of Americans will be eligible for health care under the exchanges as of Jan. 1, it remains unclear how many are actually going to sign up for the care and at what rate, he said.

"I would think it's going to be a lot slower start up than what's anticipated," Schott said.

miorfino@timesshamrock.com, @miorfinoTT