ANALYSIS/OPINION:

THE SUMMIT: BRETTON WOODS, 1944: J.M. KEYNES AND THE RESHAPING OF THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

By Ed Conway

Perseus Books, $27.95, 453 pages, illustrated

That great Victorian sage Thomas Carlyle, a master coiner of apt phrases, famously dubbed economics the dismal science, and there has been no shortage of people agreeing with him ever since. Fortunately for readers of this book about the conference held to determine postwar financial structure and the institutions necessary to regulate it, there is nothing dismal or dull or dreary about its author’s account of what went on in those three summer weeks in 1944 in the foothills of New Hampshire’s White Mountains. With no false modesty, he calls it “a gripping tale,” and he is right on target.

Make no mistake about it, there is plenty of economics in these 400-plus pages. But Ed Conway, the economics editor of Britain’s Sky News, is able to explain even the most arcane details clearly and accessibly without dumbing things down or condescending to the reader. He has a gift for making us understand — and even enjoy — such arcana as sterling balances, free convertibility of currencies, fixed versus floating exchange rates and a host of equally abstruse topics. A lively writer, he keeps the reader fully engaged from start to finish: everything you could wish for about Bretton Woods and its aftermath. Even the fact that there was no longer any such place by 1944; it had disappeared from the map “more than a century before the conference that made it famous.”

That something on this scale could have been held at all only a few weeks after D-Day as Allied troops were still making their way through France and the war in the Pacific was still being fought far from the Japanese mainland is in itself remarkable. Indeed, both Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan were very much alive and kicking — to say nothing of killing — and both poured scorn on what was being established at Bretton Woods. It says a lot about the confidence of this nation’s and its allies’ leaders that they could focus on the postwar world while still profoundly engaged in the ongoing conflict.

There’s plenty besides economics in “The Summit.” The lavish ways at the hastily refurbished Mount Washington Hotel — chosen for its coolness over the heat and humidity of Washington — with its constantly free flowing liquor and rich dishes at mealtimes are memorably evoked, as are the astonished reactions to such sumptuousness from those delegates used to the Spartan regimes of shortages and rationing at home.

There was lots of golf, and dancing lessons claimed almost as many as the links. There were plenty of sexual high jinks between the male delegates — some quite high ranking — and the female secretarial staff, and Mr. Conway spotlights the sexism endemic in those days. The press corps had lots of softer stories to leaven their detailed reportage of the drier aspects of the proceedings, which certainly were not neglected: one enterprising reporter had as his personal tutor and source none other than Dean Acheson. There was also always plenty of good copy in Lady Keynes, better known as the Russian ballerina Lydia Lopokova, whose eccentricities of speech and deed were exceeded only by the fierceness of her relentless protectiveness and devotion toward her ailing husband.

What was created at the conference was very much a reflection of the dominant position enjoyed by the United States militarily and economically, a determination to carry this paramount position into a Pax Americana with the U.S. dollar as its foundation and then some. Ultimately, Bretton Woods and its institutions only endured for little more than a quarter-century, but as Mr. Conway writes, “the system mapped out by the delegates during those three weeks in 1944 permitted the longest period of stability and economic growth in history. … There is no such thing as a perfect economic system; but, based on its performance, many economists still argue that Bretton Woods was as close as the global economy has ever come to it.”

The ever-scrupulous Mr. Conway takes account of its critics and of alternate explanations for the stable prosperity of those years, but he makes a strong case for his conclusions. There can be no disputing his dictum that “Bretton Woods remains the only time countries ever came together to remold the world’s monetary system. And for a tantalizing couple of decades it seemed to work.”

There is, of course, no such thing as a perfect book, either, and some readers may feel that its author’s nationality leads him to hail Lord Keynes as the meeting’s dominant force, when Britain’s economic weakness and American strength make that a stretch. Others may feel that he is overly sympathetic to the U.S. point man at Bretton Woods, the notorious Harry Dexter White, although he accepts White’s espionage for the Soviet Union. But generally speaking, Mr. Conway is as sound in his judgments as his scope is wide and his analyses probing.

• Martin Rubin is a writer and critic in Pasadena, Calif.