MONTPELIER — A bill that makes contraceptives and sterilization more accessible, while taking preventative measures against the uncertainty of the 2016 elections, passed on Wednesday. It also incorporates vasectomies into contraceptive health coverage.



Bill H.620 will retain the basic birth control mandate in the federal Affordable Care Act, requiring health insurance plans to provide contraceptives at no cost to patients, regardless of what happens this fall.



“If things ever change with the Affordable Care Act in D.C., this would protect Vermonters,” said Anne Burmeister, a lobbyist with Planned Parenthood of Northern New England.



The Affordable Care Act recognized that birth control is a preventative service for women. The act classified pregnancy as preventable and made birth control available at no cost for patients, with no co-pays or deductibles. Since the act became law, women have been able to get birth control for free.



“In the event that the Affordable Care Act is somehow altered in the future, depending on the political climate in Washington, our state law says that insurance policies sold through the exchange have to give people access to the family planning,” said Timothy Briglin, Democrat, District Windsor-Orange-2, and cosponsor of Bill H.620.



The House passed the bill back in March. The Senate passed the bill earlier this week, but proposed an amendment. It was sent back to the House, which passed it on Wednesday. It is now awaiting the Governor and other government officials signing it.



Briglin said the bill is intended to make birth control more accessible in the state on a couple of levels. It allows women to obtain a full 12 months of oral contraceptives without having to go back to their doctor each month. The bill will increase Medicaid reimbursement for a particular type of contraception called long-acting reversible contraception, often referred to as LARC. LARC can include IUD (an intrauterine device), injection or implant.



“It’s by far the most effective form of contraception,” said Briglin of the LARC methods. “But its a little more expensive. By raising the reimbursement level under Medicaid it makes it more available for low income Vermonters.”



This bill has also expanded birth control benefits to vasectomies, which is a surgical procedure for male sterilization or permanent contraception.



“The Obama administration did not include vasectomies when they were trying to decide which methods are covered,” said Burmeister. “There are 20 FDA approved birth-control methods, and 18 are covered. Those are the 18 that women use, but the two they didn’t cover were vasectomies and condoms. We expanded the birth control benefit to vasectomies. We (are) the first state to have passed that.”



The bill states that a health insurance plan shall provide coverage for voluntary sterilization procedures for men and women without any deductible, coinsurance, copayment, or other cost-sharing requirement. Briglin said this brings gender parity to health insurance regarding family planning.



He said that making effective birth control and sterilization more accessible is important because right now half the pregnancies in Vermont each year are unintended. Bill H.620 also states that registered health insurance carriers should allow for enrollment of women who are already pregnant.



gina.tron



@timesargus.com