Nathan Moore's 13-year-old son went to the mailbox Friday to see if he had received any letters. But instead what he found was an anti-abortion mailing that was disturbing to him and the rest of his family.

"I was upset," Nathan said. "I was shocked more than anything."

Nathan says he was downstairs when his son walked in with the flier.

"He said, 'Dad, what's this?' He was kind of tentative about it," Nathan said. "He was concerned and thought I would be mad at him. My concern was he was able to see that."

What he saw on the back of that flier was an image of a bloodied dead fetus.

"I don't want my children seeing that," Nathan said.

Nathan says he has no problem with the issue of abortion being addressed in a mailing, but he says it's wrong how the issue was presented in this case.

"To put it in your mailbox where anybody can see it regardless of their age or mental capacity, that's just blatantly wrong," Nathan said. "That's just crossing the line."

The flier gives a return address of "OR" and a zip code. "OR" stands for Operation Rescue.

The Wichita-based anti-abortion group has sent out 20,000 of the fliers in the Wichita area. The group plans to send out even more as part of an ongoing campaign against the recently opened South Wind Women's Center in Wichita.

"A picture is worth a thousand words and you can say the word 'abortion' all day but until people see a picture of what abortion really is, that's when it hits home," said Cheryl Sullenger, Senior Policy Adviser for Operation Rescue.

Sullenger says children are not the targeted audience. But Operation Rescue does not feel the image is too graphic for young kids or anyone else to view.

"Instead of being upset at us, I think they could use it as a teaching moment for their child," Sullenger said.

Nathan says he and other parents should be able to decide when to have that teaching moment and what their kids are exposed to at home.

He says the group should put the flier in an envelope and label it. Operation Rescue says it has considered that in the past and may consider it again.

But Nathan says the damage has already been done for his children.

"My son told me he doesn't want to go get the mail again," Nathan said. "I know he's going to have those images in the back of his mind."