University of Wisconsin grad Joe Richardson (left) of Michigan watches Josh London of Chicago as they play with bean bags outside AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Texas, ahead of the Wisconsin's Final Four game against Kentucky. Credit: Rick Wood

Badgers Blog Latest news, analysis and links on UW football, basketball and other sports SHARE

By of the

Join us tonight from press row inside the massive AT&T Stadium as Tom Silverstein hosts live blogs from both of the Final Four games.

First up will be Florida vs. Connecticut at 5:09 p.m.

The Wisconsin-Kentucky game is expected to start afterward about 7:49 p.m.

Both games are televised on TBS.

Packers fans who have checked in on Tom's live blogs during Green Bay's games know they're a lot of fun and packed with astute analysis and lively discussion. They're a great companion if you're watching the game on TV, especially.

After the game, check back with us for complete coverage from reporters Jeff Potrykus, Tom Silverstein and Michael Hunt and photographer Rick Wood. We'll have stories, photo galleries, videos, the social media story and more.

As you wait for the game, review some of our coverage you might have missed this week, including:

The story behind the Ben Brust's biggest fans - his big brothers (who also claim some credit for their little brother's three-pointers and free throw shooting).

The improbable run to the Final Four for Dick Bennett's 2000 Badgers team.

How the Badgers' Final Four spotlight will help UW's recruiting.

Why Pat Richter turned to Bo Ryan 13 years ago to coach the Badgers.

The stark differences between how Wisconsin and Kentucky build their teams.

Stories on Frank Kaminsky's development, Traevon Jackson's confidence, Zach Bohannon's presidential hopes, the Badgers' off-season determination, Bo Ryan's experience in big games and more.

And if you want to relive the epic 64-63 victory over Arizona that earned the Badgers their Final Four trip, here you go.

To close, here's a fun video from Wisconsin on the Badgers' trip to the Final Four...