PALM SPRINGS: Study IDs health issues Share Pin It 1 of 3 More Galleries Four local residents participate in a community health meeting Aug. 5 at the James O. Jessie Desert Highland Unity Center in north Palm Springs. The residents recently conducted a health assessment of north Palm Springs. Pictured, left to right: Marjorie Holland, Phillip Frazier, Natalie Edwards and LaVonne Hill. , ERIN WALDNER, STAFF Related article » 32% The unemployment rate in north Palm Springs 38 The percentage of north Palm Springs residents who go to the emergency room for basic health care services 37% The obesity rate in north Palm Springs Source: Desert Highland Gateway Community Health Assessment, Executive Summary

Residents of north Palm Springs, a low- to moderate-income community, deal with a number of serious health-care issues daily, according to a new study.

The assessment overseen by Loma Linda University Health and funded by the Desert Healthcare District found that 38 percent of respondents go to the emergency room for basic health care, one-third can’t afford dental care, one-half can’t afford prescriptions, and there are misconceptions about the Affordable Care Act.

In addition to affordability and accessibility issues, many community members are living with health problems. High blood pressure, high cholesterol and obesity are rampant.

Researcher LaVonne Hill said that identifying the issues means that they can now be addressed.

The health-care assessment of north Palm Springs strove to answer three questions:

• What are the main health conditions in the community?

• How do residents access health care?

• What community resources are available and needed?

The findings were presented Tuesday night in the gymnasium at a north Palm Springs community center. The meeting drew roughly two dozen community members.

North Palm Springs, also known as the Desert Highland Gateway, consists of about 480 households. Most residents are African-American, and there is a high rate of unemployment. Many of the men have been arrested or served time behind bars.

In the study, 307 north Palm Springs residents were surveyed.

Researchers suggested workshops on the Affordable Care Act, classes on disease management and the formation of a community wellness committee. They advocate better public transportation, more free- or low-cost dental and vision care, job training and substance-abuse programs.

Trained by Loma Linda University Health and El Sol Neighborhood Educational Center, several north Palm Springs residents conducted the study. They did the interviews.

One of them, Natalie Edwards, 38, has lived in north Palm Springs her whole life and was glad to see the area studied.

“This community is really overlooked,” she said. “When they come out and do other types of health assessments or anything to do with Palm Springs, they tend to bypass us and go into other communities instead of helping this community, where it’s most needed.”

Contact the writer: 951-368-9552 or ewaldner@pe.com