Share:







Email







Every year, the Supreme Court term begins on the first Monday of October. For those keeping track at home, that day is Monday, October 5.

The Court has already accepted a handful of headliner cases, including Friedrichs v. California Teachers Association, about unions and free speech; Evenwel v. Abbott, about the principle of “one person, one vote”; and Fisher v. University of Texas, about affirmative action.

After last term’s blockbuster finish—with rulings on gay marriage, the Affordable Care Act, and the death penalty, among others—the Court has set itself up for another exciting round of decisions, with the possibility of accepting additional cases about abortion, religious exemptions, and more.

The National Constitution Center’s Jeffrey Rosen was joined by two leading commentators on constitutional law to discuss what’s next at our nation’s highest court.

Kenji Yoshino is the Chief Justice Earl Warren Professor of Constitutional Law at the New York University School of Law. He specializes in constitutional law, anti-discrimination law, and law and literature. Kenji is also the author of Speak Now: Marriage Equality on Trial, which he discussed with Rosen in a program at the Center in June 2015.

Josh Blackman is an Associate Professor of Law at the South Texas College of Law. He specializes in constitutional law and the intersection of law and technology. Josh is also the author of the critically acclaimed Unprecedented: The Constitutional Challenge to Obamacare, which he discussed with Rosen in a program at the Cato Institute in September 2013.



Download this episode (right click and save)

This show was engineered and edited by Jason Gregory. It was produced by Nicandro Iannacci. Research was provided by Joshua Waimberg and Danieli Evans.

Get the latest constitutional news, and continue today’s conversation, on our Facebook page and Twitter feed.

We want to know what you think of the podcast! Send your questions, comments and suggestions to editor@constitutioncenter.org.

Please subscribe to We the People. While you’re in the iTunes Store, leave us a review—it helps other people discover what we do.

Please also subscribe to Live at America’s Town Hall, a new podcast featuring lectures and debates presented live at the Center, across from Independence Hall in Philadelphia.

We the People is a member of the Panoply network. Check out all of our sibling podcasts at iTunes.com/Panoply.

Despite our congressional charter, the National Constitution Center is a private nonprofit—we receive little government support, and we rely on the generosity of people around the country who are inspired by our nonpartisan mission of constitutional debate and education. Please consider becoming a member to support our work, including this podcast. Visit constitutioncenter.org to learn more.

Recent Stories on Constitution Daily

Constitution Check: Is the spirit of faction making governing much more difficult?

Why Boehner’s resignation is truly historic for House speakers

From the Carolinas to Catalonia, the temptation of secession

Share:







Email







Comments

comments