Melissa Lampert | SC Living | April 10, 2015

The faith-based, not-for-profit health care organization Providence Medical Institute (PMI) Santa Clarita is part of Providence Health and Services Southern California, which serves the communities of Los Angeles County through six hospitals and numerous clinics and outpatient programs.

“Nonprofit health care organizations such as Providence play a significant role in communities, reaching out to ensure health care needs are met,” said Natasha Shows, a Providence spokeswoman. “We look to our communities to determine unmet needs, including treatment for those with diabetes to help control the disease, assisting the poor in finding primary and specialty care and reaching out to the most vulnerable—the aging, the poor and children in need.”

In addition, PMI officials were “very active” in helping enroll the uninsured and under-insured in the new health care exchange insurance programs available through the Affordable Care Act and in expanded Medi-Cal for low-income individuals, Shows added.

The Providence Holy Cross Health Center located on McBean and Valencia is an outpatient facility that offers the latest advancements in medical imaging, outpatient surgeries, rehabilitation services, urgent care and primary care services for the entire family.

The organization’s mission is to “reveal God’s love for all, especially the poor and vulnerable, through our compassionate service.”

PMI officials also partner with the Santa Clarita community by offering support to local nonprofits and fundraisers, such as the American Cancer Society’s annual Relay for Life, the Santa Clarita Child and Family Center’s Kids Expo and the Samuel Dixon Family Health Center.

“Providence believes in partnering with community organizations to help improve health because we all benefit, and because it is the right thing to do,” Shows said.

Providence officials stopped by KHTS AM-1220 earlier this week to participate in the KHTS Non Profit Spotlight Show with Janice Murray.

Providence Holy Cross Health Center at Santa Clarita is located at 26357 McBean Parkway. For more information, contact the center by calling 661-288-5900. For more information about Providence Medical Institute Santa Clarita, visit www.california.providence.org.