Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina speaks at the Heritage Action Presidential Candidate Forum in Greenville, South Carolina. (Sean Rayford/Getty Images)

GREENVILLE, South Carolina — Even in his absence, business mogul Donald Trump remained a steady force during the Republican presidential forum here in Greenville, S.C. Friday, where the specter of the flamboyant GOP front-runner loomed large over nearly a dozen candidates aggressively angling to escape his shadow.

The “Take Back America” presidential cattle call, hosted by Heritage Action was expected to provide the first glimpse at how the candidates are have stacked up against each other since Wednesday’s second primary debate, where Trump’s presence was notably diminished in comparison to the bombastic first appearance. That withdrawal took a more literal form Friday afternoon when Trump’s campaign abruptly announced that he would not be able to participate in the forum because of a conflicting “significant business transaction.”

But even if Trump was not physically in the Bon Secours Wellness Arena, where thousands of conservatives gathered, he remained on the forefront of the minds of attendees who had expected to see one of his characteristic free wheeling addresses. Instead they found a subdued forum that remained mostly free of theatrics for the better part of five hours, during which 10 candidates were each given 25 minutes on stage with moderators Gov. Nikki Haley (R-S.C.) and Heritage Action CEO Michael Needham. There was virtually no direct mention the party front-runner during that time.

The event was a marked break from months of near-constant public feuding, bickering and ad-homonym attacks between Trump and his many rivals. And it demonstrated both just how much Trump has monopolized the conversation this election cycle and how eager the other candidates are to quash the billionaire’s outsize influence as the race enters a new, crucial phase.

Off stage, fireworks flashed between candidates and reporters when questions arose about the latest Trump controversy, which stirred to life late Thursday when he did not immediately denounce a town hall attendee in New Hampshire who told him, “[W]e have a problem in this country, it’s called Muslims.” Many candidates sought repeatedly to dodge questions about the billionaire.

“I understand, the press wants to get Republicans throwing rocks at each other. How about we talk about the countries facing this country?” said Sen. Ted Cruz (R) when asked about the controversy. “I’m not going to play that game.”

Cruz became terse when pressed on how he believed Trump should have responded. (Cruz is, notably, one of the few other candidates in the race with whom Trump has retained a friendly relationship.) When asked similar questions, former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum grew visible flustered and tense. “What? Look. I’m not playing this game that you guys want to play,” he said.

Other candidates were more willing to engage directly with questions about the role Trump has played thus far this election. Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal (R) tore into the billionaire during a post-speech press conference, adding that he believed Trump’s appeal would begin to wear in the coming months.

“The idea of Trump is great. I love a politically incorrect spokesperson, I love an outsider, I love somebody taking on the DC establishment. But … let’s not trust this egomaniac that only believes in himself,” Jindal said. “I think that’s beginning to happen, I think now that the summer season is over people are getting serious.”

Perhaps the most pronounced beneficiary of Trump's decision to skip the event was former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina, who was the best received candidate Friday as she rode a surge of support after her widely praised debut on the main debate stage earlier this week. She received several standing ovations as she spoke about controversial Planned Parenthood videos, dismissing criticism that one video she described in vivid detail does not in fact exist.

“Yes ladies and gentlemen, they are real, and I will issue my charge again: Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama, anyone who wants to defend Planned Parenthood, watch these tapes,” Fiorina said. “It is not actually about being pro-choice or pro-life. We cannot be a nation that funds this kind of barbarity, and that is what it is.”

Most attacks Friday were predictably aimed at Democrats or Congressional leaders, with whom Heritage has a long history of attempting to push to the right. Needham notably chose topics and framed issues portraying Republican victories as nearly inevitable. When he asked the candidates how far they'd go to defund Planned Parenthood, even with "president Obama forcing a shutdown on the issue," the candidates unanimously said they'd go all the way.

"The Democrats don't play by those rules," said Scott Walker. "They passed Obamacare by 51 votes. It's time for the Republicans to pass a bill, by 51 votes, that defunds Planned Parenthood."

New Jersey Gov. Christie, one of the few Republicans who'd called for Kentucky county clerk Kim Davis, to leave her job after defying a federal court order to grant marriage licenses to same-sex couples, gave a soft recitation of that position. He said that the eventual solution — licenses granted without her name — was the right one. Throat duly cleared, he turned his criticism back to the gay marriage supporters who'd put Davis in a bind.

"The left only looks at discrimination coming from one way," said Christie. "There's discrimination that comes from both directions, and that shouldn't be permitted in this country."

Though many voters expressed disappointment and surprise that Trump would not attend, not everyone minded.

“I’m glad he didn’t come. He takes too much from what we want to hear,” said Dennis Lamb, 71, of Greenville. “He is a distraction.”

When told why Trump missed the event, Sandra Lamb, 69, added wryly: “Oh, he’s gonna go make some more money somewhere else.”