Anje Kearney, who has worked as the Resale Lady of Topeka, organizing estate and other sales, has rented warehouse space to allow her business to expand.

Kearney said the new space, at 5608 S.W. Topeka Blvd., won’t be open to the public daily, but will be used to store items clients want to sell and also can be used for a monthly warehouse sale.

She said the opportunity to lease about 2,400 square feet of space came about after a client was moving items from Perry to Topeka. To accommodate that client, Kearney said she called about renting warehouse space, and she realized what an opportunity this offered for The Resale Lady of Topeka business. The area offers opportunities to expand the space as needed.

Having a permanent space will allow her to set up a monthly warehouse sale, which Kearney said she plans for the second weekend of every month. The dates and times will be announced online on her website and Facebook pages.

Typically, her business has featured one sale for a customer — often in their homes or another location. While Kearney said her business will still do estate sales on location, having the warehouse space will allow her to take one or two items to sell from individuals.

“As we move forward, we will start actually taking consignment stuff from people in the community to sell at our monthly warehouse sales,” she said.

40,000 KANSANS ENROLL IN HEALTH MARKETPLACE: The third open-enrollment period for the Health Insurance Marketplace signed up 4.9 million new customers for 2016, and about 40,000 of those were in Kansas, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services reported.

“Almost 5 million Americans were new to the Health Insurance Marketplaces in 2015, and about 20 million uninsured Americans have gained coverage because of the Affordable Care Act,” said HHS Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell in the release. “This year’s customers are more engaged, savvier and better informed. New customers came in earlier because they wanted a full year’s coverage, and 70 percent of existing customers came back to shop and actively selected a plan.”

As with previous years, most of the people who signed up in the marketplace received tax credits. In Kansas, the average tax credit was $246 per month, or 70 percent of the gross premium, and the average premium after tax credits was $106 per month.

MR. O AUTO PARTNERS WITH U-HAUL: U-Haul trucks, trailers, towing equipment, support rental items and boxes now will be available at Mr. O Auto Sales, 430 S.E. University Blvd. Emeka Okoronkwo owns the business.

According to U-Haul, every official community site helps keep 19 personally owned large-capacity vehicles, pickups, SUVs and vans off the road because of the ability the company offers to share trucks. Fewer vehicles means less traffic congestion, less pollution, less fuel burned and cleaner air.

SCORE BUSINESS ROUNDTABLE SLATED APRIL 2: The monthly business roundtable held by SCORE, which gives business owners and employees the opportunity to exchange ideas and share advice, will be from 8 to 9 a.m. April 2 at Washburn Institute of Technology, 5724 S.W. Huntoon, Bldg. A-East, Room AE153.

After the roundtable, a Marketing Toolbox Workshop will offer marketing tips and ideas from the experience of SCORE counselors and clients.

A reservation isn’t required. For more information, contact Forrest Thurber at scoreft@gmail.com.

KELLER, CRAIG & ASSOCIATES OPENS TOPEKA OFFICE: Keller, Craig & Associates, real estate appraiser and consultants, has offered services in Topeka but recently decided to open an office location at 5835 S.W. 29th St., Suite 203.

“We’ve been active in the Topeka market for many years now,” said Tim Keller, owner. “We just thought it was time to open an office in Topeka, and we think there’s a demand for both commercial and residential appraisal work in Topeka.”

The staff at the Topeka office providing commercial support will be Brian Klahr, MAI; Margaret Archer; Steve Nelson and Jeff Botkin, SRA, who provides residential valuation services.

In the past, the company has covered Topeka services out of its Lawrence and Kansas City offices, Keller said.

He said he believed the timing was good to open an office, as the Topeka market has been recovering after tougher years previously.

“There’s as much going on downtown as there has been in years,” Keller said.

CENTRAL NATIONAL BANK RECEIVES “OUTSTANDING” RATING FROM OCC: Central National Bank, which is headquartered in Junction City and has branches in Topeka, received an “Outstanding” rating from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in a recent Community Reinvestment Act Performance Evaluation.

“Our commitment to this mission is evident by the top rating we received for our contributions in our cities and towns,” said CEO Ed C. Rolfs in a release.

Through the CRA, the comptroller office encourages “to meet the credit needs of all community members, including residents of low-and-moderate-income neighborhoods,” the release said.

Central National Bank offers banking in 22 Kansas and Nebraska communities.