Topics: Game of Thrones, game of thrones recap, Entertainment News, News

In case it was lost on anyone after watching “The Gift,” “Game of Thrones” would like to reiterate that often times, people feel imprisoned within their lives (and lies.) No less than 10 characters are imprisoned in some way, shape, or form within the episode’s hour and that doesn’t even take into consideration the metaphorical chains worn by the vast majority of the universe’s inhabitants. So what, precisely, has everyone in the greater Westeros region feeling so bound up?

As Freudian as it may sound, their parents.

Even when not directly involved in an individual’s life, parents cast a long shadow in any universe centered on a system that includes so much in the way of lines of succession, family crests, and, well, incest. Time and again throughout “The Gift,” we see individuals forced to a point where they must choose to abide by the standards set by their parents or make their own path. It’s not something that’s gone unexamined by the show before, (a theme perhaps best explored in this piece that suggests the only way for the remaining Stark children to survive the series is to stop being Starks) but “The Gift” showed a renewed commitment to the question, with father figures passing on and actual fathers forced to choose whether or not to sacrifice their children for their own glory.

The episode begins at the Wall, with Jon taking off with the wildlings to meet up with more of their brethren and leaving Castle Black under the rule of First Ranger Thorne. Jon’s choice to become Lord Commander of the Night’s watch and eschew the opportunity to become a Stark both bears out his father’s wishes by abiding by his oath to the Night’s Watch, the honorable thing to do, particularly by Ned Stark standards, while also cutting himself off fully from the family he knew as his own. Meanwhile, Sam loses his father figure in Maester Aemon and is almost immediately forced to defend Gilly from lecherous members of the Watch. In the aftermath, Sam breaks his vow of celibacy as he and Gilly consummate their relationship.

In less pleasant consummations, Sansa is imprisoned in a tower in Winterfell, spending her days weeping and her nights being raped, leaving her so desperate that she begs Theon to help her, by placing a candle in the broken tower to signal the North of her distress. She appeals to him, not as Reek, the broken down toy of a sadist, but as Theon Greyjoy, the last surviving son of Balon Greyjoy. Theon, being a useless sack of shit, takes her faith in him and craps it all out on Ramsay’s floor, giving him both Sansa’s candle as well as her intentions with regards to her escape. In retribution, Ramsay flays the nice old woman from last episode and lets his wife admire his handiwork. On the bright side, Sansa returns from their ambulation with a handheld weapon she manages to secret into her skirts, so maybe she can do everyone a favor and bury it in someone’s brain before the season ends. The most curious factor of Sansa’s storyline, a repurposed plot that in the books involved a character named Jeyne Pool posing as Arya Stark and being married off to Ramsay, is the idea that it’s the Stark name and the fate that befalls Sansa that would drive the North to rise up and protect her. She is being punished because her name has value, her father’s honor had value, and that value can still be exploited.

(In case you were hoping for Brienne to sweep in and rescue Sansa, we briefly see the former standing watch outside of Winterfell staring intently at the broken tower, willing a candle to appear and anxiously awaiting episode nine, which I assume is around the time Brienne will actually be allowed to do something again.)

Stannis is another character who’s having trouble getting anything going, as his troops seem to be faltering under what would be considered Massachusetts’ mildest winter ever, which leads Davos to suggest they give up and return to Castle Black. However, winter in Westeros lasts for years, as Stannis reminds Davos, and this is as good a chance as they’ll ever have to take Winterfell. Davos slinks off with his tail between his legs and Melisandre suggests that they could probably move things along if Stannis would just let her sacrifice his daughter to the Lord of Light (which, honestly, feels like Melisandre’s solution for everything). But Stannis, as evidenced in the last few episodes, is a loyal father to Shireen and rebuffs the Red Woman, sending her away and leaving him alone with his thoughts and contemplating the fight to come.

But, as likely comes as no surprise given the recent loss of their patriarch, no family struggles as mightily in the shadow of their father as the Lannister clan. In Dorne, Jaime fruitlessly tries to persuade Myrcella to return home with him, advising her that it’s her mother’s will. But Myrcella is young and in love and has no qualms about refusing her “Uncle Jaime’s” wishes. As far as she’s concerned, her mother traded her like chattel to Dorne and now that she’s happy, wants her to abandon her happiness and return to King’s Landing, merely because she bids it. In this moment, Jaime yearns for the authority that a father has over his child, that Tywin never shied away from using with his own children, but serving merely as Uncle and messenger, he has no such sway over Myrcella, a realization that leaves him wanting.