Could you afford to serve in the N.C. legislature?

By Brent Laurenz



The N.C. General Assembly adjourned its “long session” last July and isn’t scheduled to reconvene until May 14 of this year. But even though they are technically out of session, that doesn’t mean legislators aren’t busy or that work isn’t getting done.

Since they adjourned last summer, dozens of committees have been meeting off and on, discussing everything from Common Core standards in schools to the Affordable Care Act to environmental issues. That requires lawmakers from across the state to return to Raleigh for work even though the legislature is technically not in session. All of this is on top of their work providing constituent services and whatever day jobs they may have as well.

Of course, because the legislature is not in session these committee meetings aren’t producing bills that are going to be passed and signed into law, but that doesn’t mean important work isn’t happening. These meetings often allow for the public to comment on important issues or lawmakers to address issues that arise throughout the year, which then informs future legislation to be crafted by the General Assembly. So it’s important that elected officials be present for these off-season committee proceedings.

The point is, while we consider North Carolina to have a part-time legislature comprised of ordinary citizens, the reality is that there are some very real hardships to public service in the General Assembly. There aren’t many people with the job flexibility to be able to take off up to seven months in odd-numbered years for long sessions, two months in even-numbered years for the short session and then travel back-and-forth to Raleigh for committee meetings out of session. And this is all for less than $14,000 a year.

In reality, serving as a lawmaker in the N.C. General Assembly is open only to those with jobs that allow the flexibility to be gone almost half the year, wealthy people or those who have already retired. That doesn’t leave much room for the average person who believes they have something to offer the state, but neither the means nor flexibility to actually serve.

One potential solution may be increasing the base pay for lawmakers in North Carolina. Raising legislative pay for General Assembly members in times like these may not be the most popular idea, but in the long run it would open up public service to a more diverse pool of potential legislators, creating a state legislature that is more reflective of the state as a whole.

In the end, the hope would be that a greater diversity of voices and life experiences in the General Assembly would lead to a more robust debate and better-informed public policy solutions to our state’s problems. And, while this may be wishful thinking, it could also put a dent in the bitter partisanship and political divisions that are too often the hallmark of state government.

Increasing the salary of lawmakers would not be a panacea for opening public service to a broader swath of North Carolinians, but it would certainly help make serving in the General Assembly a more viable option for a more diverse array of citizens.

Our democracy is ideally open to all citizens, whether as voters or public officials, but in reality the demands on lawmakers in the General Assembly are just too great for the average citizen to serve their state in this role. Anything we can do to improve that would only strengthen North Carolina and our democracy.