Land of Lincoln Health captured about 1 in 4 new enrollees during the second year of the Illinois health insurance exchange and roughly 12 percent of the total individual market, a big turnaround from the Chicago-based plan's debut performance.

And open enrollment isn't over yet.

The nonprofit's improvement is a sign that Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois, the leading insurer in the state, likely didn't dominate the online marketplace like it did last year, when it captured 92 percent of exchange enrollees.

Blue Cross spokeswoman Lauren Perlstein declined to provide enrollment numbers. But she noted that the individual marketplace is in flux, due partly to people changing jobs or shifting to group or government plans throughout the year.

“We believe that we'll have the second-biggest market share after this round of open enrollment,” Land of Lincoln President Jason Montrie said.

Related:

• As Illinois Obamacare sign-ups jump 60%, top exec heads for exit

• A look at dire Obamacare predictions that haven't panned out

• Obamacare enrollment erroneously inflated

• State figuring out how to better market Obamacare next year

A special enrollment period ends April 30 for people who weren't aware of the tax penalty for not being insured.

Land of Lincoln estimates that so far this year, it has enrolled about 42,000 of nearly 350,000 total consumers on the exchange. It also has retained more than 80 percent of last year's enrollees. In 2014, Land of Lincoln captured just 2 percent of sign-ups on the exchange.

Land of Lincoln also has enrolled an additional 5,000 small businesses and 1,600 large businesses so far this year, the majority of them off the exchange.

FORCES OF CHANGE

So what changed?

Land of Lincoln slashed premiums up to 30 percent by creating new plans with Chicago and suburban hospitals that offer deeper discounts. Some of the largest hospital networks in the state, including Downers Grove-based Advocate Health Care and Chicago-based Presence Health, are participating.

There also are more insurers competing for business this year on the state exchange, Get Covered Illinois, and more plans for consumers and small businesses to choose from. Last year, six carriers sold a combined 165 plans. This year, eight companies are offering more than 400 plans.

Of those who chose a Land of Lincoln plan on the exchange this year, 45 percent are 35 or younger. The so-called young invincibles, people ages 18-34, are considered vital to balancing out the sicker, older and likely more expensive people buying exchange plans.

It's not yet clear how many first-year enrollees moved to a Land of Lincoln plan in the second year of the exchange.