"We need to make sure antibiotics are being used for the right reasons."

The timbre of Curt Lindberg’s voice changes when he tells the story, slowing a bit. It was 2011, and he had just spent three years working in Atlantic City with a team of experts at the AtlantiCare Regional Medical Center’s dialysis unit on a problem that has plagued the medical community since the late ’90s: multidrug-resistant infections, the type caused by superbugs so virulent that even some of the most lethal cocktails of antibiotics can’t stop them.

The problem, as he and his team viewed it, was complex, but not unsolvable. Their work, which was published in 2013 in the American Journal of Infection Control, led to an 88 percent reduction in bloodstream infections. That’s a figure that would make any quality control officer take notice, especially if you were to say the unit staff developed and enforces the practices on its own.

After his team’s work had concluded and the study was published, Lindberg returned to the unit to check its progress. That’s when a technician told him a story.

The dialysis unit was being reviewed by a senior Medicare inspector, who was in the treatment area wearing a surgical gown and gloves. Then she attempted to walk into the sterile nurses’ station — a major infection-control faux pas, because she would also be bringing any organisms she might have come in contact with from the treatment area into a sterile environment. That’s when the tech stepped in and refused — multiple times — to let the inspector into the nurses’ station until she was properly clothed.

“Here’s a relatively junior frontline worker confronting perhaps the most powerful person she could ever encounter,” Lindberg says, his voice beginning to waver a bit in the retelling. “It brought a tear to my eye. They’re so proud of what they’ve all done together that they’ll do anything to sustain the practices and innovations that they developed and owned.”

Lindberg is the director of partnership for complex systems at the Billings Clinic in Billings, Mont. He’s also a Cranbury resident and the former president and chief learning officer at the Bordentown-based Plexus Institute. The technician’s story, he says, reaffirms the power of individuals and organizations to combat the problem of MDRIs. Lindberg, and the technician, are two among many health care workers in New Jersey who are making a difference in the fight against these dangerous infections.

The most recent data from the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, published in 2011, show that New Jersey health care organizations beat national estimates established by the CDC between 2006 and 2008 for controlling bloodstream infections. And that’s an encouraging sign, both for patients and health care professionals. Currently, under the Affordable Care Act, hospitals are subject to Medicare penalties whenever a patient contracts a new infection or a wound. Private insurers typically follow the government’s lead on matters such as this, so it’s likely that they will do the same. This means there is more at stake for state health care organizations than ever before.

And they have their work cut out for them. The CDC estimates that, in 2013, drug-resistant bacteria and fungi were responsible for more than 2 million illnesses and 23,000 deaths nationwide. These infections can happen anywhere, but they’re more likely to occur in health care facilities.

THE CAUSE

Fighting these infections hasn’t gotten any easier, but infection-control strategies have gotten more effective. To understand what’s being done now to prevent and treat them, it’s essential to understand what causes them: superbugs, scrappy microorganisms that have had millions of generations to evolve into efficient killers.

According to Jeremias Murillo, chief medical officer and pediatric infectious disease specialist at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center, antibiotics are both part of the superbug problem and the solution. For decades, doctors dispensed these drugs liberally. The common ear infection, which is either bacterial or viral, is a prime example, he says. There are no good tests to determine which type a patient might have. The quick solution for a doctor used to be to prescribe an antibiotic regardless of the infection type, Murillo says. If the infection was bacterial, the drug would eliminate it. If it was viral, the infection would most likely run its course and the patient would recover. A prescription took pressure off the doctor to provide a more immediate solution. It seemed harmless, Murillo says, but the antibiotic introduced a problem.

“When you use a lot of antibiotics, you change the normal flora of the body,” he says. The antibiotic cleans the body’s bacterial slate indiscriminately, killing both the invasive, harmful organisms and the many helpful organisms. The organisms that survive have genetic resistance to the drug and go on to reproduce, making more bacteria that are hardened to the chemical attack. By introducing an antibiotic, Murillo explains, a doctor may have cleared an infection, but he or she also has created a new generation of a stronger microorganism. Repeat this process a few million times and you’ve got a superbug.

Put these superbugs into a hospital setting and you’ve got an even bigger problem.

“Health care serves as an amplifier of transmission,” says the CDC’s John Jernigan, who is director of its office of prevention research and evaluation. He's also an expert on infectious diseases.

“In some sense, our modern health care facilities are a perfect storm,” he says.

Take a lot of sick people, and put them in one place where you have health care workers moving from patient to patient, acting as transmitters of bacteria, and you have a blueprint for disaster.

So what’s to be done? As long as there are sick people in hospitals, there will be an increased risk of transmitting antibiotic-resistant organisms. The answers range from something as basic as better hand-washing practices to as complex as an organizational concept called positive deviance.

ANTIBIOTIC OVERSIGHT

One of the keys to limiting the spread of superbugs and multidrug resistant infections is more judicious administration of antibiotics, a concept called antibiotic stewardship.

“We need to make sure antibiotics are being used for the right reasons,” Murillo says.

At Newark Beth Israel and throughout the Barnabas Health network, Murillo says strict measures regulate the prescription of antibiotics. Doctors have a list of antibiotics they can prescribe. If a doctor identifies a need for a more potent, higher-level antibiotic, he or she must seek approval from an infectious disease expert. Murillo says his organization has also performed rigorous lab testing to determine which drugs work best for which infections.

The code does leave room for exceptional cases, Murillo says. If a gravely ill patient arrives, there are protocols to allow for expedient access to more potent drugs.

University Hospital in Newark also follows a similar protocol. Rajendra Kapila, hospital epidemiologist and chairman of infection control, says University relies on its antibiogram, a report compiled by microbiologists that lists microorganisms specific to the hospital and details which drugs work best against them.

At Saint Michael’s Medical Center in Newark, Lourdes Hernandez also has antibiotic stewardship on her mind. Hernandez is head of the medical center’s quality department. She says proper antibiotic administration begins in the pharmacy department. John Hessell, her antibiotic stewardship pharmacist, agrees. He believes such stewardship needs to be done on a national level to prevent patients from carrying superbugs into hospitals.

Another issue is the sharing of patients between health care facilities in a region, which Jernigan says CDC research suggests does take place. “We think this is a very important driver of dissemination of some of these bacteria within a community,” he says.

So communication among health care departments at the regional level becomes an important part of limiting the spread of these superbugs, he says. If hospitals screen and identify patients as carriers, then share this information with one another, they’ll be better prepared to take necessary precautions.

FRONTLINE CARE

Regardless, much as it did for the AtlantiCare dialysis unit in Lindberg’s study, prevention falls to workers on the front lines of health care. Shannon Davila, a registered nurse and clinical quality improvement manager at the New Jersey Hospital Association in Princeton, says she’s seen a great deal of success when there’s collaboration within health care organizations.

At the Hunterdon Healthcare System in Flemington, the infection prevention department has partnered with environmental services, the people who keep rooms and treatment areas clean.

“Their role in patient safety is definitely understated,” Davila says.

Hunterdon has invested a lot of time and money implementing a detection system that can determine if a surface is actually clean. The system looks for an enzyme called adenosine triphosphate. All organisms produce this enzyme, making it useful in gauging the cleanliness of a surface. Davila says that environmental service workers will clean a room, swab surfaces and use the ATP test to determine just how clean it is.

Once they’ve established that a room is clean, Davila says, they can begin to disinfect. Cleaning crews will then bathe surfaces in ultraviolet light, which has been shown to kill microorganisms.

Hunterdon has developed a reputation for low infection rates. When the devices were brought in, these numbers were already near zero, says Lisa Rasminowicz, a registered nurse and director of infection prevention. “We brought it in as just an extra step. . . . It’s kind of hard to go any lower than zero.”

Their practices are paying off. Infections have been trending downward at the hospital for years, she says. In 2013, they were able reduce infections related to MRSA and VRE (two types of multidrug-resistant organisms) by 33 percent each.

Davila acknowledges that this sort of technology isn’t cheap. But consider the cost of a multidrug-resistant infection. In its 2013 report on antibiotic resistance threats in the United States, the CDC estimated that these types of infections have health care costs in excess of $20 billion annually.

Obamacare has empowered Medicare to withhold payment for procedures to treat these infections if a facility is shown to have excessive infection rates, with private insurers likely to follow. With hospitals facing these penalties, the cost of new equipment becomes more palatable.

But the technology is only as good as the health care workers who wield it. And while there are many steps that can help, Jernigan says the “cornerstone” of infection control is just this: good hand hygiene.

WASH YOUR HANDS

It’s so simple. And yet it’s something that all health care workers struggle with.

An academic paper by Lindberg begins with a sage piece of advice from the father of infection control, Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis. More than 160 years ago, Semmelweis advised doctors and midwives that if they didn’t want to kill their patients, they should wash their hands. This advice rocked the medical establishment and challenged the practices of the time. Semmelweis was ridiculed for his work and ended up dying in an insane asylum.

Semmelweis’ work eventually altered the course and culture of modern medicine. And to this day, according to experts such as Davila and Lindberg, improving hand hygiene is still about changing the culture within health care organizations.

According to Davila, Virtua Healthcare System, based in Marlton, used a successful

six-sigma method to reduce its infection rate, the results of which were published in a 2010 paper issued by the American Hospital Association.

Virtua was one of eight hospitals nationally to participate in the study, from April 2008 to August 2010. The efforts are: define, measure, analyze, improve and control. Using this methodology, the hospitals collectively saw their hand hygiene compliance rates go from less than 50 percent to about 82 percent. Many reported a decline in hospital-acquired infections as the compliance rate rose.

According to Martin Topiel, chief of infection control at Virtua, the key to the strategy’s effectiveness has been collaboration throughout the organization.

“Everybody in our organization is important and contributes,” Topiel says. This means providing feedback and tracking for hand washing and cleaning practices to ensure that standards are being met. As a result, they have reduced hospital-acquired MRSA in their critical care units and they haven’t seen an increase in multidrug-resistant organisms.

Lindberg’s success story at the AtlantiCare dialysis unit is similar, in that it required a review and restructuring of hand hygiene and patient care culture. But his approach was different.

At first, his thinking was like many others: “It’s so simple. Just do it.”

But the problem is much more complex. Some chocolate pudding changed Lindberg’s thinking.

At a 2007 conference on MRSA control at the Billings Clinic, clinicians were asked to do a bit of improv. A patient was in a hospital bed, with a MRSA infection. The infection, in this instance, was represented by a glob of chocolate pudding. A nurse was tasked with breaking the news of the infection to the patient. The nurse enters the room, only to be interrupted by a doctor, who begins checking the infection site, taking notes, touching the hospital bed, shaking hands with family members. And before you knew it, Lindberg says, there was chocolate pudding everywhere.

The title of this conference was “From Invisible to Visible,” and for Lindberg, this exercise did just that.

He took what he’d seen with him to the AtlantiCare dialysis unit. He and his team of researchers helped craft an intervention to reduce the bloodstream infections at the AtlantiCare dialysis unit using a method called positive deviance.

The positive deviance approach is rooted in the idea that in every organization or community, there are positive deviants: people who are confronted with the same set of circumstances, but somehow manage them better. The theory holds that by studying what these positive deviants are doing and introducing their ideas to the community, the community can then better adapt to the situation.

Under positive deviance, the solutions, Lindberg explains, come from the members of the organization themselves. This also promotes sustainability of the solutions, he says.

Because the frontline care providers in the dialysis unit own the solutions, they’re more likely to continue using them.

“We’ve adopted a different perspective on the nature of the problem,” Lindberg says. “And we’ve seen when you embrace it differently what outcomes are possible.”

For Lindberg, that means involving anyone connected to the issue and recognizing that the everyday actions of those hundreds of people matter. It also means viewing the role of leader and expert in the hospital system less traditionally.

The tech who confronted the Medicare inspector was both an expert and a leader.

Traditionally, she might not have been involved in the process to change the unit and many patient outcomes could have been different, Lindberg says.

Additionally, the staff itself changed the culture of the dialysis unit by altering how they handled the time between treatment for one set of patients and the next.

A few simple conversations revealed that many care providers believed the risk of infection was heightened when patients were coming to and going from the treatment area. Dialysis, Lindberg explains, requires many patients to spend three hours at a time in treatment, with a maximum four sessions per week. The lengthy visits often means patients are in a hurry to get in and out. The staff said that this led to important steps in the cleaning process being missed. Their solution was to limit patient access to the treatment area between appointments, so that they felt less pressured to rush through prep and cleaning for the next set of patients. This staff-created solution helped to drive down the rate of infection within the unit.

Lindberg says that part of the reason positive deviance is so effective is that it appeals to the emotional foundation of health care: empathy. Part of the process at AtlantiCare was to bring in people who had experienced bloodstream infections, or multidrug-resistant infections, to share their stories. Lindberg says that it was difficult not to be moved by many, to be encouraged to make a difference.

Lindberg’s son contracted a MRSA infection on his back while surfing in Costa Rica several years ago. When Lindberg got him back to the United States, he and his wife, Claire, a nursing professor at The College of New Jersey, found a surgeon associated with Hunterdon Healthcare to care for their son. As any nervous parents would, they kept a close watch on him and on the care he received. He ended up making a full recovery.

Lindberg then recalls a recent phone conversation he had with his son, whose wife had just gone into labor. In just a few hours, Lindberg would be a grandfather for the third time.

“Sometimes, we in health care, we just look at numbers and we don’t see the lives and the tragedies behind those numbers,” he says. “We try to make those numbers come alive.”

RELATED COVERAGE

• The three worst superbugs, according to the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

• Options in the fight against super-infections

• Better drugs, better education, better training