Topics: economy, EU, Europe, France, GlobalPost, Business News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

For 200 miles down France’s Atlantic seaboard, convoys of earth-movers, phalanxes of cranes and a 6,000-strong army of workers are toiling on Europe’s largest construction site.

The $10-billion project to gouge out a high-speed rail track linking Paris to Bordeaux — and eventually onward to the Spanish border — is a showcase for French engineering.

By bringing together private investors and the state, it symbolizes how many in France believe the economy should be run.

“To find new growth and new jobs, it’s imperative that France relaunches public and private investment in public works and construction,” Prime Minister Manuel Valls declared last week at the opening of a bridge to carry the new line over the River Dordogne. “We have to show our optimism, our willingness to believe in the future.”

Optimism, however, is in short supply.

Despite the pharaonic scale of the building work for the new railroad, the French economy has run out of steam.

Growth is stagnant. More than 3.4 million languish in France’s unemployment lines. In August, the jobless rate rose for the ninth consecutive month, leaving more than one-in-ten out of work.

Across Europe there are fears the malaise in the euro zone’s second largest economy could re-ignite the crisis of confidence that almost destroyed the currency bloc two years ago.

The reformers versus the populists

Socialist President Francois Hollande’s popularity ratings have plummeted to record lows under 20 percent.

His 2012 election pledge to reverse the unemployment rate within months is widely mocked. The publication of a kiss-and-tell biography by the former first lady he spurned for a younger actress has added to public scorn.

Valls, a fresh face whom Hollande appointed in April, has failed to turn things around.

A vote of confidence in the National Assembly next week will be close, with leftist ministers threatening to withdraw support from the prime minister. If Valls loses, France could be forced into snap elections, with the ultra-nationalist National Front riding high in the polls.

Over the weekend, Valls warned that the far right stands “at the gates of power.”

The National Front emerged as France’s biggest party in European Parliament elections in May. Polls show the nationalists’ leader Marine Le Pen as the most popular choice among likely candidates to replace Hollande when his term ends in 2017.

“There is no longer a glass ceiling that can stop our victory,” Le Pen told a rally of her party’s youth wing Sunday.

To weaken the far right, Valls has called for the left in France and across Europe to embrace reforms needed to regenerate the economy.

Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi faces similar problems. Italy is the only major euro zone economy still in recession. Its debt of $2.79 trillion and rising is a European record.

Like Valls, Renzi also faces ferocious criticism from a firebrand populist, in the shape of former comedian Beppe Grillo.

More from GlobalPost: Matteo Renzi may be the one man who can save Italy

Renzi and Valls both want German Chancellor Angela Merkel and other northern European leaders to ease European Union deficit targets which are forcing governments into austerity policies.

EU officials have complained French reforms under Hollande have been too timid, but if it survives next week’s confidence vote Valls’ government will have more leeway to push reforms to loosen the state’s role in the economy, reduce taxes and inject flexibility to labor markets.