For those of you keeping track, we got more confirmation today that the long-heralded Republican alternative to Obamacare won't be coming this year. Mississippi Sen. Roger Wicker, who chairs the Senate GOP's campaign arm, said Thursday morning that there's just too much for Congress to do this year to get around to actually replacing the controversial law. "Looking at the calendar, looking at the difficulty we had getting something done through reconciliation ... I don't see this happening during this final session of Congress," he told reporters at a breakfast sponsored by the Christian Science Monitor.

Set aside the fact that we're in February and that – even in a presidential election year – Congress largely dictates its own calendar. Let's grant that pulling together something as big as a major health care overhaul can take time, arguably even more than the nine or so months before the next election. The issue is that the GOP has been promising an Affordable Care Act alternative for something like 80 months. Going back to June of 2009, Republicans have with great regularity promised that a bill was in the offing, as the Maddow Blog's Steve Benen and the Huffington Post's Jeffrey Young have each ably documented. So it looks like we can tack on another dozen months at least to that total.

That's because – understanding, tacitly anyway, that the law has had some benefits, like a net of 17.6 million people getting health care coverage who didn't previously have it – Republicans have repeatedly uttered the now hoary talking point that they will not simply undo Obamacare, but "repeal and replace" it. The GOP collectively realizes that it has to be for something rather than just against the Affordable Care Act and, oh yeah, by extension against insuring 17.6 million people.

(Wicker, who endorsed the usual platitudes about competition, had a neat solution to this problem; he simply denied the facts of the matter. Asked about the GOP running in opposition "when so many new people have health care because of the law," Wicker replied: "You know, I would actually challenge that. I'm not sure that many more people have health care because of Obamacare." Well 17.6 million people seems like a big number to me, as does the 5.5 percent drop in the uninsured rate as measured by Gallup and the 5.3 percent drop as measured by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)