New medical clinics open all the time in El Paso, but the company behind the Komedix Healthcare clinic opening May 5 on Lee Trevino says it is different from the rest.

For one, it’s owned by a crowd-funded company based in New Braunfels in Central Texas, with no connections to a larger health care provider.

For another, its aim is to establish a loyal base of return patients – adults and seniors seeking primary care and same-day appointments – versus the urgent care clinics competing with hospital emergency rooms.

The clinic at 3130 N. Lee Treviño will be Komedix’s first El Paso location and its third in Texas.

Komedix also has plans for a clinic in Northeast El Paso.

The company is stepping into a competitive market with more than 40 walk-in clinics operating in El Paso, some offering specialty services.

Komedix’s specialty is its general primary care, says CEO David Komet.

Komet said he picked El Paso because of the unmet demand for primary care physicians and services, both of which will grow as more people sign up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

“El Paso as a community has less than half of the primary care physicians it needs for population health,” he said. “Urgent care centers are a great way to get seen quickly. The downside is continuity of care.

“If you talk to the physicians that staff those clinics, they’re great with the sprains, cuts and the incidental care. But when it comes to long-term care of chronic conditions like diabetes and cardiovascular disease, that’s not the role they play.”

Komet said there is another difference in the Komedix model, which is to take the administrative load off staff physicians so they can spend more time with patients.

“We’re a physicians-driven solution to this new era of complexity and compliance,” he said. “Practicing medicine has become extremely complex, with all the requirements for keeping electronic records.

“Physicians become physicians to help people. They’re scientists and healers and don’t want to be running IT solutions, doing quality outcome measures and dealing with billings and collections.”

Then there’s the whole realm of insurance, where the process of getting credentialed by just one health plan is, he said, mind numbing.

“If everyone knew how hard it is for physicians to get paid for the services they provide, they might have a little more sympathy for them as a professional class,” Komet said. “We hand them a laptop or iPad and say, ‘Go take care of patients.’”

Dr. Hector Lopez, Komedix’s clinical director in El Paso, has been in practice for 30 years and is the kind of experienced physician Komedix tends to attract, Komet said, because they know what running an office is like and want to try something different.

Promotional materials on the Komedix website include a pie chart showing that its doctors spend 67 percent of their time on patient care, while typical doctors spend only 20 percent of their time with patients.

Primary care is the key to health in a community, he said, because that’s where diseases and other medical problems can be discovered before they become terribly costly to treat or life threatening.

Having to wait weeks for an appointment with a primary care doctor is the most obvious evidence that there aren’t enough primary care doctors to meet the need in El Paso, he said, adding that Obamacare will make the problem worse before it gets better.

Obamacare impact

“You can hear the political conversation around Obamacare from every angle,” Komet said. “But the bottom line is more people are insured, which means more people have access to physicians.

“It may be an imperfect law and an imperfect system, but it’s something that probably needs to be worked on and refined.”

Komet said he and his company are banking on demand to grow the company. The clinic will accept Medicare and insurance plans including Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, TRICARE and Humana.

“Insurers thought this year was a big year for enrollment, but next year will be really big because the penalties for not having health insurance are increasing,” he said.

People who filed a 2015 income tax return and had to pay the penalty for themselves or a family member who didn’t have health insurance know what he’s talking about.

Email El Paso Inc. reporter David Crowder at dcrowder@elpasoinc.com or call (915) 534-4422, ext. 122 and (915) 630-6622.