Update at 2:15 p.m.: The post has been updated to describe a second Hotze email to Paxton, and include a Paxton spokeswoman’s denial that Hotze influenced the attorney general.

Original item at 12:18 p.m.: AUSTIN — Two of Texas’ most politically active Christian conservatives have called for state Attorney General Ken Paxton to resist the Supreme Court’s gay-marriage ruling — or at least provide legal defense for resisters.

In emails sent to Paxton around the time of the court’s landmark declaration that same-sex marriage is a 50-state constitutional right, Houston-area businessman and physician Steve Hotze and Midland energy executive Tim Dunn urged the state’s top lawyer to stand strong in opposition.

“Greetings in the name of Christ our King!” Hotze said in an email to Paxton about two hours after the court issued its 5-4 ruling on June 26. “Do what the Louisiana AG has done. The illegitimate SCOTUS ruling does not name Texas, so fight those lousy bastards. They hate God and want to let the Sodomites queer our country.”

Hotze, who pasted in his email a link to a Washington Post blog item, was referring to a defiant statement by Republican Louisiana Attorney General James D. “Buddy” Caldwell.

Caldwell said he’d found no specific line in the court ruling that said that Louisiana had to obey it. “Therefore, there is not yet a legal requirement for officials to issue marriage licenses or perform marriages for same-sex couples in Louisiana,” he said.

Hotze, a major Republican campaign donor, closed with an Old Testament verse comparing “a righteous man who gives way before the wicked” with polluted water.

The Dallas Morning News obtained some of Paxton and Gov. Greg Abbott’s June correspondence about upcoming Supreme Court decisions using the state’s open-records act. However, the two Republican statewide officials invoked exceptions to the law to withhold various items. They have asked Paxton’s open records unit to decide if their withholdings and redactions were appropriate.

The emails Abbott’s office released show that on the day after the court issued its gay-marriage ruling, he asked aides to print out a copy of Justice Anthony Kennedy’s majority opinion so that he could read it “on the airplane later today.”

There was no further explanation. Abbott, a lawyer and former judge and state attorney general, already had issued statements responding to the court.

Paxton’s released emails show that on June 29, Dunn forwarded to him a Wall Street Journal column critical of Kennedy’s opinion by William McGurn. McGurn, once chief speechwriter to former President George W. Bush, predicted “endless litigation” would flow from the court’s action. He warned that the tax-exempt status of private Christian educational institutions could be yanked, and business owners who refuse to cooperate with same-sex weddings could feel the “full furies” of gay rights zealots.

Dunn, a Midland oilman who is the major funder of Empower Texans leader Michael Quinn Sullivan, told Paxton that McGurn wrote a “good article.”

“It seems that the AG’s office could represent citizens, churches and schools who … have their constitutional religious liberties attacked — by government,” Dunn wrote. “Particularly the federal government. That at least would take away their ability to simply bankrupt everyone with legal fees.”

A day earlier, on Sunday, June 28, Paxton released an attorney general opinion in answer to questions posed by Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, another GOP social conservative. Among other things, Paxton said many private lawyers “stand ready” to help defend county clerks, their employees and judges and justices of the peace who feel their religious beliefs dictate that they refuse to give marriage licenses to same-sex couples or officiate at gay weddings. Paxton said the legal services would come “in many cases on a pro-bono basis, and I will do everything I can from this office to be a public voice for those standing in defense of their rights.”

On June 24, two days before the court ruled, Hotze wrote Paxton questioning Bexar County Clerk Gerard Rickhoff’s preparations for a possible decision in favor of same-sex couples. Hotze pasted into the email portions of a San Antonio Express-News story that said Rickhoff’s employees had removed gender references from Bexar County’s marriage licenses, although the references — at the time — remained on the state marriage application.

Rickhoff “does not have the authority to change the marriage license, does he?” Hotze wrote. It’s not clear whether Paxton responded.

On Tuesday, a Paxton spokeswoman said Hotze’s emails didn’t influence Paxton’s response to the Supreme Court decision.

“In response to Lt. Gov. Patrick’s request for guidance, our office issued a legal opinion — which is a nonbinding interpretation of the law,” Paxton said spokeswoman Cynthia Meyer. “The 5th Circuit’s ruling earlier this month is consistent with our opinion, which emphasizes the importance of protecting religious liberty while enforcing the Supreme Court’s expanded definition of marriage.”

Meyer was referring to federal Circuit Judge Jerry Smith’s July 1 instructions to lower courts in Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi. As AP reported in this story, Smith told them to conclude their gay marriage cases with orders from the district judges legalizing same-sex marriage.

Texas Ethics Commission records show that last December, Dunn gave $50,000 to Paxton, who had just won election as attorney general. Hotze, who is president of Conservative Republicans of Texas, gave Paxton $5,000.