Hillary Clinton was interrupted by a protester during a rally in Kentucky. Clinton responded by saying she wished people would stop "listening to Republican propaganda." (AP)

HOPKINSVILLE, Ky. — Hillary Clinton fired back at a woman who stood during a rally here Monday to disagree with a line in Clinton's stump speech about Kentucky’s Republican Gov. Matt Bevin.

The exchange unfolded as Clinton discussed improvements that had occurred in the state on issues such as education, implementing the Affordable Care Act and lowering the unemployment rate — all of which she attributed to Bevin’s predecessor, Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear.

“Your governor did such a great job and your current governor is trying to undo it all,” Clinton said, referring to Bevin and Beshear.

But the woman, who had been sitting quietly in the audience, stood and shouted toward Clinton: “That is not true.”

“Oh yes it is, yes it is,” Clinton responded before adding hotly: “You are entitled to your opinion, but you’re not entitled to your own facts!”

The crowed roared, some people leaving their chairs to cheer and hold up their Clinton signs.



Hillary Clinton pauses while speaking at a get-out-the vote event at James E. Bruce Convention Center in Hopkinsville, Ky., on May 16. (AP Photo/Andrew Harnik)

Suddenly, the woman’s outburst had become a referendum on voters who disregard the “truth" in making their political decisions.

Clinton invited the woman to come up to the rope line after the event to explain what was on her mind, because very little could be heard over the boom of Clinton’s amplified voice and the applause and cheering from the crowd.

But Clinton wasn’t finished.

“I’ll tell you what the truth is. ... and it’s time that people stop listening to Republican propaganda!” she added.

As Beshear stood watching from the sidelines, Clinton noted that “hundreds of thousands” of working Kentuckians have health care because of the Medicaid expansion during his governorship.

“And I’ll tell you something else,” she said. “If the current governor has his way and Medicaid is cut back or eliminated as it was expanded, it’s going to cost you rural hospitals, rural health clinics — a lot of people who have insurance are going to find their access less than it is, because of the way that your governor in the past expanded affordable health care.”

“We can’t have the kind of debate that we need when people don’t learn the facts,” she added.

By the time it was all over, the woman had asked to be escorted out and left the room quietly.