Republicans say they intend to force Mr. Obama to make choices on bills passed by the House that Senate Democrats have been able to keep from his desk, potentially touching off the president’s first extensive use of the veto after six years in office.

Video

Some Democrats who have been frustrated by the stalemate in the Senate say they are open to cooperating with Republicans.

“Right now, we are helping destroy each other,” said Senator Joe Manchin III, a centrist Democrat from West Virginia. “I would like to think we can work together. I’d like to get my amendments in debate.”

In gaining control of the Senate, however, Republicans ousted some of the red-state Democrats most inclined to work with them, such as Senator Mark Pryor of Arkansas, reducing the number of potential Democratic allies.

Other tensions may complicate their efforts. Mr. McConnell, with few votes to spare, will have to balance the views of a handful of more moderate Republicans, such as Senator Susan Collins of Maine, with those of unyielding conservatives such as Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, who following the election said Republicans should press their advantage as hard as possible.

Mr. McConnell will also have to contend with the competing interests of Mr. Cruz and at least two other Republican senators expected to run for president — Rand Paul of Kentucky and Marco Rubio of Florida — and those of senators up for re-election in 2016 in swing states like Illinois, New Hampshire, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin.

As for legislation, the party’s leaders in Congress are eying five major priorities:

ENERGY Approving the Keystone XL oil pipeline from Canada could be fertile ground for agreement with Democrats who have differed with the White House on the issue. Combining the pipeline with new energy exports, expanded exploration and added efficiency could result in a bipartisan consensus on energy policy.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

On a conference call last week, Speaker John A. Boehner assured his members that he was “prepared to move quickly, along with Mitch McConnell, to make clear that the new Congress will be about jobs and the economy,” according to an official familiar with the speaker’s remarks.

“I’m talking about bills to green-light construction of the Keystone pipeline and increase exports of American-made liquefied natural gas; to restore the 40-hour workweek for American workers that was undone by Obamacare; to encourage American employers to hire more of our veterans,” Mr. Boehner said, according to the official.

Photo

BUDGET AND SPENDING Republican leaders in both the House and Senate say that reaching a deal on a budget will be crucial not only to prove that they can do it, but also to allow conservatives to put their imprint on a nonbinding fiscal plan.

Senator Jeff Sessions, the conservative Alabama Republican who will lead the Budget Committee, has had his staff looking at federal spending for months to find places to cut in hopes of proposing a budget that would be balanced in as little as a decade. But despite wide sentiment among Republicans for cuts, a divide exists within the party.

Some Republicans would like to reverse a series of Pentagon spending constraints put in place through earlier budget deals with Democrats, arguing that the military is being strained at a time when it is being required to fight the continuing threat of Islamic terrorism in the Middle East. Mr. Sessions has expressed reservations about easing the spending limits on the Pentagon, and doing so would make balancing the budget harder and require even more to be cut from politically sensitive social programs.

But reaching a budget deal is also essential to putting in place a set of procedural shortcuts that would allow Republicans to force through changes in the health care law and a tax package on a simple majority vote, avoiding the threat of a Democratic filibuster.

If they can enact a budget, Republicans hope to return to reviewing what traditionally have been 12 separate annual spending bills and reinvigorating a process that has all but collapsed by putting the bills on the floor and allowing senators to amend them.

In March, for the first time since Mr. Obama took office, Republicans will also have to find a way to pass an increase in the debt limit as the majority party — a difficult task given that the debt limit has become such a lightning rod for conservatives who object to any increase in federal borrowing power. Mr. McConnell suggested on Wednesday that Republicans would address the debt limit in the budget.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

TAXES A sweeping overhaul of the entire tax code is another top priority for the new majority, one that at least in theory has some Democratic support. And much of the spadework has already been done — at the Treasury Department, the House Ways and Means Committee, which is likely to be led by Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, and the Senate Finance Committee, which will now have Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, as its chairman. Mr. Hatch will replace Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, a Democrat who is also a tax overhaul advocate and could be instrumental in the debate.

The key to a deal will be the Obama administration. Treasury officials have already developed a detailed plan to simplify the corporate tax code and lower the corporate tax rate to 28 percent from 35 percent. Republicans want it closer to 25 percent and have repeatedly said any tax overhaul must include reductions in the individual tax rates, which apply to many small businesses. It looms as a difficult negotiation, but it is possible Mr. Obama could take a page from President Ronald Reagan, who worked with Democrats to pass the 1986 Tax Reform Act.

HEALTH CARE It is a delicate topic, but top Republicans acknowledge they cannot repeal the Affordable Care Act, particularly with Mr. Obama able to veto any such effort. They will no doubt take some repeal votes, but their initial focus could be on smaller changes.

For instance, a medical device tax used to pay for the law is opposed by lawmakers from both parties who represent manufacturers, and a repeal of the tax could pass Congress. And another group of Republicans and Democrats has also called for returning the health law’s definition of full-time work to 40 hours from 30, arguing that the lower limit is forcing too many people out of work because of employers’ efforts to comply with the law. Mr. Boehner singled out that measure as one that he would like to see advance.

TRADE This is one area where the Obama administration and Republicans have a good chance of finding common ground. Republicans are enthusiastic advocates of increased trade, and the president is eager to get the added authority to negotiate new trade deals and win approval of a trade agreement with nations on the Pacific Rim. The main obstacle could be Democrats, many of whom are skeptical of trade deals that labor warns could cost American jobs. But a significant segment of Democrats back trade expansion, and a deal could probably be found if both congressional Republicans and the White House both press for it.

Over all, those on both sides of the aisle agree that the change in Senate control presents a chance to curb the gridlock that has consumed Congress, but it also holds peril for Republicans if they fail to deliver.

“They have a golden opportunity,” Mr. Manchin, the Democratic senator from West Virginia, said. “If they get that and fail miserably, it is very bleak for them in 2016.”