Craig Philip is director of the Vanderbilt Center for Transportation and Operational Resilience (VECTOR) and a research professor of civil and environmental engineering. (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Increasingly frequent extreme weather events are magnifying the risks of waterfront development.

The risks of a proposed new rock quarry near Old Hickory Dam could be catastrophic.

Repurposing existing quarries as floodwater reservoirs could help Nashville withstand a future flood.

My wife and I are among the many fortunate Yankees lured to Nashville more than 30 years ago by wonderful job opportunities and Nashville’s charm. Coming as we did from the major metropolises of the Northeast, life here seemed like a dream, with plenty of room and relatively few competing interests. There was concern about preservation of historical structures such as the Ryman Auditorium, but the infrastructure appeared much newer than the areas where we once lived, and it was certainly not stressed.

During nearly 30 years with Ingram Barge Company, my primary concern was always the safety of our associates and, nearly as often, our country’s aging waterways, which have become old, dangerous, congested and increasingly vulnerable to disruption.

Our business approach kept this in mind: We were focused first on a nonnegotiable commitment to a zero-harm safety culture, and then to be nimble both operationally and financially. We didn’t call it resilience, but that’s what it was.

Last year, I had the wonderful good fortune to join the faculty in Civil and Environmental Engineering at Vanderbilt University and a team that has been researching and advancing the science of risk, reliability and resilience.

Today more than ever, these concepts must inform our community’s decisions about future development and infrastructure investment if we are to keep our spot as an “it" city.

Extraordinary development is enveloping us and much is happening in all the right places, such as downtown, but also in more challenging places like our waterfront, where forces totally beyond us, such as more frequent extreme weather events, are quickly magnifying the risks of such development.

So let’s take a resilience lens and see how it can inform us. Resilience is a powerful concept for making systems of all types better, and it has four main elements: (1) anticipate harmful events; (2) reduce vulnerability when it is possible to do so; (3) resist/absorb/adapt when something harmful occurs; and (4) transform to a better state to prevent harm the next time.

If we look at a prominent, current development/infrastructure issue through this lens, the best path forward can come into focus.

A new rock quarry has recently been proposed that is located close to Old Hickory Dam and just a few miles above downtown Nashville.

We know the dam is old, we know that quarries involve blasting and vibration to the surrounding area, we know that limestone is plentiful throughout Middle Tennessee, and we know a failure would be catastrophic, and its impact severity would inevitably grow as riverfront development continues.

So the first two elements of our resilience lens — anticipate harmful events and reduce vulnerability — should direct us to build such a quarry elsewhere.

In another example of good “resilience thinking” that also concerns quarries, Congressman Jim Cooper proposed after the 2010 flood that we consider temporarily repurposing several of the existing quarries in the region that might be able to serve as temporary holding reservoirs for floodwaters when we experience the next 1,000-year flood.

This is a terrific example of actions that might help our community resist and absorb such an event in the future.

These concepts aren’t rocket science, though some of the mathematics behind the calculations certainly can be.

What it does urge us to do as a community is to inform our decision-making with a lens peering through the windshield in front of us and not using the rearview mirror.

Craig Philip is director of the Vanderbilt Center for Transportation and Operational Resilience (VECTOR) and a research professor of civil and environmental engineering.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1SIfseU