Charles Krauthammer believes that President Obama might finally be getting ready to do something that would legitimately merit impeachment. After six years of Republican talking heads deciding there are a number of smaller offenses that could lead to impeachment, what does Charles Krauthammer think will finally be the big move? The Republican writer and frequent Fox News guest believes that if President Obama issues an executive order that has to do with immigration, it will be unconstitutional.

Appearing on Fox News yet again, Charles Krauthammer said he believed that if the Obama administration follows through with its threats to change immigration policy through an executive order, it would be a “flagrant assault on the Constitution.” While most Republicans in Washington have been claiming that they will not seek impeachment, and that Democrats bring it up more than they do, that move appears to be back on the table.

The November 4 elections shifted the balance of power in Washington, with the right wing taking back the U.S. Senate. Since that upheaval, there have been louder rumblings about potential impeachment hearings. Charles Krauthammer is apparently fanning those flames these days. The interesting part of Charles Krauthammer’s comments is that they seem to go against what he was saying just this summer, when he called such a move “political suicide.” It’s possible that there is less a worry about that kind of suicide since they did indeed take quite a bit of power from the Democrats already.

Of course, Charles Krauthammer also believes all this talk about moving unilaterally on immigration could be a trap. Charles Krauthammer says that one of the reasons Obama might be doing this is simply because he wants something to have on his resume when his legacy is talked about. As the commentator pointed out, the president’s biggest accomplishment, Obamacare, is now in serious jeopardy thanks to the Republican majority.

Charles Krauthammer also said he believes there’s a chance the immigration move could be one that is being done as an attempt to get Republicans to go into a kind of “road rage.” President Obama might be looking for the Republicans to bring impeachment hearings, or shut down the government. Even with their new power, it appears Charles Krauthammer believes those could both backfire. There is still a presidential election coming in 2016, and Republicans don’t have an obvious candidate, while Hilary Clinton seems like the favorite among dems. Charles Krauthammer pretty clearly feels as though that could still be a problem in the long run.