Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey on Tuesday announced a new telehealth service, Horizon CareOnline, that provides access to a board certified, licensed doctor online 24 hours a day, seven days a week — at no change, and no appointments needed.

Horizon said the new benefit, which will begin Jan. 1, is “part of an ongoing commitment to improve its members’ health care experience through innovation and technology.”

Horizon CareOnline is available at no cost to individuals and families that purchase coverage from Horizon at HealthCare.gov, the website where New Jerseyans buy government-subsidized health plans under the Affordable Care Act, as well as those purchasing individual and family health plans directly from Horizon.

Click here to subscribe to the NJBIZ e-newsletters

Telemedicine is being offered by two other health insurers selling coverage to New Jerseyans via HealthCare.gov: Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey and Oscar Insurance. Open enrollment began Nov. 15 for health plans that go into effect in 2015, and individuals can continue to enroll online at HealthCare.gov through Feb. 15. Also selling coverage to New Jerseyans via HealthCare.gov are UnitedHealthcare/Oxford and AmeriHealth New Jersey.



“Horizon recognizes that there are times when individuals cannot get to a doctor quickly or easily when they get sick, so Horizon CareOnline will go a long way to adding convenience to receiving care from a licensed physician,” said Christopher M. Lepre, senior vice president, market business units, for Horizon.



Horizon said it’s offering CareOnline through a partnership with telehealth provider American Well. Horizon members also will be able to access CareOnline on their laptop or desktop computers by signing up at Horizon.Amwell.com, or calling (855) 818-DOCS (3627). Smartphone and tablet users can enroll by downloading American Well’s free Amwell app from the iTunes Store or Google Play.

Members are then able to select from a list of doctors, including Spanish-speaking physicians, for their virtual visits.



Horizon “is bringing health care home to members,” said Roy Schoenberg, chief executive of American Well. “We are proud to collaborate in this mission.”

American Well said its web and mobile telehealth platform connects patients and clinicians for live visits through video, supplemented by secure text chat and telephone conversations.



Horizon said CareOnline is the latest service offered by the company to make health care more convenient through technology. Horizon said that, for more than a decade, it has offered members a 24/7 registered nurse phone service. Horizon also has a mobile app that enables users to create a virtual ID card, review the status of a claim, find a network physician and access other health insurance benefits.

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

Source: Christie to keynote 2015 N.J. Chamber ‘Walk to Washington’ dinner

SJP Properties inks lease with e-commerce startup Jet.com at new Hoboken building

Millennial Minded blog: Ad agency puts its babies in a corner