President Abraham Lincoln led the nation to Civil War in 1861 to finally resolve the terrible injustice and brutality of slavery, brought to a head by the secession of Southern slave states. Lincoln was a Republican.

The Civil Rights Act of 1964 outlawed racial discrimination and segregation in schools and places of public accommodation. It was passed in Congress with overwhelming support by Republicans in spite of bitter opposition by Southern Democrats who staged a Senate filibuster that lasted two months.

So why do blacks almost unanimously vote for Democrats, with typically 95 percent doing so in presidential elections? A big reason is a significant percentage of blacks are dependent on government handouts. Democrats are the party of big government, especially through redistribution of other people’s income in the body of myriad social and welfare programs, of which blacks receive an inordinate share.

Living on public charity can damage one’s self-esteem. A remedy for that is to regard such handouts as “entitlements,” something you’ve “earned” not by labor, ability or achievement but by victimhood. Although slavery was abolished 150 years ago, it’s still rationalized by many blacks as a legitimate excuse for individual underachievement, while polls show a majority favor some form if “reparations” — the ultimate prize.

Now, there is a precedent for reparations. In 1988, Congress authorized $1.2 billion to pay $20,000 each to 60,000 Japanese-Americans who were forcibly relocated to internment camps during World War II. But that money went to those who had actually been imprisoned in the camps and were still alive. There are no surviving African-American slaves.

In 1990, Kwame Afo, an official of a group called New Africa, called for a payment of $133,000 to every African-American man, woman and child in the U.S. That would have cost $4 trillion, four times the then-level of total federal spending.

In 2002, Washington lawyer Robert Brock filed a class-action lawsuit demanding $250,000 in gold bullion for each of the nation’s 35 million blacks, plus payments to an unnamed country in Africa, where they could resettle. The price tag for that: about $10 trillion.

Updating for inflation and population growth, awarding reparations today at $330,000 for each of the 45 million people that the Census Bureau defines as black or mixed-race black comes to a tidy $15 trillion. That’s four times total federal spending as well as three-fourths of our GDP.

Where on earth would the money come from? And by what principle should white people today — and those of other races and nationalities who came to America long after slavery was abolished — ─be held financially or morally liable for what others did as far back as the 1600s, even predating our nation’s founding?

Conceding that reparations are infeasible and never going to happen, Theodore Johnson, a black doctoral candidate writing recently in The Washington Post, proposed a scheme he calls “weighted voting” for blacks. Arguing that since the Constitution originally “valued” slaves as only three-fifths of a person, we should now invert that fraction and give blacks five-thirds of a vote, thereby increasing their leverage in elections.

Of course, slaves couldn’t vote, so the three-fifths of a person rule was only about determining how many seats each state would have in the U.S. House. Ironically, the Southern slave states would have preferred that slaves be counted as whole persons, thereby giving those states more seats. The Northern states bargained that down to three-fifths.

Good try, Johnson, but the three-fifths clause was erased by the 14th Amendment, and your fantasy is patently unconstitutional and a direct assault on the principle of one person, one vote.

Instead of ever-more creative reparation schemes and dependence on government subsidies, that cohort of blacks who are mired in a victim mentality might far better serve their interests by taking more responsibility for their individual behavior.

Freelance columnist Mike Rosen’s radio show airs weekdays from 1 to 3 p.m. on 850-KOA.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.