Fossil Free CU is now at the negotiating table with the University of Colorado Board of Regents. On Feb. 20, over 100 students and community members from the Denver, Boulder and Colorado Springs campuses and communities joined together in a rally outside of the University Memorial Center before the February Board of Regents meeting.

Fossil Free CU's campaign asks that the Board of Regents, those responsible for managing CU's endowment, immediately stop any new fossil fuel investments and divest its holdings from the top 200 fossil fuel companies and any commingled funds within five years.

The fossil fuel divestment movement follows in the footsteps of other divestment movements. The University of Colorado has a history of responding to campus activism and global calls for divestment from unethical practices. CU divested from the South African apartheid government, as well as from Sudan because of the genocide in Darfur. In the past, CU has chosen to stand on the right side of history. Today, Fossil Free CU asks the administration to pick a side on one of the defining issues of this generation.

Advertisement

After today's presentation, several board members expressed public support and interest in continuing the conversation to explore how fossil fuel divestment can be "realistic and responsible." Unfortunately, Regent Bosley, chair of the Budget and Finance Committee, did not respond to Fossil Free CU's request of creating a pathway to divestment with students this semester. While still others were unresponsive, it is clear that the Board of Regents is seriously considering fossil fuel divestment as a very near future reality.

From petitioning and meeting with administrators, to passing resolutions and referendums through the CU student government, hosting teach-ins and educational panels, and organizing many marches and rallies, students have relentlessly pushed forward for just over two years. The campaign had been ignored, patronized and attacked. Fossil Free CU is now being listened to and supported by several regents. This marks a milestone; we are clearly at the negotiating table now.

Our administration can no longer claim a neutral position on our future. It must choose a side between the fossil fuel industry, and its students.

At our rally, student speakers from all three campuses explained that continued investments in the fossil fuel industry are simply irresponsible. This is an industry that not only directly and disproportionately contributes to climate change, but also exploits the most vulnerable communities through its chokehold on democracy and the political process in the United States. The fossil fuel industry is also the number one bad actor in environmental racism. Even here in Colorado, sacrifice zones that target primarily the most marginalized communities are the targets of Anadarko, Encana, and Noble Energy, companies that are on the top 200 list.

As an institution committed to educating the next generation of leaders, it is hypocritical for the University of Colorado to continue investing in an industry that threatens the very future CU is preparing us for. The CU fossil fuel divestment campaign is asking the university to practice its principles, stand with students, and stand on the right side of history through investments in a more peaceful and sustainable future.

Regent Bosley and several other regents seemed hesitant to take bold action on climate, but Fossil Free CU is not. Nearly 100 students and community members, united across the tri-campus system have pledged to take nonviolent direct action this spring. Fossil Free CU is is proud of the progress we've made and through the support of the CU community, we are committed to strategic escalation... because we believe that we will win.

Franky Navarrette is a student at CU-Boulder and an organizer for Fossil Free CU.