Sarah Palin’s Tea Party is out to get her former top of the ticket running mate Senator John McCain again.

The Senate Conservative Fund is not impressed with Senator John McCain (R-AZ), who announced today that he will seek a 6th term in the Senate. They want to replace him with a “real” conservative, a “Constitutional” conservative, whatever that means, seeing as the people who espouse to be a Constitutional conservative show so little understanding of the actual Constitution.

Ken Cuccinelli (remember him? He wanted to ban oral sex as a Virginia gubernatorial candidate, which should give you a clue as to what the SCF means when they accuse someone of not being a “Constitutional” conservative), the President of the SCF, wants to recruit a new candidate to beat Senator McCain because he has allegedly dealt with Democrats. Not so much, but he did try to address our immigration problem in a somewhat reasonable fashion, and this won’t be forgiven by the far right.

From Mr. Cuccinelli of the SCF:

John McCain (R-AZ)There are few Republicans who have betrayed our conservative principles more than John McCain. He wrote the McCain-Kennedy and “Gang of Eight” immigration bills that offered amnesty to millions of illegal aliens. He voted for the Wall Street bailout, to fund the implementation of Obamacare, for the $600 billion “fiscal cliff” tax hike, and to raise the debt limit 14 different times! John McCain lost his way a long time ago and it’s time to replace him with a strong conservative leader who will support and defend the Constitution.

Of course money was involved in this play on emotions, as the SCF tells the reader that they need them to pledge financial support to McCain’s conservative challenger if only they can find one.

Doesn’t Tea Party “Queen” Sarah Palin have a house in Scottsdale, Arizona? Or she did at one time, back when Republicans and the press seriously thought she might run for President in 2012. If Senator McCain’s people think she’s above that, they haven’t been paying attention. Though to be fair, she’s made it clear she’s not here to work.

The SCF pledges to repeal Obamacare and claims to be pro-life while hilariously saying in the same breath that they exist to “defend the second amendment” (aka, are NRA stooges). Defend it from what? Oh, never mind reality. The SCF also wants to abolish the IRS, which big business would surely appreciate — that is, until the roads went to crap, but too many big business leaders don’t seem to think they should have to pay their part — that’s your job, according to Republicans. The people should fund big business and subsidize them, so that big business will keep donating to Republicans. And so it goes. The SCF was started by former South Carolina Senator Jim DeMint in 2008.

Conservatives seem determined to hand the Senate back to the Democratic Party in 2016. We have seen the GOP’s circular firing squad sabotage the party before. Republicans are already in fine form, showing off their penchant for self-destruction. John McCain has got to go, but the answer is definitely not replacing him with a Jim DeMint approved “Constitutional conservative.”