Keith Dunleavy, CEO of Inovalon, monitors the pricing of his company's stock during the health-tech company’s public offering on Feb. 12. (Mark Lennihan/AP)

Until Inovalon Holdings announced its intentions to go public Thursday, the Bowie, Md.-based company was a quiet player in a roaring industry.

The intersection of data and health has become a hot market in recent years as medical providers grapple with the challenges of improving care while reducing costs. Major technology companies, including IBM, Google and Oracle, have gotten into the game, hoping that the industry’s transformation will generate big profits.

But Inovalon has been there since 1998. Founded by a physician with an engineering background, the company collects data from hundreds of thousands of physicians and medical facilities across the country and uses it to help health-care providers and insurance companies deliver better, more-cost-effective treatment.

“The volume of the data has never been so significant and the value of the data has never been so significant,” said Keith Dunleavy, the company’s founder and chief executive.

Inovalon became the Washington region’s newest public company Thursday, pulling in nearly $600 million after selling approximately 22.2 million shares at $27 each. The company trades on the Nasdaq Global Select Market under the ticker symbol INOV.

The stock price popped to more than $33 at the start of trading Thursday, but ended the day back at the $27 asking price. On Friday, it closed at $29.

Dunleavy said health-care providers and insurance companies started moving toward pay for performance in the 1990s, motivated in part by changes to the government-backed Medicaid and Medicare programs. Compensation for medical providers was increasingly tied to improving a patient’s health rather than merely treating them.

The approval of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 has pushed the broader health-care industry further in that direction while expediting the adoption of electronic health records and other technology. For companies such as Inovalon, that means more data than ever before.

“The market forces, both capitalistic forces as well as regulatory forces, are really driving in that same direction,” Dunleavy said.

As other companies look to gain a foothold in the market, Inovalon boasts customers in all 50 states and Puerto Rico, Dunleavy said. The company plans to expand globally following its initial public offering and look for opportunities to apply its technology to other aspects of health care and related industries, he said.

“It was the right time for the company to increase its visibility,” Dunleavy said.

Inovalon confidentially filed paperwork to go public with the Securities and Exchange Commission in October and planned to offer shares for $24 to $26 apiece, according to regulatory filings.

The underwriters of the deal, including Goldman Sachs Group, Morgan Stanley and Citigroup, can purchase an additional 3.3 million shares over the next 30 days.

Inovalon had revenue of $271.6 million during the first nine months of 2014, compared with $231.3 million during the same period in 2013. Net income for the first nine months of 2014 was $51.9 million, compared with $27 million during the same period the prior year.

Easterly’s $207 million IPO

Inovalon is the second local company to go public this week. District-based Easterly Government Properties, which manages commercial office space occupied by government agencies, raised $207 million in its initial public offering last Monday.