TENANTS living in apartment complexes across WA will finally be handed the keys to the kingdom in 2014.

The Barnett Government has given its strongest indication yet that major strata law reform will be coming to our apartment doors next year.

It comes after the NSW Government recently announced it was considering 70 proposals to overhaul strata laws in their state.

Among the proposals are:

- making it easier for tenants to own pets

- allowing tenants to attend strata meetings electronically

- setting stringent laws for smoking, and

- using council rangers to police apartment parking bays.

More WA Real Estate news

Other major reforms being considered in NSW include "overcrowding" laws, which would limit the number of people who could occupy a property, and laws requiring greater transparency of possible conflicts of interest.

New Lands Minister Terry Redman said he anticipated that amendments to WA's strata laws would be introduced into Parliament next year.

However, a spokeswoman for the Minister said he would not be drawn on specifics just yet.

"(He) agrees that the issue is important and will impact on many West Australians but he has only just begun his portfolio briefings and will not be drawn on any speculation on this issue right now," she said.

Landgate, who will be taking care of the legislation update in WA, says "schemes within schemes", officially recognising strata managers and simplifying ways to resolve strata disputes as the key reforms it will investigate.

The government body is also "investigating options to provide flexible methods for terminating strata schemes with safeguards if 100 per cent agreement is not reached".

WA property experts have told The Sunday Times our current strata laws, which now affect 260,000 properties across the state, had not been significantly updated for 30 years.

Strata Communities Australia state president Andrew Chambers said current laws were not only out of date but inconsistent with what the industry and people living in strata properties currently needed.

Mr Chambers said WA already had some of what the NSW Government is proposing - but restrictions on smoking, a simplified fines process for misbehaving tenants and regular valuations for apartment buildings would be welcomed warmly by tenants.

"More and more people are putting in by-laws to cover where people can smoke in strata," Mr Chambers said.

"(Restrictions are needed) not just in the common areas but also on balconies to prevent it drifting into someone else's apartment."

Opposition Lands spokesman Chris Tallentire said the Barnett Government had taken "far too long" to introduce reforms.

"We've known about important changes that needed to be made for a long time," Mr Tallentire said.

"The current Strata Titles Act is out of date and not ready for the complexity and volume of strata complexes we have today."

Mr Tallentire said some of the key changes needed were improving tenants' ability to make minor design changes without being blocked by other tenants, something NSW is proposing.

"If one person wants to put photovoltaic panels (solar panels) on the roof now for example they need permission from everyone in the building to do it," he said.

"Another issue is that if the strata company advises that the lift needs replacing, a person who know they will be shortly moving out can vote against that so they won't have to pay for it.

"Compulsory reserve funds are a good way to get around that, so is changing voting methods."

Local strata expert John Angus, author of Understanding Strata Titles, said reserve funds should be mandatory as many WA apartment buildings were now old enough to require regular maintenance.

"Strata companies should be bound to maintain realistic funds projected for at least five years in to the future," he said.

"To leave it to the latest owners is an imposition and earlier owners should be making provision for it."

Mr Angus said WA apartment buildings which had reached their "use-by-date" would also benefit from the proposed NSW reform to terminate strata schemes without 100 per cent owner approval.

Presently this could only be achieved by unanimous resolution or by court order, he said, but the NSW government's proposal to drop the number of approvals needed from 100 per cent of owners to 75 per cent was a good idea.

"The cost of major repairs might well prove prohibitive to owners to the extent that a sale to a developer might turn out to be the most practical solution," Mr Angus said.

He also said WA could benefit from NSW's plan to have council rangers police strata parking.