I agree with the person the other day about the water bills. These big businesses don’t pay their water bills and they can go for years and the water company doesn’t collect it. Then in return the private citizen, they raise their bills, to help pay for it. It’s a shame. Someone ought to get after them and do something about it.

Concerned Citizen Who Pays His Water Bill

I wonder why the Pottstown police do nothing about the car that parks on Manatawny and Walnut streets at the fire hydrant all night long and the police keep going by and leave him go. No tickets, no nothing. Does he have diplomatic immunity?

So let me get this straight. People can’t afford Obamacare now and they’re going to raise it from 9 percent to 37 percent, in between there, and people can’t afford it now? Thanks to all you Obama voters. You’re digging yourself in a hole deeper and deeper. Go Donald Trump.

Advertisement

Big John, North Coventry

This message is for the people who claim that Donald Trump is a racist because he wants to build a wall to protect our borders with Mexico. I guess the same people must feel that President Obama is a racist because he sends troops over to protect the borders of other countries overseas. You can’t have it both ways.

I think people in Pennsylvania and all across the country are being taken for a ride. Mr. Trump is not a conservative. The establishment, the Republicans including John Boehner, put him up as their candidate because they’re so afraid of a conservative candidate like Ted Cruz. I think that’s been the whole idea all along and it’s coming to fruition now. So those of you who think you have a real outsider as a candidate in Trump, surprise, you’re being taken for a ride.

Time To Get Off The Horse

Thanks a lot Jim Fitch, now that Spring-Ford has access to free water they will probably build that pool.

Rofo D

To quote JT regarding how can any Catholic be Democrat, you happen to forget about John Kennedy, both Catholic and Democrat.

Read Up On Your History

Gambone is going to develop 20 acres of land across from Upland Square Shopping Center right behind the newly constructed Citadel Bank. The problem is they’re going to put another bank behind the bank and then they’re going to put retail shopping space, a 100-room hotel and gas station, all which we have just across the street or down the road. Doesn’t make any sense at all.

The protesters at the Trump rally in California is what the entitlement mentality breeds.

Really, another shopping center when we have an empty one sitting on State Street, empty stores at Coventry Mall, some empty stores at Upland Square? Why don’t they try and fill the empty ones before building any new ones?

N

This is to Al who says that they’re going to allow 200 convicted felons to vote. Al, are they going to vote Democrat? You must be a wizard if you know how they’re going to vote. Then you must know how the rest of the country is going to vote too, who’s going to win. I also see where the governor of Michigan left two million people drink lead-contaminated water. How about that Al?

A good Christian church doesn’t ask its followers or its congregation for money. They simply pray to God and God answers them. That’s how you can tell the difference my friends. You go to a church that doesn’t reach into your pockets or your handbag or wallet. You pray to God, it’s that simple.

This is in regards to the patch job on Berks and Walnut streets in that intersection. It’s like riding on a roller coaster. I wish it can be repaired. I’m tired of driving over it. That’s where the water main broke at one time and they repaired and now it’s horrible to drive over.

Mrs. Catbird

It’s amazing they want to take God out of the government, out of the schools and other places but when something terrible happens all over the world, very important people say to please pray for the victims and their families and those who are hurting from wars and so forth. Figure it out.

A Christian

Al, the convicted felons in Washington that will be permitted to vote applies only to those who have completed their sentences and have been released from supervised probation or parole. Doesn’t everyone deserve to have their basic rights returned after they have completed their time or does it bother you that the majority of these people are black and will probably vote Democrat? Give them a break Al.

Clark S. Kent

Sound Off is a forum to spur dialogue from residents of the communities we serve on topics of interest in those communities. Fair game are comments that raise issues of note or amplify ongoing debates.

We will not publish comments that are potentially libelous, slanderous, mean-spirited, vulgar or inappropriate. Publications of Sound Off comments are at the sole discretion of the publisher.