NORTH BERGEN — Dominick Trautz has more responsibilities than your average high school senior.

Aside from being a straight-A student and the senior quarterback of the North Bergen High School football team, his duties extend beyond the football field and classroom, as he is also responsible for taking care of his mother Heather, who suffers from multiple sclerosis.

Thursday night, just before North Bergen’s home opener against Montclair was canceled due to a lightning storm, Trautz was honored for his work in the classroom, on the field and at home with his mother when three members of the New York Giants surprised him with an autographed football and two tickets to tomorrow’s game against Peyton Manning and the Denver Broncos.

“It’s tough juggling everything sometimes,” said Trautz, who lives in Guttenberg. “School work will always come first, then I go to practice, but when I come home, I just try to do what I can to help my mother.

“I know I’m not a perfect kid, but she is my everything, and I always make sure that I do what I have to do and do anything I can to help her.”

The event was coordinated by Henry Hynoski’s girlfriend, Laura Soto, who heard of Trautz’s story through her job as an investigator for the Guttenberg Police Department. She passed the word along to her NFL boyfriend.

“I heard so many great things about Dominick, and it is our honor to be here today to award him with the signed ball and a couple of tickets to the game,” said Hynoski, who signed with the Giants as an undrafted free agent in 2011. “We’re lucky to have this opportunity, he definitely deserves it for all the hard work he puts in, and it’s really our pleasure to be here.”

Although he enjoyed a breakout season in 2012, passing for 2,135 yards, 16 touchdowns and nine rushing touchdowns, it was a difficult year for Trautz and his family off the field. Heather was unable to attend most of his games because she was hospitalized for most of the season.

With his mother in the hospital, Trautz was forced to look after his younger brother, Xavier Figueroa. When he wasn’t in class or on the field, he was visiting his mother and helping her get through a difficult time both physically and mentally.

“At the end of each game he would call me and tell me that ‘I did this for you,’” said Heather Trautz, whose long-term prognosis is uncertain. “I could not be more proud of him. He’s supportive, he’s caring, he’s humble, and he is my rock.”

Despite juggling school, football, and his responsibilities at home, Trautz refuses to see any of it as being a burden.

After all of his continued hard work, the lifelong Giants fan will finally get the chance to relax this Sunday.

“I’ve been to one or two games before, but to go to the ‘Manning Bowl’ for free is amazing, and I’m very grateful that they came and gave their time to me,” said Trautz, who will attend the game with his brother.

“Now, I can’t help but keep on picturing my mother with the family back at Metlife Stadium for the state championship game.”

But before he can root on “Big Blue” against Denver, he’ll look to lead North Bergen to a 2-0 start when the Bruins host Montclair in today's 7 p.m. makeup game at Bruins Stadium.

“Every game I play is dedicated to her and the goal now is to win a state championship for my team and for my family.”