Buy Photo Presidential hopeful, Ben Carson answers a few questions from the press while meeting with parishioners at Corinthian Baptist Church on Sunday, Jan. 10, 2016, in Des Moines. Carson shook hands, posed for photos and spoke briefly during worship services. (Photo: Kelsey Kremer/The Register)Buy Photo

Republican presidential candidate and former neurosurgeon Ben Carson attended services Sunday at Corinthian Baptist Church to meet with parishioners and discuss the religious climate in the country.

Carson, a member of the Seventh-day Adventist Church, spoke to the congregation about how his own faith influenced his career as a doctor.

“Success is taking talent God has given you to elevate other people,” Carson said.

Addressing Rev. Jonathan Whitfield’s questioning of Carson’s venture into politics, he said, “Lord opened those doors and pushed me that way.”

Carson has been visiting several churches in Iowa in the lead-up to the Feb. 1 Iowa caucuses and has been candid about his faith with the audiences.

He spoke about growing up poor in Detroit and his lifelong dream of becoming a doctor.

Referencing the current $1.3 billion Powerball jackpot, Carson said he was already lucky. He said, “I already won the lottery because I was born in the United States of America and I know Jesus Christ.”

Worshipers at Corinthian Baptist responded enthusiastically to Carson’s presence and a story about a surgery he performed in South Africa while he was a pediatric neurosurgeon for Johns Hopkins Children's Center.

"I am interested not in his politics, but his policy for life," said Whitfield. "He didn't find perfection. He found success."

His success, Carson said, is thanks to a hard-working mother who "refused to be a victim" and his fellowship of Jesus Christ. Carson opened and ended his speeches with prayer that was met enthusiastically by the crowd.

Among the worshipers was a crowd of newcomers to Corinthian Baptist, eager to hear from the presidential hopeful.

Bryan Bray, student at the University of Oklahoma, drove to Iowa from Missouri after receiving an email regarding Carson’s appearance. Familiar with Carson after watching the movie, “Gifted Hands: The Ben Carson Story,” in his anatomy class, Bray said he made the trip even though he knew he would vote for Carson the moment he announced his candidacy. He felt the atmosphere inside Corinthian Baptist felt "very emotional and different."

“For people my age, I think Donald Trump takes up a lot of public space,” Bray said, referencing Trump’s controversial remarks on social media. “I feel like he distracts my generation from candidates like Ben Carson and his uplifting message.”

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Republican presidential candidate and former neurosurgeon Ben Carson answered questions in Pleasant Hill. Lissandra Villa/The Register

Many parishioners believed that Carson’s appearance at the services influenced their views, not only as a presidential candidate but as a person.

“He is touchable,” Associate Minister Anthony Cole said. Cole said he was thankful Carson was able to connect with so many people.

Later Sunday, Carson made an appearance at the Berean Assembly of God Church in Pleasant Hill.

There, he told stories from his career as a neurosurgeon to illustrate his relationship to his faith and God.

Hundreds of people gathered to listen to Carson, and he was greeted with a standing ovation. His jokes yielded laughter throughout his time on stage, where he spoke for more than an hour.

“The left loves to lie,” Carson said, adding that his political opponents “demonize” him.

Carson emphasized the importance of using brains to accomplish things.

“The people have to be the ones who drive everything,” Carson told the audience, adding that the “coup d’etat” of the government being in charge instead of the people was the Affordable Care Act.

Many of the attendees said they appreciated his commitment to religion.

“I have a lot of respect for people who are willing to stand up for their faith,” said Jeff Dangel, a resident of Altoona.

Anita Lemaster, a resident of Ames, said his faith stood out to her as well.

“He’s not afraid to stand up for his beliefs,” Lemaster said.

After he spoke, Carson took questions from the audience and spent time greeting and taking pictures with the people who lined up to meet him.

“I’m feeling very energized, as you can probably see,” Carson told the Register. “I’m delighted with the reactions of people.”

Ben Carson speaks to a crowd of hundreds on Sunday, Jan. 10 at Berean Assembly of God Church in Pleasant Hill. (Photo: Lissandra Villa)

LOVE IOWA CAUCUS HISTORY?: Find historic galleries, recaps of the caucuses

WHERE IN IOWA?: Track presidential campaign visits across the state

AT THE EVENTS

Corinthian Baptist Church

Setting: Carson was the guest speaker at two morning church services at Corinthian Baptist Church in Des Moines.

Audience : Approximately 250 people.

Reactions: Affectionate reactions to both of Carson's 30-minute speeches, followed by standing ovations. The congregation stood with hands extended as the pastor prayed a blessing over Carson. After the service, attendees stood in line to shake hands with the candidate, take photos and receive autographs.

Berean Assembly of God Church

Setting: Carson spoke at the Berean Assembly of God Church in Pleasant Hill on Sunday.

Audience : Approximately 700 people.

Reactions: Greeted with a standing ovation, and treated to laughter from the audience after several of his jokes. Carson met with a line of people afterward.

What's Next: Carson will host four Carson will host four "We The People" town hall meetings Monday in Fort Dodge, Jefferson, Denison and Le Mars. He will also stop in Sioux City for a Pastor's Roundtable.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1P0BmFF