New Jerseyans will see a new health insurance company — Oscar Insurance — when they go online to HealthCare.gov starting Nov. 15 to shop for a 2015 government-subsidized Obamacare health plan under the Affordable Care Act.

A venture capital-funded startup, Oscar debuted last year on New York’s exchange, where so far it has enrolled about 17,000 members, according to Mario Schlosser, co-chief executive.



For its first year in New Jersey, Oscar will offer health coverage in nine northern New Jersey counties, with future plans to expand statewide.



Schlosser thinks Oscar could sign up 10,000 or more New Jersey customers, even though it’s going up against three companies that enrolled a total of more than 160,000 members on the exchange in 2014 — Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, AmeriHealth New Jersey and Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey. Oscar also will face another well-known New Jersey insurance brand this year: UnitedHealthcare’s Oxford, which will compete for customers on the New Jersey exchange after sitting out the 2014 launch of Obamacare in New Jersey.



Schlosser said Oscar will offer competitively priced plans, innovative technology and consumer-friendly benefits.



“We will differentiate ourselves from other insurance companies in three ways,” he said. “We will simplify the complex health insurance process, we will guide you through the health care system and we will make you feel like you have a doctor in the family.”



If someone actually does have a doctor in their family, “that is the person you call when your kid is throwing up at 11 at night and the doctor’s office is closed,” Schlosser said.



So Oscar members will be able to call the company 24 hours a day, seven days a week when they need to talk to a doctor.



Members will dial a toll-free number, or click a button on the Oscar website or on their mobile device and, within 10 minutes, “a doctor will call you back,” Schlosser said. These unlimited tele-visits are free.



“The doctor will call you back and diagnose you over the phone, and e-prescribe medication,” with the prescription to be picked up at your pharmacy.



Oscar health plans will include several free physician visits a year, with prescription plans that include a selection of free generic drugs.



Oscar will use the QualCare network of 24,000 physicians and other clinicians, and 100 health care facilities, including 69 acute-care hospitals. Of the 69 hospitals, 21 are in Oscar’s “tier one” network, meaning members will have lower out-of-pocket costs if they use them. Oscar members have to stay within the company’s New Jersey provider network, but if they have a medical emergency outside the state, they can use an out-of-state hospital emergency room at in-network rates.

Click here to subscribe to the free NJBIZ email news blasts



Schlosser said Oscar’s online tools will help members find the doctors and hospitals that best suit their needs: “Rather than just giving you a list of 24,000 doctors, we can actually curate the list for you, so you can search in smarter ways.”



Another online tool is the health timeline.



“We will take your health history and individualize it for you in a timeline where you can see any doctor visits you had and any prescriptions you have and when they run out,” Schlosser said.



He said Oscar can be innovative because, as a new company, it is starting out fresh, with new technology.



Oscar’s call center will be “very happy to have conversations” with consumers who want someone to talk them through their health insurance shopping experience, Schlosser said. But Oscar also is offering a technology platform geared to consumers who “really would love to just research all of their options online and not necessarily have long conversations with call centers.”



To get its name out in the market, Oscar will use both traditional advertising, with ads on buses and radio and television, as well as online marketing. And it will use tactics like “station domination” — for two weeks, Oscar might take over the Hoboken PATH station: “We’ll have Oscar people there doing brand building and really get into people’s minds and getting the word out as people commute between work and home.”



Schlosser said Oscar will sell plans to individuals, but not to employer groups, and that health insurance brokers will be among its sales channels: “The brokers are very knowledgeable and they have a lot of customers who need good insurance coverage.”



The first year, Oscar will sell polices in nine counties: Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Monmouth, Middlesex, Morris, Ocean, Passaic and Union



He said that, in New York, Oscar has attracted a fairly representative demographic, with an average age of 39, and has been popular with people who are self-employed.



“If there is a category of people that I do think we have a particular attraction to, it is the people who care about their health,” Schlosser said. “People who think about their health and want to try to get better and find the right health care providers.”



More competition will advance the core goal of Obamacare — reducing the number of uninsured in New Jersey — according to State Sen. Joseph F. Vitale (D-Woodbridge), who chairs the Senate Health Committee.



“We will see greater enrollment, of course, because we’ll have more companies in the business, and they’ll be marketing and advertising for enrollees,” Vitale said.



Linda Schwimmer, vice president of the New Jersey Health Care quality Institute, said new entrants into the New Jersey exchange “is a strong signal that the marketplace is working.” She said, “Oscar’s entrance into New Jersey is a real opportunity to see if a tech company can gain members and brand loyalty through consumer service and app based communication.”

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

NJBIZ Forty Under 40 honored (slideshow)

$110M bid wins Revel bankruptcy auction for Canadian firm

Five New Jersey residents among America's richest, earning spots on Forbes 400

'Open Payments': Government posts information about $3.5B in gifts from drugmakers to doctors, hospitals