Wiggins teacher

Amanda Herbstman, a fifth-grade teacher and wife of a Wiggins town council member, just added "small business owner" to her credentials.

Herbstman started Paper Bouquet by Amanda in February as a way to make a little money from her paper crafting hobby. She makes wreaths, flowers and other decorations from used books and music sheets. So far she has sold most of her products at craft fairs or through customized orders.

"A lot of this started off mainly as stress relief," Herbstman said.

She taught herself how to make paper art after seeing examples on Pinterest. She started making bouquets and other crafts for fun, but after some of her friends said they'd like to buy paper decorations, she realized she could make a profit from her craft.

Her husband, David Herbstman, has supported her all the way, although he likes to call the crafting headquarters at home her "crap room."

Depending on their size and how long they take to make, Herbstman's products sell for around $15 each. She doesn't need to spend much money on the materials, since most of the books she uses are from the thrift store or her personal library. Some of her customers also give her materials for custom-made items.

Using recycled materials is very important to Herbstman, partly because she doesn't like destroying new books.

"Generally they have to be falling apart for me to really attack them and tear them up," she said. "Otherwise, I'm kind of a bibliophile, and it's like, 'I don't know if I want to touch this book!'"

Advertisement

But it's not just the paper that Herbstman re-uses. She uses recycled wine bottles and other materials for her decorated vases, chalkboards and wall plaques.

Even while teaching fifth grade, she was able to make at least one craft a week, and she's been more productive over the summer. But Herbstman has no plans to expand her business yet.

"Right now I'm having fun shopping for things at Goodwill, and the 'go ahead, be cool and do this,' type of thing," she said.

On the other hand, she does want to expand her skills. Next she wants to learn "quilling," a two-dimensional paper art that makes a picture with tiny, twisted pieces of paper.

Herbstman's next craft show appearance will be August 8 at the Wiggins VFW.

Stephanie Alderton: 970-867-5651 ext 227, salderton@fmtimes.com or twitter.com/slalderton