Fremont County District 2 Commissioner Debbie Bell answers questions during a candidate forum hosted Saturday by the Royal Gorge Tea Party at Mountain View Core Knowledge School. Challengers Katie McCallister, running as an Independent candidate, and Fred Warner, running as a write-in candidate, also are pictured. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Fremont County Sheriff Jim Beicker answers questions during a candidate forum Saturday at Mountain View Core Knowledge School, hosted by the Royal Gorge Tea Party. Also pictured is challenger Skip Moreau. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

If you go What: Candidate forum, hosted by the Daily Record and the Florence Arts Council When: 6-7:30 p.m. Oct. 15 Where: Bell Tower Cultural Center, 201 E. Second St., Florence More info: Email questions for Fremont County District 2 Commissioner, Fremont County Sheriff and Williamsburg Mayor candidates to alcalam@canoncitydailyrecord.com. Deadline to submit questions is Oct. 12.

Fremont County Sheriff Jim Beicker and challenger Skip Moreau made it clear during a candidate forum Saturday hosted by the Royal Gorge Tea Party that they don't see eye to eye on a number of things concerning the sheriff's office.

Moreau said the jail needs to be downsized and money can be saved by providing more in-house medical care and not having meals catered in. He proposes having a full-time paramedic in the jail and asking the county's appointed physician to back the department as a medical provider.

"There are a lot of changes that can be done, but my main objective is to make sure you're getting every bang for your buck and we're not paying out money that's being wasted like what's going on right now," he said. "We are spending a lot of money on that jail, and I want to bring it down within reason to where it's self-sufficient, and it is not right now."

Incumbent Jim Beicker disagreed.

"Skip keeps mentioning the jail and costing money, but ladies and gentlemen, if it weren't for the jail and how I did business with the jail, we would have gone under a long time ago," he said. "It is generating a million dollars a year, and to generate a million dollars a year, you have to spend some dollars, you have to have good food service."

He said the liability associated with Moreau's plan is "astronomical."

The budget for medical before Beicker took office 12 years ago was about $500,000, he said, and today, it is $574,000.

"That's not a bad increase in expenditure over a decade with what we're dealing with," he said. "He is wrong, the jail has been critical in sustaining the sheriff's office, not costing you money."

Beicker also commented on Moreau's previous comments about the sheriff being the supreme law enforcement officer in the county, even over the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Colorado State Patrol, the Central Intelligence Agency and the Drug Enforcement Administration.

"With all due respect, Skip, you are about to open this county up to huge liability; secondly, there are limits of the authority of sheriff, and worse, you're going to alienate every other law enforcement agency that you are going to need to rely upon to help protect the citizens of Fremont County with the stance you just took," Beicker said.

Candidates for Fremont County District 2 Commissioner also took turns fielding questions during the forum.

"I made a promise four years ago that I would be responsible, that I would be accountable and that I would be transparent, and I truly have done all of those things," incumbent Debbie Bell said. "My pledge to you today is I will continue to do all of those things."

She said the number of things accomplished in the last three-and-a-half years is "incredible."

"I would challenge you to look at our county website (fremontco.com) and pull up the accountability report for 2013 and see what we accomplished," she said.

Independent challenger Katie McCallister said her main focus as commissioner would be to make the county a friendly environment for businesses. She was asked what changes she would propose for revamping the Planning and Zoning Department?

"If it comes down to the point where we need to clean house and everyone in that department needs to apply for that job along with people out on the street, let's do it," she said. "Let's make them accountable, let's make them apply the rules equally and let's make them have a level of professionalism that we expect from our representatives that we are paying."

Write-in candidate Fred Warner challenged eligible voters to attend city and county meetings and see how the political process works. He feels some elected officials truly are not listening to their constituents, and they are not visible enough to the people they represent.

"I think in Fremont County we need representative government, of the people, by the people for the people," he said.