Despite a $3.5 billion budget deficit estimated for fiscal year 2016, the state is forging ahead with Medicaid expansion, Department of Health and Social Services Commissioner Valerie Davidson said Thursday. The department hopes to have open enrollment in July, she said.

Davidson was the keynote speaker at the Central Council for the Tlingit and Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska’s annual Elders and Caregivers Workshop in Juneau. A Yup’ik from Bethel, Davidson spoke to the group of elders and their caregivers about tackling the budget and Medicaid expansion with a rural Native perspective — she won’t “propose solutions and ideas that will only work in a big community.”

Living in a village, “you don’t have a choice about being innovative, you have to do more with less,” Davidson said. “How are we going to do things differently? ... We have to have people (in government) who know what it’s like to grow up poor.”

Davidson’s top priorities as commissioner are Medicaid expansion and child welfare. She said Gov. Bill Walker, who appointed Davidson the day he was sworn in, shares her vision for universal health care and is a “thoughtful” and “practical problem solver.”

Walker has asked his commissioners to identify cuts of 5 and 8 percent in their own budgets to help solve the state’s financial problems, brought on by dropping crude oil prices that are hovering around $48 per barrel.

“It’s not going to come up any time soon,” she said. “There’s no way we’re going to keep the programs we have. ... You should know cuts are coming; we can’t avoid it.”

Although she “likes a good puzzle,” Davidson said “it has been heartbreaking” to go through her department’s budget and identify line items that will take a hit. She said her department will probably be one that endures the higher 8 percent budget cut.

While other departments can shrink their spending by putting off a capital project or two, cuts to DHSS have serious implications, Davidson said

“The reality is in our department, when we make cuts, kids die, families don’t eat and people go without health care,” she said.

DHSS operates on a $2.7 billion budget; $1.7 billion of that is spent on Medicaid. With the state’s financial problems looming, the department will have to find ways to cut that cost, Davidson said.

“We can’t sustain that,” she said. “We need Medicaid reform to do things differently” and to determine ways to minimize the required state match and maximize the federal match.

Through the Affordable Care Act, the federal government has promised to pay 100 percent of expanded Medicaid costs to states that opt in during the calendar years 2014, 2015 and 2016. In 2017, 2018 and 2019, it will foot 93 to 95 percent of the bill. In 2020 and beyond, the federal government will pay for 90 percent of the costs.

Creating tribal-state partnerships “can help to save many aspects of the Medicaid system,” she said.

Some ideas for Medicaid cost-saving include expanding the role of non-MD health care workers — health, dental and behavioral health aides and nurse practitioners — so more Alaskans can get medical help closer to home; and more commonly using telehealth services — essentially a Skype appointment with a health care provider.

There are plenty of Medicaid naysayers in the state — former Gov. Sean Parnell opted Alaska out of expansion of the federal health program during his time in office because of the cost — and that will only be exacerbated now that the state is in money trouble, Davidson said. But even so, she believes “Medicaid is worth the expansion.”

“We have a lot of people in this state that don’t have any health coverage at all,” Davidson said. “We really see Medicaid expansion as an investment in the health of Alaska. ... We want (people) to be healthy, we want them to be happy and we want them to live in good communities.”

DHSS spokeswoman Sarana Schell said while there are costs associated with Medicaid expansion, there are also opportunities for savings.

“Most people who are eligible for the state’s Catastrophic and Chronic Illness Assistance program — for low-income Alaskans who have inadequate or no health insurance but who don’t qualify for current Medicaid — would qualify for expanded Medicaid,” she said.

According to a study of the impact of Medicaid expansion in the state, completed by the Lewin Group for the Parnell administration in 2013, about 20,000 Alaskans are completely uninsured and not covered by the federal government’s Indian Health Services. Expanding the program to cover those that fall in the gap at that time would have cost approximately $40 million over the 2014 to 2020 period, according to the study.

A 2013 study by the Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium, where Davidson worked previously, reports that 41,500 Alaskans fall into the coverage gap, including 15,700 Alaska Natives and Native Americans. It estimated that the state would have spent almost $91 million on expansion over the 2014 to 2020 period.

Davidson said health care coverage of Alaskans age 45 to 64 would nearly double if Medicaid, which is based on income level and available to people under the age of 65, was expanded in the state.

Schell said Medicaid coverage is important for Native people even if they are covered by IHS because not every community in the state has a Native health clinic. A Native person covered by Medicaid would be able to visit any doctor available for a medical emergency.

The state has encountered issues with its Medicaid enrollment system as well as its payment system. Doctors and other Medicaid health care providers need to be accurately and quickly paid by the state for expansion to be a success, Davidson said.

She hopes to get a Medicaid expansion page up on the DHSS website “so people can track our progress.”

Davidson also spoke on issues uniquely affecting the Alaska Native community. She said that tribal-state relations have not been great in recent years, which she called “the understatement of the day.”

“I want you to know that’s coming to an end,” she said to applause from the crowd. “We can’t make progress like that.”

Davidson was received warmly by her audience, and said she chose to speak at the workshop despite a busy schedule because “family always comes first.” CCTHITA Tribal Family and Youth Services Director Francine Eddy Jones said it has “been so fun to see (Davidson) grow professionally over the years” — she started out as a student teacher at Harborview Elementary School in Juneau after completing her undergraduate studies at the University of Alaska Southeast.

Davidson said the warm welcome is bittersweet — she worries about the public reaction once the governor’s budget is released Feb. 18.

“I hope you still feel that way when the budget comes out,” she said. “These are cuts that are unavoidable and I’m going to be the one standing in front of that budget.”

• Contact reporter Katie Moritz at 523-2294 or at katherine.moritz@juneauempire.com. Follow her on Twitter @katecmoritz.