Russia’s invasion and annexation of Crimea, an egregious violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty, prompted a strong response from the United States. President Obama used his executive authority to impose sanctions on Russia and Congress voted to ban the purchase of Russian-made rocket engines, which have been used to launch military and intelligence satellites since 2000. The White House also lobbied the European Union to enact economic sanctions.

Now, barely five months after the engine ban took effect, the Obama administration is urging Congress to ease it. Such a move would harm American credibility and give the Europeans a reason to ease their own sanctions. It would also embolden President Vladimir Putin of Russia, who even now refuses to acknowledge that he is sending troops and weapons to expand the war in eastern Ukraine.

The core problem is that the United States let itself become dependent on Russian rocket engines for national security missions. After the Cold War, it made sense to encourage cooperation between the nations and offer opportunities to Russian scientists and technicians so they would be less likely to sell their skills to Iran and North Korea.

Photo

But in recent years, Mr. Putin has become increasingly at odds with the United States. Meanwhile, United Launch Alliance, a joint venture of the defense giants Lockheed Martin and Boeing also known as ULA, has become the Pentagon’s primary rocket maker and gets its engines from NPO Energomash, a Russian company that reportedly has close ties to Mr. Putin.

Senator John McCain, the Senate Armed Services Committee chairman, says NPO Energomash could gain $300 million on engine sales that are to end under the law.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Pentagon, backed by ULA and American intelligence agencies, is pushing to change the law, arguing that additional Russian engines will be needed for at least a few more years. Under the law, ULA was allowed to continue launching satellites on its Russian-powered Atlas 5 rocket until 2019, but the Pentagon claims it will run out of engines and there will be a gap — a point proponents of the ban reject.

The consortium is now working to develop an American-made engine, but it may not be certified for use until at least 2022. ULA faces competition from SpaceX, a venture of Elon Musk, the founder of PayPal and Tesla. Last month, SpaceX’s Falcon 9 rocket was certified by the Pentagon for use in national security missions, an important step. If Congress retains the ban on Russian engines, SpaceX could end up, at least for a time, as the sole company able to bid for some satellite launches.

When sanctions are necessary, the countries that impose them must be willing to pay a cost, too. After leaning on France to cancel the sale of two ships to Russia because of the invasion of Ukraine, the United States can hardly insist on continuing to buy national security hardware from one of Mr. Putin’s cronies.