Ecuador’s President Rafael Correa: “If we can go to cheaper financing, and diversify funding sources, it would be foolish not to do so.” Reuters

QUITO, Ecuador—Six years after default, Ecuador made a successful return to international capital markets on Tuesday as the government of President Rafael Correa seeks to broaden its sources of funding for the ambitious public investment programs it hopes will develop domestic industries.

Ecuador sold $2 billion in 10-year bonds at a yield of 7.95%, the Finance Ministry said. Demand was in excess of $5 billion, with more than 200 institutional investors and private banks in the U.S., Asia, Europe and South America participating.

WSJ Frontiers Newsletter Enter your email to be notified when we launch the new WSJ Frontiers weekly email newsletter

“The process was carried out successfully and favorable to Ecuador,” the ministry said.

The sale marks a milestone for the Correa government, which had come to rely heavily on financing from China since it defaulted on $3.2 billion in global bonds in 2008, with Mr. Correa at the time calling the debt burden illegal and illegitimate. A year later, Ecuador bought back 93% of the defaulted debt at 35 cents on the dollar.

In April, Mr. Correa had anticipated that Ecuador would issue $700 million in bonds in its return to capital markets.

In preparing the way for the return, Mr. Correa recently gave the green light to the International Monetary Fund to resume annual reviews of the economy.

The 2008 default virtually shut the Andean country off from capital markets, but opened the door for China, which has become its biggest lender.

According to unofficial data, since 2009 China has committed at least $12 billion in funding for Ecuador, which many economists consider too much for an economy of Ecuador’s size. Part of the financing has been backed with presales of crude oil.

“One of the bottlenecks for all nations is funding,” President Correa said in a recent meeting with foreign reporters. “If we can go to cheaper financing, and diversify funding sources, it would be foolish not to do so.”

Ecuador is negotiating with China loans worth about $9 billion for the Refineria del Pacifico oil refinery, one of the government’s most ambitious infrastructure projects. As part of the deal, which is expected to be signed by September, China National Petroleum Corp. will take a 30% stake in the project.

Official data show that between 2007, when President Correa took office, and 2013, public investment has amounted to about $34 billion, well more than the $6 billion invested between 1998 and 2006.

For 2014, the government is planning $7.26 billion in public investments. The total investment goal through 2017 is $47.6 billion. This year’s budget calls for spending of $34.3 billion, including a deficit of $4.94 billion.

Mr. Correa, who is in his third term and could seek a fourth in 2017 if lawmakers change the constitution, is betting on public investment to maintain economic growth. The World Bank predicts Ecuador’s economy will expand 4.3% this year, among the best growth rates in Latin America—but lower than growth of 4.5% in 2013 and 5.1% in 2012.

The Guayaquil-based economic newsletter Weekly Analysis said the growth strategy has been accompanied by a spectacular 88% rise in the price of oil, which went from $50.75 per barrel in 2006 to $95.36 in 2013, and contributed to a significant rise in government revenue.

Read the full story at wsj.com.