Planned Parenthood and the abortion-supporting Democrats are taking on water over the stunning videos of PP reps haggling over the price of fetal body parts and discussing how to conduct abortions to preserve the most valuable organs for handing over to third parties in return for money (they refuse to call it “selling”). As Rick Moran reports this morning, PP’s president absurdly is blaming “militants” for the videos.

"Well gee, I thought ObamaCare was supposed to take care of all that! I am so tired of the canard about women's health. There are plenty of places where women can achieve and have these services. If Planned Parenthood is so concerned about women's health, why don't they accept, for example, federal funding of pregnancy centers, one next door to every single Planned Parenthood clinic, so that women can actually look at an ultrasound before they choose to have an abortion, or so that they can have options presented to them if they choose to bring the life into the world. But no, Planned Parenthood doesn't want that. Look, this isn't about women's health. This is about Planned Parenthood wanting to preserve their political power so they can lobby consistently on behalf of pro-abortion Democrats. Why should they be given federal funding? Why should they get federal funding so they can continue to lobby for certain candidates as Emily's List does every single day?"

Along with a clip showing Hillary Clinton talking about the importance of the range of services Planned Parenthood provides for women's health, host Chris Wallace presented statistics on its service volumes beyond abortions. He then queried Fiorina about the importance of maintaining the half billion dollars in federal funding for Planned Parenthood to maintain the substantial women's health services it provides including breast exams, PAP smears and HIV tests. Fiorina replied:

Fiorina continued, “Once again, I’m pro-life as you know but there are plenty of pro-choice women who are horrified by this as they should be. And by the way, after hours honestly. The fact that these officials can sit here swilling their wine, eating their salad, laughing over getting a Lamborghini and talk about specimens of fetal tissue, I find horrifying and the majority of Americans do as well.”

When McIntosh brought up the videos were edited Fiorina said, “I find it fascinating that Planned Parenthood, EMILY’s List and the rest of the pro-abortion lobby are now suddenly so concerned about a heavily edited video. I don’t recall them ever being concerned about a heavily edited video of Mitt Romney at a fund-raiser. I don’t remember them being concerned about Edward Snowden. We’ve had a lot of things where information has come out that we needed to see. So instead of going after the people who have put out this video information we clearly need to see, let’s talk about the issue here. Of course they’re trying to change the subject. Of course they’re trying to say this is life saving research. I find it amazing that this group of pro-abortion lobbyists continue to say that they are protecting women’s health. Really? late-term abortion is bad for women’s health. They continue to lobby against parental notification. Really? It’s protecting a teenager’s health that she can go to a tanning salon or a tattoo with her mother’s permission but get an abortion without her mother’s permission? This is not about someone else’s health. This is about a woman’s health. A woman’s opportunity to have all of the choices in front of her and it’s about a life that she is bearing.”

Planned Parenthood and the abortion-supporting Democrats are taking on water over the stunning videos of PP reps haggling over the price of fetal body parts and discussing how to conduct abortions to preserve the most valuable organs for handing over to third parties in return for money (they refuse to call it “selling”). As Rick Moran reports this morning, PP’s president absurdly is blaming “militants” for the videos.

Appearing on Fox News Sunday, Carly Fiorina debated EMILY’s List vice president Jess McIntosh, and handed the abortion enthusiast her posterior. Pam Key of Breitbart reports:

When McIntosh brought up the videos were edited Fiorina said, “I find it fascinating that Planned Parenthood, EMILY’s List and the rest of the pro-abortion lobby are now suddenly so concerned about a heavily edited video. I don’t recall them ever being concerned about a heavily edited video of Mitt Romney at a fund-raiser. I don’t remember them being concerned about Edward Snowden. We’ve had a lot of things where information has come out that we needed to see. So instead of going after the people who have put out this video information we clearly need to see, let’s talk about the issue here. Of course they’re trying to change the subject. Of course they’re trying to say this is life saving research. I find it amazing that this group of pro-abortion lobbyists continue to say that they are protecting women’s health. Really? late-term abortion is bad for women’s health. They continue to lobby against parental notification. Really? It’s protecting a teenager’s health that she can go to a tanning salon or a tattoo with her mother’s permission but get an abortion without her mother’s permission? This is not about someone else’s health. This is about a woman’s health. A woman’s opportunity to have all of the choices in front of her and it’s about a life that she is bearing.” Fiorina continued, “Once again, I’m pro-life as you know but there are plenty of pro-choice women who are horrified by this as they should be. And by the way, after hours honestly. The fact that these officials can sit here swilling their wine, eating their salad, laughing over getting a Lamborghini and talk about specimens of fetal tissue, I find horrifying and the majority of Americans do as well.”

This was far from the only zinger. As Mike Nadler noted:

Along with a clip showing Hillary Clinton talking about the importance of the range of services Planned Parenthood provides for women's health, host Chris Wallace presented statistics on its service volumes beyond abortions. He then queried Fiorina about the importance of maintaining the half billion dollars in federal funding for Planned Parenthood to maintain the substantial women's health services it provides including breast exams, PAP smears and HIV tests. Fiorina replied: "Well gee, I thought ObamaCare was supposed to take care of all that! I am so tired of the canard about women's health. There are plenty of places where women can achieve and have these services. If Planned Parenthood is so concerned about women's health, why don't they accept, for example, federal funding of pregnancy centers, one next door to every single Planned Parenthood clinic, so that women can actually look at an ultrasound before they choose to have an abortion, or so that they can have options presented to them if they choose to bring the life into the world. But no, Planned Parenthood doesn't want that. Look, this isn't about women's health. This is about Planned Parenthood wanting to preserve their political power so they can lobby consistently on behalf of pro-abortion Democrats. Why should they be given federal funding? Why should they get federal funding so they can continue to lobby for certain candidates as Emily's List does every single day?"

Watch the video: