About 25 AARP volunteers from across the state gathered Monday morning in Topeka to watch a live telecast of the White House Conference on Aging and gave a thumbs-up to the gathering’s early emphasis on providing for the needs of caregivers.

The conference, held about once every 10 years and streamed live on the White House Web page, got underway with comments from President Barack Obama, followed by panel discussions that addressed topics such as caregiving, Social Security, Medicare and the Older Americans Act.

Two locations were set up for people to view the conference in a group setting in Topeka.

One was at AARP Kansas headquarters at 555 S. Kansas Ave., and the other was at the Topeka and Shawnee County Public Library, 1515 S.W. 10th.

It was the focus on providing resources and assistance to caregivers that was of particular interest to those who gathered at the AARP office.

Mary Tritsch, director of communications for AARP Kansas, said a bill known as the Care Act was introduced during the 2015 Kansas Legislature. The bill was supported by AARP and its volunteer lobbyists.

Though it didn’t pass, the bill is to be addressed again during the 2016 Legislature.

Its central components are to offer help to the estimated 600,000 people in Kansas who act as caregivers. While many take care of elderly relatives, caregivers also take care of younger people who may have an illness, disability or injuries suffered in an accident.

“One of the first sessions this morning was on caregiving, which is really important in Kansas because we’re trying to pass the Care Act to support caregivers,” Tritsch said. “It was a great panel discussion of what caregivers do and how we can support them better.”

Among those at Monday’s gathering at the AARP Kansas office in Topeka was Judy Davis-Cole, 67, of Ottawa, who serves as an advocacy volunteer for the organization.

“This is really a very timely conference for us,” she said, “because in the last legislative session, we were trying very hard to get the Care Act passed.”

Davis-Cole said there were no fiscal components attached to the Care Act as presented to the Legislature, “which is one of the reasons we were a little surprised it didn’t pass.”

She said the Care Act would provide training to caregivers who would be providing hands-on care for family members and loved ones who had been released to their homes from the hospital.

Additionally, the Care Act calls for the patient to be able to identify an individual as a caregiver and thus make it possible for that person to have face-to-face contact with medical professionals — including physicians — before the person was released to his or her home.

Davis-Cole said there are an estimated 600,000 caregivers in Kansas, most of whom are receiving no pay for taking care of their family members or loved ones. She said caregivers save the state an estimated $4 million annually as they care for people in their private homes.

With the emphasis on caregiving at Monday’s White House Conference on Aging, Davis-Cole said she was hopeful the Care Act will be a greater priority for lawmakers during the 2016 Legislature.

The White House Conference on Aging — which was scheduled to run from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Topeka time Monday — also was to include celebrations of the 80th anniversary of Social Security and the 50th anniversary of Medicare.

Local AARP officials said Topekan Ann Garvin was a local delegate to the conference. Garvin is a former teacher at Topeka High School and Washburn University Board of Regents member.

For more information, visit www.whitehouseconferenceonaging.gov.