Danyelle Simpson, 23, lives in a Pullman neighborhood off of Davis Way where mobile homes of all shapes and colors line the streets and children's toys, portable barbecues and backyard sports equipment are out in full public view for everyone to see.

Simpson's next-door neighbor, David Beatty, 22, was one of the few people in the neighborhood who appeared to be her age. So she made an effort to get to know him better so she'd have someone with whom to hang out.

"David was the best friend I ever had," Simpson said, remembering the man who tragically committed suicide on Oct. 28 after a battle with depression that he kept well hidden from most he knew.

"He was genuine and always did nice things for people," she continued, adding that Beatty was incredibly smart and his view of the world was "really beautiful."

Beatty also left his mark on his co-workers at Cougar Country Drive-In, where he was employed for nearly two years.

"He was a very nice kid, got along with everybody," the restaurant's owner, Rhonda Witt, said.

Beatty worked as a cook at the fast-food restaurant after returning to Pullman following a short stint in the military. This past fall Beatty enrolled at Washington State University to continue his education. He spent a year studying there right out of high school, and told Simpson this time he was majoring in theoretical mathematics.

The Hanford High School graduate excelled in math, so much so that when he first entered WSU in fall 2010 he was immediately placed in calculus III - not a common class for an entering freshman.

Up until Beatty returned to WSU this past fall, he worked at the restaurant full time and was eager to take additional open shifts. He was eligible for financial aid but needed to save up to pay for living expenses and other bills once he returned to college. Cutting back to a part-time work schedule would provide him more hours to study.

Witt said she thought of Beatty almost like a family member, and she had him home to dinner from time to time. She knew he had hobbies, such as magnets, photography and playing video games. But his struggle with depression wasn't something she picked up on because he hid it well under his sweet disposition, she said.

Getting ready

Late in October, Beatty began taking care of several personal matters. He squared up the next month's rent, paid part of a medical bill hanging over him and gave his roommate a little extra money. He even cleaned his room.

The night of Oct. 28, he went shopping at Wal-Mart, buying groceries and a rifle. He went home and threw the groceries away.

He went back to Wal-Mart the next morning, this time purchasing ammunition.

Then he walked up a hill near his Pullman residence and, according to Whitman County Sheriff's deputies, fatally shot himself in the head.

He had attempted suicide twice during the previous few months, the first time in July using over-the-counter headache medication, and the second during Memorial Day weekend when he appeared to have slit his wrist, his roommate told deputies.

His earlier attempts were not unusual for someone suffering from depression or some other form of mental illness, which is the conclusion reached by deputies as to why he harmed himself. There are about 100 to 200 attempts for every completed suicide among those ages 15 to 24, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Beatty's immediate family - mother, stepfather and two younger brothers - were devastated by the death and didn't want to participate in this story.

One of his relatives said his struggle accessing mental health care for depression was highly troubling to them. They said they had offered to pay for care by a private professional but the provider wouldn't take Beatty as a client because he didn't have insurance.

There are indications he still had medical bills accumulated as a result of his first two suicide attempts.

Simpson and Witt said, in hindsight, his activities leading up to his final act of self-harm likely were things he thought would make his death a bit easier for those around him.

A friend told deputies Beatty thought that he wasn't fulfilling "high expectations" others had for him. This person also told deputies Beatty had become more distant, had anxiety and didn't "think he would have a normal life."

Getting counseling

Beatty may have been receiving treatment on campus, but even for some undergoing professional care, "depression can be a fatal illness," Whitman County Coroner Peter Martin said.

Identification of the condition as well as treatment are considered important in helping sufferers weather a crisis and are most often life-saving. The most common ways to control depression are through medication, psychotherapy and counseling.

The only evidence deputies have of Beatty being under treatment was a business card with an appointment time found by investigators, according to the incident report.

WSU and the University of Idaho have mental health centers for students. The UI requires students to have insurance but WSU does not. Professionals at both universities said youths brimming with promise also can suffer from stress and other mental health problems.

One's early 20s are a high-risk time for suicide, but attending college can often provide someone troubled with direction, said Cassandra Nichols, director of WSU's Mental Health and Counseling Services.

Among people ages 18-24, those in college have half the suicide rate of those not in college, said Joan Pulakos, head of the UI Counseling and Testing Center.

Palouse River Counseling in Pullman provides care to the entire community and cost is determined by a patient's ability to pay. A spokesman said students at either of the universities are informed about comparable services available on campus. The campus care system is supported partly through fees paid by all WSU students.

The facility also shares responsibility for some patients with the university care staff. There are some university students who prefer to work with outside care providers, and more of these young adults have coverage because of the Affordable Care Act, said Mike Berney, executive director of Palouse River Counseling.

Getting less support

Funding for such services has decreased during recent years for low income patients who don't qualify for Medicaid, however. Berney said his facility, so far, has made up for the shortfalls with help from other sources.

Berney said some patients who attend college for a semester or two, then leave to focus on work to raise enough money to continue their studies, have difficult mental health challenges. They sometimes end up falling behind and have to catch up before progressing with care because of those lifestyle shifts.

This is also a community problem noticed among health care providers across the state line in Moscow, said Rebecca Lawton, a case manager at Gritman Medical Center. These young patients haven't yet attained the level of education that would provide them with jobs offering financial security or even health insurance. The recession only exacerbated the problem, she said.

Another problem is that getting the specialized help required can be difficult. Negotiating the health care system is hard enough for people who are physically ill, and attempting to obtain treatment while suffering mental illness can be equally or even more challenging, Lawton pointed out.

Palouse River Counseling and Latah Community Health in Moscow work with lower income patients to arrange individual payments for care, and the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline can refer people to sources of care "no matter their income," she said.

Simpson said she thought her best friend "was afraid to ask for help."

Both universities also offer community instruction called Mental Health First Aid, a national program that teaches people how to recognize and understand mental illnesses and addictions, and how to intervene when someone is in an apparent mental crisis.

"As horrible and awful as suicide is, it's not all that common," Nichols said.

Unfortunately, neither was someone like David Beatty.

Getting help

Call 911

Go to a hospital emergency room

Immediate life-threatening situations when circumstances appear dire require emergency response.

Suicide Prevention Lifeline: (800) 273-8255

www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org

Available here: crisis intervention, emotional support, resource referrals, linkages to local services and follow-up, including those at risk for suicide and their families and loved ones. Veterans can access specialized help through this number by dialing “1” after the voice prompt.

National Suicide Prevention Lifeline:

www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/Learn/WarningSigns

This is one of many sources that help loved ones and friends recognize the signs that might indicate that someone is considering suicide.

OTHER IMPORTANT SOURCES

Washington State University:

hws.wsu.edu/medical-clinic/mental-health-care/

University of Idaho:

www.uidaho.edu/ctc/for-students/mental-health-resources

Help for those students facing mental health challenges.

Gritman Medical Center, Moscow

Pullman Regional Hospital

Both have staff who focus on helping people make arrangements to help ease the financial burden of paying for emergency medical care.

Palouse River Counseling in Pullman

Latah Community Health in Moscow

Payment arrangements based on a sliding scale.

Idaho Department of Health and Welfare: (208) 882-0562

Line is answered by operator around the clock. The state agency helps people in crisis navigate resources and explore treatment options. If not in immediate crisis, Idaho’s 211 also provides referrals for a variety of community needs that might be related to one’s health crisis.

Washington Recovery Help Line:

(866) 789-1511

The service is geared toward those dealing with substance abuse, gambling problems and mental health issues. Assistance also is available for those who require treatment referrals and other community services. Also answered around the clock.

Terri Harber can be reached at (208) 883-4631, or by email to tharber@dnews.com.