Buffalo resident Wenohah Ward thought she was being pranked when she was told she had won a free hearing aid.

Her husband and daughter repeatedly had said she needed to get one, but it was too expensive, Ward said.

While she knew her hearing wasn’t great, the 61-year-old Ward said she didn’t realize how bad it was until she won a hearing aid during Waco Ear Nose & Throat’s inaugural giveaway.

In 2011, Ward’s daughter learned about the Give the Gift of Hearing campaign and submitted a letter nominating her mother.

“I did a lot of volunteering at the nursing home and the people would be talking and I would just shake my head yes and shake my head yes, and I didn’t know what the heck they were talking about,” she said.

Waco ENT once again is hosting the event, which is now accepting nominations.

Residents can nominate themselves or someone they know, age 18 or older, by writing a letter of no more than 300 words detailing why the nominee should receive a $6,600 digital, state-of-the-art hearing aid. Submission deadline is Jan. 9.

The three winners will be announced Jan. 16.

Ward said the hearing aid has really changed her life, both for her and her husband.

“We would have to have the TV up on 45 and now I can hear it on 10,” she said.

Jill Clark, Waco ENT practice administrator, said winners will be selected based on their respective story, degree of need and level of hearing loss.

She said all the doctors read the submissions and the clinic’s staff comes together to help choose the winners.

“I’m the one person to say there’s nothing free in this world, but this one’s free,” Clark said.

Clark said Medicare does not cover the cost of hearing aids and many insurance policies only cover a portion of the cost.

“More often than not, the patient is responsible for some of the cost and it’s expensive,” she said. “We’re seeing more and more insurances do accept the coverage.”

Clark said the clinic has seen patients specifically purchase the Affordable Care Act because of the benefits for the devices.

Waco ENT and Baylor Scott & White have four doctors who hold a monthly free clinic at the Family Health Center for people who don’t have insurance.

Clark said Waco ENT also has opened a second location at Baylor Scott & White Hillcrest Medical Center after taking over the audiology needs for Hillcrest.

The hearing aids often give people more than just improved hearing.

Untreated hearing loss can create higher incidents of depression, increased social isolation, accentuation of dementia and dementia-type diseases, Clark said.

Individuals who can’t hear well are 37 percent more likely to suffer an on-the-job injury, she said.

“I think the tendency is to think it’s older folks who struggle with this, but especially with headphones and Walkmans, we’re seeing a definite decrease in age of those needing hearing aids,” she said.

Clark said it’s amazing to watch a person’s life change after they have purchased a hearing aid.

“We see family members come in and hug us and are so excited,” she said. “It really does make a difference when you don’t realize you can’t hear a bird chirping.”

-----

At a glance

Submissions can be emailed to gift@wacoent.com, mailed to or dropped off at 601 West State Highway 6, Suite 106, Waco, 76710.

Letters of no more than 300 words must explain why a certain person should receive hearing aids. Submission deadline is Jan. 9. Winners will be announced Jan. 16. Nominees must be at least age 18.

For details, call 776-7744.