Q: My husband wants to get his green card, but we have very little money. How can we get good legal help? I am a U.S. citizen and my husband is from Canada. We are ages 69 and 70. My husband needs a green card so he can get a driver’s license. We have very little money and we are afraid to hire the wrong lawyer.

Patricia, New York

A: I can help you find free or low-cost legal services and, if you wish, a competent and honest attorney.

To find free or low-cost immigration and citizenship services in New York City residents can call 311, the New York City information hotline. Operators there will direct to a free or low-cost service provider near where you live.

Another good source to get help is Immigrationlawhelp.org, where you can search by zip code.

Readers will find that site especially good for finding legal help for individuals in immigration detention because you can search by detention facility.

Readers in New York wanting to hire a private immigration lawyer can contact the Bar Association Referral Panel at (212) 626-7373.

For just $35, you will get a consultation with an experienced immigration lawyer.

Q: My parents recently got their green cards. Can they get Medicaid, Medicare or Obamacare? My mom is 78, and my dad is 85. They live together in New Jersey. I want to make sure they get medical insurance, but despite hours researching the issue, I am still not sure how to go about it.

The Statue of Liberty stands tall in New York Bay, a beacon to immigrants worldwide. (Getty )

Sant Srinivasan,

North Brunswick, N.J.

A: Your parents qualify for medical insurance under the Affordable Care Act, what many call Obamacare.

Permanent residents and others lawfully here qualify for Obamacare. The rules that apply to legal aliens are the same as those that apply to U.S. citizens. If your parents cannot afford the insurance premiums, they will qualify for a federal subsidy. If you don’t get health insurance by the end of March, they could face penalties.

Permanent residents qualify for Medicare (a federal health insurance program) if they have worked in the U.S. for a total of 40 quarters — 10 years. U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents at least age 65, who have been here five years, may buy into Medicare if they don’t have the work history. Individuals who qualify to buy in to Medicare can choose to participate in Medicare, or buy Obamacare insurance. Individuals who have “premium free” Medicare or Medicaid are not eligible for Obamacare.

Medicaid is a need-based health insurance program for individuals with little or no income. In some states, including New Jersey, you cannot get full Medicaid until you have been a permanent resident for five years. You can, however, get Medicaid reimbursement for emergency services. In other states, including New York, all permanent residents who meet the income qualifications can get Medicaid.

In any event, every noncitizen here legally qualifies for some type of medical insurance. You can get more information about Obamacare and the foreign born at https://www.healthcare.gov/immigration-status-and-the-marketplace/.

Allan Wernick is an attorney and director of the City University of New York's Citizenship NOW! project. Send questions to Allan Wernick, New York Daily News, 4 New York Plaza, New York, N.Y., 10004 or email to questions@allanwernick.com