Do Republicans care more about rich people making more money than your retirement plan? It certainly looks that way. This week, the House of Representatives voted to get rid of a new rule proposed by the Department of Labor, which is designed to prevent retirement brokers from engaging in shady backdoor financial arrangements with Wall Street.

To understand why this vote is so infuriating, it’s necessary to have some context on how the retirement industry works. Currently, it’s perfectly legal for Wall Street firms to pay retirement brokers to encourage their clients to invest with them. Clients, who are fairly clueless when it comes to retirement plans and therefore trust their brokers’ advice, have no idea that their brokers are being bribed.

That’s why the Department of Labor wants to cut these conflicts of interest. Essentially, it’s a way to ensure that brokers work for their clients and not their fat-cat friends. It’s the kind of rule that you’d expect to already be in place, but no, retirement brokers have no obligation to even try to provide their clients with good advice.

According to the White House Council of Economic Advisers, this “sponsored” retirement advice winds up costing $17 billion each year. To be clear, that’s money lost by future retirees who would have more in their accounts had they received more honest advice. Wall Street, of course, comes out fine either way.

The House of Representatives voted almost entirely along party lines (234 to 183) to pass this resolution. Speaker of the House Paul Ryan defended his party’s vote. “Bureaucrats in Washington, D.C. have no business getting between you and your financial planner,” he said. “It’s Obamacare for financial planning.”

Really, the best arguments they have for opposing the rule is that Americans might have to pay brokers more if companies aren’t able to pay the brokers to promote their stocks. Perhaps, but as U.S. News & World Report notes, retirement brokers already bank more off their clients’ various fees than most will have to retire from. In other words, it’s not the brokers’ retirement funds that we need to be worrying about.

There’s good news and bad news about the current political situation:

The good news is that President Obama is already threatening to veto the bill, meaning that regardless of a subsequent Senate’s vote, the Labor Department’s important new rule should prevail.

The bad news is that this is the kind of issue the GOP prioritizes. The fact is that Republicans are more concerned with allowing Wall Street to squeeze extra money out of hardworking Americans who will need to live off that money in their final years.

Americans should be able to trust that their retirement brokers are working for them, which is why this Labor Department rule is so important. Shame on the politicians who seem to think otherwise.

Photo credit: Thinkstock