LAS VEGAS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Rimini Street, Inc., the leading independent provider of enterprise software support services for SAP SE’s (NYSE:SAP) Business Suite and BusinessObjects software and Oracle Corporation’s (NYSE:ORCL) Siebel, PeopleSoft, JD Edwards, E-Business Suite, Oracle Database, Oracle Middleware, Hyperion, Oracle Retail and Oracle Agile PLM software, today announced that it has issued the next set of global tax, legal and regulatory updates for 2016. The updates include the 2016-B update for PeopleSoft clients in the United States and Canada, which were delivered ahead of the vendor’s own scheduled delivery date for similar updates, as well as global updates affecting SAP and Oracle E-Business Suite clients with operations throughout Asia-Pacific, Europe and Latin America. Rimini Street offers clients accurate deliverables through an innovative combination of a patent-pending tax, legal and regulatory technology, proven methodology and ISO 9001-certified development processes.

Updates for the United States and Canada

In the United States and Canada, Rimini Street updates included numerous tax, legal and regulatory changes required by the Internal Revenue Service and the Canadian Revenue Agency, as well as various state, local and governmental agencies.

For clients in the United States, Rimini Street delivered tax, legal and regulatory updates at the federal, state and local levels. At the U.S. federal level, additional updates were delivered in support of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), as well as numerous changes for IRS 1042-S reporting. At the state government level, Rimini Street provided updates for withholding tables, minimum wage rates, allowance amounts, unemployment insurance wage base limits and garnishment rules for numerous tax jurisdictions across the country. At the local government levels, Rimini Street provided dozens of updates for municipalities in Kentucky, Maryland, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania and West Virginia.

For clients in Canada, Rimini Street delivered Record of Employment (ROE) changes, as well as provincial tax table updates for New Brunswick.

Global Updates throughout Asia-Pacific, EMEA and Latin America

With tax, legal and regulatory delivery capabilities for nearly 200 countries, Rimini Street recently provided many required updates to its global clients, including those in Chile, India, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Singapore, the United Kingdom and Uruguay.

The following updates have been delivered to clients:

In Chile, the change in requirement to obtain Tax Treaty benefits, as issued by Chile’s Internal Revenue Service (IRS)

New electronic tax payment requirements for India, including changes to the ceiling on Tax Rebates under Section 87A, changes in surcharge rates and updates to deductions related to Home Loan Interest and rent paid

For Malaysia, several updates, including changes to income tax relief for individual tax payers, the reduction of Malaysia’s Employee Provident Fund contributions, changes to the CP39 Schedular Tax Deduction form, as well as form layout changes for CP8E, as defined by the Inland Revenue Board (IRB) of Malaysia

In Mexico, information regarding the latest changes to the social security electronic form for Single System of Self-Determination (SUA), version 3.4.6

Several updates for New Zealand effective April 1 st , including minimum wage and paid parental leave increases, changes to Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) levy rates and the extension of parental leave payment to more employees

, including minimum wage and paid parental leave increases, changes to Accident Compensation Corporation (ACC) levy rates and the extension of parental leave payment to more employees In Singapore, updates to satisfy new itemized payslip requirements

In the UK, several updates effective April 6 th , including National Insurance (NI) threshold and limit changes, Real Time Information (RTI) changes, Student Loan annual threshold updates, Scottish income tax changes and company car CO2 emissions updates, as well as income tax rate and threshold annual budget changes

, including National Insurance (NI) threshold and limit changes, Real Time Information (RTI) changes, Student Loan annual threshold updates, Scottish income tax changes and company car CO2 emissions updates, as well as income tax rate and threshold annual budget changes In Uruguay, an update that details a new requirement by the federal government to report professional fees electronically

Industry-Leading Tax, Legal & Regulatory Research and Technology

Rimini Street’s tax, legal and regulatory strategy and scoping team is made up of veteran tax specialists, attorneys and international tax, legal and regulatory professionals who use advanced technology and numerous government and private-sector sources to monitor, collect and verify tax, legal and regulatory changes. These sources include more than 2,600 government web sites and close to 3,300 information sources covering more than 26,000 localities in nearly 200 countries.

Rimini Street also participates as a member in many prominent tax, legal and regulatory associations around the world, including the American, Canadian, United Kingdom and Australian Payroll Associations, the American Bar Association Section of Taxation, the Financial Executives International Association, The Tax Council and the Tax Executives Institute. The innovative combination of technology, proven methodology and ISO 9001 quality processes consistently assures the fastest “legislature-to-live”SM update delivery cycle and highest quality deliverables in the industry.

“With over 110,000 updates delivered to date, Rimini Street has a long, successful history and proven track record of providing mission-critical tax, legal and regulatory updates to our Oracle and SAP clients in every major region of the world,” said Paul Henville, group vice president, Global Product Delivery, Rimini Street. “Through our patent-pending research technology and proven methodology, combined with ISO-certified development processes, Rimini Street is committed to ensuring that our clients maintain compliance with the help of our accurate, superior-quality tax, legal and regulatory updates delivered consistently ahead of the vendor’s own planned delivery dates.”

To learn more, follow @riministreet on Twitter and find Rimini Street on Facebook and LinkedIn.

About Rimini Street, Inc.

Rimini Street is the global leader in providing independent enterprise software support services. The company has redefined enterprise support services since 2005 with an innovative, award-winning program that enables Oracle and SAP licensees to save up to 90 percent on total support costs. Clients can remain on their current software release without any required upgrades for at least 15 years. Over 1,300 global, Fortune 500, midmarket, and public sector organizations from a broad range of industries have selected Rimini Street as their trusted, independent support provider. To learn more, please visit http://www.riministreet.com.

Forward-Looking Statements

This press release may contain forward-looking statements. The words “believe,” “may,” “will,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “expect,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, and are based on various assumptions. If the risks materialize or our assumptions prove incorrect, actual results could differ materially from the results implied by these forward-looking statements. Rimini Street assumes no obligation to update any forward-looking statements or information, which speak only as of the date of this press release.

Rimini Street and the Rimini Street logo are trademarks of Rimini Street, Inc. All other company and product names may be trademarks of their respective owners. Copyright © 2016. All rights reserved.