There's no denying there's a movement behind Donald Trump. (Gage Skidmore/Flickr)

Donald Trump is my idol and source of inspiration. His campaign to win the presidency has become a movement. His message is concise yet controversial. He says what he means and means what he says.

I support Donald Trump for many reasons, but I'll start with this one: his policies. I love his strong, pro-American stance on immigration. I believe the United States is a country of laws and we need to enforce our laws. When tens of thousands of illegal immigrants are pouring into our country through the southern border, there is a problem.

Not all of these people coming in are good people, and we need to properly vet who enters our country. There is an immigration process, and if people want to come to America, they need to do so legally.

My thoughts on @SpeakerRyan not supporting Republican nominee @realDonaldTrump... pic.twitter.com/4COasbSdvk — #MillennialsForTrump (@ClassySnobbb) May 7, 2016

Another one of Trump's policies that I wholeheartedly support is his tax reform plan. In crippled America, Trump says that single people who make less than $25,000 and married people who make less than $50,000 will owe no income tax. This is a phenomenal plan and it will leave more money in the pockets of hardworking Americans.

One of the huge problems with big government is that it steals money from hard working Americans by calling it "taxation," and then uses that money to fund ridiculous government programs. This is a mess and it must come to an end.

Details of the funds supporting Donald Trump's campaign since last FEC filing. He has self-funded 75% of his campaign. (Screenshot/OpenSecrets.org)

I am also impressed with the fact that Trump is self-funding his campaign. He is not beholden to any special interests, lobbyists, or donors. When Trump is elected, he will be free to do what's in the best interest of the American people and he won't owe anyone any favors.

I think it would be great for America to have a president who has the vast list of accomplishments that Trump has. He owns Trump Towers, Trump hotels, The Trump Organization, etc. Having a man like that as the leader of the free world would reinforce the idea that success is a good thing and not something to be afraid of. It is not "greedy" to want the best of the best or to take pride in what one rightfully owns.

Having a president who supports our Second Amendment rights is more important now than ever. As more useless gun control laws are put in place, Americans are slowly being stripped of their Constitutional rights to bear arms and protect themselves from tyranny and oppression, while lawless criminals obtain access to guns through illegal means. Trump realizes this and he has stated over and over again that he is pro-Second Amendment and will restore gun rights back to the American people. He and his sons are lifetime members of the amazing NRA.

The Trump rally in Grand Rapids, Michigan, brought in around 6,300 supporters. (Gabrielle Seunagal)

I have listened to Trump's speeches, read his books, and I even attended a Trump rally in Grand Rapids, Michigan, on December 21st, 2015. I have no doubt in my mind that Trump will do what is best for the American people. He will protect this country. He will make America great again by bringing back jobs from China and Japan, by lowering taxes, and by repealing Obamacare, which is a disaster and has caused many Americans to lose their jobs.

Trump has a history of success and getting things done. He wrote The Art of the Deal. He will be respected by foreign leaders and he will protect Americans from terrorism. He is the only candidate who will make a positive change in this country, and I am so honored to support him.

This article was written by Gabrielle Seunagal and originally appeared on Kicker. Kicker explains the most important, compelling things going on in the world and empowers you to get in the know, make up your own mind, and take action. For more, check out the Kicker site, like their Facebook page, or subscribe to their email newsletter.

Follow Kicker on Twitter: www.twitter.com/gokicker