Thomas Scriven, a former H.I.G. Capital principal director whose past work has spanned private equity and credit, will join the University of Pennsylvania’s endowment office this summer, said people familiar with the matter.

Mr. Scriven’s role as a managing director will span various asset classes. His arrival comes as the investment staffers overseeing the Philadelphia university’s $9 billion-plus endowment have been increasingly working across asset classes, rather than within narrowly delineated areas of specialization.

Peter Ammon, formerly a director at Yale University’s investments office, became Penn’s investment chief in 2013. This gave Penn a new face and put a protégé of David Swensen, Yale University’s chief investment officer, at the helm of its endowment.

The arrival of Mr. Scriven, a dual Swiss/British national and one of the founding members of H.I.G. Capital’s European arm, is expected to bolster the team’s international private equity expertise.

Giving investment officers a say across various investment types removes the need for teams to compete for dollars to put to work, proponents of the model have said. If investors have the flexibility to play a thesis through various asset types, this can reduce the pressure to push money into hot markets.

The investment offices of the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Brown University, and the Public Employees Retirement Association of New Mexico have been shifting to give staff more influence over various asset classes.

The University of Pennsylvania had $9.6 billion in endowment assets as of June 30, 2014. Most of its endowment was housed in a portfolio that held 9.2% of assets in private equity, short of a 10% goal as of mid-2014. The endowment hasn’t released its portfolio mix for the most recent fiscal year.

Penn was among the top 10 richest North American higher educational institutes by endowment assets as of mid-2014, according to the National Association of College and University Business Officers and Commonfund Institute.

For more on limited partners, including how Massachusetts Pension Reserves Investment Management Board and Pennsylvania State Employees’ Retirement System are investing capital, and how Alaska Permanent Fund Corp. finished out the fiscal year, check out LBO Wire.