The Aldersgate Crisis Room, known as the "little white house" next to the Aldersgate United Methodist Church, holds true to its original intentions by feeding and clothing the needy.

Buy Photo Volunteers sort donations at the Aldersgate Crisis Room, Tuesday, November 25, 2014, in East Brunswick, NJ. Jason Towlen/Staff Photographer Jason Towlen/Staff Photographer (Photo: Jason Towlen/Staff Photo)Buy Photo Story Highlights The Crisis Room is open to any Middlesex County resident in need.

The ministry provides clothing to families in need and sells low-priced clothing in their thrift store.

The Aldersgate Crisis Room normally feeds about 130 to 150 families per week.

EAST BRUNSWICK - As the economy corrects itself after the 2009 financial crash, some of us are seeing our lives return to normalcy. We are finding jobs, buying homes and getting an education.

However, that's not the story for all families in Middlesex County.

"While the overall economy has improved, we don't see the trickle down to the low-income families," said Diane Hutchins, director of the Crisis Room at Aldersgate United Methodist Church of East Brunswick. "The cost of living in Middlesex County is so high that even when the adults in a family are working full-time, it isn't enough if they are only making minimum wage."

Fran Mickett, an Aldersgate charter member, founded the Crisis Room about 40 years ago to assist local families in need of food and clothing.

Today, the Crisis Room, known as the "little white house" next to the Aldersgate United Methodist Church at 568 Ryders Lane, holds true to its original intentions yet has become a major outreach of the church. It is an entirely volunteer-run ministry and is funded through donations and thrift shop sales.

Feeding and clothing with food and prayer

The ministry normally feeds about 130 to 150 families per week, giving bags of food that will provide meals for two to three days for a family of four. However, at this time, those numbers have surged to 200 families fed per week. Hutchins said that September marks the beginning of the rush with families having added expenses at the start of the school year and seasonal holidays.

The Crisis Room also provides clothing to families in need and sells low-priced clothing in their thrift store as well as household goods such as dishes, small appliances, books and toys. All funds raised in the thrift shop are used to buy food for the pantry.

Hutchins said that the Crisis Room sees many families struggling with low wages due to lack of education, excessive medical bills, handicapped children, seasonal employment or lack of employment. One such client was a young woman who came to the ministry for food because lost her job as a chemist and was not getting any interviews.

"While we provided food, we also provided prayer and encouragement," Hutchins said. "She came in a few weeks ago to let us know that she was starting a new job and thanked us for helping her through a difficult time."

So how can the Crisis Room afford to assist so many needy families? "We have received tremendous help from the community," Hutchins said. "It always amazes me that our needs are met. We can always use additional funding and there are always projects that may be on hold for lack of funds, but we have been able to stay open and provide for the families who come to us."

The entirely volunteer-run ministry currently has a pool of 30 to 40 volunteers, including a core group of about 20 who help weekly and a group under Jersey Cares, an umbrella organization where people can sign up to volunteer for the Crisis Room. Those wishing to volunteer do not have to be affiliated with the church and can call 732-254-7361.

How to help and get help

Beyond assisting the Crisis Room through donations to the Home News Tribune Needy Cases fund this season, the community can drop off clean, used clothing, shoes, pocketbooks, small working appliances and other household goods at anytime in the bin front of the building.

The Crisis Room can also always use monetary donations, used to purchase deeply discounted food from the Community Food Bank of New Jersey, by sending checks to the Crisis Room of Aldersgate Methodist Church at 568 Ryders Lane in East Brunswick 08816.

Hutchins said at this time, the organization is in special need of new toys, hats, gloves and mittens as well as gift wrap, bows and tape. It can also always use food, especially peanut butter, tuna, pasta sauce and canned fruit.

The Crisis Room is open to any Middlesex County resident in need through an application process in which those looking for assistance show proof of residency. The Crisis Room currently gets to know their clients and struggles within the approval process, but they will be moving into a more formal process in 2015.

Hutchins said, "We sincerely believe that our clients are truly in need. If there are those who are 'scamming' us, then we believe they will be judged by a higher power."

Those looking for assistance can call 732-257-9920 24 hours a day. The thrift shop is open to the public on Tuesdays, Fridays and Sundays from 1 to 3 p.m.

Staff Writer Jenna Intersimone: 908-801-4853; JIntersimone@MyCentralJersey.com

How you can help

From Nov. 30 to Dec. 7, we are highlighting the stories of eight organizations helped by the Needy Cases Fund. Through the words and photographs of the journalists of the Home News Tribune, you will see how these Central Jersey-based organizations improve the lives of your neighbors in need, and how you can help them accomplish their missions.

For the past 67 years, The Needy Cases Fund has collected donations from a caring community during the holiday season, and distributed the funds to local agencies. The community-service project has been sponsored by the Home News Tribune and its predecessor, the Daily Home News, working with the Lions Club of New Brunswick.

As you read these stories, we hope you will become engaged and take action by sending a donation anytime during the holiday season to help support the Needy Cases Fund and local community agencies. Donations should be sent to: Needy Cases Fund, Home News Tribune, 92 E. Main St., Suite 202, Somerville, NJ 08876. Please indicate with a note whether you want to be acknowledged in a wrap-up story about the program, scheduled to run in late December, or whether you wish to remain anonymous. The Needy Cases Fund is maintained in a separate account by the New Brunswick Lions Club, and distribution of the funds is apportioned by representatives of the Home News Tribune and the club.

For any questions, contact Carolyn Sampson at 908-243-6624 or csampson@MyCentralJersey.com.

And please know that every dollar you donate is appreciated, and will be used well.

Paul C. Grzella, General Manager/Editor

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1CBXaXF