Working a string of low-wage jobs, Lynette Reece has always had trouble paying the rent.

A home health care aide for the past 21 years, too often she has had to skip work to go to landlord-tenant court to try to hold on to her apartment.

“How can I go to work if I have to go to court?” said Reece, 46, a single mother of two in Washington who pays $985 for a two-bedroom place. “That’s stressful when you’re trying to concentrate at work, and you can’t because you got so much on your mind.”

Her predicament eased when the District of Columbia’s 2006 living-wage law for government contractors — including home health-care aides paid by Medicaid — took effect. She now receives $13.60 an hour, up from $10.50 a few years ago. “I can pay my rent with one check. One check,” she said.

Knowing what a difference higher pay can make, Reece joined a movement that launched last week to raise wages and improve workplace protections for home health-care aides nationwide. Backed by the Service Employees International Union, the effort seeks to replicate the “Fight for 15,” a push early this year to raise the income of fast-food workers through high-profile strikes.

It’s part of actions aimed at putting the concerns of the nation’s fastest-growing workforce — one that’s 91 percent female, 56 percent non-white and highly dependent on public aid — on the political agenda. About 600,000 of the country’s 2.1 million home health-care aides are members of the SEIU.

But it’s a long way to $15 in most states, and that remains the rallying cry. Reece is being paid substantially more than the median wage for home health aides, which is $10.01. But she and others describe a wide range of problems in the field: Agencies don’t always pay their employees promptly, they don’t always keep wages on track with local laws, and local governments don’t always enforce the laws.

According to the Paraprofessional Healthcare Institute, a nonprofit consultancy affiliated with a worker-owned home-care co-op, 58 percent of home-care aides are either uninsured or are covered through the safety net.

Another obstacle in the Fight for 15 is dealing with the public sector. About three-quarters of home health aides are paid through Medicaid, which means that higher wages are a blow to public budgets, not shareholders.

By and large, states haven’t been increasing budgets to keep pace. That has squeezed providers.

According to Joanne Cunningham of the Home Care Association of New York State, which represents the private providers that employ health aides, agencies have been cutting other priorities such as training and administrative staff to comply.

“No one, least of all the agencies, wants to pay their workers anything less than a living wage,” Cunningham said. “The issue is, the health-care system now is going through such change and challenge that home healthagency providers are feeling a lot of fiscal pressure, and they’re having a very hard time coping with the wage mandate.”

Lifting the elderly in and out of beds, keeping track of their medicine, doing their shopping and generally keeping them healthy is just as challenging as the factory jobs of days past, Reece said.

“It’s not right,” she said. “We have to be their mother that died, their son that died, their daughter that doesn’t come around, their niece that doesn’t come around. We’re like their whole family. So why can’t we get paid?”