Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

OAKLAND -- It might be difficult to understand how ranked-choice voting works, but it's crystal clear that its reputation nose-dived after debuting in Oakland four years ago -- and that it still hasn't recovered.

In the decade after the disputed 2000 presidential election, 17 mostly left-leaning cities and counties -- including San Francisco, Oakland, Berkeley and San Leandro -- adopted the system that, had it been used in Florida, would have let people vote for Ralph Nader but elect Al Gore by making him their second choice.

That momentum came to a halt after Jean Quan's upset victory in the 2010 Oakland mayor's race. Not a single jurisdiction has adopted ranked-choice voting since Quan, powered by many second- and third-place votes, was declared the winner over former state Sen. Don Perata nearly 72 hours after initial election returns showed Perata with a 9-point lead in first-place votes.

The final tally appeared illegitimate to many voters, especially those who had rejected repeated pleas from Quan and several other leading candidates to leave Perata off their ballots. "People just looked at it as a cabal as opposed to a regular political act," said Dan Lindheim, a lecturer at UC Berkeley's Goldman School of Public Policy and former Oakland city administrator.

Advertisement

For ranked-choice proponents, the problem wasn't that Quan won. It was that it took three days to complete the count, during which time voters were led to believe that Perata had prevailed.

"That weakened the case that ranked-choice voting was an easy fix to the pain of holding runoff elections," said Rob Richie, director of FairVote.org, an organization that promotes ranked-choice voting.

There shouldn't be long delays in producing election results this year. Improved technology now allows election officials to perform preliminary ranked-choice tabulations on election night.

Nevertheless, with another mayoral election less than two weeks away, there is a renewed drive to make sure that people understand ranked-choice voting and renewed debate over the system's merits.

"I think there is a greater tolerance for the bizarreness of it, but my guess is people are still confused," Lindheim said.

Before Oakland adopted ranked-choice voting, it held a primary in the spring and a runoff election in November between the two top vote-getters if no candidate won more than 50 percent of the primary vote. The same system is still used in San Jose.

Many Bay Area jurisdictions simply hold a single election in which the highest vote-getter is the winner even if that candidate doesn't win a majority.

Ranked-choice voting, in theory, is supposed to offer the best of both worlds. Voters rank their top three choices and a computer figures out which candidate has the most support.

If no candidate wins more than half the first-place votes, the "instant runoff" begins by eliminating the candidate with the fewest first-place votes. Voters who supported the eliminated candidate then have their votes transferred to their second choice -- and later to their third choice if their second choice is eliminated. That keeps happening, round after round, until one candidate has more than 50 percent of the votes still in play.

The system has thrown a monkey wrench into decisions made at the ballot box and on the campaign trail. Peggy Moore, who is running Councilwoman Libby Schaaf's Oakland mayoral effort, said she encourages volunteers to knock on doors of residents with lawn signs for opposing candidates. "The second- and third-place votes are so random, you are constantly courting everyone's supporters," she said.

Not everyone likes this year's kinder, gentler mayor's race. Oakland voter Ralph Kanz said candidates have refrained from raising valid concerns about their opponents for fear of losing second- and third-place votes.

"There's something to be said about a little mudslinging on occasion if that gets the truth out," he said.

When it comes to casting ballots, election experts advise voters to follow their heart with the first choice, but to use their second or third choice on a candidate with a good chance of winning so their vote has a better chance of counting in the end.

It's also important for voters to understand that they can't help their top candidate by putting his name down for all three choices or by leaving their second and third choices blank.

All that does is deprive voters an opportunity to have their votes count if their top pick fares poorly and is eliminated in the computerized runoff. "That is hard for people to wrap their heads around," Lindheim said. "It feels like you are trying to game the system."

So why bother with the complexity?

Ranked-choice proponents say the system ensures that elections are decided in November, when turnout is largest; saves candidates the cost of fundraising for two elections; and spares cities the cost of holding a runoff, especially cities such as Berkeley and San Francisco, which previously held runoff elections after the November ballot.

Skeptics counter that voters find it harder to make the kind of informed choice that a two-candidate runoff provides and that winners are elected with an artificial majority that makes it harder for them to claim a mandate to govern.

Four years ago, Quan emerged from a 10-candidate field even though three out of four voters picked someone else as their top choice. "That really calls into question what kind of mandate you have," Lindheim said.

For all the complaints about the system being too complicated, it turns out that voters had an easier time with ranked-choice voting than they had with the new statewide nonpartisan primaries, said Corey Cook, who studies elections as director of the Leo T. McCarthy Center for Public Service and the Common Good at the University of San Francisco.

Perhaps surprisingly, Cook found that voters in Oakland's much-maligned 2010 mayoral race filled out all three choices in significantly larger numbers than in earlier ranked-choice elections held in San Francisco.

That played a big part in Quan getting elected despite badly losing the first-place vote. "She was on more ballots than Perata and she was ahead of him on more ballots," Cook said. "It was a totally legitimate outcome."

The push for ranked-choice voting has slowed, but it's far from over. Advocates such as Richie say there will soon be more voting machines that can perform the runoffs and that both New York City and Washington, D.C., are considering making the switch.

A controversy-free election in Oakland and other Bay Area cities this year could help sway some city councils across the country, Richie said. "I think every use of it where people say voters seem to handle it well is useful to people looking at it elsewhere."

Contact Matthew Artz at 510-208-6435.