Topics: Bible, Citizens United, Corporate Personhood, corporations, Court, Hobby Lobby, Religion, religious exemptions, Supreme Court, The Right, Politics News

Religious exemptions have been causing a great deal of debate lately, with some arguing that they are a natural extension of the establishment clause, and others contending they are dangerous for the law, as well as for minority groups. In some cases, religious exemptions essentially give people and organizations the right to discriminate against others, and possibly the right to commit domestic and child abuse in some cases, if there is religious pretext. How could anyone possibly be exempt from child abuse, you ask? One of the many examples one could frighteningly claim comes in the book of proverbs, where to some horrifying interpretations, the Bible gives one every right to beat a child: “Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with a rod, he shall not die. Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from hell.” (Proverbs 23:13-14)

Now, it is unlikely that one would ever successfully achieve a religious exemption for beating their child, but just the idea is scary. More likely exemptions come from laws that may help gay people, women, and minorities. Currently, in Georgia, the state senate is attempting to pass the Georgia Religious Freedom Restoration Act, which former Attorney General of Georgia, Mike Bowers, has said, “will be an excuse to practice invidious discrimination…(and) permit everyone to become a law unto themselves in terms of deciding what laws they will or will not obey, based on whatever religious tenets they may profess or create at any given time.”

Exemptions have also been harshly criticized for their widespread use for parents to opt their children out of important vaccinations, even though research has shown that no religions seem to be actually opposed to vaccination, except for Christian Science. Almost all states offer parents the right to exempt their children for religious beliefs.

What makes this all even more scary is that, as of last year, for-profit corporations also have the apparent right to religious exemptions. The Supreme Court has continued its crusade to provide corporations with every single right afforded to human beings, taking this whole corporate personhood to whole new levels. The Hobby Lobby case, decided last June, has given private closely-held corporations (not public) the right to religiously object to laws; or in other words, now certain corporations have the full protection of religious belief, just like human beings. Like all corporations, Hobby Lobby, which is a for-profit arts and crafts company owned by an Evangelical Christian family, is considered a person under the law. Though the court did not base their decision on corporate personhood, this case does continue the American tradition of providing for-profit organizations the same rights as individuals.

We’re All Human Beings, Natural and Artificial

Corporate personhood goes all the way back to the U.S code of law, where it is says “the words ‘person’ and ‘whoever’ include corporations, companies, associations, firms, partnerships, societies, and joint stock companies, as well as individuals.” A landmark case in corporate personhood was the 1886 Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad, when Chief Justice Morrison Waite declared that “The Court does not wish to hear argument on the question whether the provision in the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution which forbids a state to deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws applies to these corporations. We are all of opinion that it does.”

Since then, corporations have been given the same protections under the fourteenth amendment, which was originally passed to provide freed slaves with rights and equal protection, as people. Of course corporations are not really people; they do not have physical bodies or consciousness, they are man-made creations with the sole purpose of making profit. And while corporations are provided most of the same rights as humans under the law, they do not seem to ever receive the same penalties as humans. How could they? You cannot put an imaginary institution into prison; they don’t have bodies. The worst thing that can happen to a corporation is they can go under, or die, to keep this human-corporation comparison going. But the financial crisis fallout has shown that this rarely happens. Corporations generally receive slap-on-the-wrist fines, and go on their merry way (maybe if states like Texas continue to insist on having a death penalty, they can also sentence corporations to death?).