Transcript for Amy Robach on Breast Cancer Diagnosis: 'ABC News Saved My Life'

It is surreal to be sitting here. As scary as it is, I'm so, so lucky. Because you guys pushed me into that van. And thank god you did. Because I know me. And I wasn't in any rush to have that done any time soon. And I had cancer the whole time we senate that office. I was saying I don't have a connection to the disease, should I be the one to do this. And, wow. Boy. When you called us a few weeks ago, I'm sure the reaction that even at home, that was the reaction we had. That could not believe that moment. That you shared with us and it was so brave of you to do that. And, these have been very difficult weeks for you. Can you share what you have decided to do? I have decided to have a by lateral mastectomy. I'm going to be aggressive. I'm 40 years old. I hopefully have a lot of life ahead of me. What comes next, we're not sure. I'll have reconstructive surgery. I don't know. I don't know about chemomoe. I don't know what stage I am. I don't know if it's spread. We'll find out those things in the weeks ahead. The limbo is the hardest time. I'm saying this outloud because the whole reason I walked into that van was to raise awareness for people to get mammograms. Little did I know I would be a walking example of having a mammogram saved my life. Having you, who pushed me to do this to say, you can do this. You saved my life. Abc news saved my life. You saved your life, amy. You did it. And jen ashton is holding your other hand. I'm thinking about people watching that morning and they also got a mammogram and they maybe got similar news. Just walk people through. What do you do? And the same week that we got the news about amy, I delivers the news to one of patients as well. The reaction of everyone is what amy just described. What you know firsthand, robin. What I tell women is, step one, take a deep breath. Emotionally, it feels like an emergency. Medically, you have time to process the news and take things day by day. The second thing that i encourage people to do is try to get not one but two opinions. If that means getting your results copied on a disk, getting the pathology results copied. Bring them to one expert if not two and the last thing is, and amy mentioned this, speak to a reconstructive plastic surgeon from the begiing. It will help you plan out your options and your subsequent treatment down the road. Amy chose mastectomy. It's an option you choose. You need to know about all of those options at the beginning, not several steps down the road. Your husband, andrew is here. Mm-hmm. It could not have been easy to share this with your family. He wasn't with me. That's how surreal this seemed. When I went back in for further ima imaging, I was alone. Andrew was on speakerphone from manipula minneapolis. Telling your children was the toughest part. I spoke with a counsellor beforehand. Yesterday, I broke the news to my grandmother, who is not in great health. We had my aunts around her. My mom and I were on the phone. That's in a weird way when you get strong. Because you have to be strong to other people because you know you're about to break their hearts. That has been the hardest part, letting people know and knowing how everyone's lives change. Not just yours. And look who you're sitting next to. The strongest woman ever. You know. You're a walking example of this. When you're talking about a diagnosis like this, so often the focus is medical and physical. The emotional and spiritual part is just as important. So many emotions. It's a roller coaster. They are chomping at the bit to come in, george, andrew, lara. Josh. And you are -- you know that. I have felt so loved and. Come here, andrew. I felt so loved. I want to thank everyone for rushing to my side and holding my hand and letting me know it's going to be okay and to have robin as someone who you know, i can follow in such great footsteps to know that it's going to be okay. And I'm a fighter. You are. You were there for me. I'm here for you. We -- we all are here for you. You're going to beat this. Period. You're going beat this. Special music helped you. This is my favorite song. Let the words fall out. Say what you want to say. Love you, amy. Love you. Live from wcvb-tv, channel 5,

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.