Topics: Barack Obama, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, isis, Islam, Islamic State, Noam Chomsky, Religion, Ted Cruz, Will McCants, Life News, News

At approximately 9:40 p.m., on Nov. 13, 2015, three heavily armed gunmen stormed into the Bataclan theater in Paris and began killing people at random. According to some of the survivors, the attackers shouted “Allahu Akbar,” meaning “God is great.” But the gunmen also reportedly exclaimed, “This is for Syria” and “What are you [the French] doing in Syria? You’re going to pay now.”

These statements gesture at the complex tangle of motivational factors behind contemporary Islamic terrorism. By the terrorists’ own admission, their murderous rampage was carried out in the name of both religion and (a perverted form of) political justice. Yet many commentators in the West — some with large media megaphones — are attracted to highly simplistic, overly reductive explanations of Islamic terrorism.

On one side are what the former Islamist Maajid Nawaz calls “regressive leftists” who deny any significant link between religious belief and Islamic extremism. Rather, these “regressives” claim that Islam has been “hijacked” by outlaws who are really — even secretly — motivated by social, economic, or political grievances (such as the 2003 Iraq War). On the other side are apologists for U.S. foreign policy who stubbornly deny that Western intervention in the Middle East has had a significant role to play in the rise of al-Qaeda and the Islamic State, among other groups. As one advocate of this view states, it’s pure liberal “masochism” to suggest that “we created them” (meaning the terrorists) and that we are, therefore, “in every morally relevant sense, getting exactly what we deserve.”

Unfortunately, both of these extremes miss the mark. As with so many intellectual debates, the truth lies somewhere in the middle. First, it’s crucial to recognize that radicalization doesn’t happen in a vacuum. There are specific societal conditions that can, and do, influence the probability that otherwise moderate believers will drift toward the fringe and adopt radical jihadist ideologies in the first place. In fact, the scholarly literature on this issue strongly affirms, through detailed historical analyses and empirical investigations, this very point. To paraphrase the terrorism scholar Mark Juergensmeyer, extreme conditions breed extreme religion. This being said, once a radical ideology becomes an integral component of one’s mental software, it can indeed have a profound effect on one’s behavior, perhaps even leading one to engage in violent acts of catastrophic terrorism that would otherwise be morally unthinkable.

Making matters worse, these two factors can reciprocally interact such that societal instability (caused, for example, by a military invasion) provokes radicalization, which leads to “retaliatory” attacks, more violence, and even more radicalization. And so on. It’s precisely this cycle of conflict that the West and the Middle East are currently locked in, and which could become immensely worse if someone with the foreign policy competence of, say, Donald Trump or Ted Cruz were to get into the Oval Office.

With the 2016 presidential election rapidly approaching, U.S. foreign policy in the next four to eight years could change dramatically. It’s crucial that whichever candidate enters the Oval Office next January — as well as everyone else heading to the polls in November — listen to what the experts have to say about the nature and root causes of terrorism. Without a sophisticated understanding of this ongoing threat, our policies in the Middle East are doomed to be ineffectual — or worse, self-destructive.

There are few scholars today with greater expertise on Islamic militancy than Will McCants. With a PhD in Near Eastern Studies from Princeton University, McCants is the director of the Project on U.S. Relations with the Islamic World and a senior fellow in the Center for Middle East Policy at the Brookings Institute. McCants has also recently authored a marvelously comprehensive book, “The ISIS Apocalypse: The History, Strategy, and Doomsday Vision of the Islamic State.”

Over email, I queried McCants about the etiology of terrorism, the role of religion and U.S. foreign policy in fueling anti-American extremism, and the future of terrorism in a world cluttered by increasingly powerful new technologies.

Thanks for talking to me, Dr. McCants. To begin, what role does religion play in shaping the Islamic State’s strategy? Would it be a mistake for analysts in the West to ignore the influence of religious beliefs when trying to understand the group’s ideology and behavior?

This is a tough question to answer because religion and politics intermingle in the Islamic State, just as they intermingled in the state created by Islam’s founder, Muhammad. Islam was born in a fractious, tribal society that had no central government. Muhammad used religion to unite the tribes into a larger polity. Unsurprisingly, much of Islamic scripture has to do with the maintenance of that polity. Matters of state were matters of religion and vice versa. That changed somewhat over the centuries but the Islamic State is more interested in reviving the earliest period of Islamic history when religion and politics were fused.

Scripture and sira — the biography of Muhammad — influence the Islamic State’s goals more than they influence the group’s strategy and tactics. The State’s leaders want to reconstitute the early Islamic empire and implement the fixed punishments required by scripture. They also believe prophecy has foretold their inevitable conquest of the world, which is one reason why they war with everyone.

Although the Islamic State’s goals seem static, they have shifted somewhat over the years when confronted with reality. The founder of the Islamic State in 2006 believed a messiah was going to appear at any moment, so he made terrible battlefield decisions as a consequence. His successors learned from his mistakes and changed their interpretation of prophecy. They emphasize the return of the caliphate as the fulfillment of prophecy rather than the appearance of a messiah. They changed their doctrine for the sake of survival. It’s unlikely but not inconceivable that the Islamic State will also modify its imperialism in order to survive. Medieval Islamic groups that were just as apocalyptic made the same turn in order to survive once they established states.

As for tactics and strategy, the Islamic State’s leaders pick and choose what they think will work best given the circumstances. When scripture and sira justify what they do, they cite it. When it doesn’t, they ignore it or explain it away. The burning of the Jordanian pilot is a good case in point. Burning an apostate is forbidden by Islamic scripture because only God can punish apostates with fire. Yet the Islamic State decided to light the Jordanian “apostate” on fire in retribution for Jordan’s bombing of Islamic State positions. The Islamic State argued that the scriptural prohibition on burning apostates was superseded according to the principle of lex talionis (eye for an eye).

The history of Western intervention in the Middle East is extensive, to be sure. Do you think that, as Noam Chomsky has argued (among others), the 2003 U.S.-led preemptive invasion of Iraq is to blame for the current crisis? To what extent did Sunnis in the region interpret the Iraq War as a fulfillment of prophecy, and thus a call to fight against the invading forces?

The Islamic State would not be with us today if the United States hadn’t invaded Iraq, so in that sense Chomsky is right. Jihadists take advantage of any disorder to advance their cause. They move into security vacuums to build states, they recruit among the aggrieved parties, they grab loose weapons, etc.

Prior to the U.S. invasion, the modern Sunni world was uninterested in apocalypticism. We know this from the work of Jean-Pierre Filiu, who documented the poor sales of Sunni books about the apocalypse before 2003. After 2003, sales of books about the apocalypse soared among Sunnis. Islamic prophecies of the End Times say that Iraq and Syria will be the sites of the final battles, so when there’s major upheaval in either country, it invites an apocalyptic interpretation.