Ashley and Matt Dirks with their New Year baby, Mila Ellen Dirks, who was born at 1:35am New Year's morning at Boulder Community Heath in Boulder, Colorado January 1, 2015. (Mark Leffingwell/ Daily Camera)

Boulder County's first babies of 2015 Boulder Community Health: Mila Ellen Dirks, born at 1:35 a.m. Longmont United Hospital: Girl born at 2:38 a.m. Good Samaritan Medical Center, Lafayette: Sarah Young, born at 3:04 a.m. Avista Adventist Hospital, Louisville:Emanuel Rojas Berrios, born at 2:19 p.m.

Ashley and Matt Dirks were expecting that their child would actually be one of the last babies born in 2014, not one of the first in 2015. But then the clock struck midnight at Boulder Community Health on New Year's Eve, and the expecting parents began to consider the possibility they would have Boulder County's first baby of 2015.

Mila Ellen Dirks was born at 1:35am New Year's morning at Boulder Community Heath in Boulder, Colorado January 1, 2015. (Mark Leffingwell/ Daily Camera)

"When it went past midnight, we started to wonder if we would have the first one," said Matt Dirks.

Sure enough, at 1:35 a.m. Thursday, Ashley gave birth to a girl, Mila Ellen Dirks, the first baby born in Boulder County this year. Mila is also the Erie couple's first child.

"I'm over the moon every time I look at her," Ashley said while holding the 5 pound, 13 ounce Mila.

"It's just amazing," added Matt. "Nine months of all these appointments. Then next thing you know, you have a baby."

The Dirks didn't know if their baby would be a boy or a girl, so they chose a name for each. Mila gets her middle name from her maternal grandmother, but as for her first name, the couple just said they liked the sound of Mila.

"We just saw it online one day and looked at each other," Ashley said.

Ashley said she was hoping Mila would be born at the turn of the year, so she was excited to hear the baby's due date was Dec. 30.

"We had always wanted her to be born around this time of year," Ashley said. "With a New Year's Eve or New Year's Day baby, there will always be some kind of party."

Of course, lost in the excitement of having their first child, the couple said they have yet to get around to celebrating 2015.

"I've forgotten to say. 'Happy New Year,' to everyone I've talked to, it's been such a blur." Ashley said.

But then the new mother added, as she looked down at her baby: "But it's been the most amazing confusion I have ever had."

Across the county, Longmont United Hospital welcomed its first baby, a girl, about 40 minutes later, while Lafayette's Good Samaritan Medical Center welcomed Sarah Young at 3:04 a.m.

Louisville's Avista Adventist Hospital's first baby of the new year was a boy, Emanuel Rojas Berrios, born at 2:19 p.m.

Mitchell Byars: 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars