SAN JOSE -- Efrain Santos, an undocumented construction worker, looked relatively relaxed Saturday morning, considering he was about to be splayed across an operating table in the next room. And even though he would soon be undergoing a surgical procedure for a lymph node biopsy, Santos still knew that this was his lucky day.

"I've had some bumps growing on the right side of my leg and it scared me and was bringing me more and more pain,'' Santos, who was born in Oaxaca, Mexico, said through an interpreter. "I'm so thankful for this opportunity -- something like this doesn't come along very often for me."

Dr. Efran Rosas, left, and Dr. Jennifer Wang, center right, perform a laparoscopic hernia repair on a patient at the Kaiser Permanente San Jose Ambulatory Surgery Center in San Jose, Calif., on Saturday, March 21, 2015. Organized by Operation Access, Kaiser Permanente doctors, nurses, and staff volunteered to perform outpatient surgical procedures to uninsured patients for free. (LiPo Ching/Bay Area News Group) ( LiPo Ching )

That "something" was a free and potentially lifesaving operation for a 31-year-old single father of one who said in a soft voice that he has a "very low income and no insurance." And the gift came compliments of an indigent-health-care nonprofit called Operation Access and an all-volunteer medical team at Kaiser Permanente's San Jose Ambulatory Surgery Center.

Santos wasn't the one excited to be here today.

"We've been waiting to do this for years," said Dr. Efren Rosas, one of the center's surgeons, who along with fellow doctors and nurses gave up his Saturday to help Operation Access bring its program to Santa Clara County for the first time.

Advertisement

"We had more volunteers than we actually needed because people were so thrilled to help out," Rosas said. "While as physicians we volunteer regularly in other countries, there are so many working poor right here in our own backyard who are in dire need of our help. What better way to give back to the community than to help these people right here in our own hospital with our own staff?"

Embarking on what he called his hometown-volunteer "maiden voyage," Rosas headed for one of the operation rooms in the center, normally closed on Saturdays, where he would perform two hernia operations. And like clockwork, Santos was wheeled away while 14 other patients were taken to rooms for outpatient procedures that until today they could never have afforded on their own.

Those 15 are among the roughly 10 percent of Californians who still lack insurance despite a dramatic reduction of insurance costs because of the Affordable Care Act, commonly called Obamacare.

Because illegal immigrants are not eligible for Obamacare, many working poor who must wait to go under the knife face an extraordinarily difficult situation with a serious illness or medical condition.

"These are life-changing procedures being done today," said Ali Balick, program manager for Operation Access, which works with local clinics that send them low-income patients with urgent needs. "We provide surgical intervention before these situations become real emergencies."The mission statement on Operation Access' website says part of its goal with low-income patients "is to help keep family members employed." And that's exactly what Rosas and his approximately 50 fellow volunteers were doing on Saturday.

For Bernardino Juarez, a 41-year-old from Hollister who works on construction projects, a painful hernia was causing him to miss more and more days on the job, depriving him of the precious income that keeps him above water financially.

"The pain was getting worse," Juarez said while a brother and a friend sat by his side. "But because I have no papers, I can't get Medi-Cal and I don't make enough to afford insurance. After missing work because of all the pain, I'm so thankful for this operation.''

As he recovered from the 45-minute surgery, Juarez winced from soreness as the anesthesia began to wear off. But he was also clearly relieved.

"I was worrying that there was something much worse that I had,'' he said. "This operation will change my life. Now I'll be able to work again."

Contact Patrick May at 408-920-5689 or follow him at Twitter.com/patmaymerc