STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- Speaking to a room full of Daniel Donovan supporters in the swanky Above Rooftop lounge of the Hilton Garden Inn in Bloomfield on Saturday morning, former Mayor Rudy Giuliani stressed the importance of getting out the vote for the May 5 special congressional election against Democratic Councilman Vincent Gentile.

He noted his own close wins and said it's important, especially in a special election, to remind people to vote, as "no one expects an election on May 5." Without a turnout for Donovan, his supporters will feel terrible the next day, he said.

"Let's not feel the way we felt the day after de Blasio was elected ... and by the way, he has turned out to be worse than we thought, right? Same thing with Obama, Obama has turned out to be worse that I thought."

Giuliani spent much of his time behind the podium blasting Mayor Bill de Blasio, President Barack Obama and lauding Republican hero President Ronald Reagan.

Recalling his elections to the mayor's office, Giuliani said, "Staten Island elected me," and called it his favorite borough.

The former mayor, standing with state Sen. Andrew Lanza, Assemblyman Joe Borelli, Councilman Steve Matteo, Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotakis, Brooklyn state Sen. Marty Golden and former mayoral candidate Joe Lhota, attacked Obama on the Affordable Care Act, foreign policy and national security.

One of several speakers to reference Reagan, Giuliani said the former president is "turning over in his grave" at the foreign affairs policies of the Obama administration.

Giuliani attacked de Blasio, saying he "is moving the city in exactly the wrong direction in almost every respect."

He also blasted Gentile, saying "His opponent is on the wrong side of every issue imaginable and Dan is on the right side."

"Dan Donovan will be not just a member of Congress but a really great one because every job he's done, he's done really, really well and I've worked with him in just about every job he's done," Giuliani said.

In a statement, Gentile said, "If raising the minimum wage, fighting for middle class families, providing tax breaks for small businesses and protecting seniors is wrong then I don't want to be right."

At the fundraiser, Giuliani called Donovan "an articulate voice, an intelligent voice," and said he has shown "tremendous courage and integrity, which I respect immensely."

The former mayor said, "I know the people of Staten Island are fed up with what's going on in our city."

He urged people to vote for Donovan "as a statement that we've had enough. We've had enough of Obama, we've had enough of de Blasio, we've had enough of Nancy Pelosi."

Donovan supporter Donna Fagan yelled, "They don't love our country, Rudy!"

He jokingly said, "Who said that? Who said that?"

He has drawn the ire of many Democrats over a recent comment that Obama doesn't love America.

As Giuliani left early to attend a funeral, Donovan approached the podium as "Eye of the Tiger" blasted over the speakers.

He referenced Giuliani's run for president, saying the country would have been much better off with him and thanked the former mayor for his support.

Rallying the troops to get out the vote, he urged supporters to spread the word. If not, he joked, "I'm the DA — I will find you."