Update: This article was updated at 1 p.m. to reflect that emergency care will still be considered in-network at Carteret Health Care, even if a new contract is not reached.

MOREHEAD CITY — Carteret Health Care officials have told the News-Times they are actively preparing to go out of the Blue Cross Blue Shield network in February, after the hospital failed to reach an agreement at a meeting earlier this week with the insurer.

In early November, it was announced that unless a contract was reached before Sunday, Jan. 31, 2016, that the county hospital would no longer be in the Blue Cross Blue Shield network, likely resulting in higher costs for patients with that insurance.

Emergency care will still be considered in the network, even after February.

Hospital leaders have been unable to give exact details pertaining to the contract negotiations, but have noted they are unwilling to accept the proposed contract, because it would cost the hospital money and could take away its ability to provide certain services.

An in-person meeting was held Monday in Durham between hospital officials and Blue Cross Blue Shield North Carolina representatives, but according to Michelle Lee, community relations marketing director, no agreement was made.

“Unfortunately, we did not come out with any sort of signed document or anything,” she said of Monday’s meeting. “We’re continuing to discuss the contract, continuing to look at that, but at this point, unless we come up with a compromise at some point, we are preparing to be out of the network on February 1st.”

Ms. Lee noted the hospital is still hopeful the the issue can be resolved to benefit Blue Cross Blue Shield members in a positive way, as well as making sure the hospital can afford to provide and give affordable care to the community.

“Blue Cross, during the meeting, really, they shared that they were not going to change or alter any of the contract demands that had been previously placed,” she said.

Ms. Lee said if there is no change before the end of January, the hospital will move forward without being in the Blue Cross Blue Shield network.

“Carteret is the sole community provider,” according to a media release. “The closest hospital is more than 35 miles away. By forcing Carteret out of their network, Blue Cross will also force its members to face long drive times, spend more time from work, and use unfamiliar facilities to get the care they could easily receive here in Morehead City. All while their premiums remain at the same high cost.”

Ms. Lee stated that hospital officials are “working as diligently as we can to make this a smooth transition for Blue Cross customers.”

She said the hospital’s board of directors is looking at policies to help the transition, since it knows there is a strong possibility the hospital will be out of network in just over a month’s time.

Vice President of Human Resources, Beth Beswick, said they are going to encourage all Blue Cross customers to talk to their physicians about how to handle their care moving forward, and that will be a key aspect of managing the changes.

“It will be important that members communicate with their physicians, since they will drive that process,” she said. Ms. Beswick noted that continuation of care for some patients may be able to move forward as planned, such as for radiation therapy patients.

Ms. Lee said the hospital will use all forms of communication to reach Blue Cross Blue Shield customers about the change.

Those with questions about how the transition out of network may affect their health care costs can call the hospital at 808-6614 or visit its website, www.carterethealth.org.

The hospital’s board of directors will meet in a closed session Friday morning to discuss hospital policies and how to best handle the transition away from Blue Cross Blue Shield’s network.

According to a press release, “The hospital is working on a hospital policy to mitigate some of the financial burden related to out-of-network expenses and will share this information very shortly.”

The release also reminded patients that the hospital will still be in network through January.

Contact Anna Harvey at 252-726-7081, ext. 229; email anna@thenewstimes.com; or follow on Twitter @annaccnt.