Buy Photo John Gribbon, CEO of CentraState Medical Center, said he has no plans to merge the Freehold Township hospital with larger rivals. (Photo: Tom Spader/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

FREEHOLD TOWNSHIP It says it offers high-quality health care. It operates efficiently. It employs its own physicians. And it has invested heavily in technology. So why wasn't CentraState Health System asked to be part of Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield's new health insurance network?

That's what CentraState's Chief Executive Officer John T. Gribbin wants to know. Now on the outside looking in, the Freehold Township-based health care system is worried that it will lose patients who are covered by the state's biggest health insurer.

"We’re upset about the way we were treated, as are all (hospitals that aren't in the network)," Gribbin told the Asbury Park Press Thursday. "If you take their criteria at face value, I can't understand why CentraState wasn't approached."

The dispute stems from OMNIA, a partnership announced last month between Horizon and three-dozen New Jersey hospitals in what they said would provide better, more affordable care.

How it works:

Horizon plans to sell a new insurance product with lower premiums and out-of-pocket costs for consumers who get their care from providers in what it is calling its Tier 1 network. Among its members are Barnabas Health and Meridian Health, which own the bulk of the Shore's hospitals.

Horizon will reimburse hospitals and physicians who accept OMNIA plans for the outcome of their care instead of the traditional model of paying them for each service they provide.

Horizon will continue to offer plans for patients who go to CentraState and other hospitals not in the network. But those plans will be more expensive than the OMNIA plans. It isn't yet clear how much more they will be; Horizon hasn't yet said what the OMNIA premiums will be.

Horizon's plan comes as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, tries to insure virtually all Americans and slow down the increasing cost of health care. Open enrollment for consumers buying in the Obamacare marketplace for 2016 begins Nov. 1.

Sen. Nia Gill, D-Essex and Sen. Joseph Vitale, D-Middlesex, scheduled a hearing on Monday about the impact the Horizon plan will have on New Jersey. Horizon insures more than half of both the individual and small business market, according to the state Department of Banking and Insurance.

"The proposal to dramatically change the insurance plans offered by the largest insurer in New Jersey, and the manner in which it was announced, has caused a great deal of confusion and anxiety in consumers and members of the health care community," they wrote in a letter to Robert Marino, Horizon's chairman, president and chief executive officer.

In choosing its network, Horizon said it analyzed hospitals based on several categories, from quality to the size and scale of the system and then reached out to those that made the cut.

Gribbin said CentraState wasn't approached about joining. The result could hurt; about 15 percent of its patients are covered by Horizon, Gribbin said. Those patients could be tempted to choose a less expensive OMNIA policy.

"The problem lies in the (lack of) transparency," Gribbin said. "Tell us what your criteria are, what kind of discounts (on reimbursements) you're looking for and we’ll evaluate. That’s fair and equitable."

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1FJm8XC