Hulk who is believed to be the world's largest pit bull terrier, basks in the attention during Saturday's fifth annual BOW WOW Fest in Lakeport. He is with his owner, Lisa Grennan of Twin River. (John Koziol/Union Leader Correspondent) Among the more than 150 dogs who attended Saturday's firth annual BOW WOW Fest was Seneca, a nine-year old Samoyed who came up from Concord with her owner, Julie Sramcik. (John Koziol/Union Leader Correspondent) Candice Murray of Laconia and Angel, her Italian Greyhound, were among more than 150 humans and as many canines who participated in Saturday's fifth annual BOW WOW Fest in Lakeport. (John Koziol/Union Leader Correspondent)





- With "Hulk," who is believed to be the world's largest pit bull terrier, leading the way, about 150 pooches and their owners perambulated down the Wow Trail on Saturday as part of the fifth annual BOW WOW Fest...A fundraiser for canine units of the Laconia, Gilford and Belmont police departments, the BOW WOW Fest also celebrates the seasonal opening of the paved, multi-use WOW Trail.Phase 1 of the trail begins near the Opechee Inn and Spa in the Lakeport section of Laconia, where the event was headquartered, and goes s 1.3 miles west to the Belmont town line along a railroad right of way...Claire Hebert, who founded the BOW WOW Fest, hopes to one day connect the existing trail along Lake Opechee - hence the "O" in the Wow Trail name - with Phases II and III, which would link with current and proposed trails along Lake Winnisquam and Lake Winnipesaukee...Herbert, who was appreciative for the turnout yesterday in terms of both canine and human participants in the BOW WOW Fest, said more than 40 breeds of dogs were represented.She gave special thanks to her employer, Melcher & Prescott Insurance, for allowing her to serve as a community-relations associate, and to Hulk and his owners, Lisa and Marlon Grennan, of Dark Dynasty K9s International, for making the trip down to the Lakes Region from their home in Twin Mountain...Smiling the entire time, Hulk posed for photos with numerous well-wishers and their doggies, some of whom could have easily fit into the maw of the mighty but gentle beast , who at age 19 months is tipping the scales at a whopping 190-pounds, according to Lisa Grennan...In addition to being a star at the BOW WOW Fest, Hulk will be featured in a TV series that is currently filming. Grennan said that she could not yet discuss the details of that project. The dog will be appearing in several upcoming books as well. Grennan said Hulk would be back at the event next year, adding that the gathering "is for a good cause," which is to support local police canine units...That sentiment was shared by many attendees, including Julie Sramcik of Concord, who came north with Seneca, her 9-year-old Samoyed, and Candice Murray of Laconia, whose 12-year-old Italian greyhound Angel, was back for her fourth time..."This is a great opportunity to meet other dogs and owners," said Murray before she and Angel went to line up for the start of the parade. Prior to setting off on the trail, however, all the walkers, both of the two- and four-legged variety, received a blessing from the Rev. Marc Drouin, pastor of St. Andre Bessette Parish, who cited the Bible and St. Francis of Assisi in his remarks about the importance of animals in people's lives...District 1 Executive Councilor Joe Kenney, who with his daughter Chanel, and state Sen. Jeanie Forrester were judges in the talent competition after the parade, said he was happy to help support the event and the WOW Trail itself...jkoziol@newstote.com..