Across Central Pennsylvania and the nation, the health care industry is undergoing rapid change.

By William J. Winkenwerder Jr. and J. Robert Baum

Across Central Pennsylvania and the nation, the health care industry is undergoing rapid change.

The Affordable Care Act is an important impetus for change, but the biggest driver is high and growing medical costs. Rising medical costs are making our businesses less competitive in global markets and are denting the pockets of hard-working American families.

Historically, health insurance has been provided mostly through employers, but now individual consumers, armed with information, are making more health care decisions suited to their own personal needs – choosing their health plan, choosing their hospitals, choosing their doctors.

The ability of people to choose their health plan and health care providers and to have access to health care institutions that were built through community support must be protected, notwithstanding the changes taking place in health care.

A potentially effective way to guide consumers toward lower-cost health plans that also offer high-quality hospitals and physicians is through tiered health insurance plans. These types of plans are becoming increasingly popular in many parts of the country and are beginning to appear in the central Pennsylvania marketplace.

One example of these plans is Community Blue Premier Flex that Highmark Blue Shield is rolling out now in the region. It is also a plan that is coming under scrutiny by some health care providers who have raised questions about tiered health plan programs.

Tiered health insurance programs are based on commonsense principles: If people choose a hospital that charges less to deliver the same quality of care as another more expensive hospital does, then they should pay less, just as they would if they were buying any other product or service.

Otherwise, consumers would have no reason to choose a lower-cost hospital, eliminating any incentive for more efficient hospitals to do the demanding work of delivering quality care at a lower cost.

A tiered plan assigns different providers to different tiers based on their relative cost. Individuals under the plan pay less if they choose providers that have the lowest cost as well as high quality, and they pay more if the providers have higher costs.

The use of tiers is an important step toward greater transparency in health care, helping consumers uncover difficult-to-find information about the cost of medical services among individual providers of care.

Tiered insurance products benefit the community in several ways. They help consumers and patients choose doctors, hospitals and other health-related services based on cost and quality, just as they do with most other products and services we all use. They spur open competition among individual doctors, hospitals and larger health care provider networks, as each seeks to attract more patients by offering superior medical services at more competitive prices.

These insurance products also impose downward pressure on the otherwise high prices that very large and highly consolidated health care systems and hospitals charge that drive up medical costs for everyone.

State lawmakers and state regulators have pointed to the value of tiered health insurance plans, and regulators have made it clear that our company cannot sign agreements with health care delivery systems that refuse tiered products.

As the largest health insurer in Pennsylvania, Highmark Blue Shield has an obligation to continue to work with many segments of the community to preserve and promote choice and make quality health care more affordable.

Central Pennsylvanians want and deserve stability in the health care marketplace and the security of knowing that they will continue to have affordable access to facilities and doctors of their choice.

William J. Winkenwerder Jr., M.D., is chief executive officer and president of Highmark, and J. Robert Baum, Ph.D., is Highmark's chairman of the board. They write from East Pennsboro Twp.