What do you think is the biggest obstacle–either of their own making or not–that millennial entrepreneurs face?

KARL ULRICH: Millennial entrepreneurs, say those in their 20s, often have time and enthusiasm to devote to a new enterprise. They often lack what I call the “make-1,000″ working capital to get started. For a product-based business, a key milestone is taking delivery of the first batch of product available for sale. Once you’ve got goods on the shelf, you can start selling, you can start learning, and you can start growing a business. For food products, consumer goods and apparel, minimum order quantities tend to be from a few hundred to a few thousand units. For instance, for my bike seat company Nexride, the minimum order was 1,000 saddles, which required a financial bet of $40,000. That could be two years’ rent for a millennial; pretty scary. Historically, a brave young entrepreneur went to a Visa card or Uncle Phil for that capital.

If I were thinking about this funding challenge 10 years ago, I probably would have imagined a government program of some kind to provide incentives for small equity investments in young companies—bets that are a bit too risky for banks and too small for venture capitalists. Some such programs do exist, often tied to a particular city or region.

Fortunately, today, so called “crowdfunding” can provide a nice alternative. Crowdfunding, typically via an online intermediary like Kickstarter, Indiegogo, or WeFunder, offers capital without putting a credit rating, or Thanksgiving dinner with Uncle Phil, at risk. In soliciting support from the public, usually simply in the form of preorders, the entrepreneur tests the consumer appeal of the product while raising the make-1000 funds required to get started. Crowdfunding leverages assets the millennial entrepreneur should possess abundantly: A social network, facility with the web and an authentic story. A campaign to raise capital via crowdfunding also forces the entrepreneur to make critical decisions about the target customer, the core benefit proposition, and the product design. I’m hard-pressed to imagine a better mechanism for removing barriers to entrepreneurship among young people.

Karl Ulrich is vice dean of innovation and CIBC professor of entrepreneurship and e-commerce at the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School.

Read the latest Small Business Report.