What kind of hikes did you face prior to the Affordable Care Act? Weigh in with your comments.

WASHINGTON, D.C. – Ohio's insurance department said late last week that average Affordable Care Act policy premiums for individuals will go up by 13 percent next year. Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor, who heads the department, said this is further evidence that "Obamacare is hitting us harder and driving our costs up significantly." Several other Ohio Republicans, including U.S. House of Representatives Speaker John Boehner and U.S. Sen. Rob Portman, expressed similar feelings.

Yet a Plain Dealer review on Friday found that average rates for the biggest and most popular insurers – Medical Mutual of Ohio, Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, HealthSpan (which acquired Kaiser Permanente in the Cleveland area), and a potentially big new entrant, Aetna -- are not rising as much as the average that Taylor cited.

The article explained these differences, but the following questions and answers could fill in some additional blanks.

Q. Is Taylor's analysis misleading?

A. That implies motivation, and while Taylor is a big critic of the ACA, she is also an insurance regulator, so we're only going to deal with methodology, not motive.

Every insurer that wants to sell policies on the ACA exchange in Ohio, or is even thinking about it, had to file rate requests by May 23. The insurers listed proposed average premiums, and the amount of increase over current premiums, for every policy they expect to sell. Each insurer also had to present an average -- a single price figure -- for its overall product line. The Department of Insurance will review the requests and the justifications, send back questions to insurers, and decide by the end of summer whether the rates are reasonable under state and federal law.

Taylor's department took the single average premium price for each insurer's product line, added up every insurers', and came up with a straightforward average. It compared that average with the average premiums for 2014. That is how it arrived at 13 percent.

It treated all insurers equally. But not all insurers are equal. Some are small and sell few policies. Some have a large market share.

Q. Yeah, so what? Isn't an average just that, an average?

A. Think about cars instead of insurance. What if Chevrolet was raising average prices by 7 percent, Ford by 8 percent, Honda by 7 percent, Toyota by 9 percent, Cadillac by 16 percent and Mercedes by 17 percent. That would mean the average car price, based on these figures, was going up by 10.6 percent.

But the average car buyer would not face that kind of increase. A whole lot more people buy Hondas, Toyotas, Fords and Chevys than buy Cadillacs and Mercedes. To get the true average that customers would pay, you would have to run a calculation factoring in market share.

Q. So why didn't Taylor's department do that?

A. It says it couldn't, because the 2015 rate requests include insurers new to the ACA market. These insurers sell policies off the ACA but have not had an ACA component, although they want to in 2015. According to a rate sheet the department provided to The Plain Dealer, the highest average rate on the individual market comes from one of these, Time Insurance Company, which sells under its Assurant brand.

Q. Explain why that makes a difference.

A. The average monthly Time/Assurant premium request for 2015 is $528, according to Taylor's office. Yet Medical Mutual's requested average is $396, according to the Taylor averaging sheet. Medical Mutual is one of the dominant insurers in Northeast Ohio and Assurant is just getting in the ACA market. Assurant might pick up a healthy share of ACA clients in 2015, but right now its average proposed premium pushes the overall average – as used by Taylor – higher for all insurers.

Q. What about Aetna, which largely stayed on the ACA sidelines in Ohio in 2014?

A. Aetna says it will enter the ACA market, and will specifically sell in the Cleveland metro area. It has proposed an average premium, according to Taylor's office, of $373 a month. If you compare that with the premiums it charges off the ACA market, it represents a 7.5 percent reduction, Aetna said in its filing and in an interview with The Plain Dealer.

Q. So in 2015, should I just buy the cheapest policy?

A. No. There are other costs to consider – co-payments and deductibles – and you might want to see if the doctor and hospitals you prefer or currently have are in the insurer's network.

For example, asked specifically whether its network would include the Cleveland Clinic or University Hospitals, Aetna spokesman Rohan Hutchings said in an email, "We are still working with our providers to determine the best network solution that delivers the highest quality of care at an affordable rate for our members."

Q. What about the ACA tiers and coverage levels: bronze, silver, gold and platinum? Can't an insurer claim to have lower premiums by selling policies in the lower tiers – and doesn't that just mean that my "moderate" premium hike hides the true cost because of higher deductibles and co-payments when I seek medical care?

A. Not necessarily. It depends on your specific policy. Many buyers will get taxpayer subsidies to pay premiums but let's suppose you have to pay full freight. Let's then suppose you have a gold or silver plan, which means you have pretty full coverage. (You will still have deductibles. So do most people, and they have been getting higher since before the ACA ever passed.)

Looking at Medical Mutual of Ohio's filing, there are gold plans with premium hikes for 2015 ranging from 5.5 percent to 8.7 percent. Medical Mutual's across-all-tiers premium will go up by an average of 7.73 percent if approved by Taylor's office.

Some of the benefits covered will, in fact, change compared to what Medical Mutual covered prior to the ACA. Medical Mutual will no longer cover non-emergency visits to emergency rooms. (If you have had employer coverage, this should not shock you whatsoever.) And it will not cover non-emergency visits outside the United States. If this upsets you, consider this: Medical Mutual's state filing says these two items represented 0.3 percent of claims when they were covered.

Medical Mutual will cut skilled nursing facility payments from 100 days to 90 days, and will limit in-patient physical rehab to 60 days.

Meanwhile, Medical Mutual lists a number of new benefits that were not covered prior to the ACA, including more visits for cardiac rehabilitation, home health services and mental health services.

Q. That's just one insurer. You're being selective.

A. Okay, then let's look at Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield. The average premium hike will be 8.9 percent. Some policies will be higher, with the highest going up by 13.6 percent. The latter is for two specific bronze plans, but there are other bronze plans rising by 4.5 to 7.9 percent. There are silver plans rising from 7.4 percent to 11.3 percent.

What this means for your specific circumstance depends on your policy. You probably won't like any increase, and you could, in fact, get socked with a double-digit hike. But the average for this insurer's policies is less than the double-digits suggested by the Ohio Department of Insurance.

Q. So what? President Barack Obama said we could keep our old health plans if we liked them, and then it turned out we couldn't -- until he changed his mind again. He said we could keep our doctors and hospitals, but they're not always covered in the new plans we have to pick. And, while we're at it, how many previously uninsured people are really being served -- and how many are even paying premiums rather than picking a plan but not following through?

A. Looks like you're a regulator commenter in this space.

Eighty to 90 percent of people buying new policies have paid their premiums, according to the U.S. Department of Heath and Human Services, and insurers say this is consistent with their findings.

We still don't know how many of the 8 million people buying new policies on the exchanges for 2014 were previously uninsured. A recent McKinsey survey said that 74 percent of people buying on the individual marketplace previously had insurance, but that is a broader market than the exchanges alone. Prior to the ACA, people came on and off that market frequently, often as a stop-gap because they lost employer coverage.

In April, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that 6 million people will become newly insured this fiscal year because of the ACA, and another 7 million next year. That is not counting people gaining coverage through the ACA's expansion of Medicaid or young adults who are now able to stay on their parents' policies until age 26.

There are skeptics to these projections. Likewise, there are things to like and dislike about the ACA.