Former U.S. Sen. Scott Brown's prospects for a political comeback in New Hampshire have taken a sudden nosedive, while U.S. Sen. Rand Paul and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie top the pack of GOP presidential hopefuls in the Granite State, a new Suffolk University/Boston Herald poll shows.

Brown, the ex-Massachusetts lawmaker now considering a run against U.S. Sen. Jeanne Shaheen, is trailing the Democratic incumbent by a 52-39 percent margin in a general election matchup, according to the Suffolk/Herald poll of 800 likely New Hampshire voters.

Related: See the poll data here

Just one in three Granite State voters have a favorable impression of Brown while 42 percent have a negative opinion of the Republican transplant who shocked the political world in 2010 by winning a U.S. Senate seat in the Bay State, the poll shows.

Brown is easily defeating his GOP foes in a Senate primary matchup, getting just one third of Republican voters, according to the poll.

Brown is not the only pol whose approval ratings are taking a beating in New Hampshire. Half of all Granite State voters now disapprove of President Obama's job performance, with just 40 percent of voters saying they approve.

More than half of New Hampshire voters - 52 percent say - Obama's signature health care law has been bad for New Hampshire, according to the poll.

Just 37 percent of voters say Obamacare has been good for the Granite State, a stunning rejection of the new law that has forced millions of people nationwide off their health care plans.

But Obamacare's unpopularity has not hurt Shaheen or another Democrat facing re-election, New Hampshire Gov. Maggie Hassan. While Shaheen has opened a comfortable lead against Brown, Hassan is beating her potential GOP opponents by at least 25-point margins, the Suffolk/Herald poll shows. The margin of error for the poll of 800 likely voters is 3.5 percent.

The poll also reveals that the 2016 race for president in the ﬁrst-in-the-nation primary state is a tossup right now. Paul, the Kentucky senator and tea party favorite, is getting 12 percent of the vote in a crowded ﬁeld, according to the poll.

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, who once led the pack in New Hampshire, is also getting just 12 percent of the vote - a sign he's been hurt by the George Washington bridge scandal and ongoing criminal investigation.

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan, the 2012 vice presidential nominee, follow with nine percent in a matchup of 426 likely GOP primary voters, the poll shows.

Former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman is getting eight percent, while Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker has support from seven percent of New Hampshire voters and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio trails with six percent in a 2016 trial heat.

U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz is also in the middle of the pack with ﬁve percent support from New Hampshire Republican primary voters - tied with former Massachusetts Sen. Scott Brown.

There are 14 percent of voters who say they are undecided right now.