More than 80,000 Minnesotans enrolled in public health programs for which they weren’t eligible last year, an estimated cost to taxpayers of hundreds of millions of dollars.

The expensive problem was caused partly by miscommunication and poor training at the Department of Human Services, but the audit that uncovered the errors said software issues are primarily to blame.

Republicans said the report vindicated their claims that DHS could do more to crack down on waste, fraud and abuse — and that the MNsure-based software DHS uses is fatally flawed.

Minnesota Gov. Mark Dayton and DHS Commissioner Emily Johnson Piper acknowledged problems persist but said the department has made progress and that the audit might overstate the issue.

WHAT THE AUDIT FOUND

The nonpartisan Office of the Legislative Auditor took a random sample of 103 people enrolled in Medicaid and 54 people in MinnesotaCare between January and March of 2015. Auditors then used state employment data and tax returns to verify whether those individuals had actually qualified for the programs they enrolled in.

The sample was limited to people who enrolled using the MNsure software and to people who allegedly qualified for programs because of low income. That means the sample represented a population of about 270,000 people, out of more than 1 million receiving public assistance.

Of those 157 people, the audit found 38 percent weren’t eligible for their public program. Three-quarters of those people actually didn’t qualify for any program, while the remainder qualified for a different public program.

Extrapolating over the entire 270,000-person population, the auditor estimated that between 57,000 and 108,000 people received Medicaid or MinnesotaCare benefits but shouldn’t have received any benefits at all.

The 157 people received $104,213 in overpaid benefits from January through May of 2015. That translates to between $115 million and $271 million over the entire population for the five-month period.

Cecile Ferkul, the deputy legislative auditor, cautioned that her findings applied to only a specific time period and specific population. She warned against assuming the same error rate in the rest of Minnesota’s public programs or over a full calendar year.

“It may be that there’s more error in this time period than there would be in other time periods throughout the year,” Ferkul said.

Most of the issues found by the audit weren’t new but had been identified in a previous 2014 audit. Out of 17 relevant findings in the 2014 report, this year’s update found DHS had fully resolved just two and partially resolved five. That left 10 problems with no significant progress.

WHY THE PROBLEMS EXIST

Software glitches are responsible for many of the failures to adequately check enrollees’ eligibility:

The audit found information wasn’t accurately and fully transferred between the MNsure software and the department’s separate payment software. This sometimes let to discrepancies between the two systems about which program an enrollee was in, how many children they have or how many people live in their household.

The MNsure software often had difficulty connecting to the federal government’s computers to share information.

Software didn’t cross-check reported income or family information with available tax records or wage information.

Other issues were due to human error. The audit found many state and county workers didn’t follow correct procedures when dealing with enrollees and recommended training improvements.

WHAT’S BEING DONE ABOUT IT

In response to the audit, the Department of Human Services said it’s addressing all the issues identified.

Most of the fixes, such as improving the transfer of data from the MNsure software to DHS’s payment software, are scheduled to get done this year.

Improvements to employee training is identified as an “ongoing” issue.

A few of the issues have already been fixed, DHS said, such as a temporary solution to billing errors that will be rolled out next month.

WHAT LEADERS SAY ABOUT THE AUDIT

In a response to the audit, Piper acknowledged the “serious” problems in the report and said the “need for improvement is critical.”

“Accurate eligibility determinations are a basic function that we must get right to ensure the integrity of our public health care programs,” Piper said in a letter.

But she also suggested the 38 percent error rate the Office of the Legislative Auditor found was “overstated.”

In a different audit DHS conducted of itself, the department found 16 percent of Medicaid enrollees weren’t eligible for the program — still “too high,” Piper said, but “much lower” than the 38 percent found by OLA.

Piper said DHS’s own review also found most of those ineligible cases were still eligible for another public program — a contrast to OLA’s finding that most people ineligible for their present program didn’t qualify for any other programs, either.

Governor Dayton, speaking Thursday morning about MNsure’s private insurance marketplace, said he hadn’t read the audit. But he defended DHS, saying the agency has made improvements even as it still struggles with some issues.

“It’s so easy to take an auditor’s report and whack again, when there’s a positive story here that needs to be told,” said Dayton.

That positive story, Dayton said, includes major progress from the disastrous MNsure rollout in 2013. The governor conceded that he and other state leaders “seriously underestimated the magnitude of this task” and also that Minnesota made a mistake when it hired Maximus Inc. as the lead contractor to build software to manage both the state’s public health programs and the MNsure private insurance marketplace.

Minnesota effectively took over the project from Maximus in mid-2014, but MN.IT Services are still trying to resolve major bugs almost two years later.

Republicans said the audit vindicates what they’ve said for years: that the MNsure software is an unsalvageable mess and that Medicaid and MinnesotaCare have lots of waste, fraud and abuse.

“We’ve spent more than $300 million on this failed Obamacare exchange, and it somehow still can’t figure out how to prevent hundreds of millions in benefits from going to those who aren’t eligible,” said Rep. Greg Davids, R-Preston, in a statement.

Republicans say Minnesota should stop spending millions to fix the MNsure software and instead let the federal government run the private health insurance marketplace and start from scratch with new software to run public health programs. Dayton opposes that.

Last year, Republicans proposed a crackdown on waste, fraud and abuse in Medicaid and MinnesotaCare that they predicted would save the state $150 million per year. DHS said such an effort would save about $75 million per year and would take several years to implement.