All Politics Blog From Milwaukee, Madison and beyond, a daily dose of political news and glimpses behind the scenes SHARE

By of the

Madison -- U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin on Wednesday called on Gov. Scott Walker to track what has happened to 38,000 people who lost state health coverage and have not signed up for a private plan through a federal insurance marketplace.

“I am troubled by the fact that it has now been over a month and you still cannot account for nearly 38,000 Wisconsinites who were kicked off BadgerCare as a result of your plan,” the Democratic senator wrote the Republican governor.

“As such, I urge you to immediately determine exactly how many of the 38,000 are uninsured, as well as develop a strategy to address this gap in coverage.”

Walker last year declined to accept additional federal aid to fully expand BadgerCare Plus under the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. He adopted a plan that saw about 63,000 people dropped from BadgerCare and another 97,500 added to the program, for a net increase of about 34,500 people.

Those who were cut from the program earned between 100% and 133% of the federal poverty threshold. They were to sign up for private insurance through the marketplaces established by the Affordable Care Act, but about 38,000 of them have not done so, according to Walker's administration.

Baldwin's letter comes days after a report from the non-partisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau became public that showed Wisconsin could have saved $206 million in state taxpayer money by fully expanding BadgerCare. That's because the federal government would have covered the entire cost of people who were brought into the program.

Walker has said he opposes expanding the program because he believes the federal government would not come through with its funding promise.

Walker spokeswoman Laurel Patrick said Walker’s Department of Health Service is reaching out to people who left BadgerCare to let them know they can sign up for coverage through the insurance exchanges.

But, she noted in an email, “it is up to individuals whether or not they choose to purchase health care plans through the federal exchange.

“For a variety of reasons, including the well-publicized issues with the exchange and the price of coverage, people may have chosen not to purchase through the exchange.”

Some people dropped from BadgerCare may now be purchasing it through an employer or the private market without going through an insurance exchange, she said.