ISDS showdown today — U.S. poultry feels China, Russia bans — Conservatives join anti-fast track fight

With help from Doug Palmer, Adam Behsudi and Chase Purdy

ISDS SHOWDOWN TODAY: The moment you’ve all been waiting for has arrived: European Union trade officials will release today the results of a public consultation into the controversial investment provision of the proposed free-trade pact with the United States, according to a European Commission spokesman.

Story Continued Below

But the commission still hasn’t decided how to proceed on the issue and is expected to make that call after further consultations with the EU Parliament, member states and other interested parties in coming months.

The review was launched last March in response to concerns about the investor-state dispute settlement provision of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. Many advocacy groups worry that including an ISDS mechanism, which allows companies to challenge government decisions that affect their investments, could undermine the ability of governments to regulate in the public interest, a charge the officials on both sides of the Atlantic have denied.

The commission received nearly 150,000 online responses to its request for comment, which opened on March 27 and closed on July 13, according to a preliminary report, which did not take into account possible duplicates. About 35 percent of the responses came from the United Kingdom, 23 percent from Austria and 22 percent from Germany. France and Belgium each accounted for less than 7 percent of the comments and other EU member states even less.

IT’S TUESDAY, JAN. 13: Welcome to Morning Trade, where we think somebody should probably give Sen. Ron Wyden a hug after the Oregon Ducks got defeated last night by the Ohio State Buckeyes in the NCAA football championship. Have any thoughts about the first college football playoffs or any trade-related tips? Send them to vguida@politico.com or @vtg2.

CHINESE CHICKEN FIGHT? U.S. POULTRY INDUSTRY: CHINA BAN IS PROTECTIONISM: Back to China … While the USDA is moving ahead with efforts to improve agricultural trade with the Middle Kingdom, the Chinese government has taken what the U.S. poultry industry describes as a protectionist stand in relation to its products. While other countries have banned chicken from Oregon and Washington — the states linked recently to three separate incidents involving avian flu — China has banned the import of all U.S. poultry.



It’s a decision that will impact ledgers. Between January and November 2013, U.S. poultry companies made $272 million from Chinese-bound poultry, according to data from the National Chicken Council. Broiler chicken made up $140.9 million of that; $84.1 million was from chicken feet; the rest was in eggs, turkey and duck, the NCC numbers show.



“I have to believe that there’s a bit of protectionism going on here,” said Gary Blumenthal, president of World Perspectives, a Washington-based agricultural consulting firm. “Ultimately, it’s hard to talk countries out of doing this when it’s in their own economic interest.”



In this case, as the poultry supply in China remains the same, and demand drops because of avian influenza skittishness, it makes sense that Chinese officials would put a temporary plug on U.S. imports as a means of stabilizing prices in its own industry, Blumenthal said. Pros can click here to read more: http://politico.pro/1AJYpQL.

The USA Poultry and Egg Export Council rebuked the decision in a statement following the announcement. “For China to impose a nationwide ban in response to isolated incidents of [avian influenza] goes against international guidelines established by the World Organization for Animal Health,” the group argued. “Most all other trading partners have taken some sort of regionalized approach.”

BUT U.S. MARKET FOR CHINESE CITRUS COULD OPEN: Still, Agriculture Department officials say they are moving ahead with opening the U.S. market to five kinds of Chinese citrus fruits despite serious reservations from farmers and state officials here.

The potential influx of the citrus fruit has California producers worried about the financial impact of the increased competition; in addition, officials in Florida fear their groves, which have already been decimated by citrus greening disease, could face more unwanted pests.

These and other concerns will be on the table when U.S. and Chinese negotiators meet for agricultural talks later this month in San Francisco, USDA officials told POLITICO on condition that they not be identified. The officials said they are confident that China won’t export much of the fruit, and a regimen of food safety measures will make it completely safe to open up the U.S. border to Chinese sweet oranges, ponkans, pomelos, mandarins and satsumas. Pro Agriculture’s Bill Tomson has the story: http://politico.pro/1DT0DhC

CHINA INVESTMENT SETS ANOTHER RECORD: Despite the dire chicken announcement and potential citrus import problems, it’s not all bad news out of China. Chinese investment in the United States totaled $17 billion in 2014, setting a record for the third consecutive year, and it could rise even higher this year as the Chinese economy slows, a leading scholar of Asian economic issues said Monday.

“There has been no powerful political reaction to a greater Chinese economic presence, no ruinous scandal,” Derek Scissors, a resident scholar at the right-leaning American Enterprise Institute, said in a blog. “And the U.S. has what China wants — land, technology and strong investor protection. It would not be surprising for Chinese investment in the U.S. to hit $20 billion in 2015, with the potential for more in years following.”

The new numbers from AEI and the conservative Heritage Foundation’s China Global Investment Tracker follows the United States and China’s recent decision to accelerate talks on a bilateral investment treaty. Over the past 10 years, China has made $78 billion in “non-bond” investments in the United States, including $21.5 billion in financing, $14.8 billion in property, $13.6 billion in energy, $8.5 billion in technology and $7.5 billion in agriculture. New York, Texas, Virginia, California and Illinois have been the largest recipients of Chinese investment.

RUSSIA TRADE GOING FOWL: In other chicken news, U.S. poultry producers may start feeling some damage four months into Russia’s ban on their products. The average price per pound of dark meat chicken, the variety that would typically be shipped to Russia, has dropped from about a steady 45 to 47 cents per pound in December to about 41 to 42 cents in the last week and a half, Mark Jordan, director of poultry and egg services for Informa Economics, tells POLITICO.

The drop could signal a shift in narrative for the industry, which has made up for the Russian ban with increased business with Mexico and more poultry sold domestically due to high pork and beef prices, Jordan said. A 5 percent to 6 percent increase in poultry production by domestic suppliers is churning more output than the market can handle, exposing the industry to the impact of the trade ban, the analyst explained.

The recent price changes have been the subject of multiple recent investor calls held by publicly traded poultry producers, including Tyson and Sanderson Farms. The situation is likely to affect first-quarter numbers, which many companies are set to reveal later this month. In 2013, poultry topped the list of U.S. food exports to Russia, bringing in $306.9 million.

CONSERVATIVE GROUPS STEP UP TO ANTI-TPA PLATE: Now it’s conservatives’ turn to lobby against fast-tracking trade deals. Right-wing opponents of giving President Barack Obama so-called trade promotion authority to ease the passage of massive new trade deals will hold a press conference today denouncing the legislation, which they say cedes Congress’ constitutional authority over trade matters to the executive branch.

The press conference, which is being led by Americans for Limited Government, comes just a week after a coalition of liberal lawmakers and groups held their own press conference to condemn the bill. The groups attending Tuesday’s event include the Center for Security Policy, TheTeaParty.net, the American Family Association, ObamaTrade.com and the Eagle Forum.

Trade promotion authority expedites passage of trade deals negotiated by the administration by limiting them to simple up-or-down votes without amendments. The legislation also allows Congress to list general issues and areas in the trade agreements that it wants the administration to address.

VILSACK UPBEAT ON TPA, TPP CHANCES THIS YEAR: U.S. Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack sounded optimistic on Sunday about the prospects for Congress to pass both trade promotion authority and the Trans-Pacific Partnership pact this year if U.S. negotiators bring back a strong, high-standards agreement that opens up markets, reduces barriers and creates a more level playing field.

“I think we can get enough votes in Congress to do both trade promotion authority and a TPP,” Vilsack said at the American Farm Bureau Federation’s annual meeting in San Diego. “Then, we can set our sights on Europe, which would be the largest trade agreement ever. But there is a long, long, long way to go from my perspective in that discussion. There are a lot of issues from biotech to GIs [geographical indications] to beef that are problematic in terms of Europe.

“But we’re hopeful of getting TPP done this year and hopeful of getting trade promotion authority. But it’s not going to be an easy lift. It’s going to be all hands on deck and we’re really going to require Farm Bureau’s help and assistance,” Vilsack said.

GERMAN MINISTER: U.S. WON’T SAY NO TO GMO LABELING: Germany's agriculture minister told Reuters on Monday that he expects the United States to drop its opposition in trade talks with the European Union to the compulsory labeling of products made from genetically modified organisms.

"The U.S. has a broadly opposing standpoint to such an obligation," Christian Schmidt said in an interview with the news service. "I expect movement here, not least because American consumers surely also expect such information." Click here to read the article: http://reut.rs/1tZY7FV

SUGAR DEAL UNDER SIEGE: AmCane Sugar and Imperial Sugar last week filed requests for the U.S. International Trade Commission to determine whether the suspension agreement reached with Mexico completely removes the injury to U.S. producers.

This is the first such petition in the history of the provision, which was created in 1979, according to an ITC spokeswoman. She said that as long as the petition is “legally sufficient” for the institution of a review, the review will be launched. The law dictates that the review must be completed within 75 days of the filing of the petition.

The sugar deal, finalized Dec. 19, immediately suspended anti-dumping and countervailing duty investigations, allowed Mexican sugar to enter the U.S. market free of those duties, and created mechanisms to ensure that imports of Mexican sugar would not injure the U.S. sugar industry while enabling U.S. sugar consumption needs to be met. Read the filing from AmCane here: http://politico.pro/1BZsdbh.

INTERNATIONAL OVERNIGHT:

— A senior U.S. official, while in India with Secretary of State John Kerry, praised Prime Minister Narendra Modi for taking concrete steps to remove trade barriers, according to the Times of India: http://bit.ly/1u122Cq.

— Taiwan's economic minister is optimistic that the island will be able to sign a goods trade agreement with China this year, as well as get the services pact negotiated with the mainland through Taiwan's legislature, CNA reports: http://bit.ly/1KEdiJU.

THAT'S ALL FOR MORNING TRADE! See you again soon! In the meantime, drop your host and the rest of the team a line: abehsudi@politico.com and @ABehsudi; vguida@politico.com and @vtg2; dpalmer@politico.com and @tradereporter; mkorade@politico.com and @mjkorade; and jhuffman@politico.com and @JsonHuffman. You can also follow @POLITICOPro on Twitter.

** A message from The National Pork Producers Council: The Trans-Pacific Partnership, whose 12 countries account for nearly 40 percent of global GDP, is a high-standard, 21st century free trade agreement that eliminates barriers to trade. TPP will promote economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region, expanding demand for U.S. food and agricultural products among nearly half a billion consumers. The TPP also will strengthen trade rules and provide specific new market access commitments for U.S. exports.

Without the TPP Agreement, U.S. exports to Pacific Rim countries will be at a serious competitive disadvantage, and competitor countries – including other TPP nations and those such as the European Union that are negotiating free trade agreements with countries in the region – will leap at the opportunity to fill the void if the United States rejects the deal.

The United States needs to implement the TPP Agreement, which will significantly boost U.S. exports and create hundreds of thousands of U.S. jobs. http://bit.ly/1U51u4F **