About 146,000 people in South Carolina signed up for health insurance through HealthCare.gov during the six-month open enrollment period, federal figures show. (Photo: NONE , HEALTHCARE.ORG )

Tuesday is the deadline for enrolling in Obamacare for those who want coverage to start Jan. 1.

And the state Department of Insurance wants to make sure that customers of Consumers’ Choice Health Plan know they must find other coverage since the plan has shut down.

“A lot of people just think their coverage will be rolled over. That will not be the case for Consumers’ Choice,” Insurance Commissioner Ray Farmer told The Greenville News. “So we want to make sure that those people ... will sign up for other coverage.”

Also known as the Affordable Care Act, the law requires most Americans to have health insurance or pay a penalty.

Under the law, people can purchase health insurance through the marketplace if their household income is between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level. And most who do are eligible for a subsidy to help pay for that coverage, often reducing premiums to less than $100 a month.

Some people are exempt from the individual mandate to have coverage, including those making less than 100 percent of the poverty level.

But those who are required to get coverage and don't will face penalties of $695 per adult, and half that per child, or 2.5 percent of household income this year, whichever is higher.

Nationwide, more than 2.8 million consumers had enrolled in a plan by Dec. 5, including 78,238 in South Carolina, federal health officials said.

Consumers’ Choice was among 23 co-ops initially funded by the federal government, but some promised funds weren’t provided which, in conjunction with several other issues, presented a financial risk and it voluntarily shut down in October.

Of the company’s 67,000 members, only 35 percent have signed up for another plan so far, he said. Those who fail to sign up by Dec. 15 will still be able to obtain coverage, but it will be more difficult to do, he said.

Another 1,000 customers of Time Insurance Co., which was marketed as Assurant Health, will have to look for another plan as well because the company stopped offering insurance nationwide, Farmer said.

There are still four companies and dozens of plans to choose from, he said.

As of June 1, 168,000 South Carolinians had Obamacare coverage, Farmer said. But consumers typically wait until the last minute to sign up, he said.

Last year, more than half the enrollments occurred in the two weeks before the Dec. 15 deadline, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. And this year, returning consumers are expected to make up a larger portion of total enrollment than new customers.

Buy Photo Stephania Priester of New Horizon Family Health Services gives a tour of the new Faris Road facility on Wednesday. (Photo: HEIDI HEILBRUNN / Staff)

Nearly eight in 10 South Carolinians will be able to find a plan for $75 a month or less after the subsidy, according to HHS.

While the deadline for coverage to begin by Jan. 1 is Dec. 15, open enrollment continues through Jan. 31 for coverage that begins later than that, said Stephania Priester, public affairs director for New Horizon Family Health Services.

New Horizon has seen a consistent flow of consumers looking to be enrolled, she said.

“We have certified application counselors at all of our site locations,” she said. “We also have a kiosk at the Haywood Mall near the food court ... to educate consumers of our outreach services to assist to enroll.”

HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell said time is running out to obtain coverage.

“With less than a week remaining before the Dec. 15 deadline,” she said, “we urge consumers to visit Healthcare.gov and get enrolled.”

To learn more, go to http://www.doi.sc.gov/DocumentCenter/View/8518, call 1-800-318-2596 or go to www.HealthCare.gov.

For free confidential enrollment help, go toLocalHelp@HealthCare.gov. To get help at New Horizon, call 864-233-1534 ext. 2219.

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/1QBMSMc