Buy Photo Gov. Andrew Cuomo. (Photo: AP/File photo)

ALBANY - Gov. Andrew Cuomo offered little sympathy to health insurers and hospitals looking for a bailout after the demise of Health Republic last year as part of New York's health exchange.

Cuomo rejected pleas by health providers for the state to set up a fund of at least $200 million to cover their costs associated with the downfall of Health Republic, a cooperative health plan that folded last year and provided health care to 200,000 patients in New York.

"The state should insure insurers? We regulate them, we don’t insure them," Cuomo told reporters Tuesday afternoon. "I don’t believe the state should insure insurance companies."

Cuomo's comments are part of a growing battle within the medical community over how to address the unpaid bills from Health Republic. The Healthcare Association of New York, which represents hospitals, and its union allies are pushing for a "guaranty fund" that would establish a tax on health insurers to pay for any future insolvent insurers.

"The state needs to address the outstanding $200 million in unpaid Health Republic claims and also create a guaranty fund— like the other 49 states — to protect patients and providers in the event another insurance plan shuts down," the group said in a statement.

But health insurers are opposed to the plan, saying they already pay $4.6 billion a year in various taxes — third in state tax collections after income taxes and sales taxes.

"The last thing we need is another tax, essentially to pay for the sins of other insurers," said Deborah Fasser, spokeswoman for the Conference of Blue Cross and Blue Shields Plans. "What we need is a real solution to prevent insurers from becoming insolvent."

Health Republic, which covered about 20 percent of the exchange’s enrollees under the federal Affordable Care Act, was the largest insurer in the exchange in many counties, including Westchester, Putnam, Erie, Dutchess and Ulster.

But the company collapsed under mounting debt, and state regulators last fall rushed to find health insurance for its customers. Other insurers took on the clients, but doctors, hospitals and insurance companies have not been made whole on the bills owed by Health Republic.

Insurers have been angered by the state Department of Financial Services in recent years cutting insurers' proposed increases in rates each year, saying it is fueling their financial instability.

"The failure of Health Republic is due to poorly handled oversight of the company created by the Affordable Health Care,” the New York Health Plan Association, which represents insurers, said in a statement. “If the state as regulator did its job properly, this company or any other should not become insolvent. We believe the state’s rate setting process needs to be fixed so this doesn’t happen again.”

The group also knocked the proposed guaranty fund, saying, “The simple truth is it will not protect consumers. It only protects doctors and hospitals, and does so at the expense of consumers.”

Senate Health Committee chairman Kemp Hannon, R-Nassau County, said he doesn't think a "guaranty fund is the way to go at this time." He said the state still needs to figure out the total unpaid losses from Health Republic and how claims could be made.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1pox8C9