Dixie Daly helped start Girlfriends' Journey, a greeting card line to let girlfriends give each other messages of encouragement

Dixie Daly of Loveland holds up some of the greeting cards from Girlfriends' Journey, which she helped create to let girlfriends give each other messages of encouragement and inspiration. On the table are some of the cards from the Women in the Bible Collection. ( Shelley Widhalm / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Greeting cards What: Girlfriends' Journey greeting card line. Details: 10 cards in the set, or sold individually. Cost: $3.95 per card, or $35 for the set. Also: Women in the Bible Collection cards are available, $3.95 a card; $18 a box for six cards. More info: Visit www.girlfriendsjourney.com.

Loveland poet, speaker and entrepreneur Dixie Daly thinks of positive sayings on the fly as she embodies her new greeting card line.

"I chose to live in the positive part of life," Daly said. "I live in gratitude, and I live in appreciation of every moment."

In November, Daly and a friend she met through social media launched Girlfriends' Journey, a series of 10 greeting cards with cover drawings of girlfriends spending time together and messages of encouragement, inspiration and hope inside. The line has 10 gift cards sold online and in seven stores locally.

"It's not just a greeting card," said Nathalie Villeneuve of Meriden, Conn., who provides the art for the greeting cards. "Girlfriends' Journey has a soul, has a purpose. It's a movement to tell women to pause, to take some time to think about themselves and to reach out to other girlfriends."

Daly provides poetic prose for the cards that she hopes girlfriends are inspired to give one another to let them know they matter. The tagline for Girlfriends' Journey is "Inspiring Your Journey with Purpose & Faith."

Advertisement

"We forget to enjoy ourselves and our true identities. A girlfriend can remind you who you are," Villeneuve said. "When you get together with girlfriends, you gain a sense of who you are, and you're able to start remembering those dreams that you've forgotten."

Girlfriend connection

When Daly and Villeneuve met two years ago through a friend on Facebook, they instantly connected and shared their stories. Daly felt compelled to offer Villeneuve the passion test, an oral and written test that helps people identify and narrow down to their core passions in life.

Daly identified her own passions following the death of her husband, Ed, in 2012; he died of a heart attack at age 58. They had been married for 39 years and had four children and 11 grandchildren.

"When I lost Ed, I was lost," Daly said. "All I could do was write. ... I just wrote to heal my heart. I just wrote to find peace. I didn't know any other way."

Daly found healing by writing poetry, and her girlfriends helped her through the grieving process, she said.

"It was a shock in my life what happened to me," Daly said. "I was in the dark. I felt like I was in cement and couldn't move."

Daly, who said she was not a writer before, wrote seven books of poetry in 11 months, launching four of them in six months on Amazon.com.

"I didn't know they'd be greeting cards," Daly said.

Daly and Villeneuve found sponsors for their cards and printed a first run of 5,000 cards.

"It's important to let people know you can have your dreams without having money hold you back. All you have to do is ask," Daly said.

Other projects

Daly and Villeneuve also offer a series of six cards in the Women in the Bible Collection. Villeneuve painted the images of six women from the Bible, and Daly wrote poetic prose based on those images.

"Dixie inspires me, and I inspire her," said Villeneuve, whose work is shown in galleries throughout Canada and the United States.

Daly has another project she's working on called "A Conversation With My Soul: From My Heart to Yours." She will compile 365 of her own quotes and combine them with her photography for daily inspirations. She already does that on her Facebook and Instagram pages five days a week, she said.

Daly and Villeneuve also offer the Girlfriends' Journey "Dream" Retreats to help women regain their sense of purpose by reconnecting them with their creativity. The next retreat is March 3 in Loveland.

"We really want to bring messages of hope and faith," Villeneuve said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.