ENLARGE A still from Roland Emmerich’s ‘Stonewall.’ Photo: Philippe Bosse

A crucial flash point in the gay-rights movement is the setting of a new movie from a filmmaker better known for apocalyptic spectacle than historical drama. In “Stonewall,” directed by Roland Emmerich, it takes only a brick to set off revolutionary tumult, as a riot erupts outside the Stonewall Inn on Christopher Street in Greenwich Village on June 28, 1969.

The movie, which premiered last week at the Toronto International Film Festival, opens in theaters on Friday. It might seem an unusual project for Mr. Emmerich, whose blockbusters include “2012,” “Independence Day” and “The Day After Tomorrow,” but it was also a very personal choice for a director who grew up, he said, “deeply closeted” in a small German town during the 1960s.

“He has an enormous amount of fun making giant movies where things blow up and the aliens come,” said Jon Robin Baitz, the playwright (“Other Desert Cities”) who wrote the screenplay for “Stonewall.” “[But] what are you going to do as a gay filmmaker in Hollywood that will represent who you are—and not simply that the world is coming to an end?”

Mr. Emmerich’s efforts to recapture history drew criticism from LGBT activists when a trailer for “Stonewall” was released last month. They charged that the film’s focus on a fictional white male protagonist named Danny (played by Jeremy Irvine of “War Horse”) played down the important roles played by real-life black, Latino and transgender participants, such as Marsha P. Johnson and Sylvia Rivera, who were dynamic figures in the community.

The filmmakers have said that the trailer stirred a false, and incomplete, impression of the movie.

ENLARGE The Stonewall Inn today. New York City granted it landmark status in June. Photo: brendan mcdermid/Reuters

“Robin and I tried to be as inclusive as we could,” said Mr. Emmerich. The cast includes Jonny Beauchamp (“Penny Dreadful”) in a prominent supporting role as a composite character based on Ray Castro and Ms. Rivera, and actor Otoja Abit as Ms. Johnson, among others playing figures real and fictive. “We wanted to show all forms of gayness and gay life, from a transgender woman to a guy who basically has a marriage.”

The coming-of-age story follows Danny, a Midwestern teenager who arrives in Greenwich Village after his parents discover he is gay and throw him out of the house. With nowhere to sleep, he falls in with a wild and motley crew of street youth who frequent the mob-run Stonewall to dance and hustle dates.

Watch a film clip from "Stonewall," starring Jeremy Irvine, Jonny Beauchamp and Vladimir Alexis. Photo: Philippe Bosse

Danny’s introduction to his new life includes turning a trick and starting a romance with a slick, older gay activist ( Jonathan Rhys-Meyers ) involved with the Mattachine Society, an early gay-rights organization. He also endures a police beating that coincides with intensifying raids at the Stonewall, run by a shady manager named Ed Murphy ( Ron Perlman ).

“Danny’s the classic catalyst character who gets changed by all these people,” said Mr. Emmerich, who assembled the $17 million cost of the film, shot in Montreal.

“It completely represents the spectrum, racially and gender-identification wise,” Mr. Baitz said. “It’s certainly not going to make the people who are unhappy any happier, but the film painstakingly re-created the events as we’ve seen in news footage and photographs.”

As part of his research, Mr. Beauchamp was introduced to members of the Stonewall Veterans’ Association and spent time with Martin Boyce, one of the most visible of the dwindling number of Stonewall survivors. It was from Mr. Boyce that the actor learned the now-forgotten concept of “scare drag.”

“Maybe you’d paint your face, or wear a ponytail, but you’d have a man’s shirt or pants,” Mr. Beauchamp said. “It was a mix-and-match so you could get by in the streets.” The actor, who learned about Stonewall in college, said he was struck by descriptions of pervasive public violence against homosexuals. “It was like the ultimate survival mode at all times,” he said. “These kids were tough.”

Mr. Emmerich said it was such characters—homeless, young and scrapping for themselves—that largely inspired him to make “Stonewall,” regardless of how his interpretation is met by critics. “They can all see the movie and they can say what they want,” he said. “One of our producers said we already succeeded in putting Stonewall more in the zeitgeist. It’s such a mythical word, and very few people can say ‘I was there.’ ”