NONFICTION

America’s Bitter Pill: Money, Politics, Backroom Deals and the Fight to Fix Our Broken Healthcare System

By Steven Brill

Random House

528 pages, $28

By Stephen T. Watson

NEWS BOOK REVIEWER

In March 2013, Time magazine published a groundbreaking cover story by Steven Brill titled “Bitter Pill: Why Medical Bills Are Killing Us.” The attention-grabbing article vividly described the dysfunction in how hospitals and doctors bill for costly procedures and argued for transparency in pricing.

Later that year, Brill — the author of several books and a founder of Court TV and the magazine “The American Lawyer” — told his editors he wanted to report a follow-up article on the launch of Obamacare, which he considered “the most ambitious domestic government project since Medicare.”

The act remains deeply controversial today, nearly five years after it was signed into law, and it remains front-page news. The Supreme Court this month heard arguments in a case that could invalidate in most states the subsidies that lured the young and healthy into the act’s insurance exchanges. And the White House scrambled to contain the damage last month when hundreds of thousands of Americans received incorrect Obamacare tax data.

Back in fall 2013 and early 2014, Brill made numerous trips to Washington to watch the disastrous rollout of the Affordable Care Act, and this reporting forms the heart of the best-selling “America’s Bitter Pill.”

The book is split roughly in two, with the first half devoted to a history of healthcare financing, an assessment of today’s “broken” medical system and the battle to find a way to fix it.

The second half of the book picks up from the day the act became law and takes us through the opening of the exchanges and the struggle to save HealthCare.gov from the missteps of the Obama administration. Brill’s account of the “roller-coaster story of Obamacare” begins with a history lesson and some telling statistics.

In 1929, spending on healthcare was equal to 1 percent of the American economy; by 2008, it was 16 percent, and well on its way to 20 percent. The total healthcare bill in the U.S. in 2014 was $3 trillion, more than the next 10 biggest spenders combined, with health outcomes that are no better than those of our more frugal peers.

The health insurers are most often painted as the villains, but Brill writes that their profit margins are dwarfed by those of the pharmaceutical companies, medical device makers and many hospital networks.

By 2008, the stars had begun to align for reform, as pressure grew from patients, employers and policymakers. Early on, advocates focused their agenda on what Brill calls the “three-legged stool” of healthcare reform: requiring insurers to accept anyone regardless of a pre-existing condition, mandating that everyone obtain insurance and subsidizing the cost of coverage for the working poor.

“America’s Bitter Pill” devotes great detail to the painstaking work of drafting, and winning support for, the ACA. The trouble was when reformers and legislative aides talked about cutting healthcare costs, or raising taxes to pay for the cost of expanding coverage, the various interest groups wondered whose ox would be gored.

One by one, the pharma companies, insurers, hospitals, device makers and doctors met with officials to protect their profits. The backroom deal-making was far from the “negotiations televised on C-SPAN” promised by President Obama.

While the ACA early on carried the promise of bipartisan backing, its prospective Republican boosters all withdrew their support, a trend hastened by the rise of the Tea Party.

The bill passed only after Democrats made sleazy deals with recalcitrant senators from their own party — the Cornhusker Kickback, the Louisiana Purchase — and followed a legislative strategy that avoided the need to find 60 votes to break a GOP filibuster. At the 2010 bill signing, Vice President Joe Biden was caught on a hot mike saying, “This is a big f---ing deal.” Indeed.

However, Brill writes, the administration was unprepared to implement the law. Brill describes “panicked internal emails,” bureaucratic infighting and an unwillingness to take responsibility for the HealthCare.gov website, saying the president and his advisers “sloughed off the details of governing.”

That doesn’t even count the policy misfires, such as Obama’s “If you like your insurance, you can keep it” broken promise. Throughout this section, Brill contrasts the problems in Washington with the efficient rollout of Kentucky’s state exchange.

Much of the second half follows the IT team brought in to salvage the federal website; its members did noble work, but the story of their bacon-saving code-writing does not make for compelling reading.

After the end of the first enrollment period for the exchanges, Brill credits the act with bringing coverage to millions of the uninsured. But he laments the lost opportunities to rein in skyrocketing spending, and truly affordable healthcare still remains out of reach for many.

Brill begins the book in New York Presbyterian Hospital, where he underwent surgery to repair an aortic aneurysm. Later in “America’s Bitter Pill,” he returns to the not-for-profit hospital to grill the CEO about the $197,000 bill for Brill’s surgery, and about the executive’s $3.58 million salary.

His gratitude for the costly MRI that saved his life shows the problem: “When you’re staring up at someone from the gurney, you have no inclination to be a savvy consumer. You have no power. Only hope.”

Finally, he offers his own solution to the healthcare financing mess: an “integrated delivery and finance system,” a fancy term for an insurance company with its own hospital, clinics, doctors and labs. It’s a matter, Brill writes, of “aligning the interests of those who provide care with those who pay for it.”

That’s one way to look at it. The other is you’re creating a monopoly, which won’t protect the interests of the patient .

Brill does lay out some caveats: There must be two such systems in every market, a cap on operating profits, a cap on pay to non-medical employees, a patient appeals process and only licensed physicians should serve as CEOs of the companies.

I’ll offer some caveats of my own for his book: There are too many policy wonks, IT experts and healthcare consumers introduced to the reader; he quotes too often from less-than-scintillating policy memos; there are some minor mistakes (Kent Conrad was a senator from North Dakota, not Nebraska); and some inelegant phrasing (“It was a huge red flag waved in front of a thousand bulls”).

Nonetheless, the book is a thoroughly researched history of what ails our medical system, with a provocative prescription for a cure, from someone who understands healthcare financing as well as any layperson.

Stephen T. Watson covers the business of health care for The Buffalo News.