Medicaid expansion will go forward Tuesday, Sept. 1.

It’s been five years since the Affordable Care Act became law and three years since Medicaid expansion effectively became a state option. But it took only 50 minutes on Friday for Superior Court Judge Frank Pfiffner to strike down an attempt by the Alaska Legislative Council, a body of the Alaska Legislature, to stop expansion in Alaska.

In his oral decision — a written one could not be produced in the 22 hours since he heard oral arguments — Pfiffner said attorneys for the Legislative Council didn’t make the case that an injunction was needed to prevent “irreparable harm” to the Council or the state.

“The court concludes there is no irreparable injury, at least for the fiscal year 2016,” he said. “There’s no administrative cost for the state ... in this fiscal year.”

Pfiffner’s decision doesn’t conclude the Council’s lawsuit — it simply means that Medicaid expansion will go on while the lawsuit progresses. Pfiffner himself said he expects that the suit will make its way to the Alaska Supreme Court for resolution.

Expansion would permit many Alaskans who earn up to 138 percent of the federal poverty line to receive federally subsidized health insurance. The state has estimated that about 20,000 Alaskans will sign up for coverage once expansion takes effect, and past studies say up to 40,000 Alaskans could be eligible.

During his campaign for governor, Bill Walker pledged that Medicaid expansion would be a “day one” decision for his administration. It turned out to be more complicated. The governor first sought to push the matter through the Alaska Legislature, which proved reluctant.

No expansion bill came up for a vote during the Legislature’s regular session this spring, and a special session — held partially to address expansion — didn’t result in hearings, let alone votes, on the matter.

After the special session, Walker announced he would unilaterally expand the program.

That prompted the Legislative Council, a body that takes action for the Legislature during the period between sessions, to vote 10-1 in favor of allocating $450,000 for legal services to pay for a lawsuit to stop expansion.

The “yes” votes on the measure came from the Republican-led House and Senate majority, while the sole “no” vote came from Rep. Sam Kito III, D-Juneau. Several Republican members of the council were absent from the vote or declined to vote, and some of the absent members later said they would not have voted in favor of the lawsuit spending.

The Council’s vote took place Aug. 18, and preparations for a lawsuit moved forward rapidly to beat the scheduled Sept. 1 start of the expansion program. The suit was filed less than a week later, and Pfiffner heard oral arguments on Thursday before delivering his decision Friday.

In a statement after the decision, Walker said by email, “Judge Pfiffner’s ruling today ensures 20,000 working Alaskans will have access to health care on Sept. 1. Medicaid expansion will not only save the state (more than) $100 million in its first six years, it will save Alaskan lives. I look forward to working with members of the legislature on implementing the Healthy Alaska Plan.”

During the hearing, Pfiffner explained that in order to receive an injunction or a temporary restraining order to stop the program’s start, the Council’s attorneys needed to meet several legal “tests.” In the “hardship test”, the council’s attorneys needed to demonstrate that their case was likely to succeed, that proceeding without an injunction would cause them “irreparable harm” and that the injunction wouldn’t put the state at a disadvantage if the case progressed.

Pfiffner said the council attorneys failed two of those benchmarks. Because the federal government will pay 100 percent of the program’s costs in the first year and the Alaska Mental Health Trust has agreed to pay administrative startup costs, the state isn’t at immediate risk of financial harm.

Furthermore, Pfiffner said, “If the system does careen out of control ... well, what can happen? The state of Alaska can opt out of the Medicaid expansion.”

More importantly, for the long-term health of the Council’s case, Pfiffner said he didn’t buy its central argument: That Medicaid expansion involves providing coverage to an “optional” coverage group or a group of people “required” to be covered under the law.

“I say this case turns on the meaning of one word: requires,” Pfiffner said in part, then later added, “this court concludes that the medicaid expansion group meets the required language.”

If the Legislative Council continues to pursue its opposition to Medicaid expansion, attorneys likely will appeal to the Alaska Supreme Court, which has discretion to accept or reject the case.

With Anchorage courts closed for the weekend and for the visit of President Barack Obama, any action won’t happen before Sept. 1, allowing the program to start unfettered.

• Contact James Brooks at james.k.brooks@juneauempire.com or at 523-2258.