Volunteer profile: Marsha Ruttenberg

Family Services helps community members succeed in school, work and community life. Counseling, including bilingual counseling, is provided. Special programs for seniors and youth are available as well as Latino support services.

What role does it serve in the community?

Family Service provides a wide range of programs for Lake County residents. It is the only community mental health agency in Lake County to offer so many affordable services to clients in need. Programs for children include tutoring, physical activities, art projects, summer camps, field trips and a variety of activities that promote a healthy life style. Adult programs include ESL, computer classes and activities that promote good health and physical fitness. Help is available for Medicare, ACA (Affordable Care Act) as well as Social Security applicants.

What made you want to get involved in this type of volunteer work?

After retiring from a long career in education, I was anxious to get involved with community service. Peggy Miller, a very active Family Service volunteer, thought this organization would provide opportunities for me to utilize my teaching experience, background in bilingual and ESL programs, and knowledge of Spanish. Family Service's friendly and flexible staff made getting involved with volunteering extremely pleasant. The children and adults I have worked with are conscientious in their efforts to enhance their potential through the services offered, appreciative of efforts to assist them and great to work with.

What surprised you about the work once you started?

I was pleased to discover the commitment and cooperative spirit of staff, volunteers and clients. All work together with ease and mutual respect to achieve established goals. Everyone is happy with their association with Family Service. I am also amazed at the extent of services this local nonprofit organization is able to provide and the excellent results it is achieving.

If you could offer local officials a piece of advice about how they could help the community you serve, what would it be?

The city, schools and park district of my town, Highland Park, are doing an excellent job providing a welcoming environment and good services to all of its residents. Care is given to ensure that access to good education, medical care and recreation opportunities are available to all, regardless of income level. Family Service helps guarantee this access and maximizes the potential of its clients.

What mistakes did you make as a volunteer?

I have to take care to communicate regularly with the administrative staff of Family Service so that programming is coordinated and carried out well.

What did you do right?

I was very clear about areas where I felt I would be helpful and also about the amount of time I would be able to give. I was careful to make only those commitments that I was certain I would be able to fulfill. Presently, I assist young children with craft activities and games while their moms participate in a Zumba class, and I teach English as part of the Escuela en Casa adult tutoring program.