A few days ago someone mentioned to me – “If networking were a superpower, you would be Superman with adamantium claw-filled missiles for arms!”

I’m no Superman and that person is too kind. But I do feel that, done right, networking can be a super-power for everyone.

I’m a big fan of meeting folks in the real world. You can follow someone on Twitter, friend them on Facebook and exchange a ton of emails, but connecting in person makes a world of difference. It offers a resonance and builds a rapport that takes that relationship to a whole new level.

You see, it’s not about exchanging business cards or piling up LinkedIn connections. It’s about building meaningful and mutually beneficial long-term relationships. And whether you’re hunting for a job, looking for a partner, searching for investors or growing your team, it can be a game-changer.

So here are a few tips to help you step up your networking game.

1. Always Have Your Elevator Pitch Ready

“So what do you do?” Yeah, you’ll be asked that a gazillion times. So you better be prepared and have your elevator pitch handy. One of my favorite stories is how entrepreneur Dave Morgan, founder of Simulmedia, ran into investor Brad Burnham, partner at Union Square Ventures, in an elevator. Brad was headed down to a cocktail party and Dave, who was in his running clothes, noticed Brad’s nametag, immediately introduced himself and pitched his startup. Twelve floors later, he’d secured a follow-up meeting!

You never quite know when opportunity will knock so be ready to grab it by the horns when it does. Additionally, networking is not always about going to a particular event or conference. Often seemingly random conversations with friends or family or even strangers at the supermarket can lead to something interesting!

2. Learn To Listen And Be Helpful

When engaging in conversation, it’s important to listen. Your genuine interest in what they have to say will get them to talk more openly. It’s the first step in being helpful. If you’re looking to extract value from your connections and relationships before giving, then you’re doing it all wrong. As Gary Vaynerchuk says, when you give someone value first then you have leverage for asking for something in return. Even better, I’d recommend not being transactional at all. Be helpful to others without expecting anything in return.

3. Leave Room For Serendipity

I get a ton of invitations to events, parties and coffee meetings. I was initially hesitant at accepting if the value was not immediately apparent. But I’ve been pleasantly surprised how often partnerships and deals have emerged from the most random of meetings. I now try to accept as many as I can. Obviously I can’t go to all of them and it’s good to have some filter. But it’s important to leave room for serendipity.

One of my favorite events (that breeds serendipity) is the South by South West (SxSW) Festival in Austin. It has a fun vibe and everyone is very relaxed and accessible. I’ve randomly run into & had amazing conversations with prominent startup founders while literally walking down the street or waiting in line for tacos.

4. Meet The Right People, Not The Most People

The goal is not to shove your business cards into as many hands as possible. Instead, focus on finding interesting people and engaging in relevant, enjoyable conversations.

A few years ago, I ran into a celebrity Internet billionaire at a Hollywood Reporter party. I was a regular reader of his blog and we ended up chatting at length on many of the topics he’d been writing about. I went home from that event with no business cards but one amazing conversation!

5. Host Your Own Events

An awesome tip I learned from super networkers is to organize your own event.

Host a small, curated dinner, invite a few friends, ask them to bring along someone else and you’ll soon be hanging out with a fun, diverse crowd and expanding your network!

6. Make Introductions

By letting folks tap into your network and by connecting them to others, you not only help them but your acts help leverage your network and strengthens your existing relationships. You become a valuable liaison.

Just remember, as with everything else, curation is key. Avoid weak introductions as you risk diluting your network. Blogger and investor Fred Wilson makes a good case for doing a double opt-in introduction.

7. ABF (a.k.a. Always Be Following-up)

And finally, always remember to follow up! Connecting is only the first part of building meaningful and mutually beneficial long-term relationships. Following up is what takes it the next level.

As Virgin Group founder Sir Richard Branson says - “Succeeding in business is all about making connections.

Happy Networking!

Mr. Sharma (aka “The Guy with the Red Tie”) is the founder of GarysGuide.

Follow @garysguide



Follow @WSJstartup