E ight years ago, there was another midterm election as the administration of an unpopular two-term president, bogged down by war in Iraq and contentious domestic politics, drew to a close. Then as now the presumed leader to succeed the president was Hillary Rodham Clinton; then as now the campaign for the White House, although two years off, seemed to overshadow the congressional and senatorial candidates actually on the ballot. We all know how it ended for Clinton last time around, but the story could turn out very differently in 2016 for America’s first grandmother/frontrunner. For now, it’s already clear that figuring out how to beat her is what the presidential race is all about. Which is why our cover story in this special Campaign Issue is a fascinating inside report by Politico’s Maggie Haberman and Glenn Thrush on the secret race to answer 2016’s most pressing question. It’s an essential read for understanding where American politics is today, and a perfect showcase for this first-anniversary edition of Politico.

Politics is, of course, at the heart of our magazine’s mission, and this issue has many original takes on it, perhaps none more revealing than Matt Miller’s memoir of his short-lived career as a congressional candidate. It’s a painful, honest, funny and sharp look at the modern life of a politician, and I think it’s destined to become a classic account of a money-soaked system gone awry.

Story Continued Below

Photo by Thomas Friedman/Trunk Archive; Lettering by Joel Holland

Great writing in the magazine isn’t limited to the foibles of our electoral system, though, and I am particularly proud of two investigative pieces in this issue that look at the real-world consequences of our politics: the first, by our new senior staff writer Garrett Graff, is a hard-hitting history of the agency known as the “Green Monster,” America’s massive, troubled Border Patrol. It is “the largely overlooked story behind the story of the perennial border crises,” Garrett writes, “in which the best intentions and worst impulses of the Bush administration met the laissez-faire management and political cynicism of the Obama administration.” The result, as he documents, is eye-opening: skyrocketing corruption and violence in the nation’s largest law enforcement agency, militarized by billions of dollars in new weapons and technology and thousands of poorly vetted new gun-carrying agents hired in the panicky years after 9/11. Another kind of investigative report comes from Sarah Varney of Kaiser Health News, who traveled to Mississippi to produce an authoritative, disturbing account of how America’s poorest, sickest state got left behind by the Affordable Care Act. And I do mean left behind: As Sarah writes, when all was said and done, Mississippi was the only state in the country where the number of uninsured people went up, not down, in the first year of Obamacare. Read it, and it’s hard not to be infuriated, no matter what your politics.

All this great journalism is the product of much hard work, and it seems fitting on our first birthday to offer a special thank you to the many Politicos who helped us make it happen—and especially to the small brilliant magazine editorial team. From creative director Janet Michaud to deputy editor Blake Hounshell, senior editors Michael Hirsh and Eva Rodriguez, the indispensable Margy Slattery and her dedicated partners Elizabeth Ralph and Katie Fossett, this is a terrific group, and the magazine you see before you wouldn’t exist without them. Many, many thanks to them—and to you, as always, for reading!