Topics: disasters, ebola, Editor's Picks, Influenza, preparedness, public health, Q&A, WHO, Sustainability News, News

Last week, the World Health Organization declared the West African Ebola epidemic an international health emergency. Since its emergence this spring, the hemorrhagic fever has killed more than 900 people across three different countries. And since two infected American aid workers returned to Atlanta for treatment, the media has exploded, highlighting any number of horrific (and unlikely) scenarios. But might there be some merit to the fear-mongering? What would happen if a similar disease — say, MERS, or the avian flu — found its way, uncontained, to American soil?

Last week, Salon spoke with Dr. Stephen Morse, professor and director of the Infectious Disease Epidemiology Certificate program at Columbia University Medical Center. Morse has served on numerous governmental and civilian committees for public health preparedness, most recently at the Department of Defense where he co-directed the Pathogen Countermeasures program.

This interview has been lightly edited.

What would actually happen if Ebola were to come to the United States?

I think it depends on how infectious it is and how it’s recognized. There has been a lot of attention paid to Ebola and a lot of publicity, so I think the level of awareness among clinicians, at least, and even the general public, is fairly high, which is very important. As you know, we had a couple of people come from that area, it was thought possibly that they could have Ebola. Although it was probably doubtful given their history, but you don’t take chances. And they were put into isolation. I think as far as I can tell, generally the right things were done and they tested negative when the test came back. With Ebola, most of the danger is close contact; you’ve heard this already. Bodily fluids, etc., etc., it doesn’t spread by the respiratory route, really. I mean if somebody coughs or something and it gets into your eye or something like that … But that’s not very common.

What about a virus other than Ebola?

Something like SARS or influenza will spread more readily — SARS not that readily but by the respiratory route. It was a surprise to see what happened with SARS in Toronto in 2003, because we had seen their infection control standards and practices and they’re pretty similar to ours. I think there’s an object lesson — I hope in New York especially because of 9/11 and anthrax and so on — and a lot of attention was paid to hospital preparedness. I think for this kind of thing that it would depend on where the person got sick and who they saw.

One scenario is on the plane. If they get sick on the plane they’re supposed to notify the airport on the ground. There’s a quarantine station at JFK — I know some of the people there — as there is at every major port. There are people there who could evaluate the sick person and determine whether they could possibly, especially given the travel history from, say, Nigeria, where there are direct flights. The people can determine whether they might have Ebola and arrange for them to be moved and obviously find the right precautions, like an ambulance, and get the patient to a hospital where they would get proper isolation.

So, they would be moved to a hospital. I think any of the larger hospitals here, if they had a suspicion that this could be an infectious disease that required appropriate precaution, I think it would probably happen properly with the appropriate isolation and all the other things you hear about, with equipment and practices for infection control for the staff and anyone who comes in contact with the patient.

Now, if they get sick in the city, after they’ve come from wherever they were, then that will depend on where they go for treatment – whether they go to the emergency room, whether they see a local physician. Then that is largely dependent on whether they have a high enough awareness, if the doctors know well enough to ask everybody, “Where have you been lately?” “Are you coming from one of these countries in West Africa?” “Have you been in contact with a known Ebola patient or someone who was in contact with an Ebola patient?” Those are the usual screening questions. Then you’d put them into isolation if they looked really sick. So I think it really depends on somebody being knowledgeable enough. In Nigeria, the patient flew from Liberia and was admitted to the hospital. He was already sick but they didn’t put him into isolation and take the appropriate precautions to protect the staff and the other patients for 24 hours. That’s how I think some of the staff, sadly, got infected.