Vulnerable senators looking for campaign help from the other side of the Capitol probably won’t find much, even if it would be in their party’s best interests.

Mark Pryor of Arkansas and Mary Landrieu of Louisiana, two Democratic senators facing tough re-election battles, are getting hundreds of thousands of dollars from their Senate colleagues for their re-election campaigns. They have received nearly no financial support from House Democrats because of a Washington practice in which members of each chamber look after their own first (and sometimes only their own).

This approach, which has existed for years in both parties, seems counterproductive. With control of the House of Representatives unlikely to change hands in the midterm elections this November, the Senate is where the electoral action is. So it would seem logical that with the Senate up for grabs, both parties would be doing whatever was possible, via their elected members, to place money where it could have the biggest impact. But is this an opportunity for members of either party to break out of the traditional pattern of giving mainly to their immediate colleagues?

Probably not. This is a Congress where members place personal electoral incentives over shared political values.

“The bottom line is, team play has its limits,” said Eric Heberlig, a professor of political science at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte who has studied the financing of congressional elections and party dynamics. Senators helping representatives and vice versa is more efficient from the overall party’s perspective, Mr. Heberlig said, but “that’s not the way members think about it.” He added, “The way parties operate in the United States is very compartmentalized, very office-specific.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Party leaders in both chambers encourage rank-and-file lawmakers to form leadership PACs and to donate to their colleagues. The rewards for doing so are obvious: enhanced visibility within the caucus and perhaps an easier path to a more desirable committee assignment or a leadership position. But those incentives are tied to the chamber a lawmaker serves in; senators have little ability to influence committee assignments in the House (and vice versa), so there is little incentive to grease the wheels in the other chamber.

House lawmakers think that “leaders probably aren’t going to reward me for giving to Senate candidates,” Mr. Heberlig said. “If they’re members of my chamber, they can do favors for me.”

Photo

House-Senate rivalry is nothing new: David J. Webber, a political scientist who served as a Congressional Fellow in 1993, wrote that among the most “striking characteristics” of Congress was “the contentious nature of bicameral relations.”

You can see it in Mr. Pyror’s and Ms. Landrieu’s contributions. Through March 31, Mr. Pryor’s campaign had received $384,500 in contributions from leadership PACs, according to Federal Election Commission data, while Ms. Landrieu’s campaign had gotten $381,500. The campaign of Mitch McConnell of Kentucky brought in more than $300,000 from leadership PACs.

Almost all of that money comes from their Senate colleagues or candidates running for the Senate. Three members of the House have given to Ms. Landrieu and one to Mr. Pryor. Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida, who is also chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, is the only House member to give a leadership PAC contribution to both. In response to a reporter’s question about her support across chambers, Ms. Wasserman Schultz said: “As in past election cycles, I am proud to be supportive of Democratic members and candidates so that we retain our important majority in the Senate and gain seats in the House.”

Senate Hopefuls Find Little Help in the House Leadership PAC contributions to key Senate candidates and the amount from House PACs. Candidate Leadership PACs House Leadership PACs Mark Pryor, D-Ark. $384,500 $5,000 Mary Landrieu, D-La. $381,500 $13,000 Kay Hagan, D-N.C. $327,800 $0 Mark Begich, D-Alaska $310,500 $0 Mitch McConnell, R-Ky. $300,700 $24,500

Members of Congress have the money to contribute. Senate leadership PACs had at least $15 million in cash on hand as of the latest filings, most of which cover activity through March 31, while House leadership PACs held at least $16 million.

House Republicans looking for help may want to introduce themselves to Senator Richard Shelby of Alabama, who had more than $4.3 million in cash in his Defend America PAC. A spokesman for Mr. Shelby, Jonathan Graffeo, said that the senator did contribute to House candidates “on a case-by-case basis, but his focus is the Senate.”

There’s another inefficiency in the system: Not all lawmakers have supported their vulnerable colleagues from the same chamber. The Midwest Values PAC formed by the Minnesota Democrat Al Franken has not given to Mr. Pryor’s campaign, for example, although it has given the maximum to Ms. Hagan and $5,000 to Ms. Landrieu. The same is true for the Jobs, Growth and Freedom Fund created by Ted Cruz, a Texas Republican, which has not given to Mr. McConnell, with whom he has clashed over legislative tactics. Most members of Congress consider fund-raising a chore, and raising money that’s not for their own elections even more so.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Another factor at play: The threat that outside groups and super PACs will pour money into what might previously have been considered a safe district has pushed incumbents to raise more money for themselves, not for their colleagues.

Mr. McConnell is a notable exception to the cross-chamber donation omission. His Bluegrass Committee has given more than $60,000 to House candidates during this cycle. His own campaign has received $24,500 from House Republican leadership PACs.

There are a few other instances in which cross-chamber support is given. Off the Sidelines PAC, affiliated with the New York Democratic Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, has given at least $496,000 this cycle to female candidates for both the House and Senate. In a rare display of bicameral harmony, it also has given to both the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, the party arms of the two chambers. Such contributions, however, are the exception.