WASHINGTON, D.C. - To conservatives, being in Washington, D.C. hardly conjures up images of paradise. But conservative political activists have come awfully close to that ideal today at the Conservative Political Action Conference, or CPAC, going on right now in a Beltway suburb.

"This is like boot camp to take to the liberals," U.S. Rep. Marcia Blackburn, Republican of Tennessee, just told activists gathered in the ballroom.

CPAC is where declared or potential presidential candidates Chris Christie, Ted Cruz, Scott Walker and Bobby Jindal will speak later today. Jeb Bush is on the bill tomorrow, as are Marco Rubio and Rick Perry.

Donald Trump will be here tomorrow, too. And Dr. Ben Carson, considered a long-shot candidate for the GOP nomination, was on stage in the ballroom first thing this morning, then packed followers into a breakout room for coffee and more political talk.

His supporters passed out calendars in the conference center hallway, emblazoned with Carson's photo, his name and the words "President 2016," and a slogan shouted out by some amid the excitement: "Run, Ben, Run!"

Carson, on cutting entitlement spending: First, "we need a vibrant economy." And to get that, "we need to get rid of the stupid regulations."

To get rid of activist judges? Congress has that power already, Carson said, because Congress has power over all federal judges other than the justices on the Supreme Court. And Congress needs to exercise that power because "it's not satisfactory if these courts overturn the will of the people."

"Run, Ben, run," went the cheers.

CPAC is put on by the American Conservative Union, but a host of other sponsors are involved, too. In the hallways, activists are discussing candidates, policy, persuasion and the 2016 presidential race. Timothy Finn, 54, from New York, is dressed in a flag-like outfit of red, white and blue. He's here "because I love this country," he said. "I'm just afraid of the way it's going."

Specifically, he said, the federal debt "is going through the roof," and "we're still at war. Right now, there's a war against Americans. I realize the United States doesn't deal with terrorists, but something has to be done."

Preston Noell, of Park Ridge, Illinois, is in a suit and tie. Asked about the potential Republican presidential candidates, he said there was not one he would reject. That includes Trump, who is considering getting in, according to the Washington Post.

"If it's a Trump against a Hillary? Sure," Noell said. "It's not hard."

Washington's political media, both mainstream and conservative, have a heavy presence at CPAC, being held at the Gaylord conference center in Maryland. In a corridor nicknamed Radio Row, set up for live interviews, Bloomberg Politics has a booth right next to NRA News. Sirius XM, the satellite radio network, is next to Breitbart.

Conservative heavyweights and personalities, from Grover Norquist and Oliver North to Sarah Palin, are here or will be later. Until the 2016 Republican National Convention in Cleveland, this many prominent conservatives are unlikely to gather under one roof.

Conference-goers are unfailingly polite. College students pass out stickers that say, "God Bless Free Enterprise." Volunteers from Citizens United, the group that helped remove limits on corporate political contributions, are promoting receptions with conference speakers, including Walker and Trump.

And on the main ballroom stage, one activist after another is telling the audience what they say is wrong with the Affordable Care Act and Common Core ("Common Core: Rotten to the Core?" is the topic heading); the challenge of keeping up with the Democrats in online messaging and, yes, joking about the mainstream media.

Blackburn, the congresswoman, offered her own names for the television networks:

ABC: "The All About Clinton" news network.

NBC: The "Nothing But Clintons" network.

CNN: The "Clinton News Network."

CBS: The "Clinton B.S." network."