Women still are a relatively rare sight on construction projects, but some of them working in the industry in Topeka are trying to show girls it can be a source of opportunity.

The National Association of Women in Construction observed Women in Construction Week from March 2 to 8. The Topeka chapter celebrated by awarding a scholarship to a female student at Washburn Institute of Technology. They had planned to teach a Girl Scout troop how to make wooden desk calendars using kits on Sunday, but had to put off that event because of snow.

Tammy Botkin, a project manager assistant at Torgeson Electric and member of the Topeka chapter of Women in Construction, said they want to get girls interested in the construction industry before they reach middle school and start making serious decisions about their academic and career paths.

“They start talking to the school counselors and they’re all ‘College, college, college,’ ” she said.

As of 2011, about 828,000 women were working in the construction sector, meaning they accounted for about 9 percent of construction employees, according to NAWIC. That was down from a high of 1,131,000, but may have reflected overall job losses in the sector during the recession, rather than a lower percentage of women seeking construction careers.

About 443,000 women, or about 54 percent of the total in the construction industry, worked in sales and office jobs in the sector. Another 236,000, or 29 percent, worked in management or professional services related to construction.

Jaclyn Revelle, who received a $1,500 scholarship from the group at a luncheon at McFarland’s on Wednesday, said she is the only female in the heavy construction equipment program. Revelle, of Topeka, will graduate from Washburn Tech in May.

Out of 118 students in five construction-related programs at Washburn Tech, five are female, according to Lori Hutchinson, spokewoman for the school. Overall, about 40 percent of the school’s students are female, with many gravitating toward the health services programs, she said.

Revelle said being the only female in the program hasn’t been difficult.

“We all have got a great sense of humor, so it works out pretty great,” she said.

It helps to have physical strength when operating heavy equipment, Revelle said, but the mental side is equally important because of the information operators need to know about safety and maintenance.

“There’s more than just operating the equipment,” she said. “It’s also checking the fluids and keeping (the machines) clean.”

Sally Jackson, of Topeka, also was the only female in her construction classes at Washburn Tech. She graduated from Washburn Tech in 2011 and now she is an apprentice working with a licensed electrician. She said she needs about six months more experience before she can take the test to get her license.

“I had a really good class of gentlemen,” she said. “It wasn’t too bad for me.”

Jackson said she liked building things from an early age. She and her siblings would build forts and bridges across creeks, and when they got older the family worked on community service projects together.

In the past, girls were less likely to get early exposure to building concepts. Sue Schilling, who does safety inspections for KBS Construction and is president of the Topeka chapter of Women in Construction, said girls in her school didn’t take shop because it was offered at the same time as their required physical education class, and it wasn’t discussed as a career option. She started as a construction laborer about 18 years ago and then moved into the warehouse before reaching her current position.

Girls who are interested in the construction industry need to take the initiative to learn about it, Revelle said, because others may not think to introduce them to it. Her first contact with the industry came from following her dad to work in his restoration and remodeling business.

“You’ve got to jump in there and get in with the guys,” she said. “Don’t let them intimidate you either. Just get in there and do your job.”

Jackson said some people underestimate her abilities because she is only about 5-foot-3-inches and doesn’t have a large frame. While she can’t lift as much as some of the larger workers, she said being smaller is an advantage when they need to work in tight spaces.

The mental side of electrical work is a strength for her, Jackson said. Electricians need to be focused on details, which is an area where women can excel, she said.

“Going in expecting resistance, but also knowing you have advantages, is good because you can focus on your strengths,” she said. “My size is not really a handicap.”