If you want to draw a crowd, serve barbecue.

That was one lesson from Community Connection’s first pig roast Saturday at the West Broad Farmers Market, as the local nonprofit sought a nontraditional way of reaching out into the community to collect health data for a Community Health Needs Assessment under the umbrella of the federal Affordable Care Act.

Cars lined the block for the event, a partnership between Community Connection and local hospitals to collect 2,000 health surveys in the community. As of Saturday, the effort had resulted in the collection of 500 surveys. Anyone was welcome to enjoy the pig roast free of charge, with an anonymous survey serving as admission.

“The goal was draw people in who otherwise wouldn’t have access to the surveys,” said Fenwick Broyard, executive director of Community Connection. “We’ve got quality data from people who might not have had Internet access at home or be able to do it there.”

Broyard said he got the idea for the pig roast — Saturday marked the first in a series of such events planned for various locations in Athens-Clarke County — from an event hosted during Athens’ Twilight Criterium bicycle race weekend by Noah Brendel of the Four Coursemen in Athens.

“I’ve been to a ton of community events, and there’s usually hot dogs and hamburgers. Nobody really gets excited about that, right?” Broyard joked. “It’s not every day you can roast a whole hog for 24 hours.”

The centerpiece of Saturday’s event, a 200-pound hog, was raised by local farmer Benji Anderson and cooked by Brendel.

Along with the pig, there were collard greens, baked beans and macaroni and cheese, courtesy of a donation from the Northeast Georgia Food Bank. Daily Groceries Co-op donated vegan side dishes, and Taziki’s restaurant in Athens offered Mediterranean-style potatoes.

“It seemed like as the idea got out, people were really wanting to be involved, so we had no shortage of help pulling this together,” Broyard said.

Attendees had great things to say about the food, and even greater things to say about the party surrounding the event. Whether dancing to DJ Mahogany or playing in the bounce house, there was something for all ages to do.

Cassandra Teel attended the pig roast out of curiosity, and was not disappointed.

“I think this is a great event, and a great concept. I’ve liked getting to meet different people, and seeing the kids interact and have fun,” she said.

Emily Johnson’s children were two of the many kids running around at the pig roast. She said she brought Elliott, 3, and Nora, 6 months, out for a special dinner and a fun place to play.

“I think it does a lot to bring the community together,” Johnson said. “No matter who you are, or where you come from, anyone can come out here and enjoy the music and some good food.”

Aside from collecting health data, Community Connection’s goal for the pig roast was to bring people together and inspire new friendships. Many guests were, in fact, excited by the diverse crowd at the event. Broyard was thrilled that members of the community who might not normally interact came together for the roast.

“What I like most about it is we’ve got a beautiful cross-section of our community here. We’ve got people of all ages and all races here mixing and mingling,” he said. “I hope that we built some bridges here today. I hope that people got to meet neighbors they didn’t know they had, and that conversations got started and relationships got forged.”

Community Connection intern Megan Baer, who coordinated much of the pig roast, said she hoped the event was inviting to every member of the community.

“I’ve heard from members of the African-American community that they don’t feel welcome in places I’m shocked to hear about,” she said. “So everyone who walks in the gate is now my friend.”

Community Connection will host three more pig roasts in the coming months in an effort to map health data across all of Athens-Clarke County. The next pig roast is scheduled for April 25 at the East Athens Community Center at 425 McKinley Drive, with a hog prepared by Chuck Ramsey of Pulaski Heights BBQ.

Health surveys can be filled out online at www.athenspigroast.com.