Our nation faces many challenges – from the threat of ISIS, to out of control spending in Washington, to a President who wants to change the very fabric of our nation. I continue to work every day to stop the destructive policies of President Obama, keep our nation safe, and ensure that every American has the opportunity to succeed.

And as we move forward, I will continue to fight for the most fundamental issue before our nation: LIFE. I know that every day is an opportunity to celebrate and protect God’s most amazing gift of all. It breaks my heart to know that since Roe v. Wade, more than 55 million Americans have never had the chance to touch our soil and experience this remarkable gift.

Now, 43 years after the Roe v. Wade decision, that still should not be the case. We see the power of that message every January when tens of thousands of Americans, including thousands of South Carolinians, come to Washington for the March for Life to make their voices heard.

Everyone deserves the gift of life, period. That is why as your Senator, I support a number of pro-life bills, starting with one that would prohibit federal funding of Planned Parenthood. The fact that taxpayer dollars are going to Planned Parenthood and their extreme positions on abortion is unacceptable, and that’s why I joined Senator Joni Ernst (R-IA) to introduce a bill to stop it.

I am also supporting multiple bills to ensure that Obamacare is not forcing Americans to contribute their hard earned dollars towards abortions. I introduced the No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion and Abortion Insurance Full Disclosure Act with my friend Senator Roger Wicker (R-MS), and the Health Care Conscience Rights Act with Senator James Lankford (R-OK). Senator Lankford’s bill in particular ensures that no one who has a religious or moral objection to abortion is forced to purchase a health care plan that covers it, and that no American is fined for not purchasing a plan that does cover abortion.

Finally, I have co-sponsored the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, which outlaws all abortions after 20 weeks. Science has proven that at 5 months, babies do feel pain, and, with all of our power, we must stop abortion after that point. This bill would save a minimum of 18,000 lives a year. While it’s not the perfect outcome and I would love to see an even more expansive ban, this 20 week bill would certainly be a huge step forward in our efforts to protect life.

This is not about pro-choice or pro-life; it is simply about protecting 10 fingers, 10 toes, and 1 beating heart.

All life is precious, and as a nation that believes in the protection of all persons, including the unborn, we have the responsibility to allow them access to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

LifeNews Note: Tim Scott, a vocal pro-life advocate, is South Carolina’s Junior U.S. Senator.