YouTube Digest is a look at some of the most popular new videos of the week. This week, we have a role-reversal pregnancy announcement that doesn’t sit quite right, BuzzFeed hanging out with Bobby Jindal for some reason, twins doing yoga, and a robot butler. Oh, and, for a longer look at YouTube culture, check out last week’s long read about my trip to VidCon 2015.

HUSBAND SHOCKS WITH WITH PREGNANCY ANNOUNCEMENT! - 4,219,358 views

This video, from mid-tier family YouTube channel “Sam and Nia,” has gone mega-viral in the past two days, and you can see why. Everyone loves a surprise pregnancy announcement, and in this case there’s the added hook that the gender roles are reversed. The man, Sam, isn’t pregnant, no. But he does get to surprise his wife with the news that she’s pregnant. How did he do this, exactly? Well, he saved some of her pee in the toilet and when she wasn’t looking he took it out with a dropper and used a home pregnancy test. Yep. Then he filmed himself walking out to the kitchen and telling his wife, and two young children, that she’s pregnant. It’s . . . quite a thing.

My initial take on the video was that it was staged. The wife, Nia, seems just a little too ready for the moment, if that makes any sense. Maybe she’s just sort of stiff in front of the camera, but something in her reaction is a little . . . rehearsed, maybe? I don’t know. The modern world has made me a cynic and a skeptic.

I no longer think it was staged, but I do think there’s something decidedly off about it. For one thing, can’t we let women have that? I mean, of all the things this country does to subjugate and objectify women and their bodies, do smarmy YouTube dudes really have to be taking pregnancy announcements away from them, too? I can just picture this guy, this Sam person, quietly stewing when his wife told him she was pregnant the other two times, because she got to have the cool, fun surprise and he didn’t. So he decided that, for baby number three, he was gonna be the one who gets to say surprise. So he literally filmed himself extracting his wife’s urine from a toilet and put it on YouTube, all so he could be the big surprise guy. Like, let women have that, dude. If you want to surprise the mother of your child with, like, the gender of the baby, because she didn’t want the doctor to tell her, but would be fine with you telling her? Great! Good. Throw an “It’s a girl!” surprise party. Nothing wrong with that, so long as you’re sure she wants to know. But pulling her pee out of the goddamned toilet all so you can get to tell her she’s pregnant? It’s creepy! I’m sorry, it’s creepy, and controlling.

Don’t you detect a note of creepiness from this whole situation? Well, I did, so I did a minor amount of digging, and here are some things I’ve learned about Sam and Nia. For one, they’re big ol’ Christians. Like “‘Child of God’ is the first thing in Sam’s Instagram bio” Christians. Which, hey, fine, to each their own. Except, last month, Sam, and Nia sort of made a video apologizing for the previous day’s vlog, in which, I guess (the vlog has since been edited), they asked their daughter about gay marriage and she said whatever floats your boat, basically, but then Sam counseled her about why gay marriage is wrong. People got mad, and apparently the clip wound up on Jimmy Kimmel’s show, and so Sam made a video saying he was sorry, and that he and his wife love everyone and even—gasp!—have gay friends who they, y’know, don’t treat like garbage, and are therefore magnanimous saints. But, uh, they then go on to say that they don’t “agree with that lifestyle” or some such horseshit. See, what they’re really “apologizing” for is the way they talked about gay marriage—Sam says that people are mad because he didn’t treat it seriously enough. No, dude, people are mad because you’re an asshole, not because of how you were an asshole.

Also? You know what lifestyle I don’t agree with? I don’t agree with filming yourself taking your wife’s piss out of the toilet so you can lord the facts of her own body over her. And I certainly don’t agree with naming your daughter Symphony, which these people did. (The kid’s name is Symphony.) So go stick your “lifestyle” where God’s light don’t shine, you fame-grubbing weirdo.

Ugh. It’s always this type, isn’t it? It always is.

Push-Up Contest With Governor Bobby Jindal - 295,409 views

Speaking of that type, here’s Bobby Jindal, a man from Louisiana who will never be president, doing a fun push-up contest for BuzzFeed. Yeah, BuzzFeed’s at it again. That rancid Ted Cruz video wasn’t enough, I guess. Now they’ve gotta have a charming little thing with Bobby Jindal where he competes against things like “Obamacare” in a push-up contest. Why are they doing these videos? I know, I know, “both sides of the issue,” blah blah. But Ben Smith has recently gone on record as saying that BuzzFeed “firmly believe[s] that for a number of issues, including civil rights, women’s rights, anti-racism, and LGBT equality, there are not two sides.” Which, O.K., then why again are you giving such cheery, gee-whiz coverage to politicians like Bobby Jindal and Ted Cruz, who actively work against that stuff? Sure the “mainstream media” people might be howling away at the idea that conservative candidates shouldn’t have access to a media platform because of their beliefs, but BuzzFeed is a publication that, by and large, has been admirably responsible, fair, and progressive in its coverage of women’s rights, gay rights, trans rights, etc. And I think those principles are worth protecting and upholding far more than the sort of noodly idea that Bobby Jindal and Ted Cruz deserve silly viral videos just because, I dunno, they want them? Pfft. It’s babyish and embarrassing and, what’s worse, it all exists as a way for BuzzFeed to (a) brag about their access, and (b) limply try to convince conservatives that they can enjoy BuzzFeed, too—not out of any real desire for balance, but because they want a certain kind of journalistic respect, and, hey, conservative readers’ traffic can’t hurt. This is the same lame strategy that had serial plagiarist and conservative doofus Benny Johnson in their employ for far too long. This new-nice, smarmy (there’s that word again) pandering to being fully inclusive and reasonable and free from criticism. That last one is really what it’s all about. We get videos like this because, not so deep down, BuzzFeed just wants everyone to like them.

Yoga Challenge - 327,519 views

O.K., jeez, enough politics. Sorry about that. Here, to cleanse the palate, is a video of two twins doing yoga poses together. It’s . . . well, hm, you know what? I don’t know how old these kids are or what their deal is. (Well, I mean, I know what their deal is, they want to be YouTube stars—I saw them strutting around VidCon like they already were, in fact.) So maybe we shouldn’t be watching this yoga video. I mean, if you’re a teenager and this video makes you laugh or makes you feel, y’know, happy in your bathing suit area, that’s just fine. But no one over the age of . . . 20(?) should be watching this video, I don’t think. So! To all our teenage readers (there have to be at least one or two, right?), have at it. To the rest of you, don’t press play and let’s just move the heck along.

Aloft hotel robot butler that brings you room service. - 60,726 views

Is this cute? Or is this deeply unsettling in an Ex Machina kind of a way? On the one hand, look at this cheery little talking trash can, bringing this guy yogurt or ice cream or something. I mean, good for it, this R2-D2-looking motherfucker. But on the other hand? This guy was expecting this whirring nightmare to show up at his door and chirp at him, he summoned it. But what if you didn’t know this hotel had robot butlers and were just walking down the hallway, and suddenly there’s this menace turning the corner and puttering toward you? In a hotel hallway, which is already a scary enough place? (Thanks a lot, Kubrick!) I think that might be one of the most terrifying moments of your life. So this robot is both things, a delight and a horror. It’s all just a matter of perspective. I would love to order room service at a hotel and have this ungodly device show up at my door bearing food. But would I love being alone in a hotel corridor with this electric ghoul? Absolutely not. So, I’m firmly ambivalent about this. That’s what I am. How about you?

I LOVE CHEESE. - 195,197 views

Finally, something we can all agree on. The title for one. We all love cheese. Also, look at this weirdo eating the cheese. What’s his deal? Why’re his ears like that? Why’s his tongue doing that? Who knows. But that little guy likes his cheese, that’s for sure. And who can blame him. Cheese is good! Also good? Weekends. And, wouldn’t you know it, here comes a weekend right now. Go enjoy it. Summer may be fleeting away faster than ever before, but it’s still here right now. So go revel in it. Eat some cheese. Do some yoga. Take a pregnancy test. Whatever. The world, or the weekend at least, is yours.