Well before the Affordable Care Act became the law of the land, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) implemented the Hospital-Acquired Conditions (HACs) Initiative as part of a value-based purchasing program.

This 2008 decision to cease reimbursements to hospitals for treating patients with any of eight conditions -- if acquired during their inpatient stays -- was intended to motivate hospitals to do whatever it took to eliminate preventable infections; i.e., to raise the quality of the care they deliver while reducing the huge costs associated with battling HACs.

In 2012, a survey of infection preventionists at 317 hospitals reported a steep increase in surveillance, education, and prevention efforts focused on CMS' targeted conditions; e.g., using antiseptic-containing dressings to prevent central line-associated blood stream infections (CLABSI).

Hospitals that failed to reduce HACs began to incur high costs; at one point, hospitals in Florida faced annual Medicare penalties of up to $300 million and, nationwide, providers who failed to submit the required data were docked up to 1.5% of their overall Medicare payments.

So, is the "stick" working?

Living in a totally wired electronic age with enormous amounts of data at our fingertips, we expect real-time feedback and rapid analyses -- but the answer isn't so easy to elucidate.

Because the penalties were implemented without first collecting relevant data from randomly selected hospitals, it is difficult to say whether changes that occurred since 2008 are directly attributable to the penalties.

A study published in 2012 found no evidence that the 2008 CMS policy had any measurable effect on infection rates in U.S. hospitals.

A year later, a study of certain HACs in Florida hospitals concluded that the Medicare nonpayment policy was associated with a decline in the rate of hospital-acquired vascular catheter infections (HA-VCAI) and the probability of acquiring HA-VCAI post-policy implementation.

Fast forward to 2015 and the publication of two more studies:

A study of 1,381 U.S. hospitals showed an association between the HAC initiative and significant improvements in CLABSI and catheter-associated urinary tract infections -- evidence that better processes yield better outcomes. Results of a retrospective observational study tracking changes since the nonpayment policy was initiated showed that the incidence of hospital-associated pressure ulcers had decreased significantly among 210 academic medical centers, a clear indication that hospitals are reacting efficiently to economic policy incentives by improving prevention efforts.

It takes time for a new culture to supersede business as usual and for new habits to form; this is especially true when the threat of a penalty looms large.

Yes, the "stick" is working, but so is the "carrot" -- the professional satisfaction of making real progress in combatting HACs.