Eagles pull out another tight contest in third period

Colorado Eagles goaltender Kris Lazaruk makes a save against the Tulsa Oilers on Saturday at the Budweiser Events Center. ( Photo courtesy of Standout Imagery )

The road was steep and rocky.

The Colorado Eagles did themselves no favors to start the season, going five games without a win, and just one in their first eight. But Colorado has continued to climb.

Slow and steady wins the race the old adage says. The Eagles aren't panicking and remain focused on daily improvements. After two games against Tulsa over the weekend, it seems as though the patience is finally paying off as the Eagles won Saturday 2-1 over the Oilers, their second straight victory.

And it's starting to taste good.

"Good to get two wins, back-to-back. I thought the first 10 minutes of this game we were really angry and played with that tenacity we want to play with," said a very happy Colorado coach Chris Stewart. "We got the building involved; they were happy. And as tough as it was with the zebras slowing the game down, we tried to maintain that same pace."

Penalties did indeed hamper the pace of play with 11 power plays on the night, but Colorado's offense continued to fire away, out-shooting Tulsa drastically again 32-21.

After a handful of pucks zipping just wide of empty space in Tulsa's cage, new Colorado forward Ludwig Karlsson picked a perfect time to find his first goal in an Eagles sweater midway through the third period for a game winner.

The imposing 6-foot-3, 210-pound winger collected the puck in the far circle and sniped a shot into the top-right corner for the go-ahead power-play score with 8 minutes remaining in the game.

"Yeah, that felt great. I hadn't scored yet in my fourth game and obviously it's always fun to get your first one and get that weight off your shoulders," the Swedish national said. "It just felt great. It's been weekend of battling hard in two close games. I feel we took a great step in the right direction going forward."

Colorado (3-6-1, 7 points) used the same formula as the previous night, seizing advantage of its first power-play chance of the game to pick up a quick lead. Just 3:14 into the first period, forward Kyle Ostrow cycled the puck from the far circle to Collin Bowman on the point and Colorado's all-star defenseman lasered a one-timer past Tulsa netminder Kevin Carr.

However, the Oilers (4-5-0, 8 points) dodged a few bullets in the opening frame, trailing by just the lone goal despite being out-shot 11-5. Penalties would dominate the flow of the second after Eagles forward Jesse Mychan erased Tulsa's Dan DeSalvo with a heavy hit as he attempted a shot.

Colorado Eagles defenseman Adrian Veideman (7) battles for the puck with Tulsa's Joe Sova on Saturday at the Budweiser Events Center. The Eagles won their second straight game. (Photo courtesy of Standout Imagery)

DeSalvo never saw the hit coming, leaving him complete vulnerable. He would not return to the contest after staying down for a few minutes as trainers attended to him and aided him off the ice.

The sequence triggered a physical remaining 16 minutes to the period filled with penalties (seven minors), but Tulsa did manage an equalizer when a puck deflected off the skate of Matt Konan and across the line just before the net came free from its moorings midway through.

It was an unfortunate turn of events for the Eagles, who once more carried most of the game's offense, out-shooting Tulsa 21-12 after two frames. Yet, the Eagles have shown the greatest progress in close games, which they've found themselves in frequently this season. Instead of finding ways to lose, they're making necessary plays.

"Absolutely. We talked about that before. We went through some of those soft losses that we had that cost us. If we didn't learn something from that, then is was for naught," Stewart said. "But we learned from that; we got better. I think we showed this weekend that we can win these tight games."

But defense and play between the pipes from goaltender Kris Lazaruk (stopping 20 of 21 shots) remained stout to keep the Eagles level, and eventually in front.

"Oh, it's huge (having a hot goalie). We feel far more comfortable in our end. You need a good goalie to win games," Karlsson said. "We have guy playing really well right now, and hopefully he'll keep going like that."

Colorado heads off to its longest road trip this season with three games coming away from the BEC, the first in Utah on Wednesday followed by a pair in Allen on Friday and Saturday. The Eagles return home for six straight games starting Nov. 18.

Cris Tiller: 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller

Eagles 2, Oilers 1

At Budweiser Events Center

Tulsa 0 1 0 — 1

Colorado 1 0 1 — 2

First period — 1. Colorado, Bowman 4 (Ostrow, Veideman), 3:14 (PP).

Second period — 2. Tulsa, Konan 2 (Pleskach, Dziurzynski), 12:24.

Third period — 3. Colorado, Karlsson 1 (Kwas), 12:08 (PP).

Shots on goal — Tulsa 21; Colorado 32.

Power plays — Tulsa 0-for-6; Colorado: 2-for-5.

Goalies (shots-saves) — Tulsa: Carr (32-30); Colorado: Lazaruk (21-20).