Peter Kinder Peter Kinder Peter Kinder Lieutenant governor has fought the health care law

A remarkable hearing took place in your state Capitol on Sept. 29.

At the hearing, Brian Kinkade testified that the horror stories lawmakers have heard regarding Missouri's Department of Social Services are true.

The testimony is remarkable because Kinkade is the director of the department, which administers MO HealthNet — Missouri's version of Medicaid.

MO HealthNet provides safety-net health care for Missouri's low-income families, and complaints have poured in about the way Kinkade's department is administering the program.

Missourians report their coverage has been suddenly canceled by mistake or changed in some way. When they try to resolve the problems, they are unable to get anyone from DSS to help them. Too often, they can't even get through to the call center.

At the hearing, Kinkade said that in just one month, DSS had 250,000 calls. The majority of callers — 150,000 — hung up because of long wait times.

Clearly DSS is failing far too many Missourians who rely on MO HealthNet for their health care and medications. And yet Gov. Jay Nixon repeatedly has called for the expansion of Medicaid in Missouri.

At the hearing, a DSS spokeswoman said YoungWilliams, the company hired to operate the call center, has to offer incentives to get its employees to show up to work.

But the call center delays are only part of the problem. DSS specialists are the ones who decide eligibility and help recipients with application problems. Yet constituents tell me they've been told multiple times by DSS they are approved for medications, while they continue to await their needed paperwork.

Incredibly, these delays and service complaints come as Medicaid enrollment in the state is dropping. And even though fewer people are enrolled in MO HealthNet, the backlog has increased. At the end of June, the number of pending Medicaid applications stood at 43,740, up from 29,191 at the end of June 2013.

DSS blames a "glitch" in the new computer system used to process Medicaid applications. This sounds like the excuse uttered by federal bureaucrats whose launch of the Obamacare enrollment was such an abysmal failure.

Nixon continues to scold lawmakers for refusing to expand Medicaid in Missouri. Thank goodness the majority of lawmakers ignored him. If his DSS is unable to handle its caseload now, with declining enrollment, how could it possibly accommodate another 400,000 eligible recipients?

Kinkade said all the problems DSS is having will be fixed by the beginning of next year, but this is a crisis that has languished too long.

Missourians who rely on Medicaid have no other health care options. They have little or no financial cushion to get them through delays in health care services, and our governor and his Department of Social Services must make fixing this problem its top priority.

Peter Kinder is lieutenant governor of Missouri.

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1xeHROk