Two New Jersey senators have asked the state attorney general to delay the biggest health insurer in the state from offering a set of insurance plans that are being sold as money-saving ways to cover health care. Critics fear the Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield plans could hurt some patients and hospitals.

Democratic Sens. Nia Gill and Joseph Vitale say the state should first set up a way to oversee how health insurers rate health care providers when they set up tiered systems. Here’s a look at the issue.

THE BIG PICTURE

The business of health care has changed in the five years since President Barack Obama signed the insurance overhaul legislation. Hospitals and doctors’ offices have gone through consolidations and created partnerships. More emphasis has been placed on finding savings, largely through changing the incentives for providers. Increasingly, doctors and hospitals are being paid for getting better results rather than the traditional fee-for-service system.

Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield says its new plans, announced last month, are a way to work with providers to save money. But some advocates, along with Gil and Vitale, who chairs the Senate’s health committee, say the state needs to take a more active role in regulating changing insurance plans.

___

THE PLAN

All the details have not yet been released on Horizon’s new plans and the OMNIA Health Alliance. The company says it can’t make all the specifics public until later this month under the federal Affordable Care Act.

The offerings use a tiered provider network. Under it, patients will have low or no copays or deductibles for using preferred hospitals and higher out-of-pocket expenses for using other ones.

Horizon says the average premium will be about 15 percent lower than current plans it offers and copays and deductibles will also be lower. The company says that, factoring in premiums and out-of-pocket costs, patients would at worst have the same health care costs as they do now if they use non-preferred hospitals.

The insurer expects 250,000 people to be enrolled next year through their employers, by buying coverage on their own, or by choosing a plan on the federally run insurance exchange. State government is among the employers offering the Horizon Blue Cross plans; the public school employees benefit system is not.

Horizon says it anticipates 40,000 people who are currently not insured at all to sign up.

___

THE OBJECTIONS

“None of the legislators are opposed to changing the status quo in health care,” Vitale said in an interview Wednesday. “It’s the way that Horizon has designed and produced this product.”

Advocates worry that half the state’s hospitals could be in bad shape if they lose patients and funding after being designated as “Tier 2” facilities in the plans.

New Jersey has 72 acute-care hospitals. Half of them are designated as “Tier 1” and would take lower reimbursement rates in exchange for higher patient volumes under the plan. The remaining 36 facilities would be “Tier 2.” Patients with those plans would have higher copays and deductibles for getting treatment there. Those hospitals worry that they could be at risk if they lose the patients and the payments from Horizon.

Minalkumar Patel, senior vice president and chief strategy officer for Horizon, said Thursday that other insurers’ tiered plans are set up differently, so if the company is steering some customers away from a certain hospital, Aetna could be steering others toward it.

The New Jersey Hospital Association has not taken a position on the Horizon plan but says it believes the process for determining tiers for hospitals should be more transparent. Patel says Horizon has provide information on how the company has grouped hospitals, which he says is based on quality as well as the leadership’s openness to changed payment methods.

___

WHAT’S NEXT

Horizon says it’s not letting the senators’ request change its schedule.

The plan is being offered already to state government workers for next year. Details on the exchange, where many people can buy subsidized insurance, are to be made available later this month.

Gill and Vitale have asked the attorney general’s office for a response to their request by Tuesday.

The attorney general’s office would not comment on what action it might take.

___

Follow Mulvihill at http://www.twitter.com/geoffmulvihill