Bernard Bernacki, a family physician treating patients of all kinds in Greenfield, doesn’t like waiting for someone’s health crisis before discussing what type of end-of-life care they would want.

When patients reach an age threshold such as 50 or 65 or begin developing chronic illnesses such as heart or lung problems at any age, he’ll nudge them with literature to take home to their families encouraging a healthy talk — with relatives and then him — about what treatments they would want if incapacitated, and who should be making decisions for them if necessary.

“The conversation should not start in the last two weeks, when everybody expects the patient to die,” said Dr. Bernacki, a physician for 32 years. “No one wants to be in the position of having to guess what’s the right thing to do once someone’s in the intensive care unit. ... Crisis intervention without the patient’s input — that’s the worst-case scenario.”

That’s why he looks forward to sitting down with his staff next week to discuss a new Medicare reimbursement policy effective Jan. 1 to cover such chats, which are voluntary for its 55 million beneficiaries. Revived after being shot down several years ago as part of the “death panel” criticism of the Affordable Care Act, the policy reimburses physicians as much as $86 for a 30-minute discussion covering the life-sustaining treatment someone would want if terminally ill.

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services adopted the regulation without controversy in recent months. It was overwhelmingly endorsed by medical groups and the public alike during a comment period. Medicare has already been reimbursing for such conversations during a beneficiary’s initial evaluation. Some private insurers including Highmark have also begun compensating doctors for them, recognizing the value in avoiding expensive interventions that patients may not want if aware of their options.

“You hear more and more about how [making choices about end-of-life care] jibes with something that’s become an issue in people’s own lives, and more and more doctors are getting patients that want to talk about this,” said Lee Goldberg, director of a Pew Charitable Trusts national project to improve end-of-life care.

A Kaiser Family Foundation survey of adults nationally in September found 89 percent believe doctors should discuss end-of-life care issues with patients, though only 17 percent have done so, including just a third of those who are 75 or older. Many people still shy away from bringing up the topic voluntarily, and physicians treating symptoms and maladies throughout a busy workday lacked any financial incentive for holding such conversations.

The growing number of advocates in and outside the medical profession for such advance care planning hope and expect the discussions will become more frequent in 2016.

“It’s part of a culture change,” said Robert Arnold, a UPMC palliative care physician who counsels other professionals locally and nationally on how to have such talks. “It means that we’re paying doctors for an important thing that takes time and which we need people to be thoughtful about. This is a part of health care that should be based on patient values, rather than assuming everyone has the same values and wants to live life the same way.”

Such discussions, which can extend beyond just one session, may range in how specific they get. Doctors and staff members such as nurse practitioners and physician assistants can simply elicit patients’ goals and values describing what they would deem a quality life if seriously ill, but it can also involve the professionals’ assistance with written forms known as advance directives. Advocates urge documentation such as the following:

• A living will in which a person specifies whether treatment such as CPR, feeding tubes and surgery would be desired in the case of an irreversible coma or other terminal condition from which recovery is unlikely.

• A health care power of attorney that designates a decision maker if a patient has lost judgment abilities. Individuals are urged to discuss their goals and values in advance with whomever they’re designating.

• For seriously ill patients who may be at hospitals, nursing homes or shuttled between them, a POLST form — for Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment — in which a medical professional signs off on the patient’s choices about CPR and other lifesaving measures.

It’s crucial that medical professionals and family members alike be aware of the existence of such documents. The Allegheny Health Network is in the midst of upgrading its electronic records system to take note of whether patients have such written orders and what they say.

Arvind Venkat, an emergency room physician who is chairman of the network’s ethics committee, said that without such guidance spelled out in advance, “the path of least resistance for me is to assume I should intervene in the most aggressive way possible, even though it’s clear [from surveys that] many patients don’t want that.”

About three-fourths of the 2.5 million Americans who die each year are of Medicare age — 65 or older — but only about six of 10 people of that age indicated in a Pew Research Center survey in 2013 that they had filled out advance directives.

An open question is whether most medical professionals without a specialty such as hospice or palliative care are well-prepared to have end-of-life conversations that lead to such advance planning. There has not been a high volume of doctors billing for time spent on such consults since Highmark began reimbursing for them in March, said Tim Lightner, a vice president for the insurer.

“There’s a barrier in that a lot of providers are not really well-trained in having these types of conversations,” he said. “They’re difficult conversations to have, so it’s going to take some time, I think, for the provider community to embrace them.”

UPMC’s Dr. Arnold said medical schools and residency programs do a better job each year of preparing new doctors on end-of-life issues, and he’s involved in a training program for 200 UPMC physicians a year to improve skills and comfort in raising the issues with seriously ill patients.

“This is something every doctor should be able to do” rather than leaving it to patients to volunteer their interest, he said. “The goal is to have people be open to starting the conversation.”

Professionals such as Dr. Bernacki, who has an independent medical practice, have been prompting patients up to now without any certainty of compensation for it. He expects he and patients alike will benefit starting next year from being able to devote blocks of his time to such discussions.

“Everybody’s going to die,” he said, “but we don’t want anyone to die ugly, in an intensive care unit with 10 tubes attached to them, if that’s not what they want.”

Gary Rotstein: grotstein@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1255.