A country that descends morally and culturally will not be able to defend itself against foreign adversaries. As our culture has degenerated, our ability to defend ourselves has been weakened.

Racism is over in America. We can light our victory cigars in the flames of another black church.

Republicans are accepting the granting of marriage rights for gays with the same defiance as they had for desegregation of our public schools and the Affordable Care Act.

The TV networks and other big businesses are accustomed to pushing people around to their own liking. They've met their match with Donald Trump. He might fire the world.

Leftists don't care about the Confederate battle flag. They're just using it to attack the South — one of the last bastions of Christian conservatism left in an America that's going down the toilet.

Donald Trump may not be tactful, but he is truthful. Finally, we have a presidential candidate who speaks his mind without apology.

A once-revered country is headed for bankruptcy and failure because of unlimited spending, out-of-control entitlements and unsustainable government employment. Greece? No, the United States.

Oil scarcity has ended. Sell the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. Allow crude oil exports. Unleash the revolution in oil and gas production. Allow it to create American jobs and prosperity.

Once again I had visitors from the North who commented on the high tolls on the roads. This is what city officials want visitors to remember about their trip to Central Florida? Something is wrong here.

Concerning the bleating in the liberal press about the Confederate battle flag: Is anything ever going to be done about the real problem — easy access to firearms by mentally unstable people?

America's bending over to be politically correct shows the ignorance of our citizens — especially those educated by liberal instructors. They don't have a clue about our heritage or history.

Thank You, Orlando City Soccer Club, for planning to build and run your own stadium. Orlando's Citrus Bowl stadium … three waters, $19.20. Seriously, Orlando?

Taking down symbols that offend some groups of people sounds great. But symbols, whether they are forbidden or allowed, are not going to change hearts and minds.