It is well known that a company’s leadership can set the tone for the entire organization. A positive or negative attitude can filter from the top down and reach every employee. A recent study published in Health Affairs found that when it comes to a hospital’s performance on clinical quality metrics, the facility’s management and/or board of directors can have a huge influence.

Performance practices

“We found a strong and statistically significant relationship between hospital management practices and quality of hospital care. Hospitals with higher quality management practices also delivered higher quality of care,” said lead study author Thomas C. Tsai, MD, MPH, a research associate in the Department of Health Policy and Management at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and a resident in the Department of Surgery at Brigham and Women’s Hospital.

To evaluate the relationship between management practices and quality of care, Tsai and his colleagues looked at World Management Survey data from the United States and England. They found that hospitals that had higher quality care had better performance across four domains of management practice—operations, monitoring, targets, and human resources.

“For operations, better quality hospitals had strategies for patient flow and strategic rationales for clinical care pathways,” said Tsai in an interview with Pharmacy Today. “For monitoring, better quality hospitals had a higher degree of performance tracking and consequence management.”

He added that for targets, better quality hospitals were more able to balance multiple targets and convey to the staff the goals of targets. For human resources, better quality hospitals were more likely to reward high performers as well as have protocols for recruiting and retaining high-performing staff.

Hospital pharmacy leadership

According to Tsai, while most efforts at quality improvement have focused on tracking and incentivizing physician performance, the study suggests that hospital leadership and management practices may be an important and underrecognized contribution to the variation in hospital quality. “Similarly, hospital pharmacy leadership has an important role to play,” said Tsai. “As we move to focusing on value instead of volume, thoughtful decisions about cost-effectiveness of treatments and how to better coordinate care transitions will necessarily need to involve hospital pharmacy leadership.”

Hospital pharmacists are already taking leadership roles in national programs that resulted from the Affordable Care Act. Tsai explained that as a result of the Hospitals Readmissions Reduction Program (HRRP), all-cause readmission rates in the Medicare population have fallen to 18.5% from a baseline of 19.5%.

“What’s most impressive about the reduction in readmission rates is that the reduction is not only for the three conditions initially included in the HRRP—acute myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, and pneumonia—but for all clinical conditions,” explained Tsai. “This means that health care overall is becoming more efficient.”

He pointed out that pharmacists can play a key role in providing better medication reconciliation and after-hospital care plans. “Especially for older patients with multiple medical conditions, better education on how to properly take medications and anticipated side effects could help prevent complications that develop from poor medication adherence or polypharmacy,” said Tsai.

Emerging pharmacy opportunities

With more hospitals focusing on the value of health care, Tsai believes that pharmacists will continue to play a collaborative role in helping to shape formularies and clinical guidelines for expensive medications.

“Just as physicians are embracing new ways to coordinate the care of patients and follow-up after discharge, there may be innovative ways for hospital-based pharmacists to similarly collaborate with community-based pharmacists to ensure more seamless transitions from the hospital,” said Tsai.

As hospitals move toward team-based care, hospital pharmacists can play an “important collaborative role to proactively anticipate side effects of medications and being part of the discussion in determining optimal treatment regimens,” said Tsai.