Hemingway native follows dream

Barvetta Singletary stands on the runway in front of Air Force One, Singletary was recently named Special Assistant to the President and House Legislative Liaison working with The White House to advance legislative priorities in the United States and Congress, specifically, in the House of Representatives. PHOTO PROVIDED

We talk and dream of a thriving successful economy with job opportunities in our county, so that our children are able to go off to college and come back home to provide a decent life for themselves and help grow their community, giving back. The following person is that dream of success, a native from Hemingway, who made a difference in her county, though she lives in another state.

Barvetta Singletary has recently been named Special Assistant to the President and House Legislative Liaison working with The White House to advance legislative priorities in the United States and Congress, specifically, in the House of Representatives.

Most recently, Barvetta served as the Policy Director for the Office of the Assistant Democratic Leader, Congressman James E. Clyburn (SC, 06), the third-ranking democratic in the United States House of Representatives.

In her capacity as Policy Director, Singletary was responsible for overseeing all policy initiatives on the legislative agenda. She managed a team of policy professionals, where she oversaw drafting and analysis, and made recommendations to the Assistant Democratic Leader on legislative priorities in the House. Singletary was directly responsible for health, education, economic development, and the federal budget and appropriations policy. As an appropriations staffer, she led the effort to secure more than $150 million to improve the quality of life in South Carolina’s Sixth Congressional District. This includes funding for the Williamsburg County Boys and Girls Club, Williamsburg County Public Service Administration Building, Williamsburg County First Steps, Williamsburg County Sheriff’s Office, Williamsburg County Courthouse renovations, Williamsburg County Emergency Management and improvements to the water and waste water lines.

During Congressman Clyburn’s tenure as Majority Whip of the House, Singletary played an integral role in crafting the landmark healthcare law, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and Health Education Reconciliation Act. (“Affordable Care Act”). In addition, Singletary was the principal staffer to Congressman Clyburn on Vice President Biden’s Deficit Reduction Group (“Biden Committee”) and the Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction (“Super Committee”). In both roles, Singletary interacted and collaborated with senior White House officials, Members of Congress and other senior staff, key industries and consumer stakeholders.

Singletary was very instrumental in securing key provisions in the Affordable Care Act and Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act including: $11 billion in mandatory funding for community health centers; National Health Service Corps Scholarship and Loan Repayment Programs, which provides $1.5 billion in mandatory funding to support primary care providers who commit to practice in underserved communities; Language to ensure multi-state health exchanges meet a minimum federal standard; Non-discrimination language, a discrimination clause based on Titles VI and IX of the Civil Rights Act- an authority extended to health care for the first time in history; Language to establish and codify offices of minority health in seven agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services and she played central role in negotiating a rate review to increase accountability and transparency for insurers when raising premiums.

Singletary concurrently served as Deputy Chief of Staff to Congressman Clyburn’s congressional office, where she began as an intern in 2000 and quickly rose through a series of increasingly important positions.

Singletary is a graduate of Hemingway High School and Howard University, Washington DC. She is the daughter of Councilwoman W. Jeanie Brown-Burrows and the late Bobby Singletary.