The Super Bowl XII ring that once belonged to Dallas Cowboys defensive great and South Oak Cliff High School product Harvey Martin sold for $71,700 at auction Saturday — two days after his family tried to stop its sale in Dallas County court.

Related Dallas Cowboys great Harvey Martin won his Super Bowl ring. Next month, you can buy it.

Oak Lawn-based Heritage Auctions offered the ring during its weekend-long Sports Collectibles Platinum Night Auction in New York City. Last month the auction house’s director of sports auctions, Chris Ivy, told The Dallas Morning News it could go for upwards of $40,000. Its new owner will pay $60,000 for the ring, and an additional $11,700 to the auction house in seller’s fees.

Harvey Martin died Dec. 24, 2001, of pancreatic cancer at a Grapevine hospital. He was 51. And according to an application for a temporary injunction filed late Thursday by DeVincent Martin, son of the late Cowboy, prior to his death Harvey’s mother told DeVincent “that the prized 1977 Dallas Cowboy Super Bowl ring was stolen.”

In January Chris Ivy didn’t reveal who was selling the ring. He said only that “the ring is originally sourced from the family, but they are not the consignors.” In 1998, a local sports memorabilia dealer said Martin often hocked his playing-days belongings to keep afloat. It’s not clear if the ring was among the items sold.

After reading about its pending auction in The News in January, says the application, DeVincent called Heritage to “stop the auction.” The application says Heritage told DeVincent “the ownership was through a Florida Memorabilia dealer; however, did not list the dealer by name.” The suit was filed to “preserve the status quo” while DeVincent attempts to prove ownership.

County records show nothing beyond the application for the temporary injunction, but a Heritage spokesman says it was denied Friday, after DeVincent and his attorney T. Christopher Lewis couldn’t prove the family owns the ring. Attempts to reach DeVincent have been unsuccessful, and an email has been sent to Lewis to ask about next steps.

The petition is below.

Suit Over Harvey Martin's Ring