Austin Broda rollerblades in the Larimer County Fair parade Saturday through downtown Loveland. This year's theme was "A Rock 'n Good Time." ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

"The parade's coming. I see it coming. It's going up the street."

Carol Johnston of Loveland said this to her granddaughter, Abby, 2, Saturday morning as the bearing of the flags and area rodeo queens on horseback kicked off the 136th annual Larimer County Fair & Rodeo.

The Johnstons were sitting on Cleveland Avenue between Fourth and Fifth streets well into the route of the Larimer County Fair parade, which started at Fairgrounds Park and wound through downtown Loveland to Southeast Third Street, lasting 40 minutes.

Johnston has been coming to the parade since she was a little girl, she said.

"That's what everyone in town did," Johnston said. "It's just tradition."

The parade presented floats of all kinds, some of them displaying this year's theme of "A Rock 'n Good Time" with trailers of rock 'n roll scenes and music.

Parade judge Darla Barela, working from a table on a trailer on the west side of Cleveland Avenue between Fourth and Fifth streets, judged each float on the quality, level of creativity and how well the float carried out the theme, rating them from great to average to poor.

"It's a fun tradition," said Barela, who has been coming to the parade since she was a child and was judging for the first time.

Parade Floats

Ten of the floats were from area 4-H clubs, highlighting their activities while going along with the theme, including the Big Thompson, Boedecker Bunch, Buckhorn Valley, Desperados, Mountain Trails, Rawhiders, Sagebrush Riders, Twin Mounts, Wranglers and the Wind Dancers 4-H Horse Club.

"The more 4-H'ers we can get, the better it is," said Pat Young, chairman of the parade. "It's just a variety of entries in the Larimer County Fair parade that makes it interesting."

Young said there were some new entries this year, adding that he would like to see high school bands participate. He's made the request for several years, he said, but the parade doesn't fall during the school year.

Some of the floats featured riders on horseback; 1950s- and 1960s-era cars and trucks, wagons and trailers with hay bales, American decor or a flashback to the two decades. There were a couple of old-time diners, rock bands with cutout or real instruments, a float with hula hoopers underneath floating records and one with oversized speakers and a cardboard guitar.

"The theme of the parade this year, it brought back a lot of memories," said Kathy Greenly of Loveland. "I loved the horses. ... We used to have horses, my husband and I both did."

Greenly's friend, Elaine Hart, particularly liked the draft horses, she said.

"I love the theme and the music of the '50s and '60s. It brought a lot of memories back," Hart said.

Parades Past

The parade reminded resident Shawn Batterton of the way parades used to be, representing the farming community.

"It's kind of nice to see us honor that. The history of Loveland and the surrounding area, Weld County and Larimer County, started with farming," Batterton said. "It's nice to see we're carrying on our traditions."

Fourteen-year-old resident Breana Cross noticed this year, there was more candy — several of the float participants handed it out or tossed it onto the street for children to grab.

Mackenzie Breese stays busy playing with a plastic bag before the Larimer County Fair parade begins Saturday in downtown Loveland. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"I liked the cars and the trucks and the horses," she said. "It was pretty cool."

Though the parade officially began at 9:30 a.m., a few attendees began arriving at 7 a.m. or later to stake out their favorite spots along the route.

"We just get here early to get a place to sit before it gets too crowded," said Barbara Layne of Loveland, who came between 7:30-7:45 a.m. with her neighbor and friend, Aurora Tovar, to got their usual seat at the southeast corner of Cleveland Avenue and Fifth Street.

At 8:30 a.m.. Scott Lindschmidt of Loveland staked out a spot in the shade on Cleveland Avenue near Fourth Street for him and his daughter, MacKenna, 9.

"This is usually where we sit," Lindschmidt said. "Her mom's family always sat here, and I followed."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm