The dollar traded higher against the euro Tuesday as an unnerving breakdown in talks between Greece and its creditors caused investors to reassess the odds the highly indebted country might default on its debt.

But the U.S. currency weakened against the yen ahead of Wednesday’s updated monetary policy statement and press conference from the Federal Reserve. While the central bank isn’t expected to move on interest rates, investors are looking for clues about the timing of the first U.S. rate hike in almost a decade.

Read: Here’s all the data the Fed uses to make an interest-rate decision

The more immediate worry is cash-strapped Greece, which must repay about €1.5 billion ($1.68 billion) in loans to the International Monetary Fund at the end of the month. Creditors have balked at providing more assistance without an agreement on economic reforms, meaning the government could run out of cash to pay both its creditors and the pensions owed ordinary Greeks.

The euro fell early Tuesday after Greek Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis told a German newspaper that he doesn’t intend to present a new list of reform measures at a meeting of European Union finance ministers — known as the Eurogroup — on Thursday.

The currency later pared those losses after a Treasury spokeswoman said U.S. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew had urged Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras to make a “serious move to reach a pragmatic compromise” in a call Tuesday.

The talks between Greece and its creditors appear to have collapsed during the past few days, said Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at Oanda. “There appears to be no willingness from either to find a solution,” he said.

Should Greece default on its debts, it could leave the eurozone.

Read: Will a Grexit cause the most predictable crash in history?

The euro EURUSD, +0.1793% weakened to $1.1241, from at $1.1279 late Monday in New York, but was up from a session low of $1.1205.

The dollar traded at USDJPY, -0.42% ¥123.36, off its session highs but little changed from its levels late Monday in New York.

The ICE U.S. Dollar Index DXY, -0.22% a measure of the dollar’s strength against a basket of six currencies, was up 0.2% to 94.9990, around its level from Friday afternoon in New York.

The pound strengthened against the dollar after U.K.’s inflation report showed inflation rose 0.1% in May from the same period a year earlier. While the headline number met the market’s expectations, the details of the report, including producer prices, core consumer prices — which excludes volatile food and energy prices — and the house price index were all weaker than expected. The pound GBPUSD, +0.0953% traded at $1.5646, from $1.5598 late Monday in New York.

More from MarketWatch