A plan to move University System of Georgia retirees from a health insurance plan run by the university system to private coverage insurance companies could actually save money for retirees, but some of those retirees are not so sure.

Retirees also wonder why no one told them about the plan, approved by the Board of Regents in November 2013, until details from a leaked memorandum about it appeared in Athens’ Flagpole Magazine last week.

“We just found out a couple of days ago. It was completely a surprise to me and many others,” said Brahm Verma, a retired faculty member of UGA’s College of Engineering and president of the UGA Retirees Association.

The change, scheduled to go into effect Jan. 1, 2016, is the second part of a two-phase plan designed to slow down the climbing cost of retiree health care.

The first part, now completed, required employees eligible for Medicare to move to a federal health insurance program.

In this second change, retirees will no longer be able to get co-insurance - insurance that helps pay for expenses not paid by Medicare - through the university system.

Instead, retirees will be given a set amount of money that they can use to buy co-insurance through a so-called health insurance exchange - an organization that’s supposed to help people choose health insurance policies.

The exchange the university system plans to use is not the same as the exchanges set up by the federal Affordable Health Care Act, but a private one set up about a decade ago, said Marion Fedrick, the university system’s vice chancellor for human resources. Some universities, including private Emory University and Duke University, have already moved to the health insurance exchange model, she said.

Retirees won’t lose coverage and could even get comparable coverage at lower cost, Fedrick said in a memo circulated to senior university system administrators and again last week via telephone.

“With the health care exchange option, the retiree will be able to choose best-in-market plans (and) maximize the value of each dollar spent on health care premiums since the retiree will be able to choose coverage specific to their needs,” according to Fedrick’s memo.

The University System of Georgia is self-insured, paying medical bills with money allocated by the state and money paid by employees for health insurance, though the system contracts with an insurance company to administer it. The state picks up between 70 and 75 percent of the cost, while employees must come up with the rest, he said.

Even though the move will mean less expense for the university system, retirees should benefit from having more choices in the kinds and levels of coverage they get, Fedrick said.

And because risk will be spread among millions of customers rather than just among the university system’s roughly 16,000 retirees, retiree costs in the private plans should increase at a slower rate than they are now — a larger risk pool spreads risk and also spreads the costs out more, she said.

“Retirees are not losing benefits,” Fedrick said. “We think the majority will get better plans.”

But the memo and an accompanying “Frequently Asked Questions” document leave some important questions unanswered, Verma said. University System officials haven’t determined how much money they will put into the “defined contribution health care accounts” that they’ll establish for retirees. And the state also hasn’t determined whether the state’s contribution will be fixed or increase over time along with the cost of health insurance premiums.

“We are still trying to figure these things out,” Verma said. “I think the mystery problem is causing greater anxiety that what (the plan) might be.”

Retirees should have been involved in discussions about changing their health insurance options, Verma said.

“There should have been more of a discussion about this,” he said. “I guess if nothing else, it could have been handled better. If it was approved in 2013, there were plenty of opportunities to bring it to retirees’ attention.”

The plan is to get the word out beginning this month, including meeting with retirees at UGA and other public colleges and universities across the state, Fedrick said.

Follow education reporter Lee Shearer at www.facebook.com/LeeShearerABH or https://twitter.com/LeeShearer.