Rep. Sean Duffy, R-Wausau, speaks at the Republican National Convention in Tampa, Fla. on Tuesday, Aug. 28, 2012. (Photo: Jeff Franko/USA TODAY)

Democrats will have a candidate to run against Rep. Sean Duffy in the 7th Congressional District, they tell me. Soon.

They just don't have anyone right now.

It's not for lack of trying. Democratic Party leaders persuaded Kirk Bangstad, a Stevens Point native who made a lot of money in the tech sector, to run. Bangstad announced his bid in July; by October, following discouraging fundraising numbers, he'd dropped out.

In public view, at least, things have been extremely quiet since then. Many people, including Bangstad at the time, thought a replacement would be announced in relatively short order. But it is nearly four months later, and there hasn't even been a rumor of a candidate.

"These things take time," said Brandon Weathersby, a spokesman for the Democratic Party of Wisconsin. "We have to make sure we’re going through the right channels. ... The energy is there."

Those who do political handicapping do not typically list Duffy as a vulnerable incumbent, in no small part because, as a member of the House Financial Services Committee, he has been able to raise millions in campaign cash.

But 2016 is a presidential year, which generally means greater voter turnout for Democrats across the board. And should Republicans nominate a polarizing or unpopular candidate for president — I know it's early yet, but it is hard to imagine a Donald Trump or a Ted Cruz carrying Wisconsin — the optimistic spin from Dems is that the 7th District could suddenly be back in play.

Assuming, of course, that there is a Democrat running.

Which there will be. Soon. Any day. Look for the announcement. Just not quite yet.

Kelly Westlund, who challenged Duffy in 2014 — a very bad year for Democrats across the board — is now a staffer for U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin and is likely to remain in that job. Pat Kreitlow, the former state legislator who challenged Duffy in 2012, moved to the Grand Cayman Islands. Sen. Julie Lassa, who challenged Duffy in 2010, no longer lives in the district following the Wisconsin GOP's 2011 gerrymander. Once upon a time, Democrats talked about state Sen. Russ Decker as a future congressman; he was knocked out of office in 2010.

So who's left? Paul DeMain of Hayward, a Native American journalist of some renown, put a good foot forward in a 2014 state campaign against Sen. Jerry Petrowski. Democrats also see Hudson, the western Wisconsin border town that is more or less suburban Minneapolis, as an opportunity for growth, and point to some people they like in local politics there. And the far north, Ashland and Superior, are traditionally Democratic areas.

Running for Congress seems hard to me. You have to spend a lot of time calling rich people on the phone and asking them for money. When Bangstad dropped out, he did so with a screed calling money in politics a scourge. Weathersby and others I spoke to agreed that, yes, the amount of time a candidate must spend on fundraising does discourage many from getting involved. I can imagine the conversations party officials have with prospective candidates, and the way they must get derailed. Wait, I have to spend how many hours per week calling people up for donations?

Duffy had raised about $1.1 million as of the end of the year, according to the money-in-politics tracker OpenSecrets.org. The top industries contributing to him were investment banks and insurance companies, not exactly America's favorites. Only 7 percent of his money came from small donors, defined as individuals giving less than $200.

Are these politically inconvenient facts sturdy enough to mount a challenge upon? I have no idea. I talked this week to some Democrats who think so. Maybe one of them, one of these days, will put that theory to the test.

Robert Mentzer is central Wisconsin storytelling coach and a columnist for USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin. Contact: robert.mentzer@gannettwisconsin.com, 715-845-0604; on Twitter: @robertmentzer

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1XzZGEL