In the first round, they took a risk on a talented player who made a mistake.

In the second round and third round, they went for versatility, filling a hole on the offensive line with the athletic Ty Sambrailo, and adding to their tight end corps with Jeff Heuerman.

In the fourth round on Saturday, the Broncos took another step toward bolstering their front line by selecting 6-foot-4, 309-pound center Max Garcia from Florida two days after they traded center Manny Ramirez to Detroit to land first-round pick Shane Ray.

“I think I’m a great fit for the Broncos as far as what they do for the zone blocking,” Garcia said.

The Broncos met with Garcia several times and have told him they want him to come in and compete for the starting job.

Garcia started his college football career at Maryland, where he started all 12 games at left tackle in 2011. After transferring to Florida, Garcia had to sit out the 2012 season, per NCAA rules, but started 12 games for the Gators the next season, including seven at left guard and five at left tackle.

In 2014, after switching from left guard to center in the spring, Garcia earned second-team All-SEC honors.

“I feel pretty good about all the different players that we had,” Broncos general manager John Elway said. ” I think that when we looked at the different options that we did have, obviously offensive line was a place that we needed to get better, and we feel that we really did with Ty and Max Garcia.”

In the fifth round, at No. 164, the Broncos took Lorenzo Doss, a cornerback from Tulane.

The 5-foot-10, 182-pound Doss was a three-year letterman for The Green Wave who recorded 126 career tackles and 14 interceptions.

Darius Kilgo, a 6-foot-3, 319-pound defensive lineman from Maryland, was taken in the sixth round (No. 203) by the Broncos.

With the first of their three consecutive compensatory picks in the seventh round, the Broncos took 6-foot-3, 215-pound quarterback Trevor Siemian from Northwestern at No. 250.

Siemian tore his left anterior cruciate ligament in November and was unable to play the rest of the season.

“I’m about five months out of my surgery,” he said. “I probably have about a month left of good rehab, and I’m trying to stay the course.”

After the selection, Elway tweeted that Siemian “had a productive career as a quarterback at Northwestern. He has raw talent and we think he will develop nicely.”

He will join Brock Osweiler and Zac Dysert as Peyton Manning’s backups.

At No. 251, Denver took another cornerback from Tulane, Taurean Nixon (6 feet, 183 pounds). And with its final pick, Denver selected Josh Furman, a 6-foot-2 202-pound safety from Oklahoma State.

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickijhabvala