Victor Ng

When I decided to take my first management position, I was afraid I’d miss designing. What would life be like without the delight of finding that perfect interaction for the right problem, or the high of shipping new stuff to the world? But then I realized that I was facing the ultimate design challenge: Designing a design team.

Design is a way of thinking. It’s a process for solving problems. And these same concepts apply to the art of building your team.

Identify your ideal outcome

To create something of meaning, you must first define the opportunity.

I asked my team to think about a time when they felt like they were doing their best work. What problems were they working on? Who were they working with? What helped them ship work they were proud of? We shared our stories and wrote down the common themes: Purpose, Humility, Trust, Unity, Autonomy, Humor, Openness, Creative Space, Diversity, Passion, Camaraderie and Play.

Work collaboratively with your team to establish the core ideas you’ll use to inform the future design of the team.

Start with empathy

Design thinking is anchored around the idea of human empathy. It’s about observing behavior, understanding unmet needs, and turning these insights into something that will help people achieve what they couldn’t previously. Helping designers do their best work also starts with empathy and understanding.

Mia Blume

Dig deep to unearth what motivates each of your designers. Don’t just help them find projects they work on, but really try to understand what makes them tick. (Hint: It isn’t always the same thing!)

For example, one of my designers, is passionate about travel and foreign languages. So when we decided to launch Place Pins, it made sense to put him on the project. He took a vacation to Japan and used the product to plan, document and share his journey. He was able to incorporate his personal interests into making the product better — a win for all of us.

Ask yourself and your team: What drives them to do great work? Are they motivated by solving hard problems? Shipping quality work? Some other kind of reward?

Design (for relationships)

Some of the best products in the world help people connect, interact and learn from others. The best teams do, too. For instance, the more time designers spend with other designers, the better their work gets. Creating an environment that helps your designers collaborate, learn and ship their highest quality work is worth investing in from the start.

Create moments for inspiration and learning. Cultivate a creative community that makes it easy and comfortable for everyone to participate.

Last year at Pinterest, I kicked off a fun program called Studio Nights. Pinterest employees have a lot of interesting hobbies. Why not create a moment to celebrate and share their interests? The aim was to unlock the creativity across the entire organization by encouraging people to teach short classes about their skills or passions. We’ve had a variety of classes — building terrariums, making sushi, learning Photoshop, beekeeping — that exposed the talent and creativity of everyone that works at Pinterest.

Identify things that keep your team inspired and immersed in their craft, and then run with it.

Develop a culture of critique. Many creatives are familiar with critique, particularly if they went to art school. But it can be uncomfortable for some at first, so take heed.

- Establish a regular cadence for formal critique.

- Encourage your designers to own the responsibility of collecting feedback.

- Keep the group small and focused.

- Frame the goal of the work or the critique clearly at the beginning.

- Facilitate constructive dialogue and critique.

- Remove the person from the critique by using pronouns that focus on the work.

Play matchmaker. Take the time to observe where there’s natural synergy and where there isn’t. What types of relationships energize or deplete each individual?

Once you know what magnifies an individual’s creativity or output, try sparking new relationships that provide opportunities for growth. Pair an experienced designer with a new grad. Or put someone who’s strong on visuals with more of a system thinker.

Mia Blume

Make room for collaboration and spontaneity.

A sea of desks usually isn’t suited for sharing and collectively creating. Instead create an environment that’s comfortable, vibrant and reflects the values of the company. Give them places to go for hours of uninterrupted focus and different places for stimulating social time.

You don’t need to hire someone to do it for you, just use your creativity. You’d be surprised what a great couch, a few pillows and music can do.

Gather feedback

The best product development teams create feedback loops that help them rapidly experiment with new features and functionality. The same is true for your team.

Create regular feedback loops that help you gather input on how to improve both the work and the team environment. Personally, I prefer one-on-one time with each designer. Whether it’s grabbing coffee or going for a walk, it provides an opportunity to check in on how things are going for both of us. Team debriefs can also be a really useful tool if you conduct them every few months or after significant shifts in the way you work.

Iterate. And then iterate again.

Designing a team is an ongoing project. And crafting an environment that nurtures and inspires your most talented creatives to ship their best work is a design challenge worth taking on. Don’t be afraid to take risks and experiment, because the best solutions are the ones designed to fit your team and your culture the best.

Ms.Blume is a Product Design Manager at Pinterest. Prior to Pinterest, Mia was a design lead at Square and before that, she was interaction design lead at IDEO

Follow @mialoira



Follow @WSJstartup