Some same-­sex married couples may discover that Social Security benefits that were once tax-­free are taxable due to required hitting income thresholds. (Photo: AndreyPopov, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

With all the new rights and benefits same-sex married couples can look forward to after the Supreme Court's big decision on Friday, there are some potential downsides, as well.

Experts were quick to note potential downsides for same-sex married couples in the wake of the Supreme Court's ruling. Yes, you'll be able to file joint income tax returns, but now the so-called marriage penalty comes into play, says Lee-Ford Tritt, a professor at the University of Florida Levin College of Law in Gainesville, Fla.

For instance, Tritt says same­-sex married couples with children who previously could file separately as single and head of household could possibly see increased taxes as a result of joint filing, he says. And couples might also lose some credits such as the adoption credit.

Plus, some same-­sex married couples may discover that Social Security benefits that were once tax-­free are taxable due to required hitting income thresholds, says Tritt.

Says Alan Gassman, an attorney with Gassman, Crotty & Denicolo, in Clearwater, Fla.: "The day has arrived for same-sex couples to do the math and make the hard decisions on whether to take advantage of this new opportunity in the face of well over a dozen important legal, tax, social benefit and other planning factors. There will doubtlessly be many errors made, and estate plans distorted by well-meaning new married couples who thought with their hearts, but not with their accountants, lawyers and wallets."

Tritt did warn of some serious unresolved issues that will affect the finances of same-sex married couples. For instance, the bans on same-sex marriages have been held unconstitutional — they are "void ab initio" — which means that at no time in history were these bans legally valid (it is as if these bans have never even existed).

This will create, says Tritt, legal issues among the states. For instance, there will be issues, and most certainly lawsuits, concerning the effective dates (retroactive or prospective) of the marriages of same-sex couples who married before the Supreme Court decision but were living in non-recognition states. "These couples might have been deprived serious property rights concerning a host of issues, including inheritance rights, elective shares, spousal support, co-ownership of real estate, tax deductions and credits, just to name a few," says Tritt. "If these bans on same-sex marriage 'never existed,' these spouses, or their estates, might be entitled to these rights retroactively."

However, these marriages and the corresponding rights might be applied prospectively and not retrospectively, says Tritt. "There is ample legal precedent that will provide sound jurisprudential arguments for all sides of these forthcoming legal debates," he says. "These issues and many others are yet to be determined."

Robert Powell is editor of Retirement Weekly, contributes regularly to USA TODAY, The Wall Street Journal and MarketWatch. Got questions about money? Email Bob at rpowell@allthingsretirement.com.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share SUPREME COURT RULES IN SUPPORT OF GAY MARRIAGE Obama: Marriage equality strengthens communities | 1:13 President Barack Obama speaks about the Supreme Court ruling on same-sex marriage. Bloomberg 1 of 10 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share SUPREME COURT RULES IN SUPPORT OF GAY MARRIAGE Reporter inside the Courtroom for #SCOTUSmarriage ruling | 4:23 USA TODAY's US Supreme Court reporter Richard Wolf details the Justices' emotions and opinions during today's historic ruling legalizing same-sex marriage. Collin Brennan, Richard Wolf, USA TODAY 2 of 10 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share SUPREME COURT RULES IN SUPPORT OF GAY MARRIAGE Supreme Court: Gay marriage legal in all 50 states | 0:29 The U.S. Supreme Court struck down bans on same-sex marriage in a historic 5-4 ruling. The justices ruled that states cannot deny gay men and lesbians the same marriage rights enjoyed for thousands of years by opposite-sex couples. VPC 3 of 10 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share SUPREME COURT RULES IN SUPPORT OF GAY MARRIAGE Same-sex couples celebrate SCOTUS ruling | 0:45 Watch as people rejoice in the moments following the Supreme Court's ruling on same-sex marriage. VPC 4 of 10 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share SUPREME COURT RULES IN SUPPORT OF GAY MARRIAGE Supreme Court ruling on gay marriage to impact businesses, individuals | 3:42 There are financial implications for individuals and businesses following the U.S. Supreme Court's ruling that legalizes same-sex marriage nationwide. Janice Cowhey, a partner at Marcum, said the ruling will impact the economy. Newslook 5 of 10 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share SUPREME COURT RULES IN SUPPORT OF GAY MARRIAGE Beachgoers react to court ruling on gay marriage | 1:13 Even in blue state California, folks had a polarized view of the Supreme Court ruling. Jefferson Graham reports from Manhattan Beach. Jefferson Graham 6 of 10 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share SUPREME COURT RULES IN SUPPORT OF GAY MARRIAGE Hamm, Janney praise gay marriage ruling | 1:19 Allison Janney and Jon Hamm were among the many celebrities praising Friday's landmark U.S. Supreme Court ruling on gay marriage. The actors spoke about the ruling while promoting their roles in the animated spinoff "Minions." (June 26) AP 7 of 10 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share SUPREME COURT RULES IN SUPPORT OF GAY MARRIAGE The financial side of the marriage equality ruling | 2:19 The Supreme Court's ruling on whether same-sex marriages should be recognized will have wide-ranging economic impacts for same-sex couples. Time 8 of 10 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share SUPREME COURT RULES IN SUPPORT OF GAY MARRIAGE Punchlines: The 'jiggery-pokery' high court ruling on Obamacare | 5:02 The late-night comics explore SCOTUS ruling and words that have no meaning. Take a look at our favorite jokes on the Supreme Court ruling to uphold Obamacare, then vote for yours at opinion.usatoday.com. Eileen Rivers 9 of 10 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share SUPREME COURT RULES IN SUPPORT OF GAY MARRIAGE Penn Jillette on same-sex marriage decision | 1:00 Penn Jillette, of the magician duo Penn & Teller, reacts favorably to the U.S. Supreme Court ruling, legalizing same-sex marriage across the nation. He made the comment while promoting their upcoming stint on Broadway. (June 26) AP 10 of 10 Last VideoNext Video Obama: Marriage equality strengthens communities

Reporter inside the Courtroom for #SCOTUSmarriage ruling

Supreme Court: Gay marriage legal in all 50 states

Same-sex couples celebrate SCOTUS ruling

Supreme Court ruling on gay marriage to impact businesses, individuals

Beachgoers react to court ruling on gay marriage

Hamm, Janney praise gay marriage ruling

The financial side of the marriage equality ruling

Punchlines: The 'jiggery-pokery' high court ruling on Obamacare

Penn Jillette on same-sex marriage decision





Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Nks1Jf