For more information about what Medicare Advantage plans are available, visit the SHIBA program’s website at www.Oregon.Gov/dcbs/insurance/shiba or call 800-722-4134.

Central Oregon’s Medicare Advantage market won’t see the same shake-up this year it did last — when five new plans entered the playing field and two were discontinued — but some of those buying plans for 2016 will notice significant cost hikes.

The monthly cost of one of Moda Health’s plans with drug coverage will jump nearly 39 percent to $97 per month. For another Moda Health plan without drug benefits, the spike will be even higher: 60 percent to $16 per month. Some of the rate increases are similar to those seen in 2015, including one plan’s premium increase of 39 percent.

Medicare beneficiaries can only switch their Medicare Advantage and prescription drug (Part D) plans during a specific window: Oct. 15 through Dec. 7. While some seniors and individuals with disabilities who rely on the federal health insurance program may be tempted to let their old plans roll over into 2016, experts warn that — although it may have been in the past — that’s no longer a safe bet.

Cynthia Hylton, Central Oregon’s field and training officer for the state’s Senior Health Insurance Benefits Assistance Program, said Medicare Advantage and Part D plans can go through significant changes from year to year, especially when it comes to monthly premiums and which doctors and drugs are covered.

In an interview last week, Hylton said she had just worked with a woman who had no intention of checking for changes in her Part D plan.

“I said, ‘You know, Agnes, you better let me do it because you just don’t know what’s going to happen,’” she said. “Turns out, four of her meds would not have been on her plan if she had just let it roll over. That was going to really hurt her.”

Hylton said she knows how confusing it can be to sort through, especially if someone has a cognitive impairment or isn’t good with computers, which is why they should enlist the help of a friend or family member or contact her office within the state’s Insurance Division, which has people like her whose jobs include helping people enroll in Medicare plans.

“That’s why a program like ours exists,” she said. “We can do that.”

Since there are a lot of things basic Medicare doesn’t cover, such as outpatient prescription drugs, dental care, alternative care and hearing aids, many people buy extra coverage to fill in the gaps, either Medicare Advantage plans (also known as Part C) or Medicare Supplement plans (also known as Medigap plans). Which of those a person chooses depends on their specific needs.

The federal government pays private companies a set amount of money — in 2014 it came to about $850 per person on average — to offer Medicare Advantage plans. The companies also charge premiums on top of that.

About 13,300 people in Deschutes, Jefferson and Crook county were enrolled in Medicare Advantage plans as of October, or about 26 percent of the Medicare-eligible population, according to the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

Medicare Advantage plans generally cost less per month, but they have networks that determine which providers customers can see without paying a boatload of money. Medicare Supplement plans, by contrast, are good at any clinic that accepts original Medicare.

“If you’re a person who, in your happy, golden retirement years, you want to drive to Missouri and see Aunt Matilda and spend a few months there visiting all your cousins, your original Medicare and supplement travels really well,” Hylton said. “There is no in or out of network.”

Jan Smith, a volunteer who helps people enroll in Medicare plans at the Central Oregon Council On Aging office in Bend, added that Medicare Advantage plans often allow services performed by out-of-network providers to be considered in network if the patient couldn’t get the care at an in-network provider. If someone from Bend broke his leg while on vacation in New York, for example, his Medicare Advantage provider would cover care from doctors there as in-network because he wouldn’t be able to travel back home, she said.

Coverage through a Medicare Supplement plan is not as simple as that.

People can apply for Medicare Supplement plans any time during the year, but they’re only guaranteed to be accepted during their first six months of being on basic Medicare. After that, the carriers can ask health questions and deny applicants based on pre-existing conditions. While the Affordable Care Act prevented traditional insurance policies from denying coverage for people who are already sick, Medicare Advantage plans were exempted from that requirement, Smith said. The exception is if someone’s Medicare Advantage plan is discontinued. In those cases, people can enroll in Supplement plans without running the risk of being denied.

There are 12 Medicare Advantage plans offered in Central Oregon by four carriers: Humana, Moda Health, PacificSource and Providence. Lisa Emerson, SHIBA’s program coordinator, said that’s a healthy range of choices for the region’s population size, and it doesn’t hurt that Bend’s population is growing rapidly, especially among people of retirement age.

Beginning in 2014, the Affordable Care Act required that Medicare Advantage carriers spend 85 percent of their income on medical services. The rest can go toward things like administrative expenses and profit.

That’s had a big impact on how the carriers interact with their customers, Hylton said. These days, carriers are much more proactive about making sure people get the medical services they need, she said. The federal government is rewarding carriers using a star rating system based on customer feedback. That’s also made carriers much more responsive than in the past to their customers’ complaints, Hylton said.

“The key for the consumer to know is if you’ve got an issue with your plan, you’ve got to call Medicare and tell them,” she said, “because it’s driven by that.”

— Reporter: 541-383-0304, tbannow@bendbulletin.com