Colorado Spirit Mountain Outreach Team finds permanent home, more ways to reach out to flood survivors

Pinewood Springs resident Jeff Sherman, left, talks Thursday with Amanda Rumsey, an outreach counselor with the Colorado Spirit Mountain Outreach Team, about flood damage to his residence and property during the Public Flood Recovery Meeting/Workshop, where the team had a booth. Sherman, who is staying with his sister in Longmont, said his basement was flooded out, destroying all of his personal belongings and tools, and that he lost a half acre of dirt in his backyard. "I have a grand canyon in my backyard. ... It's a boulder field. There's nothing but rock," he said. "If you go out the back of my house, you can look down 6 to 8 feet." (Shelley Widhalm)

A flood recovery group that wants to reach every business and residence in Loveland and Berthoud now has a permanent home base.

The Colorado Spirit Mountain Outreach Team is leasing space at the future Community Life Center, 1511 E. 11th St., which will house the House of Neighborly Service and 11 other nonprofits by an undetermined date.

The Outreach Team provides community outreach, crisis counseling and education about community resources available to survivors of the Front Range flood that struck 13 Colorado counties in September 2013. The team members promote these services by going door to door, distributing information and making presentations.

The team, which consists of three smaller teams, moved the Loveland team to office space in the Community Life Center in late November 2013. At about the same time, the Fort Collins team relocated to donated space at the Foothills Mall, 344 E. Foothills Parkway, Unit 5W, and the Estes Park team to leased space at 1218 Graves Ave.

"It took awhile to get permanent space," said Darlene Bassetti, team leader for the Outreach Team.

Previously, the Loveland team, which consists of Bassetti and five outreach counselors, was housed at the former disaster relief and donation center at the old Agilent Campus on 14th Street Southwest. The outreach counselors include Sahrah Bliss, Angelica Dominguez, Elena Duran, Amanda Rumsey and Meghann Shaffer.

Advertisement

Going Door to Door

The entire 20-member team will be in Loveland, Fort Collins and Estes Park at least through November 2014, but may remain longer if additional federal funding is approved. The team receives its financial support through the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Substance Abuse Mental Health Service Administration that is coordinated through the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. These agencies have a contract with Touchstone Health Partners to administer the team.

The team members travel in groups of two, going door to door to businesses and residences in flood-affected and other areas of each city to reach out to survivors and those who may have contact with survivors. Their aim is to address the emotional impact of surviving the flood and to inform survivors of the resources and support services in the community.

"We're more of a support role," said Derek Gaarder, program coordinator for the Outreach Team. "We're not traditional therapists."

From mid-September through Friday, Jan. 24, the team made 5,100 primary service contacts and 11,000 secondary service contacts in Larimer County. Primary contacts involve talking directly with a survivor, while secondary contacts consist of leaving materials about the program in a public place or a home when no one is available.

Starting in November, the team also began providing informational letters to churches and schools, contacting 70-plus churches and nearly 30 schools in Loveland, Berthoud, Estes Park and Masonville.

"This is going to be a marathon, not a sprint," Gaarder said. "There's no quick fix. It's going to take time."

Positive Response

The response to the primary contacts has been mostly positive, though a few are surprised to have people knocking on their door, wanting to help, Rumsey said.

The outreach counselors explain why they are there and ask if the resident or business owner or employee is a survivor or knows someone, such as another employee or customer, who has gone through the flood.

Starting in early January, the Loveland team divided Loveland into six quadrants to canvass the city and outlying areas to make sure everyone has been contacted who has been affected in some way by the flood.

"We're going everywhere to make sure we don't miss anybody," Dominguez said.

The survivors have dealt with some of the immediate logistics in response to a disaster, but now are in a transition phase, Duran said, adding that the outreach counselors need to know how to ask the right questions to get them to open up.

Some normal reactions include anxiety, depression, irritability, loss of concentration, sleep issues and intrusive thoughts, Gaarder said.

"People are going through very normal reactions to an abnormal event," Gaarder said, explaining that people will have emotional reactions to life-changing events. "It's trying to honor that feeling."

Other Ways of Reaching Out

The team is trying to reach the survivors in additional ways, including:

Dropping off informational brochures and flyers that explain the team's services.

Making presentations to educate individuals and groups about those services.

Setting up weekly informational tables at coffee shops, including the Coffee Tree and Dazbog in downtown Loveland.

Organizing support groups, which rotate every other Thursday between the Loveland and Fort Collins offices. The upcoming groups in Loveland are 5:30-6:30 p.m. Feb. 13 and Feb. 27.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.