Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

The presidency of President Barack Obama is "finished," even though he can't admit it, which is why the president continues to talk about his policies in light of the fall midterm elections, radio talk show host Laura Ingraham told "Fox & Friends.""The president really can't get his head wrapped around the fact that he is over. Obama is finished. I'm sorry. But, his policies have failed. The country is weaker," Ingraham said Tuesday.Ingraham said Obama gave a "gift to the Republican party" during an interview on Rev. Al Sharpton's syndicated radio show, "Keepin' It Real," on Monday when he said that Democrat lawmakers had supported his policies, even though few wanted him to campaign with them."The bottom line is, these are all folks who vote with me. They have supported my agenda in Congress," Obama said. "So, this isn't about my feelings being hurt. These are folks who are strong allies and supporters of me."Ingraham said that it was, indeed, "all about his feelings being hurt," adding that "65 percent of Americans think we're going in the wrong direction.""In the end, Obamaism didn't work. And, all the candidates across the country know it," she said. "He can't change his policies, because that would be conceding ultimate policy defeat. So instead, he says, 'Oh, no. They're all with me, and they're going to go along with my ideas.' "Ingraham said Obama "struggles" with his ego that combined with his insecurity, so that "they're all at war with each other inside the president."Should Republicans win the majority of both houses of Congress in the November elections, Ingraham cautioned "there will be a day after the election day where they also have to stand for something." In order to "grow the Republican party," she said the GOP would have to show "what does work when it comes to our economic policies, our foreign policies, border policies.""I hope the Republicans are thinking in those terms. Not just in, 'We're going to be against Obama,' because that's only going to take you so far. You've got to win in 2016 as well, but you've got to win first in the midterms," she said.