Perhaps the most encouraging sign in the monthly statistics was evidence that people who had long been sidelined were being lured back to the job market. The overall share of Americans in the labor force ticked up 0.2 of a percentage point to 62.9 percent.

“That has been the shadow hanging over all the other labor force statistics,” Patrick O’Keefe, director of economic policy at CohnReznick, an accounting, tax and advisory firm, said of the stubbornly low participation rate.

Despite the improved economic picture, there is still plenty of distress and anger, emotions that have helped spur the success of the Republican presidential front-runner, Donald J. Trump, and rallied many Democrats behind the underdog Bernie Sanders’s attacks on inequality and Wall Street cronyism.

Part of the reason is the unevenness of the recovery. Fortunes have diverged depending on where people live, their education and skill levels and what industry they work in.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We are seeing job growth across a range of industries, but we’re also seeing a polarization in the labor market,” said Tara Sinclair, chief economist for the job site Indeed.

There has been vigorous demand for hospitality and service workers, often at low wages. But the higher total job count masks losses in manufacturing, transportation, warehousing and energy, better-paying industries that tend to be dominated by blue-collar white men who have been particularly battered by shifts in the American economy.

The mining industry, for example, continues to bleed jobs, with a loss of 19,000 in February, while manufacturing lost 16,000.

“Working people in states like Michigan and Ohio feel the lousy manufacturing job loss and growing trade deficit with China, even if Wall Street and D.C. do not,” Scott Paul, president of the Alliance for American Manufacturing, said in a statement. “If you’re wondering why there’s so much interest in political insurgencies among both Democrats and Republicans this year, here’s your answer.”

And while employment has been advancing at a robust pace for more than two years, many workers continue to complain about low pay, or jobs beneath their skill levels.

“Why do we have this persistent gloom about the economy, when you have below-average unemployment rates?” asked Neera Tanden, president of the left-leaning Center for American Progress. “It is really a product of anxiety about what we call the middle-class squeeze, the ability of your income and wages to keep up with the staples of a middle-class life.”

Photo

“If you look at many Trump voters, they generally are people who have not been winning economically for a long time as the country is diversifying,” Ms. Tanden said. Whites without a college education provide the core of support for Mr. Trump.

Douglas Holtz-Eakin, a former Congressional Budget Office director and now president of the American Action Forum, a center-right policy research organization, agreed that stalled incomes were a persistent source of dissatisfaction. “Getting wage growth up more rapidly is the key thing,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Still, if steady job growth continues and wages pick up in response to a tighter labor market, it could change views about the economy and influence the political dynamic. In previous elections, the direction of the economy in the months leading up to the vote has been perhaps the single most important factor affecting whether Americans opt for continuity or change.

The brisk hiring since the Affordable Care Act went into effect also serves to undermine the Republican argument that the measure has stripped millions of jobs from the economy.

“Our businesses have created jobs every single month since I signed that ‘job killing’ Obamacare bill,” for a total of 14.3 million private sector jobs, President Obama told reporters at the White House.

Thomas E. Perez, the secretary of labor, underscored the point. “There’s an undeniable Eeyore caucus out there of fear-mongers and fact-deniers who want people to believe there is no job creation,” he said.

Certainly, the law is spurring job creation in the health care industry, with 38,000 jobs added in February.

Edward Fleischman, chief executive of the Execu/Search Group, a professional recruiting firm based in New York, said he had seen outsize demand for health care professionals, including urgent care physicians, nurses, therapists and technicians. “A lot of that has to do with Obamacare,” he said.

Mr. Fleischman, whose firm opened three new offices last year, added that hiring — particularly for digitally adept workers — had been strong across the board.

Friday’s report is the first of three estimates of February’s job creation by the Labor Department. Revisions for December and January showed a total of 30,000 more jobs than previously reported.

William Spriggs, chief economist at the A.F.L.-C.I.O., contrasted the palpable dissatisfaction of many voters with the record of unbroken job creation. “This is one of those times when the economic cycle has hit a weird political cycle,” he said.