Police blotter items from Middlesex County. (Photo: ~File)

SOUTH RIVER

PEDESTRIAN STRUCK BY CAR, 10:26 a.m. Nov. 21. A 7-year-old boy suffered nonlife-threatening injuries after he was struck by a vehicle that was traveling east on Main Street near Wilcox Avenue, Sgt. Robert Maclosky said. The youngster came out from behind a parked car when he was struck by the vehicle, driven by Jose Darocha, 45, of Spotswood. The youngster was transported to Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick. The accident is under investigation by police.

NORTH BRUNSWICK

THEFT, between 10 p.m. Nov. 7 and 9 a.m. Nov. 8. Police responded to Staybridge Suites at 2195 Route 1 South on a report of a theft. Upon arrival the victim told police that two catalytic converters, valued at $1,000, were removed from her 2005 BMW X5, which was parked in the parking lot.

THEFT, between 11 p.m. Nov. 7 and 4:30 p.m. Nov. 8. Police were dispatched to Staybridge Suites at 2195 Route 1 South where a vehicle owner reported that the catalytic converter was cut out from the exhaust system of his Chevy Equinox, police said.

THEFT, 12:16 p.m. Nov. 13. A shopper reported that while shopping at Costco on Grand Avenue her wallet, containing various items including her driver’s license, credit cards and $200, was removed from her purse, which was in a shopping cart, police said. A credit card that was in her wallet was used in Target. Video surveillance at Target revealed a woman used the card to purchase gift cards and a pair of gloves, totaling $4,015.99. Minutes later, one of the gift cards was used at Target by a male to purchase $100 in iTunes gift.

THEFT, 7:33 p.m. Nov. 13. Police responded to the parking lot on Route 1 for a reported theft from a vehicle, police said. The owner told police she parked the vehicle and went inside Work Out World. When she returned to the vehicle , the front driver’s side window of her 2015 Nissan Murano was shattered and a black leather purse, which was on the front driver seat, was missing. The purse contained various pieces of jewelry, valued at about $1,900.

DUNELLEN

DWI, 2:13 a.m. Nov. 8. Nisargkum Patel, 30, of North Plainfield, was arrested and charged with DWI, following a motor vehicle stop on North Avenue, police said. The vehicle was stopped for speeding on South Washington Avenue and for swerving into the opposite lane of travel on North Avenue. The driver was found to be intoxicated and arrested. He was brought to headquarters where he was processed and later released to a sober party.

DWI, 2:11 a.m. Nov. 7. Tye Sheffield, 22, of Plainfield, was arrested and charged with DWI and six counts of contempt of court, following a motor vehicle stop on South Washington Avenue, police said. The vehicle was stopped for speeding and for the registered owner having a suspended license. The driver was found to be intoxicated and had warrants from six different jurisdictions out for his arrest. He was arrested, processed and later turned over to Plainfield police for outstanding warrants.

CONTEMPT OF COURT, 2:17 a.m. Nov. 6. Amber Braithwaite, 22, of the Bronx, New York, was arrested and charged with contempt of court, following a motor vehicle stop on North Avenue, police said. The vehicle was stopped when a plate check revealed that the vehicle had a suspended registration. The driver was found to have an active warrant for her arrest. Braithwaite was processed and later posted bail.

CONTEMPT OF COURT, 1:15 a.m. Nov. 5. Eric Baker, 31, of Piscataway, was arrested and charged with contempt of court, following a motor vehicle stop on North Avenue, police said. The vehicle was stopped when a plate check revealed that the driver had a suspended license and an active warrant. The driver was arrested, processed and later posted bail.

CONTEMPT OF COURT, 12:46 a.m. Nov. 2. Milton Simmons, 35, of Piscataway, was arrested and charged with contempt of court following a motor vehicle stop on South Washington Avenue, police said. The vehicle was stopped because the registered owner was showing an active warrant for his arrest. The driver was arrested, processed and later released.

DWI, 12:43 a.m. Nov. 1. Bertram Nipper, 36, of Orange, was arrested and charged with DWI following a motor vehicle stop on Bound Brook Road, police said. The vehicle was stopped for speeding. The driver was found to be intoxicated and was arrested. He was brought to headquarters where he gave breath samples and was found to be over double the legal limit. He was processed and later released to a sober party.

DWI, 12:02 a.m. Oct. 31. Judith Salazar-Garcia, 46, of Woodbridge, was arrested and charged with with DWI and refusing to submit to breath testing after a motor vehicle stop on North Washington Avenue, police said. The vehicle was stopped because the driver kept revving her engine not realizing the vehicle was in neutral. The driver was found to be intoxicated and arrested. She was brought to headquarters where she refused to give breath samples. She was processed and later released to a sober party.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1jgsh2A