Orlando Health decides against possible merger

Orlando Health's decision bucks a national trend of mergers of hospital chains. Many are trying to consolidate resources, both to reduce costs and expand market strength to better compete in the Affordable Care Act health-care industry. It also reflects that the hospital company's board has decided Orlando Health has turned the corner financially after a difficult stretch in 2012 and 2013 left it looking for a possible new owner.

The not-for-profit Orlando-based hospital network announced Wednesday that it will end its explorations begun last fall for a partner for merger or acquisition, and instead will remain independent and Orlando-based.

Orlando Health doesn't want to become a partner in a bigger hospital chain, after all.

By February, the $1.9 billion nonprofit health-care system already had received several proposals

But since last fall, the board has been pursuing a new strategic planning effort, and Chair Dianna Morgan said that process convinced the board that the best strategy is independence. The board made the decision Monday.

"We realized we have tremendous momentum, that our financial situation has been steadily improving and the most important thing we wanted to do was preserve the culture and the clinical excellence that we've been able to offer since 1918," she said.

That leaves Orlando with two major regional chains, both based locally. Florida Hospital, owned by Adventist Health System, is larger. Orlando Health has six wholly-owned hospitals anchored by its downtown complex around its flagship, Orlando Regional Medical Center, and two partnership hospitals, with 2,295 beds throughout Central Florida. Last year the system treated more than 100,00 inpatients and nearly 900,000 outpatients.

Orlando Health's board also decided Monday to begin a national search for a new president and chief executive officer. Last year Sherrie Sitarik resigned amid the company's financial difficulties, which had included layoffs, falling net income, disgruntled employees and efforts by nurses to form a union.

Sitarik was replaced by interim chief executive officer Dr. Jamal Hakim. Morgan said he took the post with the understanding that the company would seek a permanent replacement later, and she said he will continue on until the new president and CEO has been hired. A search firm will be hired in July, she said.

The company finished in the black in the last two quarters, which Morgan attributed to aggressive cost cutting.

Morgan said the company was attractive to buyers in the past few months.

"We are significant not only in our size but also in our geography. A $2 billion system located in Central Florida is seen as a valuable opportunity for other systems," Morgan said. "And yet after evaluating those options, we realized our best partners are those right here in Florida, such as the University of Florida."

Even under the interim CEO and facing the prospect of a merger, Orlando Heath undertook other partnership efforts. In December, Orlando Health severed a 23-year relationship with MD Anderson Cancer Center and entered a new partnership with the University of Florida, creating University of Florida Health, joining efforts in cancer research, cardiology and pediatrics with the Gainesville-based teaching hospital.

Orlando Health also owns Arnold Palmer Hospital for Children, Winnie Palmer Hospital for Women & Babies, UF Health Cancer Center Orlando, Dr. P. Phillips Hospital, South Seminole Hospital and Health Central Hospital, and has a 50 percent affiliation with South Lake Hospital and a 20 percent affiliation with St. Cloud Regional Medical Center.

smpowers@tribune.com or 407-420-5441. Marni Jameson of the Sentinel staff contributed to this report.