GoHealth acquired Creatix, a small software-development shop that has done work for the company, a sign of how hard it is to find tech talent.

It's the latest acquisition of a small company by a larger one that's rapidly increasing its tech ranks. Last week, Raise.com said it bought Tastebud, formerly called StyleSeek, and its staff of 10. GoHealth says that Creatix's 35 employees will join the company.

GoHealth, an online health-insurance portal, has been one of Chicago's fastest-growing tech companies in recent years.

The company has hired about 20 tech workers so far this year, and it plans to add another 20 by year-end, said co-founder Brandon Cruz.

“We've hired a lot of tech people already,” he said. “It's nice when you can grab a huge group at one time. We've worked with them for a while. It just made sense for us to hire them and give them a ton more work.”

GoHealth's acquisition of Creatix reflects the increased demand in an already-tight labor market.

“Talent is at such a premium right now,” says David Belsky, regional director at Jobspring Partners, a tech-recruiting firm in Chicago. “If there's a small team that's already been established in a niche that a company needs, (acquisition) makes sense. Companies are throwing more resources at hiring, working with more third parties as part of that strategy.”

Alex Bratton, CEO of mobile-application developer Lextech, predicts the "acqui-hires" will continue, though his firm has a different strategy. The company, which has offices in Chicago, Downers Grove and Champaign, plans to step up its college recruiting. “Meshing of two cultures is a huge risk."

Terms of the Creatix deal weren't disclosed. Creatix is based in Chicago, but most of its staff is in Bratislava, Slovakia. “We'll be adding staff in both places,” Cruz said.

GoHealth provides technology used by insurers to operate online exchanges to enroll and manage customers. The business, which got a boost from the Affordable Care Act, is growing 20 percent to 30 percent annually.