Mary Taylor makes her move. John Kasich takes a veiled shot at Donald Trump. And the debate over legalized marijuana takes center stage in Cleveland. Oh, and Ed FitzGerald has a new job. Read on in Ohio Politics Roundup. And don't forget to subscribe to our daily National Politics newsletter, which comes at you each morning.

Early voting begins: Before we get to the real business of counting votes in the 2016 presidential race, we have the 2015 off-year elections. Voting in Ohio starts today.

Among the major issues on the statewide ballot: Marijuana legalization. A proponent sees Issue 3 as an "opportunity to get Ohio law in line with public opinion," reports the Northeast Ohio Media Group's Rich Exner, who covered Monday's public forum at the City Club of Cleveland. "But an opponent countered Monday that the change could open the door to more drug addictions and DUI-related traffic accidents."

Doctors against legalization: "Addiction specialists from the Cleveland Clinic, University Hospitals of Cleveland and MetroHealth Systems attacked the proposal, arguing that marijuana use has harmful effects on the brain, especially those of teens and young adults," NEOMG's Mark Naymik reports. "Speaking at a press conference at the Cleveland Clinic organized by the opponents of Issue 3, the doctors also discounted claims that smoking marijuana can be useful as a medicine."

Meanwhile on the medical marijuana front: "A new marijuana research nonprofit is prepared to build a $24 million research facility in Licking County and offer medical marijuana insurance if Issue 3 passes on Nov. 3," NEOMG's Jackie Borchardt reports.

Other 2015 races to watch: Mayoral contests in Akron, Columbus and Toledo.

Too early to talk 2018? Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor "is taking steps to identify the best opportunity for her to continue serving the citizens of Ohio in the future, including seriously considering running for governor," Taylor's political consultant, Kristen Frissora, told me Monday in response to questions about Taylor's name coming off Ohio Gov. John Kasich's lame-duck gubernatorial campaign committee.

That change frees up Taylor to form her own committee and raise money for a potential 2018 bid. Of course, she could find herself in the governor's chair sooner, should Kasich succeed in his presidential bid or end up as vice president or a Cabinet member.

First to strike: By making her interests known Monday, Taylor staked an early claim in what could be a crowded GOP primary. Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine and Secretary of State Jon Husted are known to be considering runs for governor.

He's talking about you, Donald Trump: On the campaign trail Monday in Richmond, Va., Kasich, who is less inclined to bash fellow candidates on the trail then some of his fellow contenders, couldn't resist a subtle jab at some of the competition," reports Jessica Wehrman of the Columbus Dispatch.

Said Kasich: "In politics today, people yell really loud, but they don't represent most of the people." He added: "I was made to be a troublemaker. But it's not enough be troublemaker if you can't get things accomplished. You don't want to be a clanging bell in life."

Happening today: Kasich addresses the U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce in Washington. Sabrina Eaton, from NEOMG's Washington bureau, will be there.

Also happening today: "The compromise version of Ohio's charter school reform bill coming out Tuesday will have several small changes," The Plain Dealer's Patrick O'Donnell reports, "but will not include some of the big ones that charter operators seek, said members of a special committee handling the bill."

Fitz's new gig: "Ed FitzGerald, the former Cuyahoga County executive who ran unsuccessfully for governor, is working for a [real estate] consulting firm that has commercial and industrial clients," NEOMG's Karen Farkas reports. "He is a vice president for placevalue, a Chicago-based firm, in its Cleveland office. The firm also has offices in Dallas, St. Louis, Baltimore and Washington, D.C."

Think about it this way: A couple of years ago, when his political career held such promise, it didn't take much imagination to picture FitzGerald as vice president.

Playing the RINO card: Heartbeat Bill supporters are taking aim at Ohio Senate Republicans who they believe are keeping the anti-abortion measure from a vote, NEOMG's Robert Higgs reports. "Faith2Action has posted critical, sometimes graphic, anti-abortion videos that accuse Senate President Keith Faber and five of his fellow Republicans of disloyalty and being RINOs – Republicans in name only. The videos urge viewers to call the legislators and pressure them on the heartbeat bill."

First fundraising numbers in OHSEN: Sen. Rob Portman's re-election campaign raised more than $2 million last quarter and has more than $11 million on hand.

Ted Strickland, the former governor and frontrunner for the Democratic nomination, hasn't released numbers yet. "Bottom line: Portman's campaign raised less money in this year's third quarter, which just ended, than it did in the previous two," NEOMG's Stephen Koff observes. "But by announcing its approximate fundraising take today, it laid down a marker – knowing Strickland is still unlikely to match it, let alone beat it.

Bookmark the Roundup: Find each morning's roundup and past editions here.

Tips or links? Send here. Follow along on Twitter: @henryjgomez.