Buy Photo The completion target for the future Forest Community Health Center is spring 2016. Bids to remodel the former McLaren building are due this week. (Photo: Curt Smith/Lansing State Journal)Buy Photo

Ingham County expects to start moving soon on the remodeling of a now-vacant building that will serve as a adult and adolescent health clinic for lower income patients.

Bids on the work, to be done at a former McLaren building at 2316 S. Cedar St. are expected to arrive at the county's Facilities Department on Friday.

"Hopefully we'll be able to have opened all the bids and have reviewed them and be prepared to make a recommendation in the next two weeks," Facilities Director Rick Terrill said. He estimates the cost will be $1.7 million to $1.8 million.

The completion target for the now-christened Forest Community Health Center is spring 2016, he said.

The county bought the one-story, 40,000-square-foot facility in December 2013 for $1.84 million. County Health Officer Linda Vail said the Forest clinic will serve as a "big hub for adult and adolescent care, both primary care and dental."

The county's maternal and child health programs will stay at the Health Department's main facility at 5303 S. Cedar, Vail said.

"We serve a number of clients; we have to have the space to be able to do it in," she said.

The Board of Commissioners on Dec. 10, 2013 approved the building's purchase via money from a Medicaid cost reimbursement settlement. The resolution cited a projected 30,000 more county residents people eligible for Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

Deputy Controller Jared Cypher said the county is using reserves from its Clinic Fund to cover the remodeling

"The Clinic Fund is an enterprise we have set up specifically for our clinical operations," he said.

The county will lease 3,000 square feet to an as-yet unnamed community agency, Vail said.

The Human Services Building, where the Health Department is based, is undergoing renovations of its own. The projected cost of that work is estimated at $1.2 million to $1.3 million, Terrill said.

"We've pretty much finished the conceptual design and now we're getting ready to work on putting together the actual construction documents," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://on.lsj.com/1Ca9ZFE