Topics: Bill O'Reilly, conservative media, Fox News, Media Matters, Media News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on Media Matters

Always viewing conflicts through the prism of partisan warfare, conservative media have been faced with a stark choice as Bill O’Reilly’s long list of confirmed fabrications pile up in public view. They can defend the Fox News host no matter what, while lashing out his “far-left” critics for daring to fact-check the host. Or, conservative media outlets can let him fend for himself. (The third, obvious option of openly criticizing O’Reilly for his duplicitous ways doesn’t seem to be on the table.)

Incredibly, as the controversy marches on and neither O’Reilly nor Fox are able to provide simple answers to the questions about his truth-telling as a reporter, some conservative media allies continue to rally by his side.

On Sunday, Howard Kurtz’s MediaBuzz program on Fox came to O’Reilly’s aid by doing everything it could to whitewash the allegations against the host.

Over the weekend at Newsbusters–a far-right clearinghouse for endless, and often empty, attacks on the media–Jeffrey Lord denounced the O’Reilly fact-checking campaign as “wrong” and “dangerous.” And Fox News contributor Allen West actually told the Washington Post that all the allegations against O’Reilly had been “debunked.” (Lots of attendees at the Conservative Political Action Conference last week shared West’s contention.)

What’s the peril for blindly protecting O’Reilly this way? Simple: It completely undercuts the conservative cottage industry of media criticism. Because why would anyone care about media critiques leveled by conservatives who are currently tying to explain away O’Reilly’s obvious laundry list of lies.

“O’Reilly’s story, intended to portray him as an enterprising journalist unfazed by potential danger, is a fiction,”noted Gawker. “It is precisely the sort of claim that would otherwise earn Fox’s condemnation, and draw sophisticated counter-attacks to undermine the accusers’ reputation.”

And how do we know that to be true? Because the entire conservative media apparatus spent last monthunleashing sophisticated counter-attacks to undermine NBC News anchor Brian Williams after doubts were raised about his wartime reporting. Today, the same conservative media are either playing dumb about Bill O’Reilly, or actually defending him.

Obviously, you can’t have it both ways. You can’t demand Brian Williams be fired and that Bill O’Reilly be left alone. Not if you want anyone to pause for more than three seconds when considering your press critiques.

Given its current defense of O’Reilly, look at how comically hollow previous conservative condemnations of Williams now sound:

Hubris. So many celebrities — be they politicians, journalists, artists — refuse to accept that the cover-up and obfuscation is always worse than the crime. Time and again, when honesty and humility beckon, they are nowhere to be found.