Walk boldly into the future. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

It’s time to channel your inner Silicon Valley entrepreneur.

The pace of modern life is fast. In the business world, change has become a constant. For investors, guessing the Next Big Thing is the key to getting that important leg up on the market. Stop for a minute, and you’re a dinosaur. With all that in mind, S&P Capital IQ’s Michael Thompson and a team of analysts at the firm outlined ten “disruptors” for 2015, one for each sector of the S&P 500.

In most cases, the impact of these disruptive forces isn’t always one-sided. Indeed, whether or not the disruption is good or bad depends upon how companies respond to it. Microsoft, for instance, has had a hard time adapting to the mushrooming trends in mobile technology. Apple, meanwhile, has owned the shift. So, the key is not only recognizing the trend, but picking the winners and losers.

Good luck, race fans.

Financial Services Disruptor: Mobile Technology

For an industry that is so central to our daily lives, the banking industry is still more Medici than mobile. That’s going to change, and in 2015 it starts with two words: Apple Pay. The geniuses from Cupertino have launched their mobile wallet. If it’s anything like Apple’s other products it will be a rousing success, nudging millions to move their banking and commerce completely online.

Mastercard, Visa, J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., Citigroup, Bank of America, American Express, and Discover Financial Services look like the early winners. Smaller regional banks like BancorpSouth and West America Bancorp and asset managers will struggle to maintain pace, S&P says.

Reuters

Technology Disruptor: Wearables

Calling Dick Tracy! Calling Dick Tracy!

The tech sector is the place where the word “disruption” takes on holy connotations. This industry lives for the upheaval of a new “killer app” and in 2015, wearables are poised to make the leap into the mainstream, moving from “limited-run products for tech-cognescenti into an important hardware category,” S&P’s Angelo Zino and Scott Kessler wrote.

Again, Apple is at the forefront here. The company’s new watch will be coming to market in the next few months, and will be a key driver in the wearables movement. “The launch should not only benefit Apple buy other hardware makers as adoption ramps up.”

Apple is the clear winner here, and Samsung, which launched its Gear S smartwatch this past fall, also looks like a winner. Other hardware companies and hardware supply-chain companies that jump on board should also find success. The firm doesn’t, actually, see many losers, at least in tech. “Wearables will result in a greater amount of information technology dollars being spent versus cannibalizing any particular segment or company,” they wrote. Traditional watch makers, however, may see their sales fall.

Consumer Discretionary Disruptor: Digitalization.

It’s not hard to see how digitization is going to sweep across media companies. The bundled model of TV will almost inevitably succumb to an a la carte model as the process of delivering programming gets digitized. Several media outlets, HBO, ESPN, CBS, are working on exactly this. It’s not just media. Traditional retailers are going to continue ramping up their “omni-channel” efforts in a attempt to catch up with Amazon.com Even restaurants like Chipotle Mexican Grill are experimenting with digital services, offering an advance-ordering app. Don’t forget the auto industry, either; AutoNation recently unveiled plans to move the car-buying process completely online.

Time Warner Cable, Walt Disney, CBS Corp., Gap, Best Buy, Verizon Communications, Chipolte and Amazon look like early winners. Distributors like Cablevision Systems, Charter Communications and DirecTV look like potential losers, as well as retailers like Fred's that don’t adapt technology to boost sales, the S&P team said.

Energy Disruptor: U.S. Oil Exports

“There is a reasonable chance that U.S. legislators will repeal the 40-year-old ban on exports of U.S. crude oil,” S&P analyst Stewart Glickman wrote. As is the energy industry didn’t have enough upheaval, right?

U.S. crude oil producers, like EOG Resources, Devon Energy and ConocoPhillips, look like the big winners here. The big losers may well be U.S. refiners like Valero Energy, Philips 66, and Marathon Petroleum, since the producers won’t have to bring their crude to domestic refiners, Mr. Glickman said.

AFP

Industrials Disruptor: Oil Prices

The price of oil isn’t just an oil-industry story. It’s going to have ramifications in almost every industry, and industrials are likely to feel it sharply. “Those industries and companies for which fuel is a major cost would benefit from lower oil prices,” Jim Corridore wrote.

The list of winners here is long. Virtually every airline–Delta Air Lines Inc., United Continental Holdings, Southwest Airlines and the rest–will benefit from sharper lower jet-fuel costs. Commercial transportation, trucking and railroads, will benefit, too. “Any company that uses energy to manufacture products will benefit,” Mr. Corridore wrote.

But there are some losers. Mr. Corridore said that companies in construction and engineering, like Foster Wheeler AG and Joy Global, will suffer as the they lose business from an energy industry that’s retrenching amid the supply glut and price collapse.

Consumer Staples Disruptor: Demographics

“As the baby boomers age, they – along with many Generation X members and Millennials – are driving increased demand for products that focus on improving health and wellness,” analyst Joseph Agnese writes. With an improving U.S. economy in 2015, these trends will sharpen, touching food manufacturers, retailers, and drug companies.

Winners look like companies like Kroger, Sprouts Farmers Market, CVS Health, and Hain Celestial Group Losers may include Campbell Soup and Kellogg, Coca-Cola and PepsiCo, and cigarette makers like Altria Group and Reynolds American, Mr. Agnese said.

Heathcare Disruptor: the Supreme Court

Obamacare gets a hearing in the Supreme Court, most likely in the spring, and the outcome could – the GOP hopes – cripple the federal health law. The case is King v. Burwell, and it keys upon the meaning of a single line in the law, whether that’s ambiguous, and who qualifies for heath-care subsidies. The court will likely hear the case in March and render a verdict in June.

While the case has hyper-partisan political overtones, for the healthcare industry, what matters is continuity, and the fact of the matter is that the law has been good for investors. From the start of 2010 through this November, the healthcare sector has outperformed the broader S&P 1500 by 24%, analyst Jeffrey Loo said. “Health care sector investors have benefited significantly since the law was passed and will most likely continue to succeed in 2015.” Assuming it survives the Court.

“If the Court agrees with the challengers that subsidies can only be provided to those enrolling through state-run exchanges, it would cause a major disruption throughout the health care sector.” If that happens, the entire industry will feel the effects, he said.

Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

Materials Disruptor: the Chinese Economy

It’s no secret that China has been a major consumer of the raw materials that go into building an industrial economy, and it’s also no secret that China’s economic growth has been slowing down, with an attendant slide in the use of raw materials.

This is really a continuation of a trend, but to the extent that the economic slowdown gains steam, 2015 could be a rough year for materials companies.

In the sector, there are no winners in a China-slowdown story, Christopher Muir said. Losers would be strung across the paper and packaging industries, chemical companies, and metals.

Telecom Disruptor: REITs

The real estate investment trust structure has been employed by communications-towers companies like American Tower, but the firm thinks that in 2015 infrastructure companies may start adopting a REIT model as well. Windstream Holdings got an allowance from the IRS this year to form a REIT, and S&P thinks others will follow.

Utilities Disruptor: Congressional Action on the EPA

A new Republican-controlled Congress is likely to take action aimed at reining in the Environmental Protection Agency, S&P said. A lot depends upon what Congress can push through, of course. Efforts to block the implementation of carbon rules would benefit utilities like Dominion Resources, Duke Energy, and NextEra Energy Efforts to cut the value of renewable generation assets would hurt companies with exposure there, like NextEra’s unit NextEra Energy Partners, S&P said.