A Forbes columnist who is also the founder of a wealth management firm has one big tip:

Invest in guns – and lots of ammunition.

David J. Marotta, of Marotta Wealth Management in Charlotte, Va., and writer of Forbes’ “Marotta on Money” column, issued the advice in a pre-Christmas note to investors that included lists of what average people should have on hand in the event of a fiscal disaster or social upheaval.

“Firearms are the last item on the list, but they are on the list,” Marotta wrote, according to the Washington Examiner. “There are some terrible people in this world. And you are safer when your trusted neighbors have firearms.”

Marotta says he is no survivalist anticipating a total societal breakdown and “Mad Max” kind of world anytime soon. Just the sort of low, painful decline your basic Obamacare patient can expect in the not-too-distant future.

“There is the possibility of a precipitous decline, although a long and drawn out malaise is much more likely,” Marotta said.

And the causes are the same those who worry about a financial apocalypse — Obamacare, the rise of the surveillance state with the National Security Agency’s spying on civilians, ruinous federal spending.

“I, along with many other economists, agree with many of the concerns expressed in these dire warnings. The growing debt and deficit spending is a tax on those holding dollars. The devaluation in the U.S. dollar risks the dollar’s status as the reserve currency of the world. Obamacare was the worst legislation in the past 75 years. Socialism is on the rise and the NSA really is abrogating vast portions of the Constitution. I don’t disagree with their concerns,” he wrote.

The bottom line, though, is being prepared. Whether it’s a natural disaster or the result of the most “progressive” administration in United States history, an emergency is an emergency.

Keeping a “bug out bag” on hand stocked with the immediate necessities of food, water and firepower is an idea for everybody.

“A bug-out bag is a good idea depending on where you live even if the emergency is just power outages, earthquakes and hurricanes,” Marotta advised. “Be prepared. Especially because it keeps you from being scared.”

Related story: Nazi survivor’s warning to Americans: ‘Keep your guns and buy more guns’