On Wednesday, the Senate Finance Committee focused on two Medicaid reform proposals as sources of likely cost savings during a period of large budget deficits.

Senate Finance adopted a committee substitute for Gov. Bill Walker’s SB 78 and again took up a separate Medicaid reform bill by Senate Finance Co-chair Pete Kelly (R-Fairbanks), SB 74.

“Without argument, Medicaid has became unsustainable in its current form,” Kelly said. “We have a runaway service that we’re providing, and we’re not providing it well enough.”

“This bill is complicated, it’s far-reaching, but it’s going to deliver,” he said of SB 74.

MacKinnon announced that both SB 74 and SB 78 will be considered by a new Medicaid subcommittee with the goal of presenting senators with one Medicaid reform recommendation.

MacKinnon will chair the Medicaid subcommittee. She said she has invited Senators Peter Micciche (R-Soldotna), Donny Olson (D-Golovin), Cathy Giessel (R-Anchorage), and Kelly to serve with her.

Micciche chairs the Department of Health and Social Services (DHSS) finance subcommittee.

Overseeing Medicaid, DHSS is one of three hard-to-cut chunks of the budget totaling $3.7 billion. The other two are the Department of Education & Early Development and “statewide items,” which includes debt service, retirement, and, under Walker’s New Sustainable Alaska Plan, $700 million for Permanent Fund dividends.

Olson and Giessel will participate, in part, because they are both health care providers.

MacKinnon said that while Senate Majority Leader John Coghill (R-North Pole) will not serve on the Medicaid subcommittee, he will be involved.

Coghill drove a lawsuit challenging Walker’s unilateral expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Oral arguments for that case are scheduled for February 4.

SB 78 was the original vehicle for Medicaid expansion. However, all those provisions are stripped from the new CS.

Medicaid Management System Improving, Expansion Going As Planned

Before consideration of the CS, MacKinnon asked DHSS Commissioner Valerie Davidson to answer a series of questions on the status of the State’s new Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS), which came online in 2013 and suffered serious flaws. The State is requiring the developer, Xerox, to fix the system before it receives payment.

The MMIS was one of the reasons legislators chose not to expand Medicaid last year.

Certification of the new system has been delayed, in turn delaying related enhanced federal funds, but not funds associated with Medicaid expansion.

The system still has 121 defects, acknowledged Davidson. However, most of these are new, and only seven affect payments to providers. In some cases, the system is not correctly identifying the type of care provided, then paying the wrong amount.

Currently, 20 percent of Medicaid applications are being processed within a week, said Davidson, and the vast majority are processed within 60 days. Payments to providers are being made the week they are submitted or the following week

The State has so far recovered about half of the $165 million in advance payments it made to providers while Xerox was repairing the MMIS.

There is still work for Xerox to do on the corrective action plan set forth by the State. For example, the company missed one of the federal quarterly updates limiting services for which providers can bill. These updates would prevent a provider from billing separately for brain surgery and drilling the skull because drilling is considered a necessary element of the surgery, said Davidson.

Even so, the new MMIS is more efficient than the previous system, Davidson told committee members.

In response to Olson, Davidson said the State has not seen a reduction in the number of providers due to Medicaid expansion.

This is consistent with the findings of a report commissioned by the Legislative Budget and Audit Committee after the legislature decided not to act on SB 78 last year.

Published on January 15, the report by The Menges Group reads, “While data evidence on this particular issue is sparse, we have not been aware of situations where providers have been harmed by Medicaid expansion. To the contrary, Medicaid expansion brings a large infusion of new revenue to the provider community. Providers throughout the country – including in Alaska – have been strong proponents of states implementing Medicaid expansion.”

The Menges report called Medicaid expansion “a highly attractive policy change financially” and “an attractive policy programmatically and clinically due to the health coverage being provided to Alaskans who are not in a position to purchase health insurance.”

“It puts to rest the concerns of the opponents of Medicaid expansion,” Sen. Bill Wielechowski (D-Anchorage) said of the report in a Wednesday press conference.

“We are sending a letter to legislative counsel today in light of the Menges report… asking them to immediately drop [the Medicaid expansion] lawsuit,” he said. “In the middle of a fiscal crisis, it makes absolutely no sense that the majority is suing the governor to stop a program that poll after poll shows Alaskans want… and that the very group hired by the majority indicates is something that we should do.”

Wielechowski said that legislative attorneys declared the suit without merit. A superior court judge has indicated his agreement.

Consensus on Many Opportunities for Savings

Despite the lawsuit, sectional analyses of SB 74 and SB 78 reveal that the Walker Administration and legislators recognize many of the same possibilities for reducing the costs of Medicaid.

Both bills add civil penalties to existing criminal penalties for Medicaid fraud, reduce travel through the expansion of telemedicine, and seek to put emergency room “super-utilizers” in contact with a primary care provider within 96 hours of an ER visit. SB 78 also adds whistleblower protections for people reporting Medicaid fraud.

Matching Medicaid recipients with providers is part of a “managed care” initiative, said Kelly, that will reduce ER visits and self-referral to specialists.

Similarly, SB 78 requires DHSS to “establish guidelines for health care providers to develop health care delivery models that encourage wellness and disease prevention.”

SB 78 mandates that the State apply for Section 1115 waivers. Under these waivers, federal funds can be spent on demonstration projects like managed care organizations or accountable care organizations.

Accountable care organizations would receive a set amount of funds to care for a local population. Because the funds are fixed, providers are incentivized to provide preventive care. They can pocket the savings if they mange their patients well. Otherwise, they have to eat the additional costs of care, Davidson explained.

DHSS is already implementing pharmacy reforms included in SB 74, designed to encourage prescription of cheaper generic drugs.

Some Diverging Ideas of Medicaid Reform

Davidson said the recommendations of a report drafted by Agnew::Beck Consulting, LLC at the behest of DHSS are incorporated in the CS for SB 78.

One of those recommendations is increased use of tribal health organizations. An October federal policy update allows for those eligible for Indian Health Service to be 100-percent covered by the federal government if they receive care through a tribal facility.

This coverage stretches to related travel and accommodations, including Medivacs, said Davidson.

SB 78 would also remove restrictions on mental health clinics and drug or alcohol treatment clinics so that more behavioral health care providers fall under Medicaid. DHSS Deputy Commissioner Jon Sherwood said bringing more providers into the fold will make behavioral health care more available and reduce wait times.

Legislative Counsel Kate Glover issued a memo on Tuesday cautioning the State on its Medicaid fraud penalties, which include the seizure of property.

Sherwood said some fraud perpetrators have moved property to newly established businesses to avoid seizure, so SB 78 clarifies that real or personal property may be seized by the State if the attorney general establishes probable cause of Medicaid fraud.

However, Glover wrote that courts have also required the seized property to be connected to the crime prior to forfeiture.

The overarching Alaska Medical Assistance False Claim and Reporting Act incorporated into the bill is intended to meet federal regulations targeting Medicaid fraud, she noted.

Kelly’s bill seeks savings through a competitive bidding process for Medicaid travel and equipment, agreeing with providers on a fixed rate for care (e.g., a knee replacement), and potentially privatizing the Alaska Pioneer Homes for seniors, the Alaska Psychiatric Institute, and some juvenile justice facilities.

Kelly’s aide, Heather Shadduck, said his office has received interest regarding privatization of all three.

KTUU recently reported that because the Alaska Psychiatric Institute only has about one-third of the necessary psychiatrists, patients have been flown to Juneau and Fairbanks for care.

Shadduck told committee members that Florida has privatized a psychiatric facility.

However, the State of Florida later had to investigate a series of deaths and reports of patient mistreatment at that South Florida State Hospital.

These will be some of the issues the Medicaid subcommittee will have to consider.

MacKinnon said they will meet Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays throughout February and will hopefully have a product by the end of the month. Both the Menges and Agnew::Beck reports will be part of the equation, she said.

Like this: Like Loading...