State lawmakers are trying to mount a broad campaign against federal government intrusion.

Missouri State Sen. Brian Nieves has introduced legislation that Missouri would not "recognize, enforce, or act in furtherance of" any federal actions restricting the right to bear arms, federal action legalizing or funding abortion, any federal action requiring the sale or trade of carbon credits, any federal actions involving a public option for health care, and any federal action mandating the recognition of same-sex marriage. (Photo: Via Springfield (Mo.) News-Leader) Story Highlights Measures include creation of a Committee on the Tenth Amendment to monitor federal legislation

One bill would exempt products made in Missouri that remain in the state from federal regulation

A proposal seeks to prevent the enforcing of any federal actions on guns, abortion, health care

SPRINGFIELD, Mo. -- After a failed effort to nullify federal gun laws in 2013, some Missouri lawmakers are now seeking to mount a broader campaign against what they view as federal government incursion.

Recent federal government actions such as the passage of the Affordable Care Act and efforts to place restrictions on gun ownership, along with recent decisions by federal judges striking down state laws banning gay marriage, are bringing fears of an encroaching government to a head this year in the Missouri General Assembly.

Among the proposals is the creation of a Committee on the Tenth Amendment, which would watch for federal legislation that infringes on Missouri's state sovereignty.

In another effort at pushback, a senator wants to put before voters a measure to stop Missouri from enforcing all federal laws legalizing abortion or recognizing same-sex marriage, among others.

There is also a bill that would exempt products made in Missouri that remain in the state from federal regulation.

And, proposals to nullify federal gun laws also have been renewed.

George Connor, a political science professor at Missouri State University, said state legislators are taking a stand now, assuming that eventually their actions will be vindicated.

Though the U.S. Supreme Court has consistently ruled against nullification efforts, Connor said that the court has changed its mind in the past.

"What you're seeing from (lawmakers) is the hope or anticipation that the actions that they're taking now will be seen by the U.S. Supreme Court as constitutional," Connor said.

The 10th Amendment

The 10th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution is short: "The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people."

Those 28 words have gained new prominence in recent years as conservatives have cried foul at federal government action during President Barack Obama's time in office.

Rep. Chrissy Sommer, a Republican from St. Charles, Mo., introduced the bill to establish a Committee on the Tenth Amendment. At a hearing on Thursday, she said the committee's purpose would be to review federal laws and actions, such as executive orders.

“Now, more than ever we have serious questions about the interactions between the two (federal and state government). We have a president who is talking about, if he does not get the federal action that he desires, threatening to use executive powers.” Abe Messer, lobbyist with the Missouri Family Network

As a Joint Committee made up of representatives and senators, the panel would be able to meet when the Legislature is not in session.

"Basically the idea is, obviously, so we have some mechanism in place to help us as a state should something happen during non-session times," Sommer said.

Abe Messer, a lobbyist with the Missouri Family Network, said lawmakers should already be on the lookout for federal intrusion, but said that the committee will help that effort.

"When it comes to the question of state's rights and state sovereignty, those are serious questions that have been bouncing around all of our states for the last 150 years," Messer said. "Now, more than ever we have serious questions about the interactions between the two (federal and state government). We have a president who is talking about, if he does not get the federal action that he desires, threatening to use executive powers."

Earlier this month, Obama announced two executive orders to allow states to more easily report information about individuals with mental illness to the federal background check system, The New York Times reported. The president has signed more than 20 executive orders related to guns.

The committee would have the power to recommend legislation to preserve the "integrity and principles" of the 10th Amendment as well as refer cases of infringement to the Missouri attorney general, who could sue on behalf of the state.

Intrastate commerce

The Tenth Amendment Center, a national group that focuses on nullification and state sovereignty issues, has put forward model legislation on a number of issues, including guns, marijuana and intrastate commerce.

The center's model legislation for intrastate commerce is designed to stop the federal government from regulating anything manufactured in a state that stays in that same state.

"All goods grown, manufactured or made in (STATE) and all services, performed in (STATE), when such goods or services are sold, maintained, or retained in (STATE), shall not be subject to the authority of the Congress of the United States under its constitutional power to regulate commerce" among the several states, the model bill posted on the Tenth Amendment Center website reads in part.

In addition to creating a 10th Amendment committee, Sommer has another bill, House Bill 1163, that seeks to stop federal regulations of products made in Missouri that remain in the state. The bill uses similar language as the model.

Though her bill explicitly states that products manufactured within Missouri that stay in the state are not subject to federal law, at a legislative hearing, Sommer argued that nothing would change if her bill becomes law.

"It does not negate anything that we currently have on the books, nor does it negate anything that we can do as a state. Meaning, if we feel that the federal government is doing their job and we like their rules, those rules will apply," Sommer said.

In effect, for federal laws and regulations of Missouri-only products (the bill specifies they be stamped "Made in Missouri"), the state would be able to pick and choose which rules it wants to follow, Sommer argues.

John Davidson, a self-described political scientist, spoke against the bill at the hearing. Lawmakers are not considering the consequences of the bill, he said.

Gov. Jay Nixon recently vetoed legislation regarding guns in Missouri. (Photo: Julie Smith, AP)

As an example, Davidson said weapons manufactured in the state would not be subject to federal law — which currently prohibits machine guns, sawed-off shotguns and bombs. Consequently, law enforcement provided by the ATF, which enforces federal gun laws, would not be available.

Missouri law prohibits the possession and manufacturing of machine guns and sawed-off shotguns in violation of federal law. If Sommer's bill became law, machine guns and sawed-off shotguns would apparently be legal under state law so long as they are made within the state and stamped "Made in Missouri."

"You think it's wonderful because you can put black powder together and make a bullet but that's not the only thing that people are capable of doing," Davidson said.

A bill to nullify the National Firearms At of 1934, which first criminalized machine guns, sawed-off shotguns and bombs was passed by the Missouri General Assembly in 2013. The Missouri bill declared the 1934 law invalid in the state. Gov. Jay Nixon vetoed it and an effort to override the veto fell short.

Same-sex marriage

State Sen. Brian Nieves, a Republican from Washington, Mo., has a piece of legislation that seeks to bite back at the federal government. Senate Joint Resolution 38 would amend the Missouri Constitution upon voter approval.

Missouri would not "recognize, enforce, or act in furtherance of" any federal actions restricting the right to bear arms, federal action legalizing or funding abortion, any federal action requiring the sale or trade of carbon credits, any federal actions involving a public option for health care, and any federal action mandating the recognition of same-sex marriage.

“It does not negate anything that we currently have on the books, nor does it negate anything that we can do as a state. Meaning, if we feel that the federal government is doing their job and we like their rules, those rules will apply.” Missouri Rep. Chrissy Sommer

Several other federal actions are also listed.

The resolution's provision barring enforcement of federal action mandating the recognition of same-sex marriage could set the state on a collision course with the federal government as federal judges have now begun ruling that bans on same-sex marriage unconstitutional. Missouri voters approved a ban in 2004.

In the past two months, two judges have struck down same-sex marriage bans in Utah and Oklahoma.

In the Oklahoma ruling, U.S. District Judge Terrence Kern said the state's ban violates the U.S. Constitution's equal protection clause.

Kern issued a stay on his own ruling pending appeal and the U.S. Supreme Court has halted the issuance of same-sex marriages in Utah. But it is likely the Supreme Court will have to consider same-sex marriage at some point.

A Supreme Court ruling striking down Oklahoma's ban could mean trouble for Missouri's ban because the two are similar: both are constitutional bans passed in 2004 by voters.

If a Supreme Court ruling does legalize gay marriage in Missouri, the action will galvanize state's rights activists, Connor said, ensuring Missouri's debate over the role of the federal government will continue into the future.

Contributing: The Associated Press

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eqwBTO