By announcing his Westgate Resorts will start paying many workers at least $10 an hour, David Siegel is following other employers moving to that standard amid a tightening job market and national debate over the minimum wage.

Starting Jan. 1, Westgate will pay at least $10 hourly to employees who are not tipped, working on commission or represented by unions. Siegel said "several thousand" employees nationwide will be affected, with about 1,000 of them in Orlando, working in areas such as housekeeping and maintenance. Westgate employs 12,000 people nationwide and 7,000 here.

Siegel, Westgate's founder and chief executive officer, said he wants to reward employees for helping the company achieve record revenue and profit this year. Siegel said he also wants to attract the best workers.

"I feel like anything less than $10 is not really a living wage," he said in an interview Wednesday. "Everybody keeps talking about $10 an hour minimum wage, and I thought that should be the minimum now."

Florida's minimum wage is $7.93 an hour. President Barack Obama has pushed for increasing the minimum nationwide to $10.10. Supporters say that would help the nation's poorest workers and reduce dependence on public assistance. Republicans have opposed the plan, saying it would kill jobs.

Some governments and companies, however, are taking action on their own. California, home to the Walt Disney Co.'s corporate headquarters, mandated a jump to $9 this year and $10 in 2016. Seattle recently voted to raise its minimum wage to $15 over the next seven years.

Walt Disney World this summer reached an agreement with its largest union group to pay workers at least $9 hourly this year and $10 starting in 2016. Nationwide, employers including Gap Inc. and Ikea also are moving to at least $10 hourly, too. Siegel said competition for workers wasn't a concern for him. But Disney's decision to pay at least $10 an hour will likely pressure other employers, Wells Fargo senior economist Mark Vitner said.

"I think Disney does set the standard in a number of ways," Vitner said. "They're likely to set the tone whether they want to or not. ...They're a widely sought out employer, so other people are going to have to compete with that."

Vitner said what's happening in Orlando also reflects an improving job market here.

"You've had strong growth in the tourist sector and professional services," he said. "The labor market there has tightened up considerably. I think the competition for workers is causing wages to increase more and more."

Orange County's unemployment rate in August was 6.2 percent, down from 6.9 percent a year ago.

Both Universal Orlando and SeaWorld, whose work forces are not unionized, raised minimum hourly starting rates to $9 in June. They have not announced plans to go to $10. A spokesman for Universal couldn't be reached. SeaWorld spokesman Nick Gollattscheck said in an email the company will continue to review starting wages.

Siegel, who also recently purchased the Orlando Predators, said he has mixed feelings about mandating a nationwide $10 minimum wage. "I'm not on a crusade or anything here," he said.

In 2012, Siegel made headlines when he sent an email to employees warning that if President Obama were re-elected, employees could lose their jobs because of higher taxes and Obamacare.

Asked his thoughts on Obama today, Siegel said, "I'm very happy with what he's doing. He's staying out of the economy, and the economy's doing quite well without him. I would be happy if he would go to Hawaii for the next two years and go on vacation."

spedicini@tribune.com or 407-420-5240