TAMPA - The I-Team is uncovering a potential loophole that could cost you money or valuable care.

It's a lesson one Bay Area mother learned the hard way when she tried to get special services for her son who has autism.

There are sometimes different rules for insurance plans regulated by the state and those offered through Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) exchanges.

A local family that bought what they thought was a premium plan discovered they were going to have to pay thousands of dollars per year out of pocket for what other insurance plans would have covered.

Zack Connolly may look like most 12 year olds, but he struggles daily with autism.

“He's more like a 5 or 6 year old when it comes to reasoning, or things like that,” said Zack’s mother Cory Mohammed.

Sometimes Zack acts out.

“I yell. I bang my head and stuff,” said Zack.

When he lived in Massachusetts, Zack received applied behavior analysis therapy, or ABA, through his insurance.

ABA involves individual counseling sessions which help patients learn life strategies.

“My son is functioning, all because I got support in the beginning. If we never got this support, my son would have not been able to tie his shoes. Dressing himself was a challenge,” Mohammed said.

Thirty-seven states, including Florida, mandate ABA benefits to be covered by regulated insurance plans.

Zack's mom thought her son would be covered when her family purchased a $1,600 a month Florida Blue plan through an Affordable Care Act exchange.

“I have in my mind when I was sending it to them that we were going to start services, we're gonna get all these therapies, everything's gonna get better,” Mohammed said.

But those plans don't cover ABA.

Twenty-nine states have mandated that the therapy not only be provided by private insurance, but also under their healthcare exchanges. Florida does not.

Florida Blue issued the following statement concerning their plans’ coverage:

Florida Blue health insurance plans provide coverage for several Autism Spectrum Disorder treatments such as physical therapy, occupational therapy and speech therapy. Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA) therapy is not covered by individual plans because it is considered experimental or investigational in the treatment of Autism Spectrum Disorder, as there is a lack of scientific evidence to draw conclusions as to the safety, efficacy or effects on health outcomes. Florida Statute 627.6686 regarding health insurance coverage of individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder does not pertain to plans offered in the individual market or any health insurance plan provided to a small employer. As consumers shop for insurance during Health Insurance Marketplace open enrollment, we encourage them to contact us to help them research specific services, providers or medication they may need so they are fully aware of what is covered by the plans they are considering.

Zack's family disagrees.

“There needs to be a mandate in that insurance companies can't pick and choose. The insurance companies really need to say if we cover a child with autism, all his services are covered, just like a child with cancer,” said Mohammed.

The best lesson to be learned from all this is to ask lots of questions before you sign up for any plan, so you know exactly what's included.

For more information about benefits offered under different Affordable Care Act Plans, you can visit this website .

If you have a story you think should be investigated, contact the I-Team here: adam@abcactionnews.com

-----