Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

RICHMOND, Va. (AP) — No one around the Washington Redskins harbors doubt about whether DeAngelo Hall has the know-how and competitive spirit necessary to come back from two — count ’em, two! — operations on a torn Achilles tendon.

Least of all the ever-confident Hall himself, of course, who answered with a simple “Yeah” and a chuckle when asked whether he can regain his starting job. He is, don’t forget, second among active NFL players with 43 interceptions.

The question, really, for the cornerback, who turns 32 in November, and the team is whether he’ll be able to fully recover physically.

“The mental part of the game, he has. And I still see his skills. Does he need to clean up his footwoork? Does he need to get his angles correct? Does he need technique work? Yes, he does. But that’ll all return with time,” defensive backs coach Perry Fewell said. “We’re taking it slow with DeAngelo. A lot of people are not able to get back and play at a high level after that type of injury.”

To that end, Hall sat out Saturday’s walkthrough and practice — the first of training camp with full pads — after participating with the first-team defense during Days 1 and 2. Fewell said Hall will follow that pattern for now: work two days, then take a day off.

“Not being in football in 10 months, I’m going to need some monitoring, as far as reps and things like that, just to make sure I don’t kill myself in the first two weeks,” Hall said. “You’ve got a little bit of anxiety — kind of anxiousness, nervousness, excitement — so it felt a little different. But once you get on the field, it’s still football. My leg still worked. Still not quite as explosive as I want to be, and they say that’s going to take some time, but I feel good.”

Having Hall ready for the regular season took on increased importance for Washington when defensive back Bashaud Breeland was suspended for Week 1’s game against Miami. In addition, Breeland injured a ligament in his right knee at practice on Friday and is expected to miss the next four to six weeks.