Doctors in the Rehabilitation Unit of Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami in 2013. (REUTERS/Joe Skipper)

This week the Congressional Budget Office announced as part of its Budget and Economic Outlook (p. 69):

On the basis of information about 2015 enrollment and information available as of the end of December 2015 on 2016 enrollment, CBO and the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT) estimate that about 11 million people per month, on average, will receive such subsidies in calendar year 2016. Additionally, the agencies project that about 2 million people who are not eligible for subsidies will purchase coverage through an exchange, bringing the total number of people enrolled in coverage through exchanges in any given month to 13 million, on average.

That essentially means that the exchanges by year’s end will be down 40 percent from the 20 million predicted last year. The Hill explains:

Though it predicts fewer customers, the budget office says the number of people receiving subsidies will be higher than expected. About 11 million people are expected to receive subsidies this year, compared to 8 million people in 2015. And while healthcare spending has grown more slowly in the last several years, the CBO is projecting that per-person spending on healthcare programs “will grow more rapidly than it has in recent years.” The cost of subsidies alone is expected to increase by $18 billion in 2016, reaching a total of $56 billion, and doubling that within a decade.

This is exactly the pattern Obamacare critics predicted: Fewer healthy people enrolling, resulting in smaller enrollments of sicker people with rising costs. The two fundamental objectives behind Obamacare — universal coverage and cost containment — have not been reached. We have, however, spent a boatload of money and raised taxes for many. Around 5 million people got booted off of their insurance plan, many of whom therefore could not keep their doctors.

Like so much else of the social welfare state, the problem is not that Obamacare accomplished nothing. It is that it accomplished far less, at far higher cost, and with far less personal choice than might otherwise have been available. A balanced assessment from a University of Iowa professor puts it like this:

The truth is that, to the extent that Obamacare’s major goal was to reduce the number of uninsured Americans, it has been a success. The rate of uninsured Americans is the lowest it has ever been since we started tracking that data more than 50 years ago. At the same time, the country still has a long way to go if the goal is to ensure that every American has some form of health insurance coverage. In that respect, Obamacare has underperformed. The CBO projections have proven to be overly-optimistic. The reduction in the number of uninsured seems to be leveling off. In short, we’re approaching a floor. Now, on the other side of that floor, there are people who qualify for benefits under the ACA as originally enacted.

Treating Obamacare as so valuable we dare not upset the apple cart does not sit well with many on the left. Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) has tapped into that understanding, producing a break-the-bank single-payer health-care system. This is the opportunity conservatives have been anticipating. Health-care reformers on the right argue we can cover more people, at far less cost, with fewer taxes and with far more personal choice and control. Voters have every right to ask: So where is it?

Lanhee Chen and James Capretta have their own plan:

About 155 million Americans get health insurance through their place of work. They should be left alone. The only change would be a new upper limit on the tax preference for employer-paid premiums, set so that only the most expensive 25% of plans would exceed it. . . . Individuals without employer coverage would get an age-adjusted tax credit to help purchase health insurance. These credits would be more flexible than ObamaCare’s premium subsides, because there would be no strings attached, i.e., none of the current federal law’s mandated benefits. Consumers could pick any state-approved plan that meets their needs and those of their family. Together with employer coverage, these tax credits would ensure that all have access to secure insurance. . . . Instead of forcing people to buy government-approved insurance, we propose to give people a strong incentive to stay insured: As long as they remain continuously insured, they cannot be charged higher premiums, have their benefits restricted, or be denied enrollment in a plan based on their health status.

They would add in a Medicaid reform (which would allow able-bodied adults and their children to combine Medicaid with a federal tax credit, thereby letting them enroll in a private insurance option) and Medicare reform. (“For new retirees, Medicare would provide a fixed level of assistance—derived from bids submitted by competing insurance carriers and the calculated cost of staying in traditional Medicare—which seniors would use to purchase a health plan of their choosing. Seniors could enroll in the traditional program, which would be modernized with a uniform deductible for hospital and physician services and more discretion for administrators to make distinctions among providers based on quality. Current retirees may choose the reformed program, or to remain in traditional Medicare with no substantial changes in their costs.”) And, finally, health-care savings accounts could be expanded so Americans could use pre-tax dollars to pay for expenses in high-deductible plans.

Unless the GOP wants to be stuck with Obamacare forever, and get beaten on the issues in the presidential race this year, they’d do well to introduce and pass such a plan in the House, send to it to the Senate and let Democrats filibuster. The GOP presidential nominee should then run on it. There will be the choice: Obamacare in all its mediocrity (or a pie-in-the-sky single-payer plan) or the GOP plan. That’s what elections are for and how mandates are obtained — not by rhetoric and running against the status quo but by presenting a better alternative to it. We will see if the GOP is capable of such a thing.