The Obama approval rating has plummeted even further because of Obamacare, and is now lower than George W. Bush’s rating at the same point of his presidency..Making matters even worse, it’s believed Democrats will face an uphill battle in the 2014 mid-term elections, and the 2016 presidential election.

As previously reported by The Inquisitr, a Paxil SNL skit mocked President Obama and Obamacare by claiming he needed to take drugs in order to bring Republican-like performance back for Obama’s second term in office. Even the CMAs roasted Obamacare because of the slow Healthcare.gov website and all the myriad problems the Affordable Care Act is causing.

The Obama approval rating has fallen to 42 percent in a new ABC News, Washington Post poll, although previous polls had President Obama at only 37 percent in October. In contrast, George W. Bush’s approval rating stood at 49 percent near the beginning of his second term in office. But America’s current opinion of Bush is getting even better as time progresses:

“Americans’ opinions of George W. Bush have improved with the passage of time, and now the public’s ratings of the former president tilt positive. Bush left office with decidedly negative favorability ratings as well as approval ratings, so the recovery in his image is notable.”

As a comparison, Ronald Reagan, Jimmy Carter, George H.W. Bush and Bill Clinton all exceeded a 60 percent approval rating when last measured.

Unfortunately, President Obama’s disapproval rating also set a new record, with 55 percent disliking Obama and 70 percent saying the “country’s headed seriously off on the wrong track.” He also isn’t considered a strong leader, is said to not understand average Americans, and is not considered trustworthy. But, as might be expected, 84 percent of Democrats still approve of President Obama’s performance.

Much of the decline in the Obama approval rating can be blamed on the botched implementation of the Affordable Care Act. President Obama apologized for Obamacare causing approximately 15 million people to lose their health insurance plans. And then several weeks later, Obama offered an Obamacare “fix” that supposedly allowed people keep their plans, but 71 percent of Americans still oppose the individual mandate.

The numbers surrounding the Obama approval rating will also cause trouble for Democrats in upcoming elections. Any person up for re-election in 2014 who has favored Obamacare in the past has a 37 percent chance of being opposed, compared to 21 percent odds of being supported. 45 percent of American also consider Obama “too liberal” and 46 percent say the same for the Democratic Party as a whole.

Do you think George W. Bush was actually a better president than the current President, based upon the Obama approval rating?