Ben Sasse says he knows how to fix a broken institution — and the federal government, he says, is broken.

In his campaign for the Republican nomination for Nebraska's open U.S. Senate seat, Sasse is running on his conservative vision, a sharp critique of the federal health care law and his background in crisis management, including his recent role in the recovery of Midland University in Fremont.

Sasse, 42, presents himself as a fifth-generation Nebraskan who would be a bold outsider in the Senate, someone who can sweep into Washington, D.C., and whip the federal government into shape, just as he did at Midland.

“I really do view this campaign as just a project to talk about a constitutional system that I think is under assault,” he said.

He is also a former Washington bureaucrat who worked in three federal agencies. His campaign is supported heavily by out-of-state donors and organizations. And, in fact, the Fremont native has spent only about a quarter of his adult life in his home state. Sasse says none of those things detracts from his genuine conservatism.

He said the four years he spent working for the federal government “radicalized” him. The experience taught him, he said, that government spends too much and doesn't work well.

As for Sasse's time in Washington, campaign manager Tyler Grassmeyer described Sasse's outsider status as “more of a mindset — it's more of a governing philosophy — than it is about geography.”

In any case, the Senate would hold new challenges for Sasse, who is making his first bid for public office. Like all his opponents, he has no experience as a legislator.

But he says he'd bring to the office a conservative vision that he believes is lacking in the mainstream Republican Party.

Sasse's campaign catapulted to national attention in January with a cover story in the conservative National Review that dubbed Sasse “Obamacare's Nebraska nemesis.”

The candidate has picked up endorsements from some high-profile Tea Party favorites: former vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin and Sens. Mike Lee of Utah and Tom Coburn of Oklahoma.

“I've been very impressed with him, with the fact that he's an innovator, a strategic thinker, a doer,” Lee said in an interview.

Sasse has also gotten the nod from three big-name political action committees: the Senate Conservatives Fund, FreedomWorks and the Club for Growth.

In Nebraska, former Gov. Kay Orr and Sasse's former boss, Rep. Jeff Fortenberry, have given him their support.

They say Sasse is well-equipped to fight the Affordable Care Act because of his experience working in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. He recently outlined a 20-plus-page health care proposal as an alternative to the 2010 federal health care law signed by President Barack Obama.

Even before Sasse announced his Senate bid, he promoted himself as an expert on the health care law. In 2012 and 2013, while still heading Midland, he earned $460,000 on the side for health-care-related speeches, strategy sessions and staged debates around the country. His campaign said he doesn't charge for events in Nebraska.

One of his opponents, Shane Osborn, has questioned Sasse's commitment to fighting the health care law, saying some of his past speeches show he was in favor of it.

But Sasse says the intent of those particular speeches was to explain the law's effects, not make the case against it. Friends, colleagues and even debate opponent and former Democratic presidential candidate Howard Dean have said that Sasse's opposition to the law has remained steady.

The health care law has continued to be his focus during the campaign. As a prop for his speeches, Sasse hauls in the entire text of the regulations associated with the legislation, which towers several feet above his head. Sometimes the stack bumps into the ceiling.

His speaking style hovers between pedantic college professor and colloquial man of the people as he tells voters that the legislation represents a world view that he wants to fight: the idea that government can cure all problems.

Friends say Sasse is earnest about conservatism. But they don't think he'll follow the path of Sen. Ted Cruz, the strident Tea Partier who helped orchestrate a partial government shutdown last year over the debt ceiling.

“There's no question that Ben is a fiscal, and really a social, conservative,” said Midland board President Gary Perkins, who is CEO of Children's Hospital & Medical Center. “But I think Ben is also a pragmatist about it.”

He has always been that way, said Ryan Taliaferro, a college roommate and former colleague who is now a senior vice president and portfolio manager at a Boston-based company, Acadian Asset Management.

Sasse's philosophy is “a very practical, sort of Midwestern conservatism,” Taliaferro said.

Sasse's path from Fremont High School valedictorian to Midland president took him around the country and back.

He has earned a degree from Harvard and three from Yale. His career began at Boston Consulting Group, which provides consulting to businesses with tricky problems.

There, he said, he learned his overarching business philosophy: “Too many organizations are doing too many things way too poorly.”

At Boston Consulting Group and other firms, he traveled around the country consulting for businesses that had difficult problems, usually involving losing money. Often the solutions involved slashing entire departments or laying off groups of people.

Sasse and his wife, Melissa, home-schooled their children so they could travel with him.

He worked in Washington, D.C., on and off between 2003 and 2008. That included a stint at the Department of Justice in 2003 and 2004, followed by serving as chief of staff for the newly elected Fortenberry. Sasse also worked briefly with the Department of Homeland Security.

Starting in 2004, he also commuted weekly to the University of Texas-Austin, where he served as an assistant professor of policy and history.

In 2007 and 2008, he worked as an assistant secretary of HHS, an appointment by President George W. Bush that required Senate approval.

In 2007, Melissa Sasse developed an aneurysm in her neck that led to an artery's coming apart. She almost died and spent more than a year in recovery.

That caused the young family to re-evaluate its priorities and its nomadic lifestyle, Sasse said.

“It definitely is a key formative experience in why I think about what stuff I want to invest in and why I only take projects I think are big and important,” Sasse said.

They had always wanted their kids to grow up near Fremont, Sasse's hometown. The year after his wife's health crisis, Obama won the presidency, and the Sasses decided it was time to return to Nebraska.

In June 2009, they moved into a house just outside Fremont.

When Midland leaders went looking that year for someone to save the school from bankruptcy, they found Sasse.

They hired him as president at an annual salary of more than $200,000. Sasse inherited an academic crisis, a financial crisis and a public relations crisis.

In four of his first six months as university president, he had to ask donors to help the school make payroll.

What happened next, according to friends and colleagues, is typical Sasse: He took a big-picture view of the problem and devised a long-term strategy.

He warned board members that he would be making decisions that would most likely be unpopular and that they should prepare for repercussions and potentially a vote of no confidence from the faculty.

“I don't know if he thinks out of the box. His box is just big,” said Midland board member Steve Pribnow.

Eventually, Midland ended lifetime tenure for faculty and made steep cuts to departments that weren't drawing many students. Sasse asked faculty members in majors with too few students to take buyouts and early retirements, and 15 people left. Sasse said at the time that the school “could no longer be all things to all students.” Those were tough decisions, Sasse said. But they were necessary.

Plus, he said, “I just don't think it's the right way to treat people to have them doing jobs that don't matter,” such as teaching in a department with more professors than students.

As he made potentially unpopular decisions, he explained to the board, faculty and students what he planned to do and why.

People now say those meetings helped stakeholders understand why such major changes were necessary. Sasse never faced that no-confidence vote.

“I would have expected a lot more negative pushback,” said Russ Peterson, a longtime Midland donor and a Sasse supporter.

Meanwhile, Midland invested in other areas. The school expanded its health sciences offerings and increased sports programs and other extracurricular programs. It focused on recruiting, in part through a four-year graduation guarantee and a campaign to put Midland in the minds of Omaha-area high school seniors.

Over the past five years, Sasse has hired a team of administrators who share his vision for Midland's future.

“I think this group around here would follow him into war if he asked,” Pribnow said.

He expects hard work: Employees report that his texts and emails generally start to arrive about 4:30 a.m. — and he uses his phone so much that he has gone through 10 BlackBerrys in the past eight years.

In response to his changes at Midland, students have flocked there. Enrollment doubled from a low of 590 in 2009-10 to 1,288 this year.

The enrollment boom was partly driven by the 2010 closure of another private Lutheran school, Dana College, in Blair. Midland offered Dana students enrollment and the same financial packages they had at Dana.

In Sasse's first full year, 2010-11, more than three-fourths of the additional students came from Dana. But the school has grown beyond the Dana bump.

Midland went from a seven-figure deficit to seven-figure surpluses, according to public nonprofit documents.

And there are other indicators of success, like the fact that the men's basketball team went to the NAIA Division II national championship game this year for the first time ever.

Still, Midland hasn't fully recovered from its near-bankruptcy. Most notably, the school is on accreditation notice from the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools because of its past financial problems and assessment concerns.

The review stems from a site visit in the 2008-09 school year, before Sasse was president and near the height of the enrollment troubles. The school has since submitted its response to the association, which will make its final decision later this year. Midland spokesman Nate Neufind said the school expects to retain its accreditation.

The next step for Midland is to prepare to open the former Dana campus in order to expand enrollment further and to increase online learning options.

When Sasse announced his bid for Senate, he offered to resign from Midland, but the board asked him to take a partial leave of absence instead. Perkins, the Midland board president, said that if Sasse won, school officials would be sad to see him leave, but they're happy with what he has accomplished there.

If elected, Sasse would face different challenges from those of a university executive or business consultant.

Friends and supporters acknowledged that some of the management skills required to be a good college president wouldn't necessarily translate to the Senate, where he would be one of 100 senators.

But they said Sasse's communication style and ability to work with many different people would bring him success in Washington, just as it did at Midland.

Sasse says he brings a vision for the future, like his alternative health care plan. He said his own party leaders are failing at telling people what they stand for.

“A Republican Party that has nothing to say when Democrats answer, 'Big government is the solution to every problem' — I'm so bored by that,” he said. “I think we have to actually propose real solutions.”

He said the philosophy he learned at Boston Consulting Group 20 years ago is what Washington needs. He says government has gotten too big and is trying to do too many things. And, he says, it's doing them poorly.

Just like Midland, the government needs to cut the programs that aren't succeeding and focus on the things it does well, he said. And that can't be done through small steps.

“Business as usual doesn't work,” Sasse said. “We need to do big stuff.”