NASHVILLE, Tenn. — Baseball’s offseason already was hot.

Then the Arizona Diamondbacks shook up the National League West by signing former Los Angeles Dodgers ace Zack Greinke last week to a six-year, $206.5 million deal. And then the San Francisco Giants threw their weight around, signing Jeff Samardzija to a five-year deal for $90 million, pending a physical.

The annual winter meetings officially begin Monday, and the Rockies figure to be minor players. They enter the fray, once again, as the most pitching-deprived team in the NL West, if not the majors. With the monetary bar already set sky high, it will be more difficult than ever for Colorado to beef up its rotation via free agency.

Of course, general manager Jeff Bridich is more apt to pull the trigger on a trade in an effort to upgrade pitching. Going the trade route could cost the Rockies an outfielder and probably a prospect or two.

Former all-stars Carlos Gonzalez and Charlie Blackmon, plus up-and-coming slugger Corey Dickerson, could have suitors. But it’s clear the Rockies will have to give up something big to get quality on the mound.

These will be Bridich’s second winter meetings as the Rockies’ chief architect, and he remains as tight-lipped as ever about Colorado’s plan. Then again, he shocked the baseball world in late July by trading star shortstop Troy Tulowitzki and reliever LaTroy Hawkins to Toronto for veteran shortstop Jose Reyes and three right-handed pitching prospects.

“The primary difference (this year) is that the composition of our team is different now, so that forces you to be flexible for any opportunities that are out there,” Bridich said. “But our overall approach will be the same.”

Pitchers such as Chicago White Sox lefty Jose Quintana and Cleveland Indians righty Carlos Carrasco could emerge as targets. So could Atlanta Braves righty Shelby Miller, a hot commodity. As of last week, however, the Rockies had not been in contact with the Braves regarding Miller.

Colorado, which lost closer John Axford and is waiting for Adam Ottavino to return from Tommy John surgery last spring, also needs help in the bullpen.

Colorado also could make a move to upgrade first base. They had preliminary talks with the Seattle Mariners about first baseman Mark Trumbo, but he was subsequently dealt to the Baltimore Orioles. For now, steady and improving Ben Paulsen is the starter at first. Still, the interest in Trumbo shows that the Rockies would like to add a power bat to their lineup.

The Rule 5 draft comes Thursday at the tail end of the winter meetings, and it could be important for the Rockies, who are trying to build a collection of young, powerful pitchers. They choose fourth, and there are prospects to be had. Righties Corey Black (Chicago Cubs), Zack Jones (Minnesota Twins) and Alberto Tirado (Philadelphia Phillies), and lefties Onelki Garcia (White Sox), Reymin Guduan (Houston Astros) and Sam Selman (Kansas City Royals) all fit the bill.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or @psaundersdp

Rockies at winter meetings

• Possible (but unlikely) free-agent targets: Right-handed pitchers Ian Kennedy, Doug Fister and Mike Leake, and first baseman Chris Davis.

• Possible trade targets: White Sox LHP Jose Quintana, Indians RHP Carlos Carrasco and Braves RHP Shelby Miller.

• Possible trade bait: Outfielders Carlos Gonzalez, Corey Dickerson and Charlie Blackmon, as well as prospects.

• Rockies’ needs: Starting pitching, relief pitching, power bat.

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post