President Obama listens to keynote speaker Ben Carson at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast in Washington. Obama would not be smiling for all of the speech. (Kevin Lamarque/Reuters)

At the prayer breakfast in 2013, he took his outrage public, criticizing Obama’s policies while standing at a lectern a few feet from the president. Carson talked about the country being in danger of falling, like the Roman Empire, from “moral decay and fiscal irresponsibility,” and he lambasted Obama’s signature health-care overhaul. As the president’s smile wilted into a grimace, a viral video and a conservative folk hero were born.

Armstrong Williams, the conservative commentator who serves as Carson’s business manager, was thrilled. “We’re going to rachet it up,” he remembered thinking.

And they did. The newer, bolder Carson was on television comparing homosexuality to bestiality, causing such an uproar that he was forced to apologize. Then he called the president’s health-care law “the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery.” Many who admired him were stunned.

“Say it ain’t so,” Sharpton said were his first thoughts when he heard Carson’s slavery comparison.

“We’ve had black Republicans before, so it’s not that he’s on the right that is particularly surprising,” Sharpton said. “It’s that he’s so far right.”

That winter, a conservative activist named Mike Murray knocked on the door of Carson’s new retirement home in Florida.

Carson answered the door in shorts and a T-shirt. He invited him to the living room, and Murray sat near Candy Carson’s organ. Over three hours, Murray told Carson he wanted him to be the face of an organization that would push for the repeal of Obamacare.

“I’m concerned about being too political,” Murray remembers Carson replying.

But Murray was persuasive. “People are hungry to hear from you,” he said, “and you could do this the right way.”

Together, they ventured throughout the country, urging legislators and voters to sign a petition. Everywhere they went, Murray recalled, people told Carson that he was the right one to deliver the hard truths about the state of the country.

Carson basked in their admiration. He said he began to believe that the country needed “someone who has been able to utilize the strength of lots of other people, as well as their own intellect, to solve problems that no one ever solved before. Maybe that would be a more useful skill set than time in Washington, D.C.”

“It has to be someone,” Carson thought, as he recalled it in an interview earlier last year. Then he chuckled. “Maybe it just happens to be me.”

Then came a sign from the divine, according to Murray. The two men had agreed that Carson would call the 100,000th person to sign the health-care petition. The woman did not want her full name made public, Murray said, but he identified her in a mailer as a woman named Emily from Virginia.

When Carson reached her, Murray said, she told the neurosurgeon that her dying son was once one of Carson’s patients. He helped to save him. Now she wanted him to run for president to save the country.

“I couldn’t believe it,” Murray said. “Everyone will think she was a plant.”

In a February 2014 email to supporters, Carson wrote that he might have received “a wink from above.”

That November, Carson grabbed a voter registration form in Florida. In the party field, he checked “Republican.”