Dr Persaud denies any wrongdoing and is set to appeal his sentence

An FBI agent blasted his fraud as a violation of his patients' trust

Some of his patients underwent heart surgery that they did not need

He allegedly made over $5.6 million from his medical fraud scam

An Ohio cardiologist has been sentenced to 20 years in prison for forcing patients to undergo surgeries that were unnecessary - so that he could reap financial rewards.

Dr. Harry Persaud who was practicing in Westlake was convicted of persuading patients to have major operations like open heart surgery - that they did not need - for his own financial gain.

He allegedly made over $5.6 million from Medicare and private insurance companies from the medical fraud.

Convicted: Dr. Harry Persaud from Westlake was convicted of persuading patients to have major operations like - open heart surgery - that they did not need them

Scam: Dr. Harry Persaud, pictured leaving federal court allegedly made over $5.6 million from Medicare and private insurance companies from his medical fraud

He was found guilty of health care fraud, making false statements regarding health care matters and money laundering on December 18, The Inquisitr reported.

He will start his sentence on a date yet to be decided by the FBI.

Dr Persuad went to school and trained to be a doctor in the UK after moving to London at the age of 10 from British Guyana.

According to the FBI, he carried out his scam between 2006 and 2012 when he over-billed insurance companies and the Medicare system.

And his patients ranged in age from their 40s to their 90s.

Dr Persaud allegedly scammed patients by falsifying the results of their exams which made it seem as though they needed to have specific procedures carried out when they didn't.

Some patients were allegedly injected with radioactive material for heart tests, other patients underwent bypass operations or had stents for problems that they did not have.

Dr Persaud was found guilty in federal court on December 18 of health care fraud, making false statements regarding health care matters and money laundering - but he denies any wrongdoing

One woman who testified against the doctor believed that her husband died as a result of a procedure Dr. Persaud made him have.She said an unnecessary stent was put in his heart and acted as a 'ticking time bomb' on his health.

Dr Persaud, who had his own private practice also worked at three hospitals in the Westlake area, a suburb of Cleveland where he performed procedures.

His scam came to light after a doctor noticed test results and referrals that he'd made for more procedures that seemed unnecessary.

Dr Persaud has not practiced since 2012 but still has a medical license.

His medical licence is currently under review by Ohio medical authorities. It's likely that he may lose it and be required to repay insurance companies for the fraud that he committed.

Several patients have sued him over the elaborate fraud.

FBI supervisory special agent Justin Shammot in Cleveland told The Guardian that it was the 'worst kind of health care fraud you can have as he violated his patients trust.

He said: 'He had convinced his patients to really trust him and he led them to believe that if they had not had these services that it's likely that they could possibly die.

'These procedures do have consequences,' Shammot added. 'When they are appropriate, the risks are outweighed by the benefits, but [if] you are performing nuclear stress tests and giving patients stents that were not medically necessary … there are all kinds of risks associated with these, including taking medications for the rest of your life.'

Dr Persaud denies any wrongdoing and plans to appeal his conviction.

He said: 'I made some billing errors, but I did not do anything wrong, medically. I never put in a stent or did a procedure that I did not think was necessary. I am appealing the conviction and sentence.'