Senate Democratic Whip Dick Durbin Dick DurbinReid: 'Lay off' Sanders criticism Senators tout 4.5B defense spending bill that sticks to budget Lawmakers seek changes in TSA PreCheck program MORE (D-Ill.) has introduced legislation to strengthen procedures for preventing, detecting and treating concussions in student athletes.

The Protecting Student Athletes from Concussions Act unveiled Thursday would set minimum state requirements for K-12 schools to follow when they suspect a student may have a concussion.

ADVERTISEMENT

The bill institutes a “when in doubt, sit out” policy and forces schools to notify a student’s parents of an injury and obtain a written release from a healthcare professional before the student may return to play.

“Research has shown the serious long-term health risks associated with concussions in youth sports,” Durbin said in a news release. “I’m glad to say that Illinois has been a leader on this issue, but it’s time for all states to play under the same rules.”

According to figures from the National Federation of State High School Associations, Durbin said there are an estimated 140,000 students playing high school sports who suffer concussions every year, though many go unreported.

Durbin said his legislation would raise awareness about the dangers of concussions among student athletes by building on a comprehensive plan implemented by the Illinois High School Athletic Association.

Illinois law requires school districts to educate students, families and coaches about the nature and risk of concussions and requires student athletes to abstain from sports until they receive a medical evaluation and a letter of clearance from a licensed healthcare professional saying they can return.

If passed, states would have five years to issue guidance to schools about concussion plans under the Protecting Student Athletes from Concussions Act or forfeit 5 percent of its federal formula funding under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act in the first year and an additional 5 percent if the schools fails to comply a second year.