A squirrel makes its way to a Longmont bird-feeder in this November 2011 photo. Johnnie St. Vrain looked for a squirrel to photograph for this article but couldn't find one. ( Times-Call file )

Dear Johnnie: Until about two weeks ago, the neighborhood where I live had many squirrels — a bumper crop from this spring.

Suddenly they are gone. About the time I noticed the absent squirrels, I noticed several dead field mice.

Are there other areas of Longmont in a similar situation? Perhaps a disease that has quickly decimated the squirrels this summer?

Or might it be something more ominous?

Thanks for any information you might be able to provide. — Missing the Furry Ones

Dear Missing the Furry Ones: A question like this causes a local columnist to begin wondering if he has seen many squirrels around. For two days, I kept my eyes peeled for squirrels — to and from work, and in the trees outside the office, at Thompson Park and in the yard — and I didn't see a single one of the rascals.

Further, I read about the appearance of tularemia along the Front Range. Tularemia — also known as rabbit fever — is a bacterial infection that affects wild rodents. I began to wonder if Longmont squirrels had met their demise.

However, others in the newsroom have seen squirrels in their neighborhoods on the north and east sides of town.

To be sure, I reached out to Dan Wolford, the city's land program administrator and the person I often turn to to ask about wildlife in Longmont.

He was unaware of any squirrel shortage in town but directed me to Colorado Parks & Wildlife and Boulder County Public Health.

Neither CPW nor the heath department report hearing of any disappearance of squirrels or any outbreak that might be hitting them especially hard.

Advertisement

Sharon Bokan, with the CSU Extension's Longmont office, theorized that this summer's weather might have changed the rodents' feeding patterns.

"It may be that with all the vegetation and all the moisture we've had, they're finding other sources of food," she said. " I don't know. But I haven't heard anything from anybody. ... If there's something going around like that, usually I get notice from the state veterinarian's office or (Boulder County) public health."

So, Missing, it could be that squirrels are simply going about their business this summer while avoiding you and me. I'm curious to hear if other residents are noticing fewer squirrels.

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com.