Gregg Hook with Liberty Tax says, "It's that time of year where everyone needs their taxes done."

Another year, another tax season. Doors opened yesterday at some tax offices, including Liberty Tax. It's looking like some people aren't slacking.

Hook says, "We already had around 20 people in, so people are getting out early and getting their taxes done sooner than we've seen in the past."

When asked when they do their taxes, some locals say they don't wait.

"Usually by the beginning of February."

"As soon as I get my W-2s so generally somewhere in the middle of January. I want to get it done as soon as possible."

But for many others, they don't get the deed done as quickly.

"Usually we try to start early, but we don't end up until April."

The IRS begins tax refunds on January 19th and Hook at Liberty Tax says there are plenty of benefits to doing your taxes early, but the main one? Getting your money back quickly!

Hook says, "Getting your return done even before then gets it to their front door and they start processing those quick so you're going to get your money back a little quicker when you file early."

He also recommends going somewhere to have your taxes done so you don't miss anything and if you choose to do them yourself, maybe having a second pair of eyes look them over.

Hook says, "Taxes are pretty complex so with the changes to the Affordable Care Act in recent years, education credits, children have lots of different credits as well. Sometimes you might miss something so we want to make sure people get all of their money back that they're due. Even if we don't prepare them, we'll review them to make sure that you didn't leave any money out there on the table."

Mistakes are pretty easy to make when working on your taxes.

Hook says, "A lot of times simple addition is the big one. But also not knowing what's out there. If you're a college student, what credits you might be able to qualify for."

So whether you choose to get ahead of the game this tax season, or wait it out, keep some of these tips in mind.