“When Oliver Gardner lived here, he would hold great gatherings with his family and friends,” Carriere said.

The historic six-bedroom mansion built by Oliver Gardner and 36 surrounding acres are available for $745,000. Gardner was one of the five brothers who founded Glen Gardner in the 1860s. (Photo: ~PHOTO COURTESY OF BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY HOMESERVICES NEW JERSEY PROPERTIES) Story Highlights Oliver Gardner, built a hillside mansion in 1869 overlooking the town. Now, this historical home is being marketed by Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices New Jersey Properties for $745,000.

The home comes equipped with artisan hand-carved doors and ceiling trim, a billiard room and widow’s walk, with breathtaking views of the town.

Other great features include a large study, fieldstone fireplace, and grand terrace.

The kitchen has cherrywood cabinets, white appliances, a white counter, hardwood floors and an attached wine cellar.

This Hunterdon County hamlet was founded by five inventive brothers who ran a chair-and-frame factory in the 1860. One of them, Oliver Gardner, built a hillside mansion in 1869 overlooking the town. Now, this historical home is being marketed by Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices New Jersey Properties for $745,000.

“There is such a sense of history in this home. There are few physical remnants of the Gardner family legacy in our area, but this home is definitely one of the most notable,” said John Carriere, the listing agent at Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices New Jersey Properties’ Hunterdon County sales office. “Oliver Gardner was the financial and creative mind of the Gardner Family, which is clear in this home’s elegance.”

The six-bedroom Victorian home sits on 36 acres of land, with a formal garden, swimming pool, and stocked pond. The home comes equipped with artisan hand-carved doors and ceiling trim, a billiard room and widow’s walk, with breathtaking views of the town. Other great features include a large study, fieldstone fireplace, and grand terrace.

The kitchen has cherrywood cabinets, white appliances, a white counter, hardwood floors and an attached wine cellar.

The Gardner family was most well known for their invention and production of mass-market plywood. Other notable products include picture frames, furniture, and even cable cars.

“When Oliver Gardner lived here, he would hold great gatherings with his family and friends,” Carriere said. “Highly anticipated social events were held here, specifically for the wealthier acquaintances of the Gardners. With the spacious veranda and grand terrace, this home is still well-equipped for social events just as it was when Oliver owned it.”

For more information on this unique home, contact listing agent John Carriere at (908) 735-9700 or email him at john.carriere@BHHSNJ.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1uwXbGZ