Timothy Dick’s office receives all kinds of reports of child abuse and neglect. Perhaps a child has a broken bone, or is underfed, or has been left home alone for too long.

But when caseworkers drive to the child’s home to investigate, they often discover the same root cause. “What we’re finding more and more is that the parents are addicted to opiates. And more often than not, it’s heroin,” said Dick, assistant director of child protective services in Clermont County, Ohio.

In Ohio and other states ravaged by the latest drug epidemic, officials say substance abuse by parents is a major reason for the growing number of children in foster care. In Clermont County, east of Cincinnati, more than half the children placed in foster care this year have parents who are addicted to opiates, Dick said.

The number of children living in foster care started rising in 2013 after years of decline. Last year, about 415,000 children were living in foster care, according to federal statistics released last week. Fifteen percent of them hadn’t yet passed their second birthday.

It’s not clear how many child-welfare cases nationwide involve parents abusing drugs or alcohol, said Nancy Young, director of the federally funded National Center on Substance Abuse and Child Welfare.

But she suspects that most cases do: “That’s what all the caseworkers and judges are saying.”

Added Pressure on State Systems

Numbers emerging from the states show how rising heroin use is putting pressure on child-welfare systems.

In Ohio, 23 percent of child-welfare cases investigated in 2013 involved heroin or cocaine, up from 19 percent in 2010, state records show. Seventy percent of children less than a year old who were placed in foster care that year had parents who were using those drugs, according to the Public Children Services Association of Ohio (PCSAO), a coalition of county child-welfare agencies.

In neighboring Indiana, Republican Gov. Mike Pence linked the spike in children moving through the child-welfare system—18,925 as of July—to drug abuse, especially of heroin, and hired 113 new caseworkers this year to help handle the load.

And in Vermont, substance abuse was cited in more than a third of phone calls to the state’s child-protection hotline. Last year, 1,326 Vermont children were in state custody, up 33 percent in one year.

“Young children are coming into state custody in unprecedented numbers. This is primarily being driven by parental heroin use,” writes Cindy Walcott, Vermont’s deputy commissioner for family services.

Social workers point out that drug abuse does not always result in child neglect. But parents might be so consumed by addiction that all they think about is getting high.

Officials in the three states say child-welfare cases that involve drug addiction are particularly challenging because parents have limited time to prove that they’re able to safely care for their children and get them back.

But kicking a drug habit—particularly when the drug is heroin—can be a lifelong battle.

Federal law requires that a child be reunited with his family or put up for adoption after spending 15 consecutive months in foster care (or any 15 over a 22-month period). “As soon as the child-protection agency files the case with the court, the clock starts ticking,” said Angela Sausser, executive director of PCSAO.

Many parents can’t recover in time. Relapse is common with opioids and heroin, Sausser said. And that’s assuming parents can start drug treatment. Waiting lists are often long in Ohio and Vermont, particularly for intensive services like clinics where parents can detox with the help of medication.

When a parent has to wait three to six months simply to enter a treatment program, that’s critical lost time, Sausser said.