Downtown chalk art may be the best part of Wausau's best weekend.

Buy Photo An artist labors over her work at Chalkfest in this 2011 file photo. (Photo: Daily Herald Media )Buy Photo

Have you ever tried drawing in chalk on a sidewalk? It is hard. Besides having to labor on your hands and knees in the hot sun, the medium itself is messy, imprecise and hard to shade.

Each work of chalk art that will adorn The 400 Block in downtown Wausau this weekend, then, is worthy of respect, and the best of them — the abstract swirls, the Wisconsin scenes and the painstaking recreations of great artworks and pop-cultural icons — are a minor miracle.

Chalkfest may be the most enjoyable part of the most enjoyable weekend on Wausau's calendar. The downtown square will be populated with artists beginning early Saturday, and all weekend long crowds will tour the art in progress and, once finished, will ooh and ahh and choose their favorite chalk depictions.

One of the drawings depicts Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. at ChalkFest in downtown Wausau, Sunday, July, 10, 2011. Dan Young/Wausau Daily Herald. (Photo: WDH/Dan Young)

Story: Wausau Chalkfest, Rib Fest return bigger, better

Story: Downtown Wausau retailers ready for sidewalk shoppers

A fun game at Chalkfest is to measure the zeitgeist by which characters from books, TV and movies pop up on the most sidewalk squares. In recent years, we've seen multiple depictions of Harry Potter, Iron Man and characters from the "Twilight" and "Hunger Games" series. We're predicting a lot of drawings based on "The Lego Movie" this year. Maybe some images from the "Game of Thrones" books or TV show.

Chalkfest, which has grown into a local institution beloved by artists and audiences, is only one of the weekend's big, exciting events. Downtown streets will be lined with sidewalk sales. And at the Wausau Downtown Airport, the Balloon and Rib Fest kicked off Thursday and will continue through the weekend, with lots of music and family activities, balloon glows — hot air balloons inflated at dusk, lovely glow from the inside — at 8:30 p.m. Friday and Saturday, and fireworks at dark afterward.

And ribs. Lots of ribs, pulled pork sandwiches and other barbecue goodness.

At Chalkfest, another part of the fun is the impermanence of the art. Like a Buddhist sand mandala, soon enough the small artworks will all be gone, rubbed away by the footsteps of downtown visitors and washed away by summer rain. It's meant to be enjoyed right now, this weekend. Enjoy it!

Buy Photo Raechel Schultz of Wausau works on her drawing based on the book “Where The Wild Things Are,” by Maurice Sendak at 2011’s Chalkfest event. (Photo: Daily Herald Media file photo)

Read or Share this story: http://www.wausaudailyherald.com/story/opinion/2014/07/10/wausau-chalkfest-community-delight/12487831/