Pip, pip, hooray!

That might be the easy response to the national tour of “Pippin,” which had its dazzling launch Wednesday. ( Through Sept. 20 at the Buell.)

While that enthusiasm would be utterly earned, it might also be less than “Pippin” deserves.

* * * * musical

Director Diane Paulus’ take on Stephen Schwartz and Roger Hirson’s 1972 Broadway musical about a bright if entitled prince on a quest for meaning is a high-wire act of pleasure and smarts.

Paulus enlisted choreographer Chet Walker. He danced in the original and worked with Bob Fosse, director-choreographer on that show. She also tapped circus genius Gypsy Snider.

Yes, this new “Pippin” remains the story of a boy who runs off. Only instead of joining the circus, it joins him.

Leading Player is the show’s winking narrator, its alluring emcee, its whip-cracking ringmaster, and deeper into Pippin’s — and our — journey, the character becomes the musical’s uncomfortable charismatic force.

Sasha Allen portrays the sly, sensual character. With a voice vast and lush, she arrives on stage with a troupe of acrobats, the Players. After their knock-out number “Magic to Do,” cqq she introduces us to Pippin’s deceptively simple saga.

The son of King Charlemagne (John Rubinstein)returns home from his studies, hungering to be “fulfilled,” to find, he sings with soaring optimism, his “Corner of the Sky.” It’s a quest — goosed by Leading Player — that finds our intrepid Pippin grappling with human endeavors that have promised purpose for centuries: war, sex, revolution. Matthew James Thomas, who originated the role of Pippin in the Broadway revival, stepped in late for this run. He captures the heir with winning humor and a vivid tenor.

But then The cast as a whole charms. As Pippin’s grandmother Berthe, Lucie Arnaz nearly brings down the house, invitingthey bring up the house lights so the audience to join her in the growing-old ditty, “No Time At All.”

John Rubinstein is bawdy and knowing as Charles. The scene in which Pippin arrives at a cathedral where Charles retreats in prayer is rich, and not just for the twists on the roles of father and son — Rubinstein played Pippin in the original.

Ah, the generations of man.

Walker and Snider mix the erotic charge of Fosse with a carnival’s carnal grace. of the carnival What they have created often stuns.

The show has a number of one-two punches in which The breezily amusing is followed closely by the deliciously ominous. For instance, Leading Player’s dark anthem on war, “Glory,” follows Charles’ tongue-twister “War Is a Science.”

Like the brilliant work of its acrobats, “Pippin” is a feat of balance. It is playful and deadly serious. A lark and a lesson. A coupling of astounding spectacle and deeply earned sentiment. Often it is all those things in the same instant.

Pip, pip, hooray, indeed.

Lisa Kennedy: 303-954-1567, lkennedy@denverpost.com or twitter.com/bylisakennedy

“PIPPIN.” Book by Roger Hirson. Music and lyrics by Stephen Schwartz. Directed by Diane Paulus. Featuring Sasha Allen, Matthew James Thomas, John Rubinstein, Lucie Arnaz, Sabrina Harper and Kristine Reese. Through Sept. 20. 2 hours, 35 minutes. At the Buell Theatre, 14th & Curtis streets. Tickets $25-105 via denvercenter.org or 303-893-4100.