Comedian and co-host of the ABC Network show The View, Sherri Shepherd, is in the spotlight for her outside-the-box dieting technique that has helped her shed more than 60 lbs. off her 197-pound frame. The 5-foot, 1-inch successful dieter has revealed her weight loss secrets that have not only helped her stay fit and slim but also beat diabetes.

"Diabetes has forced me to make exercise a part of my daily life," Shepherd told Forbes. "It just really changed my entire way. I’ve been eating and living, and that’s actually a good thing."

Despite her family history of type 2 diabetes, Shepherd ignored her susceptibility to the disease and kept enjoying her favorite meal: pancakes and syrup. In 2007, the TV star was formally diagnosed with pre-diabetes, but this did not deter her from eating the way she wanted to until her doctor gave her a bleak look at her future. Shepherd was told her foot would be cut off if she kept eating the way she did, and she would no longer be able to wear the high heel shoes she loved.

Sherri Shepherd at the 6th Annual Comedy For A Cure Benefit hosted by the Tuberous Sclerosis Alliance. The Music Box Theatre, Hollywood, CA in 2007. s_bukley / Shutterstock.com

The National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse says high blood glucose levels from diabetes could lead to two problems that can hurt a patient’s feet. Nerve damage to the legs and feet could result in the individual not feeling pain, heat, or cold, also known as neuropathy. The other problem it can lead to is poor blood flow, which occurs when there is not enough blood flowing to the legs and feet. Poor blood circulation makes it harder for a sore or infection to heal, also known as peripheral vascular disease. These two problems may cause the patient’s skin and tissue around the infection to die, becoming black and smelly, and possibly leading to an amputation.

The reality of Shepherd’s condition did not sink in until doctors told the TV star she would not be around to raise her 8-year-old son, Jeffrey, if she continued to consume so much food. With the help of friends, Shepherd began to eliminate white foods such as pasta, pancakes, cereal, and anything loaded with sugar, the Daily Mail reports. Shepherd has even shared her weight battle and diabetes diagnosis with the public in her book called How to Lose Weight and Beat Diabetes (Even If You Don’t Have It).

Now, The View co-host has lost 20 lbs. since her major weight loss of more than 40 lbs. in August. Shepherd’s weight loss secrets lie in a healthy diet and exercise. The 46-year-old avid Zumba fan admits to doing Zumba every night for the past two years whether it’s a class or a DVD. She also dished to ABC News she has a fool-proof strategy to avoid overindulging at restaurants, especially during the holiday season.

NEW YORK-DEC 16: TV host Sheri Shepherd attends the world premiere of "Grudge Match" at the Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City in 2013. Debby Wong / Shutterstock.com

“I tell people eat before you go to a restaurant,” Shepherd said. “A lot of times, you go to a restaurant, and you’re so hungry. I eat before I go, cause the point is to have great conversation. So, I’m already full and that helps me.”

The successful dieter also reveals she keeps a healthy snack readily available in her purse for hunger pangs during the day. “I always carry apples and peanut butter in my purse to give me that boost of energy to get me through the day.” Shepherd’s husband, Lamar Sally, also contributes to the TV star’s rapid weight loss, as he does most of the cooking in the home. The couple’s favorite snack is kale with sautéed green peppers, olive oil, and garlic.

Although Sally does most of the cooking, Shepherd still plays an active role in the kitchen. The comedian confesses to doing “push-ups against the [kitchen] counter” and does lunges while doing laundry. “'I have learned to turn my house into a gym,” she comically admits.

Shepherd’s weight loss has not only improved her appearance, reversed her type 2 diabetes, but has also given her so much energy to spend time with her son Jeffrey. Her low-carb, low-sugar diet, and regular exercise has allowed her to be medication free and even run races and climb the monkey bars with Jeffrey.

“I want to live, and I'm going to beat this thing. I feel so blessed."