Troy University's Manuel H. Johnson Center for Political Economy recently released a study finding that expanding Medicaid under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) would prove exceptionally costly for Alabama.

The Troy study argues that research from UAB and the University of Alabama supportive of the PPACA's Medicaid expansion overstates the tax benefit of the program to the state and underestimates the administrative costs of running an enlarged Medicaid bureaucracy.

While the Troy study shows that reasonable economic minds in Alabama disagree about the impact of the PPACA's Medicaid expansion, it is unlikely to sway those already decided on the issue. Many Alabamians favoring the PPACA assert that the law's Medicaid expansion will improve health quality for low-income Alabamians. Unfortunately, that conclusion is largely driven by the liberal mantra that more government spending and services necessarily produces better outcomes.

If more Medicaid improves health quality, tracking health outcomes under Alabama's current program as it has grown should reinforce that conclusion. Unfortunately, Alabama's Medicaid program does not effectively monitor and provide information that could determine whether Medicaid beneficiaries' health quality actually improves over time.

In the 2013 legislative session, Alabama Gov. Robert Bentley and the Alabama Legislature took the first steps towards improving the health of low-income Alabamians by enacting a modern, information-drive, beneficiary-centered approach to Medicaid that will hopefully have the added benefit of reducing costs for health issues that could have been prevented through a more comprehensive approach to care.

While the new model may need improvements, it outclasses the previous system designed to pay for health services with little focus on overall health outcomes. Yet instead of working to improve the current Medicaid program for children, the disabled and the poorest Alabamians, PPACA supporters want to pile more people onto the already burdened program.

Even so, PPACA supporters, liberal politicians and activist groups focusing on growing Medicaid are not actually generating the lion's share of the pressure to expand Medicaid. The most powerful supporters of the Medicaid expansion in Alabama are the state's hospitals, and their motives are decidedly, and understandably, economic.

Ironically, the PPACA created the problem that has Alabama hospitals pushing ardently for the Medicaid expansion. The PPACA's cuts to Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH) payments, designed to compensate hospitals for the higher costs of treating low-income patients, have left Alabama hospitals scrambling to find revenue.

With gridlock in Washington, pragmatic solutions to the DSH cuts such as reducing PPACA subsidies in exchange for more effectively supporting indigent care at hospitals seem unlikely. Given that Congress and President Obama are unwilling to reach common ground on revisions to the PPACA, it is hard to blame Alabama's hospitals for their support of the expansion, but that does not mean that their path of least resistance is the best one for Alabama.

Alabamians should be critical of the voices claiming that expanding a massive government program will provide an economic windfall. The Troy University study confirms what experience has already proven: Growing government entitlement programs creates a cost for taxpayers that will continue to increase over time and is nearly impossible to slow or reverse.

Alabama is making important strides toward the goal of improving healthcare for the most vulnerable Alabamians, and accountability over time will show the effectiveness of the changes. At the same time, Governor Bentley and Alabama's elected leaders are wise to reject a Medicaid expansion that supports an expensive, Washington-driven approach to healthcare that the majority of Alabama's voters flatly reject.

(Cameron Smith writes a regular column for Alabama Media Group. He is vice president and general counsel for the Alabama Policy Institute, an independent, non-profit research and education organization dedicated to the preservation of free markets, limited government and strong families. He may be reached at camerons@alabamapolicy.org or on Twitter @DCameronSmith.)