A man sentenced to life in prison for his role in the stabbing deaths of five people at a Denver bar says his attorneys “coerced” him into pleading guilty.

In April, Joseph Hill, 28, mailed a letter to the judge who sentenced him to prison, announcing his desire to withdraw his guilty plea. Hill wrote and sent the letter without telling his attorneys, who he says took advantage of his “ignorance” and misled him about signing the plea agreement.

Hill and his brother, 25-year-old Lynell, accepted plea agreements and were sentenced in January for their roles in the deaths at Fero’s Bar and Grill on Oct. 17, 2012. As part of their plea agreements, the two will testify against a third defendant, Dexter Lewis.

Lewis faces the death penalty in the case. Prosecutors claim he inflicted the fatal stab wounds on all five victims.

Denver District Court Judge John Madden, who is presiding over both Lewis and Hill’s cases, released Hill’s letter to the public for the first time this week.

In his letter, Hill said he was under extreme duress after his attorneys told him prosecutors would seek the death penalty and, because of evidence and statements he and co-defendants made, would likely succeed. After he pleaded guilty to five counts of first-degree murder, his attorneys told him several mitigating factors — such as no criminal history — would have likely prevented prosecutors from obtaining the death penalty in his case.

Denver prosecutors never said they intended to seek the death penalty against either Hill brother.

“You (Madden) asked me if I was promised anything, I answered incorrectly,” Hill wrote. “I was promised death if I didn’t cooperate, my own and my brothers.”

During a hearing in the Lewis case on May 9, Hill’s attorneys said they had not yet read the letter. On May 30, Hill’s legal team filed a motion asking Madden to keep the letter sealed and told the judge they now had a conflict of interest in representing Lewis.

“It is extremely difficult to withdraw a guilty plea,” said defense attorney David Lane, who is not representing any of the defendants connected to the deaths.

Judges thoroughly advise defendants of their rights and ensure they are making their plea freely, before they accept a plea agreement, Lane said. Hill’s legal team now has a conflict in representing him because now they have the right to defend themselves against his claims that they misled him.

Denver attorney Patrick Ridley has been temporarily assigned to represent Hill.

Jordan Steffen: 303-954-1794, jsteffen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jsteffendp