Topics: Mindy Kaling, Mindy Lahiri, parents, Sitcoms, TV, Entertainment News

Rhea Perlman’s “Mindy Project” guest spot as Danny’s overbearing Staten Island ma, Annette Castellano, has been exactly what the show needed. Not only is it a splendid showcase for one of our finest comedic actresses, but having her around has also helped us better understand where some of Danny’s many hangups stem from, and even helped us get to know Mindy — whose interactions with Annette have been occasionally tense, sometimes outright unpleasant — a little better. As we saw last night, the integration of Annette has also been key to introducing new areas of friction within the Danny-Mindy relationship.

But now that Annette is a feature of the show, the absence of Mindy’s parents is even more conspicuous. At this year’s New Yorker Festival, Mindy Kaling explained why they haven’t shown up yet, saying that while she plans to include them at some point, she has had difficulty casting someone to play her mother, who passed away before the show premiered in 2012. That is totally understandable, needless to say, but Mindy Kaling isn’t Mindy Lahiri, and it’s hard not to think that introducing Mindy’s parents could provide a useful layer of character development for one of the most deliberately, charmingly superficial characters on TV.

There’s a reason that “meeting the parents” is such an often-used sitcom trope. Particularly in a show about the relationship between urban professionals, the eventual introduction of the parents can provide a deeper insight into adult characters who may have seemed thus far to be living in a vacuum. While we know a lot about Mindy’s feelings on Michael Fassbender and sour straws, her inner life is something of a blank space (think of how few real insights were revealed when Danny read Mindy’s diary). But intelligently deploying Mindy’s parents could be a huge moment both for her character and for the show. The parents have already informed our understanding of Mindy in subtle ways: We know that they would only let her go to Jewish sleepaway camp (“they only trusted me in the gentle hands of the Jews of the Berkshires”), that they send her an email every day called “Mindy’s Compliment Corner.” Let us see this beautiful lunacy in action.

While Jack Donaghy on “30 Rock” read mostly as a caricature, his scenes with his mother, played to perfection by the late and wonderful Elaine Stritch, softened him and gave us context for his prickly exterior, showing the audience his rarely seen vulnerable side. While “Sex and the City” was unusually devoid on parental plotlines, the episode where Miranda’s mother passed away was one of the show’s emotional high points. And what would George be without Frank and Estelle Costanza? His parents, like Jerry’s, became an integral part of the character’s mythology; plus, by letting us in on George’s family traditions, the world gained a tradition of its own (a festivus for the rest of us).