State officials: Highmark Medicare plan breaks agreement with UPMC

Pennsylvania officials intend to take Highmark Inc. to court over a Medicare Advantage plan they believe violates a deal the governor and attorney general brokered between the health insurer and UPMC.

In a letter dated Friday, Attorney General Kathleen Kane, Insurance Commissioner Michael Consedine and Health Secretary Michael Wolf told Highmark that they will seek enforcement through Commonwealth Court because Highmark is not complying with the deal Gov. Tom Corbett and Kane negotiated this summer.

A separate letter to UPMC cautioned it against suing Highmark, saying the state officials have “exclusive jurisdiction” over enforcement of the consent decrees.

The letters scolded Highmark and UPMC for continuing to fight over issues such as UPMC doctors that Highmark members will be able to consult, and the rates UPMC charges Highmark for cancer care.

“Your continued discord has now resulted in us having to take legal action that will likely only heighten consumer confusion and alarm,” the letters state. “Our collective expectation is that both parties will stop trying to out-maneuver one another and instead work together to fulfill both the letter and spirit of the consent decrees.”

A zero premium Highmark Community Blue Medicare HMO plan introduced last week prompted the state response. The plan excludes UPMC hospitals and doctors in Western Pennsylvania as in-network providers.

Highmark advertised the plan as a low-cost alternative to its traditional, broad-network Medicare Advantage products for seniors, which are rising in price.

Highmark spokesman David Carter said the insurer needs to be able to offer competitive products.

“The burden is on the state to explain to seniors why this company can't sell a zero premium product and others can,” Carter said.

He said UPMC Health Plan sells Medicare Advantage plans that exclude Allegheny Health Network, the hospitals Highmark owns.

UPMC spokesman Paul Wood said the state is taking the right action to ensure that seniors “will have full in-network access to UPMC, regardless of the Highmark Medicare product they choose.”

In consent decrees that Highmark and UPMC officials signed in June, the health care giants agreed that senior citizens are a “vulnerable population” who would keep full in-network access to UPMC.

Employer groups and individuals with Highmark coverage will lose access to most UPMC hospitals in Pittsburgh on Jan. 1.

Kane spokesman J.J. Abbott did not respond to requests for comment. The Department of Health referred questions to the Department of Insurance.

“We have a long-standing commitment from both parties that vulnerable populations need the most protection and would not be impacted,” said Melissa Fox, an Insurance Department spokeswoman. “Because this may be subject to litigation, we can't provide further comment at this point.”

Highmark is raising prices on its broad-network Freedom Blue and Security Blue Medicare Advantage plans. To offer lower-priced insurance products, it is restricting access to hospitals and doctors with narrow networks, such as Community Blue.

Alex Nixon is a Trib Total Media staff writer. Reach him at 412-320-7928 or anixon@tribweb.com.