After 30 years working to treat and prevent the spread of HIV in New Orleans, NO/AIDS Task Force is broadening its patient base.

Equipped with a $1.4 million two-year grant from the federal government, the nonprofit organization is launching its first general health clinic to provide services to children and adults regardless of health status or ability to pay.

Called CrescentCare, the first center will occupy three floors in a leased space at 3308 Tulane Ave., offering primary care, behavioral health services, obstetrics and gynecological services and dentistry.

But leaders hope to open five to seven more CrescentCare centers around town over the next three years, with special focus on providing more access to those in the Gentilly and Lower 9th Ward, where neighborhood medical options are scant. They also are especially interested targeting service industry personnel as well as anyone who is at high risk for chronic communicable diseases.

“This isn’t going to supplant what we currently do,” said Dr. Ron Wilcox, chief medical officer for NO/AIDS, which is employed in a daily battle to reduce the city's alarming rates of new HIV infections. “All the services that are currently available are going to be there.”

Noel Twilbeck, chief executive officer for the agency, said the group first started discussing the move toward what they named CrescentCare in 2009, when dialogue leading up to the Affordable Care Act forecasted greater shifts in federal support toward more community based health care centers. NO/AIDS won the federal grant in November.

Research identified a huge need in New Orleans for increased access to medical care.

Ellie Tinto-Poitier, project manager for the community health center development, said the group looked at data for five zip codes between Canal Street and Lake Pontchartrain. In that area, she said, there were roughly 81,000 people, 42,000 of them living at or below 200 percent of the federal poverty level. Of those, only 4,000 indicated they had a so-called “medical home” — a place they go for continuous, comprehensive and preventative medical care for themselves and their families.

“Those stark statistics really drove home the need,” Tinto-Poitier said.

The federally qualified community health care center designation is available to nonprofit organizations that successfully apply to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. It enables the center to bill on a sliding scale according to patient income and to be reimbursed for services provided under Medicare and Medicaid.

CrescentCare isn’t the only federally qualified community health center in New Orleans. Others include Common Ground Health Clinic, Daughters of Charity clinics, EXCELth Family Health Centers in Gentilly, eastern New Orleans and Algiers, Mahalia Jackson Health Service Center, NOELA Community Health Center, the Latino Health Outreach Project Mobile Van, Ruth U. Fertel/Tulane Community Health Center and St. Thomas Community Health Center.

Twilbeck and Tinto-Poitier said they believe CrescentCare is a natural of NO/AIDS Task Force’s existing community focus and grassroots work reaching patients in need where they live. CrescentCare just pushes it further, embracing a more diverse patient population while continuing care that welcomes those from lesbian, gay and transgendered backgrounds. “It’s an outgrowth of what we have done for 30 years,” Tinto-Poitier said.

Wilcox said he hopes the first clinic will reach about 800 patients in its first year. Though its staff is expected to grow, it currently has a staff internist, a pediatrician, and a contracted nurse practitioner midwife who will be providing intensive prenatal care for expectant women through a program known as “Centering Pregnancy.”

CrescentCare has a proposed annual budget of $2.8 million, of which the federal grant amount of $775,000 in the first year and $650,000 in the second year makes up about a quarter of the revenues. The organization will depend upon donations and other non-governmental sources to make up the rest of its budget.

NO/AIDS Task Force in 2011 received $20.2 million in revenue, including $11.7 million from charitable contributions and grants, according to its tax filing.