If the polls are reliable, New York real estate developer Donald Trump and Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders will emerge the winners of the crucial first-in-the-nation Iowa caucuses in just about a week's time.

Taken separately, either result would be a shock to the nation's political establishment. Together they are an earthquake that will realign, at least momentarily, the country's political topography.

It's hard to explain either phenomenon as they have about as much in common as they are different. Suffice it to say, the strength of both candidates is emblematic of a general level of dissatisfaction among the electorate in both parties with the state of affairs in Washington.

Consider the Democrats, who rode Barack Obama's coattails into power unseen since Lyndon Johnson. What have they accomplished besides the passage of the Affordable Care Act? Not much, or at least that's the way it seems to the cohort of party activists backing Sanders. Obama is moving things to the left as far as he can through regulatory initiatives like the Clean Power Plan and his Waters of the United States proposals, but none of it is far enough or fast enough for the people who see European-style single-payer health care as low-hanging fruit, easy to get if someone would just expend the necessary political capital.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

To the Sanders supporters, Hillary Rodham Clinton represents the interests of Wall Street and corporate America – and they have too much power already, at least in the eyes of the faithful followers of the senator from Vermont. She's even losing ground in conservative South Carolina where – according to Monday's New York Times – State Rep. Justin T. Bamberg "is switching sides because he believes Mrs. Clinton embodies establishment politics, while Mr. Sanders offers a bolder platform that will improve the lives of people in the South and across the country."

On the GOP side the electorate is just as dissatisfied. Trump was helped in the early days of the race by the size of the Republican field, which made it nearly impossible to form a bloc large enough to stop him because none of the other candidates was willing to devote his or her potential strength to anything other than winning the nomination. Stopping Trump would have required a temporary alliance among several of the stronger candidates – but that would have required a diversion of resources no one was willing to part with even for a short time.

Trump is succeeding not for ideological reasons – he may be the most pragmatic candidate in the race on either side – but because he is giving voice to the frustration many Republican and Republican-leaning voters feel with what they perceive to be the party leadership's inability to get the better of Obama. He's the spokesman for everyone who lost a job, is in fear of losing the job they have or can't find a job because of Obama policies in general and the bipartisan support for free trade specifically.

He's tapped into the same kind of middle-class resentment of preferential treatment by the government for everyone else that spawned the tea party – which is why he may actually run better in states like Connecticut, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Maine that the GOP's campaign solons routinely write off in presidential years. His message – we're going to fix the country's problems and "Make America Great Again" – resonates with folks who long ago gave up on politics because it didn't make a swivel-eyed tinker's dam bit of difference which party was in power.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Obama]

The difference between the two movements, if that's what they can be called, can be seen more clearly in the long-term political life of the nation rather than in the immediate future, even if either Trump or Sanders becomes the next president.

Trump's army is built on dissatisfaction and anger. If he's successful, the emotion underlying his political machine will dissipate. Success will destroy it as it will remove the raison d'etre for which it came into being. He can't alter its basic DNA that much. Even with him at the head, the GOP will still be the party of lower taxes, limited government and a strong national defense.

Sanders' machine is different. It's bringing the Democratic Party to its natural position. His platform strips away the centrist mask it put on when Bill Clinton became its presidential nominee, which to be candid has never fit quite right.