Buy Photo Rekha Basu (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

Each campaign season brings another target for demagoguery, accompanied by a menacing new narrative: The “slut” (sexually active single female) who wants her health insurance to cover her birth control. The destroyers of traditional marriage (same-sex couples) who want to steal the institution from straight people. The robber, murderer, criminal black man (Willie Horton) who wants to get furloughed to do it again.

This year’s target is the foreigner. That's the undocumented Latino immigrant portrayed as sneaking across the border to rape or addict your children, give birth to American citizens in your hospitals and squander your tax dollars on food stamps. Usually the rhetoric is aimed at a political rival, and the demographic group is ammunition for the candidate’s case. But this year’s chief demagogue is a popular Iowa talk radio host.

On his Aug. 17 WHO radio show, Jan Mickelson proposed that Iowa declare undocumented immigrants to be “state property,” and enslave any who remain here past a deadline. They could then be coerced into building a wall along Mexico for free. “What’s wrong with slavery?” Mickelson shot back when challenged, contending that it’s Americans who are enslaved by having to pay for undocumented immigrants.

Mickelson’s reprehensible remarks infuriated many, including Des Moines immigrant advocate Matt Hildreth, who filed a complaint with the Federal Communications Commission. But he says the commission responded by saying it can only fine for obscenity, and Mickelson didn’t use swear words. Now Hildreth has a petition already signed by hundreds, he says, calling on WHO owner, I Heart Radio, to pull Mickelson off the air.

Hildreth says the Constitution protects free speech, but that a homeless Mexican immigrant was beaten in Boston last week by attackers, one of whom claimed to be inspired by Donald Trump.

“We're entering a new space where people act on this stuff,” he said of such inflammatory rhetoric. The American Civil Liberties Union is calling for advertisers to boycott the show.

In 2012, 45 advertisers pulled their ads from Rush Limbaugh’s slow after he called law student Sandra Fluke a slut over her bid for birth-control coverage. In 2007, CBS radio fired Don Imus for calling Rutgers female basketball players “nappy headed hos.” And in 2004, Clear Channel (precursors to I Heart Radio), suspended Howard Stern for allowing a racial slur denigrating women on the air.

When a media celebrity or presidential candidate uses rhetoric like that, people assume the idea has legitimacy. The right to own another human being may have been abolished 150 years ago, but Mickelson put it back on the table. When Trump advocates scrapping birthright citizenship, other candidates like Ted Cruz and Scott Walker scramble to claim the idea. But it's not going to happen. They'd have to amend the Constitution to get around the amendment where anyone born on American soil is American — or get the Supreme Court to overturn its ruling on how that's enforced.

Nor is anyone going to deport every undocumented immigrant here. It’s not practical or ethical, and from meat-packing plants to hotels, it would bring much of the American economy to a standstill. Americans rely on undocumented immigrants to clean our homes, raise our children, and work the plants and factories. They repopulate dying cities and schools, taking little from the economy compared with what they give. And their status makes them vulnerable to everything from substandard housing to hazardous working conditions to sexually abusive employers. Complaints over a lack of safety precautions or mandatory overtime can result in to calls to immigration authorities.

If Mickelson heard the stories of Agriprocessors workers rounded up in the 2008 immigration raids in Postville, he might have understood the great personal risk at which immigrants come to make a living and feed their families. Maria Ruiz left Guatemala after becoming orphaned and homeless at 17, when the greenhouse where she and her parents had worked for $100 a month revoked her company-provided housing. So she crossed two borders by foot and hitchhiked to Texas where, broke and hungry, she turned herself in to authorities. They let her go with a paper she thought was a residence permit but turned out to be a court date. In Iowa, she packed beef for $7.25 an hour and no health benefits, often working 19 hours a day.

For more context, let's go back to the U.S.-engineered 1954 coup in Guatemala, which toppled a democratically elected president who was responsive to people’s economic needs, replacing him with a series of dictators friendly to U.S. corporate interests. They plundered the wealth, leaving their people impoverished. Now millions of undocumented immigrants are embedded in this nation's fabric. We should talk about how to fix their status, but in a responsible way.

This inflammatory rhetoric is a long way from the approach of past GOP leaders like former President George W. Bush and former Nebraska Sen. Chuck Hagel. Iowa's beloved former Iowa Gov. Bob Ray, who welcomed Southeast Asian war refugees in the 1970s, issued a statement earlier this year supporting Justice for Our Neighbors, which provides free legal services to unaccompanied undocumented minors. “Iowa is a welcoming state!” Ray declared. At least it was then.

I'm hopeful most Iowans will respond to Mickelson's slave-ownership plan by showing it still is.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1JcS8S4