Landrieu’s 100% pro-abortion record since 2009 is too extreme for Louisiana

BATON ROUGE, La. – The National Right to Life Committee today endorsed U.S. Rep. Bill Cassidy (R-La.) for U.S. Senate in his challenge to unseat pro-abortion Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.)

“Louisiana is a pro-life state and Mary Landrieu’s voting record is far removed from those pro-life values,” said Carol Tobias, National Right to Life president. “It’s time for Louisiana voters to elect a true pro-life senator who will provide a strong voice for the most vulnerable members of our society by electing Bill Cassidy.”

During his tenure in the U.S. House of Representatives, Rep. Cassidy has been a strong advocate for the pro-life cause. He co-sponsored the “Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act” – groundbreaking legislation to protect unborn children at 20 weeks, a point by which the unborn child is capable of experiencing great pain when being killed by dismemberment or other late abortion techniques. He also co-sponsored the “No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Act,” which would establish a permanent, government-wide prohibition on federal subsidies for abortion and for health plans that cover abortion. This policy would apply both to longstanding federal programs and to the new programs created by Obamacare.

Rep. Cassidy also voted against Obamacare, which provides government funding for insurance plans that pay for abortion on demand, and will lead to the rationing of lifesaving medical treatments.

In accepting the endorsement at a press conference in Baton Rouge today, Rep. Cassidy said, “I believe in the culture of life and will always advocate for and defend those who cannot defend themselves, the unborn. Senator Landrieu’s record on abortion is the exact opposite. This is a question of Louisiana values. We value every human life, and as Louisiana’s Senator, I will work to protect the unborn.”

In sharp contrast to Rep. Cassidy, Sen. Mary Landrieu voted to endorse the U.S. Supreme Court’s 1973 Roe v. Wade decision that gave America abortion on demand for any reason and has cost the lives of more than 56 million unborn children. Since her re-election in 2008, Mary Landrieu has compiled a 100% pro-abortion voting record. She voted for Obamacare and its pro-abortion, pro-rationing policies, and she opposes the “Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act.”

“For years, Mary Landrieu has tried to have it both ways,” Tobias said. “When she’s in Louisiana, she claims she’s ‘pro-life,’ but when she’s back in Washington, she votes against the pro-life cause every chance she gets. It’s time to retire Mary Landrieu and elect a true pro-life leader in Bill Cassidy.”