SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Editor’s note: The presidential nominating contests in both parties will come down to the California primary.

For Democrats, 548 delegates are at stake — 11.5% of the total. For Republicans, 172 delegates are at stage — 6.9% of the total. Of those, for Democrats, 158 (29%) are divided proportionally on a statewide basis, while 317 (58%) are divided proportionally by congressional district, with each district providing between 5 and 8 delegates. The remaining 73 (13%) are “superdelegates.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

For Republicans, 13 (8%) are awarded statewide, with ten going to the candidate with the highest number of votes on a winner-take-all basis, and three going to “pre-determined” delegates (the State Chair, National Committeewoman, National Committeeman). Meanwhile, 159 (92%) are awarded by congressional district on a winner-take-all basis, with each district providing 3 delegates.

The result: a district-by-district battle in both parties, which we preview for you here.

CA-22: This district takes in the northern and eastern sides of Fresno, including Cal State Fresno, before winding south through the Central Valley. While agricultural, the district also includes a good portion of the valley’s urban population. Roughly half of the district is Hispanic. Moderate Republican Devin Nunes represents the area, and was a critic of Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) during the abortive shutdown against Obamacare in 2013. Yet times have changed.

Prospects:

Democrats: Clinton will do well, though Sanders will find some votes in the cities, especially in Fresno.

Clinton 3, Sanders 2

Republicans: Cruz will dominate here, as in much of the Central Valley, thanks to Latinos and conservatives.

Cruz 3, Trump 0, Kasich 0

Joel B. Pollak is Senior Editor-at-Large at Breitbart News. His new e-book, Leadership Secrets of the Kings and Prophets: What the Bible’s Struggles Teach Us About Today, is on sale through Amazon Kindle Direct. Follow him on Twitter at @joelpollak.