Waukesha West's Calli Delsman and Dani Rhodes talk about the team's victory over Mukwonago.

By of the

Mukwonago — When you play with a scorer as prolific as Dani Rhodes, it's easy to be overshadowed, but Calli Delsman can put the ball in the hoop, too.

The Waukesha West junior entered Friday's game as the team's second-leading scorer at 11.4 points per game, but the 5-foot-10 forward is starting to emerge as a big-game performer herself. She added another line to her résumé with a 21-point, five-rebound performance that helped West score a 59-53 victory over Classic 8 rival Mukwonago.

Take into consideration her 24-point night in a victory over Arrowhead on Dec. 11 and a 15-point showing in a five-point loss to state-ranked Appleton North on Dec. 11, and it could be argued that Delsman is showing she can come through when the lights shine brightest.

"She's a fantastic player. Everyone kind of focuses on Dani, but it's nice to have someone like that that (for) teams is not their No. 1 priority on the scouting report," West coach Mark Busalacchi said. "On a lot of teams she would be."

The showdown pitted West, which is ranked second in the area by the Journal Sentinel, against No. 3 Mukwonago. On a statewide level, Mukwonago (10-2, 3-2 Classic 8) is ranked No. 1 in the Division 1 Associated Press poll and the wissports.net coaches poll, while West (10-1, 5-0) is No. 3 in the Division 2 AP poll and No. 2 in the wissports.net poll.

With Delsman filling the void late in the first half, West was able to weather a 7½-minute stretch when Rhodes was on the bench in foul trouble. It then pulled away with a 15-5 run during a 5-minute stretch late in the game.

Rhodes, who is averaging 25 points, played more aggressively in the second half when she scored 11 of her 14 points. She also grabbed five rebounds, made three assists and went 8 for 10 from the free-throw line to help West post its fourth straight win over the Indians.

"We definitely adjusted our game as a team," Rhodes said of the second half. "I think that's why we were able to get a lead and keep going on a run. We played great defense so that helps a lot. We started getting stuff moving on offense....It's a team effort."

Mukwonago, meanwhile, hung tough despite the continued absence of Iowa recruit Bre Cera. The senior guard watched the game from the bench in street clothes as she continues to recover from a broken hand.

Morgan Glatczak, the team's 6-5 center, finished with 17 points on 8-for-12 shooting and grabbed nine rebounds, but overall the Indians struggled to find to the hoop. They shot 32% (18 for 56) and at times had a hard time getting point-blank attempts to fall.

"The positive thing is we were getting shots," Mukwonago coach Rick Kolinske said. "We're a very good shooting team. It's a talented team. Unfortunately this was one of those nights when in those crucial moments the shots didn't go in for us. It is what it is. I think this is the worst shooting percentage we've had all season and we lost by six."

It was a key conference victory for the Wolverines, who face Kettle Moraine, the league's other undefeated team, on Jan. 22. Meanwhile, Mukwonago fell two games behind the leaders, but Cera is expected to be back in time for the team's Feb. 9 meeting at West.

"We were excited all week for it. We knew it was going to be a big game..." Delsman said. "We knew it wouldn't be easy just because Bre was out because they have other good players. We just wanted to take the win."