“The Americans,” the riveting Cold War spy thriller on FX that combines period drama and action/romance, has so far avoided the misstep that tripped up “Homeland,” another suspenseful thriller about national security and political intrigue. The domestic realm, which became a drag on “Homeland” whenever the focus diverted to the offspring, has been held to the background on “The Americans.” Until now.

The kids, a source of extra tension but, so far, no sentimental plot detours, are about to be drawn into the spy game.

As the award-winning “Americans” returns Feb. 26 for season 2, son Henry is unknowingly dragged into one of his dad’s undercover gambits and daughter Paige is increasingly curious about what her parents may be hiding.

Not to worry. We’re not approaching a Dana-like roadblock.

The good news is that, judging by the first five episodes, the familial focus doesn’t take away from the taut storytelling.

Even when extreme coincidences mar the plotting — did FBI agent Stan Beeman (Noah Emmerich) really need to live across the street from the undercover Russians? — creator Joe Weisberg’s tale has us hooked.

As the new season begins, this series continues to be among the best of the extraordinary number of great TV dramas vying for attention.

The appeal of the couple at the heart of “The Americans” can’t be underestimated. Keri Russell and Matthew Rhys, as Elizabeth and Philip Jennings, KGB agents in an arranged marriage, masterfully blending in with the neighbors, are credible, not to mention gorgeous (even in their endless supply of bad wigs).

The depth of the characters and the narrative sweep in season 1 was astounding. Now flashbacks to earlier relationships continue to fill in the histories and motivations. Elizabeth’s uneasiness on the topic of motherhood and her relationship to her own family is increasingly coming into focus; Philip’s awareness of his mostly brainwashed past and his disconnect from his actual feelings is dawning.

Perhaps the best news for season 2 comes in the fourth episode when the couple’s former KGB contact Claudia (Margo Martindale) returns.

The tricky balance of marital issues, secret identities, cover stories (even a cover marriage for Philip), violent action scenes, FBI politics, Russian Embassy politics — plus the kids — continue to make “The Americans” a rich experience. Let’s hope many, many episodes elapse before the kids get to the truth of what goes on in that laundry room.

Imagine, the two sides battled valiently for years without cellphones: the series is faithful to Reagan-era technology, using radio signals, hand-written number codes and drop boxes, to illustrate the world pre-GPS and internet hacking.

It’s amazing how often Cold Warriors had to hurry to public phone booths.

Joanne Ostrow: 303-954-1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp