<p>KAREN QUINCY LOBERG/THE STAR</p><p>Gabi Paredes (left) and Felicia Paredes, members of the Riverview Pony Club, ride at Peppercorn Ranch on the outskirts of Ojai on Thursday. The sisters and three fellow members of the pony club recently competed in the United States Pony Club Championships in Kentucky.</p>

SHARE KAREN QUINCY LOBERG/THE STAR Gabi Paredes, a member of the Riverview Pony Club, rides at Peppercorn Ranch on the outskirts of Ojai on Thursday. She, her sister Felicia and three other members of the pony club qualified to compete at the United States Pony Club Championships in Kentucky. KAREN QUINCY LOBERG/THE STAR Felicia Paredes, who rides six days a week, is affectionate with her horse Seamus on Thursday after one of her rides at Peppercorn Ranch on the outskirts of Ojai. KAREN QUINCY LOBERG/THE STAR Gabi Paredes removes the tack from her horse Crescendo after a ride Thursday at Peppercorn Ranch on the outskirts of Ojai.

By Claudia Boyd-Barrett

Sixteen-year-old Gabi Paredes, of Ventura, never expected to make it into the national championships for the United States Pony Club this summer.

Yet there she was in July, strutting through the arena on her horse, Crescendo, in front of judges and spectators inside Lexington's famous Kentucky Horse Park.

Just hours before, Gabi had doubted she'd even be able to ride Crescendo. The horse had become severely dehydrated after the 2,200-mile trip across the country from Ojai. Luckily, a veterinarian was able to revive him. But Gabi still felt nervous as she waited to enter the ring to compete in the dressage competition, where riders perform a sequence of movements on a horse.

That's when Greg Coulson, head of the Riverview Pony Club in Upper Ojai, stepped in with the pep talk routine he always gives his club members.

"Who owns this dressage ring?" he demanded

"I do," Gabi replied firmly.

And own it she did. Competing in four tests, the Foothill Technology High School student scored highest in dressage out of all the competitors, wowing Coulson and her fellow club members.

"It felt really good. I was proud of (Crescendo). I was proud of myself because we worked really hard to get there," Gabi said. "I didn't expect to win."

Gabi was one of five members of the Riverview Pony Club to qualify for this year's championships. It was a landmark event for the small, rural club of 12 children and teens, which Coulson said has never had so many members qualify for the championships held every three years.

The other qualifying members were Gabi's older sister, Felicia Paredes, 18; Elaine Sanders, 14, of Ventura; Sarah Barns, 16, of Ojai; and Camryne Hartke, 13, of Ventura. The girls worked for years as members of the club to perfect their riding and horse management skills, entering numerous smaller contests before reaching the national level.

"It was really exciting. ... I didn't have a clue that I would make it in," Felicia Paredes said. "For me, the most favorite part was the cross-country where we rode out in the big, old Rolex field where some of the top riders have ridden before."

Riverview Horse Club, a chapter of the United States Pony Clubs, is more than 25 years old, Coulson said. He runs the club out of his property, Peppercorn Ranch, which offers about 12 horses for lease to members who don't have their own. The members range in age from 8 to 18, and come from Ventura, Oxnard and Ojai.

Most members spend several hours a day at the ranch, tending to the horses and riding them. Usually, they have one riding lesson a week, and meet monthly as a group to discuss horse management and other skills.

"It's all about having the kids mature to be adults with good decision-making processes and also to make good horse people for the future," Coulson said.

Gabi and Felicia's mother, Marcie Watanabe, said her daughters have thrived in the club.

"It is a big commitment," Watanabe said. "But it's that commitment that got them to be able to compete in Kentucky."