High cost puts life-saving drugs out of reach for some

Photo: /COURTESY PHOTO Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Robert Brischetto: Democrats must work to expand their base. Robert Brischetto: Democrats must work to expand their base. Photo: /COURTESY PHOTO High cost puts life-saving drugs out of reach for some 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Last month, I lost a close friend who could not afford medication that likely would have saved his life.

Nicolas Freeman often referred to himself as a “computer geek.” His aptitude in putting together and analyzing large databases was well known among members of the Green Party, where he served as local co-chair and engaged daily in progressive causes. I worked with Nic on several research projects that required his computer skills, and we cooperated on community volunteer efforts.

Nic contracted the hepatitis C virus, or HCV. As a self-employed computer consultant, he did not have insurance coverage and was too young to qualify for Medicare.

The Affordable Care Act was implemented in 2011, and the Texas Legislature failed to expand Medicaid after a misguided U.S. Supreme Court ruling that states need not accept federally funded insurance coverage for low-income people.

Nic fell into the coverage gap — those 766,000 Texans who don’t qualify for ACA subsidies and also don’t qualify for Medicaid, and are thus left uninsured. In 31 other states, he would have been fully insured.

Nevertheless, Nic’s hopes were raised after December 2013 when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved a drug called Sovaldi, which Gilead Sciences advertised as “providing high cure rates” (greater than 90 percent) for patients with HCV.

The Houston Chronicle reported that the drug costs about $1,000 a day, or $84,000 for a 12-week treatment.

The Gilead website offers a “co-pay coupon” to U.S. patients “who are not enrolled in a government health care prescription program” such as Medicare Part D or Medicaid. The coupon would reduce the cost of Sovaldi by 25 percent of the catalog price. Cash-pay patients like Nic or those with commercial insurance would thus be paying $750 per pill. For a 90-day course of treatment, he would need to raise about $67,500.

Astronomical drug costs are becoming all too common in this country as drug companies use political donations to control health policies. The Center for Responsive Politics reports that the pharmaceuticals and health products industry spent more on lobbying Congress than any other industry — a total of $3.146 billion from 1998 to 2015.

The drug lobby was able to block a provision in the Affordable Care Act of 2010 that would have allowed Medicare to negotiate down drug prices. Now Medicare pays the drug companies whatever they ask, and that comes out of everyone’s taxes.

Recent news reports demonstrate that hiking drug prices has become standard practice among most pharmaceutical companies to the point where drugs are not affordable for many patients.

It’s not just about HCV drugs. More than 100 oncologists in the August Mayo Clinic Proceedings reported that “the high prices of cancer drugs are affecting the care of patients with cancer and our health care system.” They called for a popular uprising among American cancer patients to form “a grassroots movement that advocates against the high price of cancer drugs.”

At their state convention in Fort Worth in June, several Green Party members noted Nic’s absence and were told of his condition. Immediately, a fundraising effort was launched to pay his plane fare to India to buy the medication he needed.

My repeated calls to the drug manufacturer identified too late a little-known patient assistance program that might have allowed people like Nic, those with no insurance who met certain income guidelines, to apply to obtain the drug for free. A close friend is sure that Nic was unaware of the program.

Time, his health and money ran out for Nic. He died Sept. 18 without obtaining the $1,000 pills or making it to India, where the Bloomberg News Service reported that the same pill costs about $10.

He was 62.

Robert Brischetto is the former executive director of the Southwest Voter Research Institute.