Peyton Manning inadvertently eclipsed “Rocky Top.” A week after Manning nearly broke the internet with his dancing, the Broncos opened stretching Monday with Manning rapping.

What the what?

Manning joined brother Eli in a “Fantasy Football Fantasy” song for DirecTV, following up last year’s diddy “Football on Your Phone.” The new commercial hit the web on Monday and made its way to the Broncos’ playlist a few hours later.

Peyton Manning, decked out in ripped jeans, white T-shirt with gold chain in the video, reminds listeners that this fantasy is “Like catching a football that came from me.” Eli receives extra credit for working in a word that rhymes with nachos. The video features dancers and cameos from Jets running back Chris Johnson and Hall of Famer Joe Namath. The best bits, however, were arguably the non-speaking parts.

Lined up in the back as part of the Mannings’ crew were Broncos’ offensive linemen Ryan Clady, Louis Vasquez and Orlando Franklin.

“I was happy and thrilled about doing it,” said Franklin, who admitted the outtakes were funnier. “I think Eli is a little better than Peyton in the rap game. But they did a great job. It’s a catchy song. It gets in your head.”

Manning making people giggle is standard procedure. Seeing the hulks, however, caught some Broncos off guard.

“I was laughing so hard, I couldn’t even pay attention after a while,” safety Rahim Moore said. “It’s good that (Manning) is sharing the love, and our offensive line deserves it. They work so hard, so to get that exposure is great for them.”

Tamme excused. Tight end Jacob Tamme was excused for his second consecutive practice Monday for personal reasons. Tamme’s wife gave birth to a baby girl Tuesday. Tamme starred in the team’s scrimmage at Sports Authority Field at Mile High, and remains a valuable receiver and special teams player.

Famous visitors. Broncos camp featured visitors who were as impressive as the players. Former Pro Bowl safety Brian Dawkins worked with the defensive backs during practice. Dressed in sweats and a sleeveless shirt, Dawkins looked like he could still take reps. Kicker Jason Elam, whose bucket list is bigger than most, also stopped by Dove Valley. The one-time record holder of the NFL’s longest field goal before Matt Prater broke it, Elam will attend Oxford University this year, studying theology.

Footnotes. Defensive tackle Malik Jackson returned to practice after an excused absence and made an impact. The former Tennessee star tipped and intercepted a pass by Manning in 11-on-11 drills. … Cornerback Chris Harris (knee) doesn’t know if he will play in the preseason, but is confident he will start the opener on Sept. 7. “It will be seven months (out from surgery) at game time. I will be ready,” Harris said. … The Broncos’ starters are expected to play two quarter’s Sunday against the San Francisco 49ers. … An Air Force helicopter featuring a Broncos’ flag few over practice. The servicemen attended practice after landing. … Cornerback Louis Young (groin) returned to practice.