The cost for higher education is high enough to cause college students some stress.

Outside activities, food, rent and the thought of having to pay for health insurance makes college students feel knots in their stomach.

Without the aid of parents, college students may question whether or not health care is affordable for them.

This is a question students should not be asking, considering how crucial a proper health care is.

In the past, health care plans were known to take off young adults from their parents’ plans regardless if their child was enrolled in school or not.

This left a nation of young adults without health insurance.

With the Affordable Care Act, which is also known as Obamacare, adults under the age of 26 are able to stay on their parents’ insurance. Even if the child is married, not living at home or financially dependent on the parent, he or she is still eligible.

Those enrolled in school will still have coverage even after graduation.

Everyone in the United States should have some form of health insurance because a person’s health is the most important thing.

Doctor appointments are meaningless if it costs too much and skipping those appointments can lead to further health risks.

College students are near the age where they need to start paying closer attention to their health, because their eating habits and choices made now will affect them later.

Some young adults even face hereditary health risks, such as cancer or heart disease.

Fortunately, those under 26 do not have to worry about this. Although there are a couple steps that need to be taken before someone under 26 receives coverage.

College students wanting to enroll under their parents’ plan need to enroll before the open enrollment period.

Open enrollment to get health care coverage for 2014 ends on the 31st of this March.

For example, if Californians were to apply by March 15, they will be able to get health coverage by April 1, according to HealthCare.gov.

Under Covered California (California’s enrollment website for Obamacare), people are able to reduce their health costs such as hospitalizations, emergency care and maternity care.

There are a lot of costs attributed to going to college, so much so that around two-thirds of college students are choosing to live at home with their parents in order to cut some costs.

But even with the relief that comes with not having to pay rent, an added cost of health insurance would probably still be too much for a student that may not be working to have to pay for.

Having an age range of 26 gives students some time to hopefully get their career started and get to the point where they can afford to pay for their own insurance and finally leave the safety of mom and pa.

Some students may even be able to squeeze an extra year of being under their parent’s health care. If they turn 26 in the middle of the health plan coverage, the coverage will extend until the next tax year (Dec. 31).

This is a fair amount of time students have where they won’t have to worry about the cost of health insurance.

The Affordable Care Act gives young adults nationwide the relief. While facing the new experiences of adulthood, there is one less thing to worry about.

Tending to one’s health should not be something that a person questions. A young adult should not have to choose between paying to take care of their well being or next month’s rent.