IRVINE, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--As a result of healthcare reform initiatives, including the Affordable Care Act, organizations are emphasizing outcomes-based programs in order to reduce costs and litigation while increasing access to quality care for injured workers within the workers’ compensation system. Data provided to attendees during this quality care session demonstrated how the method of scorecarding physicians remarkably improves outcomes while simultaneously lowering overall costs.

Harbor Health Systems, a One Call Care Management company, participated in the Center for Excellence breakout session, providing insights about the quality care movement in workers’ compensation, August 26th at the 70th Annual Workers’ Compensation Educational Conference in Orlando, Florida.

The panel conversation uncovered a great need among workers’ compensation professionals to shift their focus toward getting injured workers to the best doctors available, as opposed to being primarily focused on discounts and network penetration.

“At this Center for Excellence discussion, we discussed provider scorecarding and the importance of getting injured workers to the best doctors, not only so they can return to work, but because of the immense financial implications inherent when someone sees a five-star doctor versus a one-star doctor. It’s critical for workers’ compensation professionals to become advocates for injured workers and focus on patient engagement for this outcomes-based model to be successful,” said Gregory Moore, MPH, Senior Vice President of Innovation for One Call.

Panelists brought the conversation back to the healthcare reform changes of late, noting that successful outcomes-based programs are evolving to pay-for-performance models and risk-sharing, which are in line with changes coming as a result of the ACA.

Participants in this session included:

Kimberly George, Senior Vice President, Corporate Development, M&A and Healthcare at Sedgwick Claims Management Services, Inc.

Mark Walls, Vice President, Communications and Strategic Analysis at Safety National

Jacob Lazarovic, M.D., Chief Medical Officer at Broadspire

To learn more about how utilizing outcomes-based networks can help lower overall claims costs, contact Greg Moore at (949) 273-7023, gmoore@harborsys.com.

Follow Harbor Health Systems on social media for updates on the workers’ compensation claims industry in California along with MPN updates: Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn and Google+.

About Harbor Health Systems

Harbor Health Systems, a One Call Care Management company based in Irvine, Calif., leads a revolution in medical networks that allows customers to build and manage a medical system based on quality performance of providers rather than the “lowest bidder medicine” that is typical of PPOs and HMOs. Harbor Health builds and manages outcomes-based medical networks, and supplies the tools, software and services to help their customers build, implement and optimize custom networks. With Harbor Health Systems, companies can identify physicians and other medical professionals who have exceptional skills in clinical, patient care and business management. By working with these healthcare professionals, payers and self-insured employers can greatly reduce the cost of care, complications, and time away from work. For more information, visit Harborhealthsystems.com.

About One Call Care Management

One Call Care Management (One Call) is the nation’s leading provider of specialized solutions to the workers’ compensation industry. One Call's solutions enable faster, more efficient and more cost-effective claims resolution. One Call provides reliable, consistent connections to care with expertise in high end diagnostics, physical therapy and transportation services, post-discharge home care and durable medical equipment, dental and doctor specialty services, complex care management, and the language services required for today’s multicultural workforce. With a focus on injured workers’ needs across the continuum of care, One Call enables maximum medical improvement and superior outcomes. For more information, visit www.onecallcm.com.