Stephen Savage

In yet another cost-cutting move, the DePuy Synthes medical device unit of Johnson & Johnson is eliminating all travel – except for its sales force – for the rest of the year in hopes of lowering such costs by 25% and meeting 2014 financial goals, according to an internal memo. At the same time, all consulting contracts valued at more than $50,000 must now obtain top-level approval.

“Despite our progress in so many areas, DePuy Synthes faces short-term challenges to deliver on our 2014 financial commitments and to position us well for 2015,” Pete Batesko III, the unit’s vice president of finance and chief financial officer, wrote in the July 14 memo. “In particular, our travel and meetings expenses are growing at an unacceptable and unsustainable rate relative to our revenue growth.”

A spokeswoman sent us this note: “Careful control of expenses is good business management. DePuy Synthes employees were reminded that they should manage spending with the approval of their supervisors.”

This is the second time in recent weeks that DePuy Synthes, which represents the largest portion of the $7.2 billion J&J device business, has cut costs. Late last month, the unit eliminated about 400 jobs, or less than 2% of its global workforce of 23,000 employees, as part of a reorganization.

At the time, a J&J executive said the reorganization was in response to “seismic shifts” in the health care business. As previously noted, device makers are grappling with the rising costs and risks associated with developing new products, increased pricing pressure, a lagging number of procedures and hospital admissions and cost-cutting hurdles posed by hospitals as a result of the U.S. Affordable Care Act.

Indeed, the J&J medical device business has been sluggish. Second-quarter sales were $7.2 billion, a 0.7% increase, while the pharmaceutical segment jumped 21% to $8.5 billion and the consumer products unit, which includes the troubled over-the-counter business that experienced quality control issues and numerous recalls, saw sales rise 2.45 to $3.7 billion.

The device business has had an additional challenge – digesting Synthes, which J&J purchased two years ago for $21.3 billion. The deal was made to grab a commanding lead in the global market for surgical devices that are used to treat traumatic injuries and fractures, which is one of the biggest markets for device makers.

The DePuy Synthes unit generated nearly $2.5 billion in sales in the second quarter, which amounted to 34% of all device sales. On a global basis, sales rose 3.5% during this period, but in the U.S., sales increased a meager 1.6%. In discussing earnings yesterday, Alex Gorsky, the J&J chief executive, said the Synthes integration is nearly complete. Perhaps the cost cutting will speed that along.