Erick Erickson sits down with Ted Cruz, one of 10 Republican presidential hopefuls who participated in the first GOP debate on Aug. 6.

By Jared Yamamoto

WSB Radio was live inside the Intercontiental Hotel for the RedState Gathering. This was a breakdown of the speakers and their agendas as it happened.

5:19PM Erick thanks Governor Walker and the Gathering heads to the College Football Hall of Fame for the Trumpless afterparty.

4:53PM Walker concludes that he will destroy the Iranian-U.S. nuclear deal on his first day in office and that the greatest modern threat to America is radical Islam. He believes that our military needs to be the strongest in the world and our veterans need to be treated better. Walker said, “We can be great again.”

4:43PM Walker’s platform includes reform, growth, and safety. He wants to repeal Obamacare, bring the ideals of the American Dream back, and small government principles. Walker says, “You can spend your money better than the government.”

4:31PM Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker is on to close out the RedState Gathering. He opens by attacking Hillary Clinton.

4:22PM Erick takes the stage and thanks the RedState contributors for their hard work and another successful year.

4:03PM A panel discussion begins on Common Core. While mingling with fellow gatherers in the main lobby, Common Core appeared to be a top 5 political concern for the 2016 presidential election.

3:09PM Millenials are the focus for the next panel of speakers. There focus is how the Republican Party seeks to gain millennial support in future elections. Essentially the panel appears to be an extended breakdown of Millenials and what they need from their elected officials.

2:37PM Cochran discussed why his Christian values were so instrumental to his career successes. He believes that the U.S. should focus on protecting faith based institutions and that the U.S. Constitution was designed to protect religious beliefs. The crowd loved it.

2:28PM Kelvin Cochran joins the Gathering. He was Atlanta’s Fire Chief and was fired for controversial comments on gay marriage.

2:05PM Bush closes out with immigration reform, his conservative record in Florida, and asks Donald Trump to apologize to Erick and women around the country for his colorful remarks. The RedState crowd gives him a standing ovation. It appears that he’s gained some supporters.

1:44PM Former Florida Governor Jeb Bush takes the stage. He seeks to shrink the federal government, enforce political lobbing restrictions, and grow the American Middle Class. Bush wants to promote small business promotion and create dynamic trading around the world. We’ve got a full room, but it’s definitely lacking the energy we saw with Cruz.

12:50PM Lunch is underway. Senator Cruz stole the show and spoke with the crowd for 30 minutes after his scheduled time. The crowd definitely responded positively to his speech.

11:56AM Ted Cruz is promising the Gatherers that if he’s elected president, he will repeal Obamacare, abolish Planned Parenthood, and shred the U.S.-Iranian nuclear deal. He will focus on protecting religious liberties and stop funding radical Islam. Cruz says, “We must speak the truth, in order to win.”

11:38AM Texas Sen. Ted Cruz has taken the stage bringing the RedState Gathering to its feet. He’s breaking down the GOP needs to take the White House.

11:21AM Oklahoma Congressman Jim Bridenstine has the RedState crowd rocking. He’s sick of the Washington politcal machine and the lack of leadership presented in the GOP. He wants to expose the Washington cartel.

10:59AM Erick’s decision to disinvite Donald Trump for his controversial comments appeared to be the buzz of the crowd during the first morning break. A group of women and big Erickson supporters have already created a Facebook page and hashtag “standwitherick” to voice their support for his difficult decision.

10:26AM Arthur Brooks, of the American Enterprise Institute discuses conservative values by connecting them to the founding principles of the first colonized regions of America. Also, the American free enterprise system should be allowed to thrive globally. He explains that Democrats are against this needed growth.

10:04AM Florida Congressman Ron DeSaints highlights defunding planned parenthood for the ‘atrocities’ they’ve caused.

9:34AM Erick Erickson congratulates Mike Huckabee and wishes him the best on his presidential run.

9:01AM Former Arkansas Governor, Mike Huckabee opens up RedState Day 2 by discussing America’s need for a secure border, the fair tax, and his distaste for President Obama’s Iranian nuclear deal. Huckabee believes the U.S. military should be expanded and the strongest in the world by a longshot.