Eagle Butte, South Dakota—The Cheyenne River Youth Project on Thursday announced the launch of its “Dress Drive” for the annual Passion for Fashion event to be held on March 8, 2014. CRYP is requesting donations of new and gently used formal wear in sizes from 2 and up with an emphasis on sizes 18-24. Also needed are accessories, shoes, make-up, gift card and cash donations to assist our local teen girls in getting ready for their proms and spring formals. Organizers for the event say they are expecting to serve between 150-200 girls this year.

Passion for Fashion is more than just playing dress-up, says Julie Garreau, CRYP executive director. It's also about providing support in a positive environment for a community where unemployment and under-employment hovers at around 80 percent. The event is a family affair that promotes self-esteem and encourages girls to make new friends and have fun while getting ready for prom. Along with their mothers, grandmothers, sisters, aunties and cousins, the girls are surrounded by generations of women to assist them in their journey.

“It is a special time for these girls where they want to look and feel beautiful for their high school prom, which is one of the most important events in their young lives,” says Garreau. “Our mission is to help each young lady be her absolute best with the love and support of their families and community behind them all the way. Every girl deserves to walk into her prom feeling empowered and beautiful.”

This year's theme is 25 Years of Fashion, which is a nod to CRYP's recent 25th anniversary celebration. Festivities will begin with a luncheon and keynote presentation, followed by a trip to the Cokata Wiconi gym where they can shop for dresses, shoes and accessories with their mothers. Additionally, the girls will be treated to makeovers, hair-styling, manicures, pedicures and facials. Dresses are being accepted until March 5, but CRYP will continue to take dresses after the event since some girls can't come in until after the event because they are unable to participate for one reason or another.

Afterward, the girls will model their new looks at the CRYP runway fashion show. The evening will conclude with a special Passion for Fashion cake and fun activities such as karaoke. Each young lady will go home with a dress, accessories, new jewelry to compliment their dress and a gift bath set from CRYP. Participants may also include their names in drawings for prizes.

View CRYP's Passion for Fashion video from 2013 here:

Video of Cheyenne River Youth Project Passion for Fashion 2013

Please send dress, accessories, shoes and gift card donations to: P.O. Box 410 or 101 E. Lincoln St., Eagle Butte, SD 57625. Financial contributions can also be made directly on our website. Visit www.lakotayouth.org and click the donate button. You can also follow us on Facebook and Twitter for more updates and information.

CRYP is also seeking volunteers to help with make up, hair, pedicures, manicures and to help the girls with choosing a dress. Those unable to volunteer the day of the event may come earlier in the week to help with set up in the Cokata Wicona Teen Center gym.Founded in 1988, the Cheyenne River Youth Project is dedicated to providing the youth of the Cheyenne River reservation with access to a vibrant and secure future through a variety of culturally sensitive and enduring programs, projects and facilities, ensuring strong, self-sufficient families and communities. Today, CRYP provides a wide variety of programs and services to the community, covering nearly 3 million acres in South Dakota.