Bloomberg Congress can barely agree to keep the government functioning.

Are we ready for the next recession?

Far too many ordinary Americans might snort at such a question. We’re not out of the last one, the retort might go.

But at the Brookings Institution Monday, conclusions from an “expert” panel of academics, policy analysts, and investors weren’t much cheerier.

Ben Spielberg, a research analyst with the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, put it bluntly: “The short answer is no, we’re not.” The long answer, Spielberg continued, “is still no. But we can be if we take the right lessons from our historical experience and start to prepare for it now.”

But that’s a very big “if.”

In fact, Spielberg on Monday released a paper co-authored with economist Jared Bernstein arguing for a stronger set of automatic stabilizers, the programs like unemployment insurance and food stamps that kick in when economic conditions pressure incomes downward.

Spielberg and Bernstein also propose stronger, more direct government action in the next downturn, such as job creation programs that would subsidize hiring or help states offset the price of their own initiatives, or directly create and fund national service jobs.

In fact, because such programs are tough to start up quickly, particularly when conditions are deteriorating and nerves are frayed, they should be put into place and tested now, Spielberg said.

That’s a tall order from a federal government that’s so far being able to govern wisely that it had to build deep cuts into a budget in order to force itself to take action to avoid them — and still failed.

Another panelist, Philip Swagel, gave a nod to that idea by listing many of the reasons the current recovery has been especially weak. The recovery was held back by policy choices, Swagel said.

It wasn’t just problematic that we have a “disruptive political system,” Swagel argued. Also working against us was the fact that the economy had to absorb “disruptive change in a recession,” via big policies like the Affordable Care Act and Dodd-Frank and ongoing questions about smaller changes like lending in the housing market.

It seems silly to pin hopes for a robust recession response on a government that draws fire for wanting to shrink itself at a time when fiscal stimulus is needed — but also gets criticized for the policies that it does enact.

And that’s playing out even as debt as a share of GDP is set to balloon about eight percentage points over the next decade, and the Federal Reserve is struggling to get enough economic traction to warrant having interest rates high enough that they can be easily reduced, other panelists reminded the audience.

More from MarketWatch