Erin Burnett interviewed Republican presidential hopeful Rick Santorum in a taped sit-down chat earlier today. But rather than sticking purely to substantial issues, the CNN anchor also posed two rather trivial queries, one about a hot microphone comment Sen. Mark Kirk (R-Ill.) made about fellow Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) being a "bro without a ho," and another regarding if Rick Santorum approves of Bruce Jenner's newfound lifestyle as Caitlyn, a transgendered woman.

Below you'll find a transcript of Burnett's questions to Santorum as well as that of a tease prior to the commercial break which preceded the interview:

CNN

Erin Burnett OutFront

June 11, 2015

7:44 p.m. Eastern

ERIN BURNETT: OutFront next: A Republican senator joking that Lindsay Graham is "a bro without a ho." Yes, that was actually was said by a senator today. And I happened to have Rick Santorum on my set when it happened. And you'll, you'll see what he had to say and what he did when he heard it, next.

7:49 p.m. Eastern

BURNETT: OutFront tonight, 2016 Republican presidential candidate, Rick Santorum. Great to have you with me, senator, I really appreciate it. So you now have the president saying another 450 troops. They might have be putting even more to support these bases, that's what Dempsey was saying today was possible. You have talked about 10,000 American troops, so, on some level you must actually think the president's going in the right direction. He's increasing the number.

BURNETT: And, so, when you talk about 10,000 troops, you know, the Pentagon will say, OK, that could mean 30,000 Americans cuz, you know, you need the support staff and you need to run those bases, so, the numbers could get higher, right?

BURNETT:Today, the Republican Senator Mark Kirk, uh, was speaking at an Appropriations Committee meeting, he said he was joking with colleagues when he made a comment about Lindsey Graham, who's running for office, it's about his bachelorhood, and what it would be like in the White House, and I wanted to play for you what Sen. Kirk said.

[audio clip of Sen. MARK KIRK: Did you see that? He's going to have a rotating first lady. He's a bro with no ho.]

BURNETT: Uh, I see the look on your face.

BURNETT: Should Mark Kirk apologize to women for making a comment, calling women ho's, essentially, is what he did?

BURNETT: Now, speaking of Lindsey Graham, he spoke to CNN this week about Caityln Jenner, obviously formerly Bruce Jenner, right, now Caitlyn. Um, when Bruce Jenner came out as transgender, he also said in that interview with Diane Sawyer, I'm sure you noticed it, he did that kind of look over his shoulder, he said, yeah, I'm a Republican, is it OK if I say that, sort of making a joke about it. Um, here's what Lindsey Graham said to CNN about Caityln Jenner.

[Clip of Sen. LINDSEY GRAHAM to CNN's Dana Bash, as CNN shows split-screen with Santorum's reaction: I haven't walked in her shoes. I don't have all of the answers to the mysteries of life. I can only imagine the torment that Bruce Jenner went through. If Caitlyn Jenner wants to be a Republican, she is welcome in my party.]

BURNETT: Do you welcome her?

BURNETT: So you don't care? A gay man who's married to a man? A transgender? It doesn't matter to Rick Santorum?

BURNETT: Well, you accept their vote, but do you accept them? Right? Do you accept her?

BURNETT: Alright, well, Rick Santorum, I appreciate your taking the time. Thanks so much. Good to see you.