Tennessee Gov. Bill Haslam was wise to wash his hands of the Legislature's misguided quest to sue the federal government over its refugee resettlement program. Attorney General Herbert Slatery III needs to be next in line at the sink.

Last week Haslam allowed a joint resolution clamoring for a lawsuit to go into effect without his signature, a signal of the governor's disdain for the effort.

Inspired by the Obama administration's plan to accept up to 10,000 refugees from war-torn Syria, the resolution calls on Slatery to take some sort of legal action against the federal government. Slatery already has explained to lawmakers in an advisory opinion that the federal government has exclusive authority over the acceptance and resettlement of refugees.

If Slatery opts not to file a lawsuit, the resolution authorizes the House and Senate speakers to hire outside counsel. According to supporters of the measure, a Michigan-based nonprofit public interest law firm is willing to provide free legal services to the state.

The resolution is based on two erroneous contentions. First, the measure claims that forcing states to provide Medicaid services to refugees amounts to unconstitutional coercion. Second, it asserts the federal government has violated the law by not consulting with the state on refugee resettlement.

The resolution cites the U.S. Supreme Court's 2012 decision making Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act optional for states. The court determined that the Affordable Care Act's original requirement that states expand Medicaid to cover new categories of recipients or risk losing existing Medicaid funding amounted to a new program that states had no choice but to accept.

The ruling also reaffirmed the federal government's authority to attach conditions on programs using federal funds, however, and left the existing Medicaid program intact. Refugees already are eligible for Medicaid.

The resolution also contends the federal Office of Refugee Resettlement has not consulted quarterly with the state as required by the Refugee Act of 1980. Tennessee opted out of the federal refugee program in 2007, however, and Catholic Charities subsequently was designated to operate the Tennessee Office for Refugees. ORR provides funding to the state refugee program, which offers services such as case management, medical screening, English language training, limited cash assistance, job placement and more, all with the goal of promoting self-sufficiency.

The Tennessee Office for Refugees essentially acts as a stand-in for the state in working with ORR. The state's refugee coordinator, Holly Johnson, told the News Sentinel ORR complies with the law's consultation requirement.

"ORR and the State Department talk to us and they're also talking to the governor's office, so they're fulfilling their obligation," Johnson said. If legislators want to talk to her or ask her to make presentations to committees, she added, all they need to do is call.

The resolution is little more than political grandstanding in an election year. Denying resettlement to refugees, who are fleeing oppression at home, would be cruel and illegal. Slatery should follow Haslam's lead and refuse to participate in such a scheme.