The crowd of more than 500 chanted “Cruz, Cruz” as the Republican presidential candidate took the dais at the Radisson Lackawanna Station Hotel in Scranton as part of a tour of Pennsylvania before Tuesday’s primary.

U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas had just come off an appearance in Williamsport on his way to Allentown when he gave his stump speech, billing himself as the best candidate to face off with probable Democratic presidential nominee and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

His enthusiastic supporters often interrupted with interjections throughout his 40-minute talk, shouting “never Trump,” “defund PP (Planned Parenthood)” and “abolish abortion.” After a time, he stopped acknowledging the frequent outbursts.

If the crowd counts are an indication, Cruz has his work cut out for him. The Radisson ballroom set up for about 370 seats was filled. Those were joined by more than 100 others standing, typical of his draw at Keystone State appearances. The GOP frontrunner, billionaire businessman Donald Trump, on the other hand, recently drew 6,000 to the Pennsylvania Farm Show Complex.

“God bless the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and God bless the people of Scranton,” Cruz began. “The entire nation is looking toward Pennsylvania.”

He called his supporters patriots who have come out to fight for the country. As the nominee, Trump would be defeated in the general election, he said, citing polls, and the GOP possibly would lose the House and Senate. Given the opening on the U.S. Supreme Court, conservatives would “lose the Supreme Court for a generation.”

He delivered a message of tax cuts and deregulation, saying those would bring millions of jobs back from Mexico and China and increase wages. He would repeal the Affordable Care Act. He would impose a flat tax and abolish the Internal Revenue Service.

For the seeming chaos and tension on the GOP side, Cruz pointed to the Democratic side, saying it consists of “a wide-eyed socialist with ideas dangerous to the world and Bernie Sanders,” a U.S. senator from Vermont.

“Want to know the quickest way to clear our a Bernie Sanders rally? Tell everyone there they have to get a job,” he said.

Cruz cast Trump as an appeaser who supported Democrats. He maligned the New Yorker for his “neutral” position on the Israeli conflict. Cruz said he would offer unquestioned support of Israel.

He noted that Trump opposed the controversial North Carolina law that, among other things, prohibited transgender people from using the bathroom that conforms with their gender identity.

“Trump agrees with Hillary and (President Barack) Obama that grown men should be able to go to little girls’ bathrooms,” he said. “This is political correctness run amok.”

He called on the people in the audience to unite, and then work to unite the party and the nation.

“Our task is to bring the party together, then we have to unite this country,” he said. “If we stand together, we will win the nomination and we will win the general election.”

dfalchek@timesshamrock.com