VASSAR, MI — A Vassar facility could provide temporary shelter for Central American teens who've fled their home countries — how much would it matter?

Pioneer Work and Learn Center, a Wolverine Human Services facility in Vassar, could temporarily house 12- to 17-year-old unauthorized immigrants from Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador who have crossed into the United States without their parents.

Wolverine, an agency based in Grosse Pointe Park, is negotiating a sub-contract through Chicago-based anti-poverty organization Heartland Alliance, which has contracts with the U.S. Office of Refugee Resettlement.

More than 57,000 children from El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras have turned up at U.S. borders since October. Many of the children are unaccompanied minors, and the U.S. Border Patrol has taken them into custody.

On Wednesday, July 9, Wolverine Senior Vice President Derrick McCree told more than 200 people at an informational meeting in Vassar about the plan and possible contract.

Many residents disagreed the children and teens should come to Vassar for two- to four-week stints for medical care and basic education before they go on to immigration courts or face deportation.

Through thousands of commentsMLive coverage, readers have expressed both concern over bringing the children to Vassar and support for helping in a humanitarian crisis.

MLive commenter MI_resident says the U.S. doesn't need to move the unauthorized immigrants throughout the country.

Great. Just what we need. Let's transport them 3000 miles away from where we picked them up, to an area with little supporting structure for them, and unleash them in Michigan never to be seen again.

Most illegal immigrants would have to pay a premium to be smuggled this far from the border. But now we'll do it for them for free, and even pay to feed and educate them.

This is a southern border problem. Don't spread the problem out over the whole country. That's just a way to ensure that you manage to turn the entire country against immigration when they now have a headache in their own backyard.

If the gov't has the $$$ to pay to move them all the way here, and then back again when we hopefully deport them, then they have the money to NOT move them anywhere and find/build housing close to the border.

Reader baycitygar writes the children should go through the official immigration process if they want to move to the U.S.

These young people with no family structure here or financial backing other than that of the tax payers leaves them distined to a life of poverty and or crime if they are allowed to stay.

They should be sent back to their families where they belong.

There they can start through the proper channels the route to immigrate to the U.S. if they would like.

MLive commenter jeltez42 16 agreed, saying the Central American unauthorized immigrants aw are law-breakers.

Why are we housing them in private juvenile facilities? Why not allow the UN to drop off tents and they can live in tent cities in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California.

There are legal ways to come to the US as refugees and asylum seekers. They choose to break the law. If we were to send the kids from our gang (illegally here) infested, desperately poor and threatened by extreme violence areas illegally to Central America. Oh wait, no we can't. They will be turned away right away, then barred from ever entering the country. There is a possibility of long prison sentences for illegally entering these countries. But speaking about our endangered kids, when are we going to do anything meaningful to help THEM? But then I guess it is criminals before citizens.

Reader MiniCoop 41 believes the government should focus on helping its own citizens first. Why is it that elected "leaders" want to help every other country but our own? Who are we trying to win over. No country would take on American children who are abused, etc. 110% sure about that! I would love to know who's paying for the immigrants basic education, and medical treatments. I have a very hard time getting money for my post cancer screenings. Very costly and is horrible because I have a high deductible due to Obamacare. Are these children going to be enrolled in Obamacare? Or will these immigrants have the same healthcare that the president does. Obviously these children mean more that American children being harmed. Other readers, however, believe the U.S. should help children displaced in a crisis. Reader HarveyMilks says the nation should aid the children and teens. As a 'Christian nation' we should be welcoming these children and doing all we can to help them in their dire situations. What do you think? If the teens come to Vassar for temporary care, will it matter? Take our poll and share your comments below. — Lindsay Knake covers education for MLive/The Saginaw News. Follow her on twitter or contact her at 989-372-2498 or lknake@mlive.com.