By Matt Chapman

It is good to have heroes. One of mine is Tim Schulze, a fifth-grade teacher at Harrison Park School in Portland.

Tim's class includes immigrant children just learning English, many of whom are still below grade level. But Tim organizes supplemental instruction, including summer school, to help them catch up. However, they have to take the Oregon-mandated Smarter Balanced test, which only tells Tim (and the school) if they are at grade level. It provides Tim no useful information for their instruction and contributes to rating his school as failing even though his students are doing a great job of catching up to where they need to be.

This is a process of humiliation over many days and hours that has been appropriately characterized by other Portland Public Schools teachers, such as Portland Association of Teachers President Gwen Sullivan, as abuse of our students.

But there is good news. This can change if Oregon steps up to a newly permitted system for student assessment.

With passage of the federal Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), Oregon (like all states) has an opportunity and a responsibility to move away from the punitive policy of federally mandated accountability assessments that was the hallmark of No Child Left Behind (NCLB). Oregon can now adopt an assessment system that gives teachers the information they need to inform instruction so that students learn better and faster, and one that measures growth and progress instead of just grade level status.

The equally important good news is that Oregon already has a foundational plan, finalized this summer under Gov. Kate Brown, which can readily be turned into an assessment system that achieves exactly these goals. It is the Oregon Assessment Plan and it was developed collaboratively by teachers, state and local education officials and highly respected education thought leaders, led by Dr. Rick Stiggins, an Oregonian who is arguably the nation's leading authority on assessments as a tool for learning.

The plan outlines a system of useful assessments that enable teachers, parents and the students themselves to target instruction based on multiple measures of growth and mastery. We can learn where we need to put emphasis and resources so that every child can be successful. Further, the plan is not at the expense of accountability, but shifts it so that the growth of struggling students toward a goal of graduation is measured against a roadmap for that graduation. And it would measure the progress of students who excel above grade level, who currently too often settle for just passing a proficiency test. The plan can lead to a comprehensive system designed to enable all students to reach their full academic potential, measuring their progress along the way.

The news around the plan gets even better. At the recent Oregon Business Plan summit, the keynote by Brown on her education priorities is totally consistent with this approach. And implementing the plan was endorsed by the statewide business community.

All these issues are now up to Oregon under the new federal law, and I strongly urge state educators, policymakers and community members to join together to implement the Oregon Assessment Plan so that our system is first and foremost useful for instruction, while still providing appropriate accountability. If we do so, the real answer to the opt-out movement is not a fight over legislation, but a chance to take a leading role in the nation, by creating a system of assessments that parents and students embrace because it adds value to learning.

Public opinion surveys sponsored by the Northwest Evaluation Association reveal that parents, students and teachers are all strongly in favor of assessments that deliver timely feedback and support learning. That is what the Oregon Assessment Plan does. Let's take this opportunity to restore balance and make assessment a positive part of learning and a tool for success.

•

Matt Chapman is chief executive officer of the Northwest Evaluation Association (NWEA.org), a Portland-based nonprofit.