A long-awaited independent review of NJ Transit's performance during Hurricane Sandy has found a glaring need for better coordination and more places to store trains in the event of another monster storm.

Officials with the statewide transportation provider made the ill-fated decision to leave trains at rail yards in Kearny and Hoboken that ended up flooding during Sandy, resulting in hundreds of damaged locomotives and train cars and a $120 million bill.

NJ Transit's response to Sandy was reviewed by the Texas A&M Engineering Extension Service — informally known as TEEX — which focuses on emergency preparedness, homeland security and workforce training.

In a 26-page report released today, TEEX found that:

• Flood protection models are needed to predict the impact of future monster storms on key facilities such as NJ Transit’s Meadows Maintenance Complex and Rail Operations Center in Kearny.

• Having the Emergency Management Team in Newark and the Emergency Operations Center in Orange caused duplication and slowed the sharing of information to the public.

• Even with NJ Transit’s public information staff working around the clock, there was insufficient personnel to manage the website, monitor social media and handle customer service inquiries.

The report wasn't so much a public scolding as constructive criticism to help NJ Transit for the next huge weather event.

TEEX seemed to sympathize with NJ Transit over the dilemma of where to store trains during a storm it termed "a raging freak of nature."

"Storage of rail cars and equipment at the (Meadows Maintenance Complex) resulted in flood damage, but the decision to park equipment at the MMC was based on the storm information available at the time, past storm experience and the need to keep the equipment as close as possible to meet demands for prompt restoration of service," the report stated.

“In conclusion, several areas for improvement were identified. Among these were the need for vulnerability assessments to be conducted for all critical facilities and appropriate measures taken to mitigate potential threats,” the report stated. “Storm surge and flood models should also be prepared for all key facilities for more accurate projections of flooding in future storms. Also identified was the need for more emphasis on the importance of timely, accurate communications with the public during an emergency and consideration should be given to dedicating additional resources to the emergency public information effort during future crisis of this nature.”

Regarding the need for places to keep the trains high and dry during the next Sandy, TEEX was preaching to a choir of converts.

NJ Transit earlier this year secured rail yards in Linden and Garwood to shepherd trains from flooding and falling trees.

And NJ Transit has already addressed another suggestion in the report by putting up sandbag flood barriers to serve as a 6-foot-tall dam at its Kearny rail yard and maintenance facility, and is looking for an alternate location for its Rail Operations Center.

In a response to suggestions made by TEEX, NJ Transit said today that it has contracted with "a private weather service to provide modeling and flooding projections, and an outside engineering firm has developed storm surge maps for critical facilities. In addition, NJ Transit has collaborated with Stevens Institute on real-time, site-specific surge modeling for use during significant weather events."

Of the 72 damaged locomotives, 55 have returned to service and 17 are awaiting repair, including nine "dual-power" locomotives capable of operating in diesel or electrified territory, four electric locomotives and four diesel locomotives.

Of the 248 damaged rail cars, 226 have returned to service and 22 are awaiting repair, including 14 single-level coach cars and eight multilevel coaches, informally referred to as "double deckers."

NJ Transit is operating 697 trains a day, close to the 700 a day offered before Sandy. The Main/Bergen Line is down three runs, while the North Jersey Coast and Morris-Essex lines are down one each and the Montclair-Boonton Line is up two trains over 14 months ago.

RELATED COVERAGE

• NJ Transit boss defends decision to leave trains in area hit hard by Sandy flooding

• NJ Transit boss vows: Mistake that led to flooded trains won't happen again