Henry Speight gets past Nick Cummins in their clash in March. Photo: Getty Images

Cobras can't stop a honey badger, but ACT Brumbies winger Joe Tomane thinks his Fro Bro can.

Tomane is a big fan of Western Force cult hero Nick Cummins and thinks the Wallabies flyer will be a huge loss to Australian rugby, but he's still backing his Brumbies teammate Henry Speight to win the wing battle between the pair in Friday night's do-or-die clash at Canberra Stadium.

The Brumbies' equation is simple – beat the Force and they make the Super Rugby finals.

But Tomane's first priority is getting his cheek all-cleared by the specialist on Monday morning, which would make him available for selection for the big game.

Advertisement

He took part in contact training on Friday and if he gets the nod, then Brumbies head coach Stephen Larkham faces a selection dilemma in the outside backs.

Only three of Speight, Tomane, Robbie Coleman, Clyde Rathbone, Jesse Mogg and Pat McCabe will make the starting XV, with possibly two on the bench.

Whatever the side, Tomane is confident the Brumbies have the talent to win.

"It is pretty nerve-wracking [waiting for the all clear] and also considering what's on the line for us on Friday," Tomane said.

"The team fielded against the [NSW] Waratahs is good enough to win this game against the Force, so it's going to be pretty hard for me to try and push through and gain a spot in the 23."

Cummins, known as the Honey Badger, announced last week he was leaving the Force at the end of the season to play in Japan for personal reasons.

It's a big blow to Australian Rugby Union, not only on the field but off it, with Cummins known for his entertaining interviews.

Tomane said the Honey Badger was exactly the same away from the cameras and would be sorely missed from Wallabies camps.

Cummins' departure opens up a spot in the Wallabies XV, but Tomane didn't think it bolstered his own chances for the upcoming Rugby Championships.

As good as Cummins is, Tomane thinks Speight, who boasts the best afro in Super Rugby, is even better.

"I'm really disappointed that we're losing such a quality player," he said. "You saw the buzz that the Honey Badger created for Australian rugby and he was so good for the team. Off the field we saw the excitement with his one-liners and then he backs it up with his hard carries on the field.

"Two Wallaby-calibre wingers going head to head [in Cummins and Speight] should be exciting for the fans.

"I'm always going to back my Fro Bro Henry, as much as I love Nick Cummins as a bloke and a player, I'm always going to back my boy."

Following the Waratahs' victory over the Otago Highlanders, the Brumbies could finish as high as fourth and host a Super Rugby final.

A home final would not only bolster the club's coffers, but also give it a crucial home-ground advantage.

Larkham will wait until after Monday's training before deciding on his outside backs, but he was confident Tomane would be able to slot straight back into the side if the specialist clears him.

Tomane has been out since May 10 when he fractured his cheekbone against the Sharks.

"He's had a bit of time off, but he's been training exceptionally hard," Larkham said of Tomane.

"Obviously he had the setback with not being allowed to play two weeks ago, but he was ready fitness-wise and he's been working very hard to maintain that fitness if not improve it.

"I've got no doubts he'll be right to play."

The Brumbies are expected to announce the re-signing of powerful No.8 Fotu Auelua on a one-year deal this week, possibly as early as Monday.

FRIDAY

ACT Brumbies v Western Force

At Canberra Stadium, 7.40pm

Tickets available at Ticketek