As raging floodwaters began to rip through area communities, neighbors and first-responders rushed to provide aid. And after the water began to recede and the affected communities got their first look at the damage, thousands more residents mobilized to help those in need. Here's a look at just a few of those heroes, nominated by our readers. It's an incomplete, inadequate list -- for every person listed here, there are hundreds more just like them -- but it presents a snapshot of the good that came out of the worst disaster that anyone here can remember.

"Kenny Beecher is my father-in-law and has been working for the city as a lineman for the Power & Communications department for 15 years now. He has spent this past week working non-stop, day and night with 50 hours of overtime, never leaving a call unanswered. We love him dearly."

The Cub Scouts of Pack 673 treated police, firefighters and National Guardsmen to snacks after the flood. (Courtesy photo)

Kendall Bullock, Longmont

"One hero that deserves to be recognized is Carrie Adams. She heads up Silver Creek's Leadership Academy. This woman has worked non-stop since this crisis began to keep people informed of opportunities to help others in our community. She has had teenagers in her kitchen fixing hundreds of sack lunches to be delivered to those in need. She is organizing groups to do laundry, baby-sit, feed others, etc. She has been a constant and continual resource for many in the community to get the help they need. She has been tweeting, emailing, collecting resources and constantly putting others before herself. This woman is tireless and extremely compassionate. There is no better role model for the students in the Silver Creek Leadership Academy than this woman. She has been a "go-to" person for many."

Advertisement

Tammy Carson, Longmont

"On Wednesday, my son Patrick Campbell, who is a volunteer with the Lefthand Fire District, was called at midnight to help direct traffic in Lefthand Canyon, in the pouring rain at the height of the storm. He stayed up there until 9 p.m. Thursday night, after spending the day at his day job at The University of Colorado. He went back Saturday for another 12-hour shift, going door-to-door, checking for stranded homeowners. He's not the only one, but that is heroic. None of them get paid."

Michael Campbell, Longmont

"For the boys of Longmont Cub Scout Pack 673, there are too many heroes to count or identify. The first- through fifth-grade boys who live mostly in southwest Longmont, and from some families that were flooded or evacuated, wanted to say thank you. All week, Pack 673 Cub Scouts have been collecting donations from the citizens of Longmont and Pack 673 families. On Tuesday, Sept. 17, we sent out four teams of Cub Scouts with a couple of Boy Scouts from Troop 66 to deliver a box of Boy Scout Caramel Corn to the Longmont Police Department, Longmont Firestation No. 1, Boulder County Sheriff's Office, and the Colorado National Guard Station in Longmont. The boys received a touching welcome at each of these stations of first responders who have made such a difference in our community over the last week. They were so touched and grateful for the recognition and for the boys' efforts and gift to them of delicious snacks. At each location the officers and soldiers shared stories, gave them tours of the trucks and equipment that helped save lives, and encouraged the boys in their Scouting endeavors."

Tony and Kristy Martinez, Longmont

"Danny Hernandez, a teacher at Westview Middle School and his wife, Sarah, a teacher at Central Elementary, and their three young boys live in unaffected Old Town, Longmont. Danny immediately mobilized people and coordinated laundry (pickup) for the Memorial Building shelter. They spent the entire day Friday doing load after load of laundry at the Drop N' Wash laundromat. Then, as soon as people where allowed back in to their neighborhoods, Danny mobilized a Westview Middle School team to go in to the Greens and walk door to door. Day after day after day, Danny has been moving from affected neighborhoods jumping in and doing whatever needed to be done. He's enlisted 100s of people to help. He has been an incredible inspiration."

Anna Vahlenkamp, center, had the idea to bring Lyons students together for a post-flood party as a way to reconnect. More than 500 people attended. From left: Maylee Mora-Delamarter, Vahlenkamp and Lexie Kuseski pose after helping clean out a basement. (Courtesy photo)

Bridget Shaughnessy, Longmont

"The Longmont Humane Society is my hero. They took in animals of all kinds and some humans to give them shelter from the storm and piece of mind to many families with no place to safely house their animals."

Lauren Finan, Longmont

"At 1 a.m. on Sept. 12, I got a call from a neighbor, Pam Frisby, who said her house had been demolished by a huge landslide. Her upper floor had partially fallen into the basement where her husband was trapped under a desk, and the water was rising quickly in the basement. My husband RJ, and three other neighbors, Farrell Lowe, Matt Ladwig, and Stewart Dorman converged on the Frisby home. They soon realized the home reeked of natural gas, but not knowing where the shut-off was, they had Pam open all the windows to reduce the risk of an explosion. They called through the floor for Dan Frisby and heard his voice, so they began tearing out the bathroom floor where they'd heard his voice. After a lot of sledge hammering, Dan could see the beams of their flashlights, but told them he was about nine feet away from the hole. So they started sledge hammering there, but found they'd severed some electrical lines that began sparking. But since the house was now relatively free of natural gas, they persevered, and finally pulled Dan through the hole in the floor just in the nick of time since the water had risen to his neck."

Judy Smith, Boulder

"The National Guard. They have been there throughout. One of the Army recruiters came in to buy sandwiches for the guards stationed over by McIntosh Lake. Instead, I talked him into letting us make several hot pizzas compliments of Mama Mead's Pizzeria for the men instead of several cold sandwiches, as it was a very chilly day. It was the very least Mama Mead's could do to show, that as part of the Longmont Community, how very much we so appreciate them being here for all of us."

Heather Gibbons, Longmont

"My hero is Payton Peterson. He has worked many hours this last week helping document and report on the flooding, getting info and peace of mind directly to those who needed it. He is just one of many heroes who showed their faces this week helping others in a time of need."

Trenton Hoshiko, Longmont

"One of many heroes in Lyons directly after the flooding is Rob, the cable guy. He saved two of my aunts' three cats by risking his own life to enter her destroyed home, water still running through it, to get her missing cats and bring them to her. He knew that they would bring a smile to her face even though she had lost everything. I will never forget his generosity and courage to help her and make her feel better. Thank you Cable Guy Rob."

Missy Boone, Longmont

"The Silver Creek High School Football Players, of all grade levels, are my heroes because they volunteered their time away from video games, TV and friends to help our community. Most were in The Greens and surrounding neighborhoods, which is where a varsity coach lives with 8 feet of water in his basement. This was not mandatory by the coaches or the school. The Silver Creek Raptors are thankful for a community that is so supportive to them and jumped at a moments notice to help."

Kimberley Allen, Longmont

"A local hero I have noticed is Anna Vahlenkamp. She is a teen who attends Lyons High. She has a tender heart and has seen many needs and has worked on meeting them. She was the origin of the idea for all the Lyons Middle/Senior High kids to get together this past Monday at Calvary Church. Thinking it would be a smallish event, which turned into a gathering of over 500 people. She saw the need for the kids to connect and make sure their friends were OK. She also started a Facebook page called Step Up and Clean Up. She has been out emptying basements and gathering her friends to help as well. She worked for two days helping in a neighborhood with many elderly people and was anxious to get back to it today. She's my hero with her tender heart and vision for what needs to be done and how she can help."

Deanna Delamarter, Longmont

"Brad and Nancy are volunteers at the Longmont Police Department. Since this crisis started, they have worked 12 to 15 hour days coordinating the operations of the Citizen Volunteer Patrol. During the day, they have been in the field with us, working neighborhood barricades, blocking flooded streets and making sure all of the volunteers working under them are fed and rested. Their evenings are spent re-stocking, and repairing, Citizens Volunteer Patrol cars and making arrangements to meet the staffing needs for the next day. They have become familiar faces to many of the folks living in The Greens neighborhood, as they helped run that checkpoint Saturday when we first allowed residents back in to visit their homes."

Mike Mullin, Longmont