Here’s your Investing Action Plan: What you need to know as an investor for the coming week.

Earnings season kicks into high gear, led by tech giants like Alphabet (GOOGL) and Microsoft (MSFT), industrial heavyweights like General Electric (GE) and General Motors (GM), and leading consumer names like McDonald’s (MCD) and Starbucks (SBUX).

Oil futures plunged after Sunday’s a long-awaited meeting of top oil producers in Doha, Qatar, ended with no agreement on an output freeze. Asian stocks retreated, with U.S. stock futures also down somewhat.

Netflix, Alphabet, Microsoft Earnings

Top-name techs Netflix (NFLX) and Google owner Alphabet report quarterly results.

The video streaming leader is projected to see earnings drop 73% to 3 cents a share amid rising costs for its global rollout when it issues its report after the close on Monday. Revenue is seen jumping 25% to $1.97 billion. Netflix expects subscriber additions to hit 6.1 million, up from 4.9 million last year.

Netflix was able to retake the critical 200-day line on Tuesday, gaining 7.4% for the week. Shares are trading 16% below its December high and a cup-base buy point of 133.37.

Alphabet reports after the close on Thursday. Earnings are expected to climb 23% to $7.96 a share as revenue increases 18% to $20.34 billion. The Internet giant has edged above a cup-with-handle buy point of 777.41 this week, but volume has been light. Shares are now trading 3% below their all-time high reached in January.

Microsoft’s earnings are projected to rise 3% to 64 cents a share when the PC maker reports its quarterly results on Thursday. Revenue is seen rising 1.7% to $22.1 billion.

IBM (IBM) reports Monday. The consensus estimate is for earnings per share minus items to fall 28% to $2.09 and revenue to drop 6.6% to $18.26 billion.

Meanwhile, Amazon (AMZN) also broke out of a cup-with-handle base recently with a 603.34 buy point, gaining 5.3% for the week and finishing still within buying range. Amazon reports its quarterly results on April 28.

For when to buy, hold or sell Amazon and other top stocks, take a free trial of IBD Leaderboard

Crude Market Reaction After Doha Failure

After weeks of anticipation, the Doha oil freeze meeting of top OPEC and non-OPEC producers ended with no agreement Sunday as Saudi Arabia objected to Iran declining to take part.

U.S. oil futures fell 4.5% to $38.50 a barrel, with Dow futures down nearly 100 points. Oil prices, energy-related stocks and financial markets generally had rallied significantly from January’s longtime lows for crude, in large part on output freeze hopes. However, Kuwaiti oil production has plunged due to a strike, providing some near-term support oil prices.

The U.S. Energy Information Administration will release weekly U.S. crude stockpile and production numbers Wednesday. The American Petroleum Institute, an industry group, will give inventory estimates late Tuesday. Baker Hughes (BHI) will release the weekly U.S. rig count on Friday.

Yahoo Bids Are Due Day Before Q1 Report

First-round bids for flailing Web portal Yahoo (YHOO) are reportedly due Monday. Among those rumored to be considering bids are the U.K.’s Daily Mail, Alphabet’s Google and Verizon Communications (VZ).

Yahoo will report quarterly earnings after the close Tuesday. Analysts expect revenue to fall 12% to $1.07 billion while earnings plunge 53% to 7 cents.

GM, GE Lead Industrial Earnings

General Motors is on tap for April 21 and Wall Street expects a 17.4% hike in EPS to $1.01 and revenue of $35.75 billion revenue, flat with a year ago. With reports indicating that U.S. sales are peaking or leveling off, watch for comments about future sales.

General Electric reports Friday, and consensus is for a 5% decline in earnings per share to 19 cents and a 5.4% drop in revenue to $27.78 billion. Investors will look for an estimate from GE of future order-book rates.

Oilfield services company Schlumberger (SLB) reports Thursday and will hold a news conference the following morning. Construction and mining equipment giant Caterpillar (CAT) will announce Q1 earnings Friday. Both are projected to report big earnings declines.

McDonald’s, Starbucks On The Menu

McDonald’s is seen growing its per-share profit by 15% to $1.16 a share, with revenue expected to fall 3% to $5.8 billion, when it reports Friday. Analysts are looking for continued momentum stateside. Shares remain in buy range after breaking out of a cup-shaped base late last month.

When it reports Thursday, Starbucks’ fiscal Q2 earnings are anticipated to rise 18% to 39 cents a share, on 10% sales growth to $5.03 billion. Shares have been consolidating above their 50-day and 200-day lines. Given investors’ high expectations, the stock could face pressure even if results look good, said Deutsche Bank’s Brett Levy in a Friday note.

Yum Brands (YUM) is slated to release results on Wednesday. Dunkin Brands (DNKN) reports on April 28.

In the hot fitness sector, Under Armour’s (UA) Q1 earnings are expected to decline to 2 cents a share on revenue growth of 29% to $1.03 billion when the maker of athletic apparel and footwear reports Thursday. The stock has been forming a monthslong cup-shaped base, with shares currently below their 200-day but above the 50-day line. Skechers (SKX) also reports Q1 on Thursday.

First Look At Casino Earnings

The world’s largest casino company, Las Vegas Sands (LVS), will release Q1 results Wednesday. Analysts expect Sands to report a 6% drop in Q1 EPS to 62 cents. Revenue is seen shrinking 4.3% to $2.88 billion.

Las Vegas continues to grow at a slow, steady pace and analysts point to signs that Macau, the globe’s No. 1 gambling destination, may be near the end of a nearly two-year recession.

Earlier this month, rival Wynn Resorts (WYNN) pre-announced Q1 combined Macau-Las Vegas casinos revenue of $987 million-$1.007 billion. The midpoint missed Wall Street’s $998.22 million target. Wynn blamed Macau.

Broadcasters’ Show

The National Association of Broadcasters holds its show in Las Vegas from Saturday to Thursday. Executives from media giants 21st Century Fox (FOXA), Disney (DIS) and Discovery Communications (DISCA) are scheduled to speak. Cablevision (CVC) Chief Operating Officer Kristin Dolan will also address attendees.

Underscoring the tech sector’s growing role in media, Daniel Alegre, who oversees all of Google’s strategic partnerships worldwide, will speak as well. Workshops on filming with drones will be held. And on the show floor, showcases on virtual reality and augmented reality will be on display.

The event comes as TV broadcasters are looking at a next-generation TV standard (ATSC 3.0) that will enable stations to broadcast in 4K and offer IP services. FCC regulations and trends in cable cord-cutting will be hot topics, as well as the just-started “incentive auction” of radio spectrum owned by local broadcasters. Live content is still king as broadcasters eye online-streaming agreements.

UnitedHealth First Among Insurers

Top U.S. health insurer UnitedHealth (UNH), which has had scant participation in ObamaCare, says it’s not expecting to make any announcement regarding the health program when it reports Q1 earnings before the open on Tuesday.

Analysts see UnitedHealth reporting $1.72 in earnings per share, an 11% increase. Revenue is expected to reach $43.96 billion. UnitedHealth has reported slight upside surprises for the last two quarters.

Spokesman Tyler Mason confirms that it is pulling out of exchange markets in Georgia and Arkansas in 2017, adding that ObamaCare accounts for “less than 1%” of UnitedHealth’s business. Late Friday, Michigan regulators said UnitedHealth would exit that state as well.

Airlines Profits Ready For Liftoff

Delta’s stock surged on Thursday after the carrier reported Q1 results and forecast $3 billion in 2016 fuel savings, benefiting from low oil prices that could lift many airlines to record profits this year. However, questions loom over whether the good times for the bottom line might be fleeting.

Wall Street will likely be on the lookout for such signals from the slew of airlines reporting results. United Airlines (UAL) reports quarterly results on Wednesday, while Southwest (LUV), Alaska Air Group (ALK) and Hawaiian Holdings (HA) report on Thursday. American Airlines (AAL) reports on Friday.

Is Housing Building Momentum?

A stack of economic data and earnings reports will show whether housing activity is picking up steam. On Monday, NAHB releases its housing market index of homebuilder sentiment. On Tuesday, the Commerce Department releases March figures for housing starts and building permits. On Wednesday, March existing-home sales data are due from the National Association of Realtors. On Thursday, homebuilders D.R. Horton (DHI) and Pulte Group (PHM) report quarterly earnings, with investors interested in orders and any other clues to future activity. Paint-seller Sherwin-Williams (SHW) also reports Thursday.

Sherwin-Williams stock hit a record high in the latest week. D.R. Horton is within 5% of a 10-year high set on Dec. 1. Pulte Group is well off highs, but is trying to move back above its 200-day line for the first time since Sept. 17.