Technology connects students to data, resources and tons of information to help them with their studies. But having technology available isn’t enough for students without Wi-Fi access at home.

On Tuesday Facebook announced a pilot program to help students get free W-Fi at home to aid in their school work. The social network is partnering with PANGAEA Internet, Rutherford County and the Town of Forest City, North Carolina to offer Wi-Fi to 75-100 students’ houses.

The pilot program follows a 2011 initiative where the county wanted to help provide laptops to all middle and high school students. Unfortunately, many of the students didn’t have Wi-Fi access at home.

Dr. Janet Mason, Rutherford County Schools’ superintendent, gave a statement about the importance of giving students “equal access to digital information.”

“When you can utilize technology to enhance educational opportunities for our county’s young people, everybody wins,” she said.

Forest City was chosen for this Facebook program because it is home to one of the company’s data centers.

Facebook’s site data center manager, Keven McCammon, posted that the program is still in the process of being developed. It hasn’t been said whether or not the program will eventually expand to other cities.

This program could definitely fulfill a need that many Americans, especially lower income families, are facing.

A 2013 research project by Pew Research Center showed that 15% of Americans did not have a broadband connection at home. About one-third of people making less than $20,000 a year were not online at all.

Thirty-five percent of low-income families ended up relying on the library to use the internet. For young students who can’t drive, getting to the library to work on assignments can be difficult if their parents are unable to take them.

Another Pew Research article giving expert opinions on today’s technology needs echoed the need for Wi-Fi access for everyone available at a low cost across the country.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments