On April 24, the oldest person in the world gave credit to God for her record-breaking lifespan.

Jeralean Tailey, who will be 116 in May, said, “Every day is a gift from above. There is nothing we can do without God. He made us, and He knew when He wanted to take us.” She added, “If you want to do it right, follow Him. I don’t care what you do for me, if it weren’t for the good Lord, you wouldn’t do it.”

Tailey was born in 1899 and was featured at the Senior Alliance 35 annual luncheon. At the event she was given a standing ovation and introduced by the organization’s chairman, Frank Valso. Valso said, “I want to highlight one of our success stories. We have the oldest person in the world here. Not just Michigan, not just the United States, but in the world.”

“Talley, born May 23, 1899, was verified earlier this month as the world’s oldest person by the Gerontology Research Group, a California-based organization that keeps track of the longest-living people in the world. The previous record-holder, Arkansas resident Gertrude Weaver, died April 6 at 116 years old, according to the group,” the report indicates.

Additionally, U.S. Rep. Debbie Dingell was the keynote speaker and told the crowd that our country needs to focus on strengthening long-term care for the sick and elderly. Her husband, former Rep. John Dingell Jr., 88, fell extremely ill in 2014 and taught her a lot about suffering. She said, “I believe God had a plan and I believe God’s plan was for me to experience all that I experienced so that I could be a hands-on advocate. We have to fix long term care in this country. Period.”

She also addressed Obamacare saying, “The Affordable Care Act, no matter what you think of it, did nothing to address longterm care in this country, and not dealing with it isn’t going to make it go away. It’s a problem, and the way we start (fixing it) is by talking about it.”

Unfortunately, Rep. Dingell is correct. In fact, Obamacare is forcing physicians and health care providers to ration health-care. This is why many are leaving the health profession. Some doctor’s are uncomfortable deciding who receives treatment and who doesn’t, while others are arrogantly making God-like decisions.

As LifeNews previously reported, Obamacare is designed to prevent us from using our own money to help our sick and dying loved ones. Prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010, National Right to Life warned that it would limit choices for patients seeking healthcare. They said, “In addition to having access to fewer doctors and hospitals, the best medical centers are going to be excluded from many of the exchange plans. While insurers are moving to make their plans less expensive at the cost of sacrificing access to doctors and specialists, there is the real possibility that plans that choose not to limit access will be forced to do so under the Federal Regulations governing the exchanges.”