Longmont Police Chief Michael Butler hands his business card to Maria Gutierrez during Butler's community walk through the neighborhood of 19th and Collyer in Longmont on Sunday morning Aug. 9 as part of Butler's program to get out and meet the community. Behind Gutierrez is l-r: Leticia Nunez, Gonzalo Guttierez and Ignacio Cairillo. ( Jonathan Castner / For the Times-Call )

Longmont Public Safety Chief Mike Butler has been spending part of his Sunday mornings walking select neighborhoods and asking people how they feel about where they live and their opinion of the police.

"The folks who live in these neighborhoods might be a little more disenfranchised and marginalized," Butler said. "They are trying to make life work as much as they can. We wanted to make a connection."

Dan Benavidez, a community activist and former city councilman, accompanies Butler on the walks to translate if they happen upon members of Longmont's sizeable immigrant community, most of whom speak Spanish.

Their walks began in neighborhoods — which they say are part of a larger idea they call the "Belonging Revolution" — with large immigrant populations, but they want to hit every neighborhood in Longmont sooner or later.

Other elected officials have joined in on the walks.

Benavidez said the walks help officials talk to residents who might not be predisposed to come to city council or other community meetings, and began in predominantly Spanish-speaking neighborhoods.

"What's deeply important to me is when we went in these neighborhoods, we have powerful people like the chief of police," Benavidez said. "They don't' have to go to a meeting. We have powerful people going down and talking to people."

Advertisement

They don't knock on doors but approach people who are outside their homes working on cars or mowing their lawns. They've been going on the walks since July of last year.

In the neighborhood around 19th Avenue and Collyer Street, residents generally said they felt safe, and complaints ranged from noisy neighbors and speeding vehicles to people drinking in nearby Lanyon Park and mean dogs.

Butler said he expected to encounter people who didn't feel safe in their neighborhoods or recounted negative encounters with police, but he has encountered the exact opposite.

"We ask questions along the lines of 'do you feel welcome?'" he said. "It's been pleasantly surprising and refreshing to hear that on some level, I was wrong to sense or believe these folks would feel disenfranchised."

Ivon Waters said he has had one interaction with police when he was pulled over for erratic driving, but didn't have an negative impression of the officers, who told him not to drive for a few hours and "go have a cup of coffee."

He said from what he has witnessed from seeing officers speaking to people, the police seem to be more interested in finding solutions to problems that arresting or intimidating people.

L-R: Longmont Police Chief Michael Butler and Boulder County Commissioner Elise Jones and Dan Benavidez talk to Ivon Waters, in brown shirt, during Butler's community walk through the neighborhood of 19th and Collyer in Longmont on Aug. 9 as part of Butler's program to get out and meet the community. At right is Waters son Jonathan Wates Serrato and his wife Monica Serrato. (Jonathan Castner / For the Times-Call)

Ann Morales lives near Lanyon Park and told Butler that she has relatives who have had past trouble with the law but are now hard workers raising families but feel they still get hassled by police because of their past.

Morales said she has lived in Longmont since the early 1970s and believes the racial atmosphere has improved over the years but "it's still going on" and the police department "still has a way to go."

"To say that stuff is over is not right," she said.

Hector de Angel immigrated from Mexico after serving in the military and working as a federal policeman for several years. He has lived in Longmont for nine years and now trims trees for a living.

De Angel said he does get treated poorly sometimes by American-born Latinos and white people, because he is Mexican, but his wife is American and he has American friends. He "more or less" likes the neighborhood he lives in.

"Longmont is very tranquil," he said through an interpreter. "It's my community."

Jose Luis Ramirez, who immigrated from Mexico and has lived in Longmont since 1998, said he hasn't felt any discrimination, adding that the "hueros (white people) talk and wave" and he likes his neighborhood.

A group of homeless people in Lanyon Park didn't have the highest opinion of police who patrol the area, because they said they are ticketed frequently for being in the park after hours.

"We're not here to cause trouble," Steve Maes said. "We can't afford housing by ourselves, so we stick together, and the cops give us (expletive)."

Maes said that while he resents getting pestered for being in the park after curfew, he understands that the officers have a job to do and he doesn't want to disrespect the profession.

Butler said on Friday that he had spoken with Maes, who has decided to get sober. Maes told the Times-Call that he does like to drink, but he never bothers anyone.

"I spoke to Steve at length and then found him a ride to the (addiction recovery center) vis-a-vis one of our many good-hearted police officers," Butler said. "According to Steve, it was the conversation he had with us that inspired him to get help."

He added that another woman he spoke with who was part of the group at the park had taken herself to ARC earlier in the week.

Butler said he wants everyone in Longmont to feel like they are a part of the community, in part, because he believes everyone can bring something to the table, an idea he refers to as "social capital."

In addition to asking residents about their concerns and opinion of the public safety department, he has also been collecting names and numbers of people willing to become more directly involved in the community.

Butler recently called for greater community involvement in mental health issues at a March press conference shortly after a murder suicide and fetal abduction happened within 24 hours of one another.

Butler said that "belonging" in a community involves two dimensions — that a person feels they belong and the community belongs to them.

"It's a powerful relationship," he said. "If they feel like they belong and if they feel a sense of ownership they are more likely to make an investment."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme