A WOMAN who "died twice" on the operating table says she has been left with a huge scar that "looks like a shark bite".

Mother-of-two Victoria Mann, 33, has had 14 operations but fears she could still lose her leg after suffering bone poisoning.

Today, Miss Mann tells how what she thought was just a sore knee turned into a five-month nightmare after she claims doctors initially failed to recognise the seriousness of her condition.

She was finally able to return to her home off Anlaby Park Road North, where she lives with her partner and two children, yesterday but faces a long and uncertain rehabilitation.

• More news: 'I couldn't remember my kids' names after attack'

Miss Mann said: "When I first went with a sore knee they said it was probably a blood clot and sent me home. But I was in agony so I went back and they said it was a muscle-wasting disease. They then told me it was the tendons or ligaments and sent me for physio."

She says doctors at the Hull Royal Infirmary emergency department had failed to spot a large abscess at the back of her knee. It took a trainee physiotherapist to recognise the seriousness of her condition.

Miss Mann said: "The trainee immediately saw something wasn't right as my leg had ballooned."

She was finally diagnosed with the bone infection osteomyelitis. Now, she says after the months of treatment it looks as if a shark has taken a bite out of her right leg.

She said: "I was immediately taken to the acute assessment unit and given antibiotics. The next day I had a ten-hour operation and I died twice on the operating table. My organs failed.

"I went in early October and didn't go home again until December 18. There is a large chunk taken out of my leg. It does look like a shark bite."

• More news: LOTTO RESULTS: Winning National Lottery numbers for Saturday April 2 2016

Her partner Mike Thompson, 39, admits it has been an anxious time for all the family.

He said: "While Victoria was having the operation we were told to go to hospital as she might not make it through. We took the children from school and we properly feared the worst."

Miss Mann returned for a further three operations at the beginning of February, only returning home yesterday. But it is far from over.

She said: "I had bone taken from my hip to help the femur, which had worn away through all the cleaning. If I stand on my leg now it could shatter.

"Also, if it goes septic again then there is nothing more they can do and they will have to amputate it. It's about 50/50 whether or not I lose it."

Miss Mann and Mr Thompson have two daughters Bailie-Mae, ten, and Millie, eight.

Miss Mann said: "Being away from my kids for so long has been unreal. It has been very hard on them.

"I have missed the little things like doing their hair and reading them a story. I will never fully recover or walk properly again. I won't be able to play with the girls in the park or go swimming.

Miss Mann has made an official complaint to the Hull and East Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust over the initial misdiagnosis.

She said: "If they had diagnosed it early on the antibiotics would have probably cleared the infection. We know the staff at A&E are stretched, but they need to be given time to make the right diagnosis. But the staff at Ward 60 have been amazing. I don't know where I would be without them. They have gone above and beyond for me."

The trust says it is investigating the case. Chief Nurse Mike Wright said: "We can confirm we have received a complaint from Miss Mann in relation to her care.

"We have subsequently investigated the concerns Miss Mann raises, including those in relation to timeliness of diagnosis, and we have responded to her about these directly.

"We are sorry if Miss Mann feels let down by the Trust and would like to apologise for any distress she has experienced."