More Photos Click thumbnails to enlarge Downriver Community Clinic volunteer staff work out of 3333 Biddle Ave., Suite A, which is a Henry Ford Health System property. Photo courtesy of Downriver Community Clinic A doctor working at what was formerly known as the Wyandotte Clinic for the Working Uninsured examines a patient. The clinic recently changed its name to the Downriver Community Clinic and has expanded services to underinsured workers. Photo courtesy of Downriver Community Clinic

Volunteer physicians at the Downriver Community Clinic review a patient’s files. The clinic, formerly known as the Wyandotte Clinic for the Working Uninsured, has expanded services to underinsured workers. Photo courtesy of Downriver Community Clinic

With more and more area residents covered under the Affordable Care Act as penalties climb for those without medical insurance, the Wyandotte Clinic for the Working Uninsured is transforming itself.



The clinic has changed its name to Downriver Community Clinic, but more than simply a name change the clinic also is expanding its services to underinsured workers.



“It was time to update our identity,” said Clinic Administrator Nancy Zack. “Downriver Community Clinic better reflects who we are, where we are and what we do.”



While the clinic has always been in Wyandotte, Zack said using the city’s name in the title occasionally caused confusion.

“We always treated people from all communities, however, some were confused by our name, assuming they had to reside in Wyandotte to be one of our patients.”



In particular, Zack said the name was confusing when those who run the clinic approached sponsors and sought donations because some believed it to be run by the city of Wyandotte. She said it was most confusing for those who had never heard of the clinic.



In Zack’s eyes, the most important part of the name change involves the change in who the clinic serves.



She defines “underinsured” as pertaining to those whose insurance coverage isn’t keeping up with what they can afford to pay for medical care. She said the clinic has a core group of patients who voiced their desire to remain patients, despite enrolling into a basic insurance program because they are still unable to visit a doctor when they need care due to the cost of monthly premiums, high deductibles and co-pays.



“Our new name gives us the opportunity to broaden our reach and provide the continuity of care our existing patients desire,” Zack said.



The Wyandotte Clinic for the Working Uninsured began in 2005 with the purpose of providing preventive and primary care for working adults. Continued...