Have a health-related question? Submit it here and veteran reporter Deb Pressey will chase down an answer.

This week ...

Q: My company offers a family health plan, but it’s gotten so expensive I’m thinking about dropping out of it and going the Obamacare route while I have the chance. Is that allowed and what are the things to consider?

A: Unless your salary is very low, the law doesn’t work in favor of dropping out of an employer plan and signing up for a government marketplace plan.

Here’s what largely keeps people seeking cheaper coverage outside an employer plans stuck: Nothing stops you from enrolling in Obanacare if you want. But under the rules, if you’re offered health coverage at work that covers the required basics and it’s considered affordable, you don’t qualify for a tax subsidy that lowers the premium costs on Obamacare health plans, according to Champaign County Health Care Consumers Organizer Jen Tayabji.

“Affordable” specifically means your share of the premium cost for the health plan that would cover only you (not your family) is less than 9.56 percent of your family income.

The fact that family coverage costs so much more than the individual coverage used in the calculation is how this provision became known as the “family glitch” in the law, Tayabji said.

“It’s one of the biggest things that needs to be fixed,” she added.

The average cost of an entire year’s family premium (employer and employee shares combined) is running $17,545, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation 2015 Employer Health Benefits Survey. That’s more than an entire year’s salary for a minimum wage worker.

That said, here are some possible options to a family health plan that is squeezing your budget:

— You or you and your spouse go back to individual coverage at work and you pick up individual coverage elsewhere for just your kids. Children can be less expensive to cover separately, even without the help of subsidies, and depending on how much your share of the premium costs for single coverage at work, the total cost of individual plans for everybody in the family can add up to less than an expensive family health plan.

— Your children may also qualify for coverage under the Illinois’ All Kids program, Tayabji said. See this link for the guidelines at www.allkids.com/income.html

— If your pay is very low, you may qualify for coverage through Medicaid yourself.

For anyone considering jumping from an employer plan while the government marketplace open enrollment is under way (Nov. 1, 2015-Jan. 31) here are some important things to keep in mind:

Weigh the entire premium cost and whether your employer is currently helping pay for it. If you take on the premium alone in the marketplace without a subsidy, you’ll be footing the entire bill yourself.

Look at what all your costs will be, not just the premium, and what benefits will you stand to gain or lose. For example, does your employer plan include dental coverage? Obamacare plans don’t include dental. You can add dental, “but it will cost you more,” Tayabji said.

Carefully check the provider network of the plan you’re considering. Your doctors or hospital may or may not be in it.