By ANDY METZGER

and GINTAUTAS DUMCIUS

SPRINGFIELD - There are hundreds of defects in the Health Connector's revamped health insurance exchange, Gov. Charlie Baker's health and human services chief said Thursday.

The new health exchange system was developed after its website failed in 2013, as state officials sought to comply with the federal Affordable Care Act . The efforts cost hundreds of millions of dollars.

"There are 400 operational defects to the system, the new system that went into place for open enrollment," Health and Human Services Secretary Marylou Sudders told lawmakers during a budget hearing.

The new system successfully determines whether applicants qualify for MassHealth and allows them to sign up for subsidized or unsubsidized health plans.

"This last go-around was better, but we're really focused on ensuring that we have an improved infrastructure for the next open enrollment, which is in the fall," said Sudders, appointed by Baker to chair the board of the Health Connector, which oversees the health insurance marketplace for coverage.

Sudders said defects are centered on "technology interface" and were caused by "workarounds."

"These are all the backroom functions of the workarounds that the Connector has had to put in place," Sudders said. She said, "The first didn't work. The second worked better, but there's all sorts of workarounds associated with it."

Sudders said she would have an idea of the cost of the upgrades in six weeks.

Some of the health exchange website improvements they're looking to make include allowing customers to add or cancel family member policies.

Louis Gutierrez, executive director of the Connector Authority, said some progress has occurred at the exchange, with the agency's call center seeing caller abandonment and answer rates improving after they hit "stratospheric" rates earlier this year.

"Starting with the call center, we're improving performance there because that was an initial source of a lot of complaint," he told reporters after a meeting of the Connector Authority's board in Boston. "Now we're really turning our focus to all of those back office operations and I think at the end of six weeks we'll have an assessment of what the span of things is, what our general plan of approach is, and those actions that are immediate, medium term and longer term."

Connector officials plan to report to the board at its next meeting.

"Every day there are new issues coming in, every day there are issues being resolved, and we need to work that queue down to really negligible levels and keep pace with that going forward," Gutierrez said.