Sioux Falls, SD

A homeless Sioux Falls sex offender has been arrested in connection with the city's fifth murder of the year.

Police reported Friday that 57-year-old Arthur Brundige has been arrested on murder and manslaughter charges after family members discovered 39-year-old Sabrina White dead in her apartment Monday morning.

Sioux Falls Police say White was discovered dead around 11:30 a.m. Monday morning in her apartment on Western Avenue by concerned family members who hadn't heard from her in a few days. Investigators say the last time White was seen alive was when her friends left her alone around 11 p.m. Saturday night with Brundige.

Bob Graham, the landlord of 523 South Western Avenue, says White moved in less than two months ago. Graham says investigators have had control of the property since Monday.

"I haven't been in there yet. They said they would call me and release the keys to me so I could have it and they haven't called me yet," Graham said.

Police says White's friends brought Brundige over to White's apartment Saturday night. At 11 p.m. Saturday night the friends left - leaving Brundige and White alone.

"It is believed that there were drugs involved in this whole circumstance surrounding their meeting and ultimately her death," Sioux Falls Police Captain Greg VandeKamp said.

Investigators believe Brundige strangled White.

Brundige is a registered sex offender who was convicted of sexual assault in Nebraska in 1989 and criminal sexual conduct in Minnesota in 1982.

Police arrested Brundige late Wednesday night after conducting interviews with him and several people who live in the neighborhood.

"The story that we have developed between the friends, and between the individual that was arrested, we were able to corroborate certain parts of that with the neighbors," VandeKamp said.

And now a neighborhood is left in disbelief following a homicide that quietly happened in their own backyard.

"This area seems to be a pretty clean and quiet neighborhood and I was really surprised we had a homicide in the area," Graham said.

Brundige was on probation after being convicted of failing to register as a sex offender.

He is scheduled to be in court on Monday.