Topics: Alex Ross Perry, Bored to Death, elisabeth moss, jason schwartzman, jonathan ames, Listen Up Philip, Movies, the darjeeling limited, Entertainment News

Jason Schwartzman has carved out a nice little niche playing insecure, anxiety-riddled authors. From the fictional, floundering Jonathan Ames in “Bored to Death” to the heartsick Jack in “The Darjeeling Limited” (which Schwartzman wrote with Wes Anderson and Roman Coppola) to the abrasive titular novelist in “Listen Up Philip,” Schwartzman nails the neuroses of the lonely, isolated world of writers. Philip is a tricky balancing act, as writer/director Alex Ross Perry (“The Color Wheel”) essentially dares the audience to spend time with Philip, a young New York author riding the steam from a successful debut, and essentially dismantling all efforts toward sophomore commercial success. In the process, Philip alienates his girlfriend (Elisabeth Moss) and nearly everyone else with his self-righteousness and egotism. But Schwartzman softens the character’s poisonous humor and self-destructiveness with his typical boyish likability and quiet charisma.

Do you think Philip finds redemption in his journey?

Redemption? That’s a big word and probably not. Alex said to me when we first started doing the movie, “Don’t think of Philip as a writer. Think of him as an asshole.” I was like, “OK” [laughs]. I admired him. My first reading of the script is probably exactly what your first viewing of the movie was like, which is kind of like you can’t believe someone could be that way, and how do you feel about that? I didn’t really like the guy my first time. I was like, “What a dick.”

He was placed in a world that kept me in its gravitational pull, and I couldn’t stop thinking about it. Oddly enough, this idea of redemption is so interesting because that’s something that I feel like in movies, at least I am, wanting or conditioned to see in modern movies one of the main guys learn something. He figured it out, or rides off into the sunset. I came to New York a month before shooting and sat with Alex every day. We talked about all that stuff, and messed around with versions of Philip where maybe there’s a moment that makes him sympathetic or less abrasive. We were open to trying different things, but when we did, they worked against the goal of the movie, and against Philip. Instead of making him more likable, it made him more detestable and he ended up becoming passive-aggressive.

I love playing him because I think it’s much more honorable to be direct. With most people’s feelings, it’s kind of like champagne or wine. You don’t know where you stand with them. You can drink champagne, you’re having a great time and it tastes like alcoholic soda. The next thing you know you’re sick and feel terrible. Vodka is more astringent, you drink less of it but you feel it immediately. That’s like Philip. You know where you are.

I was at the film’s L.A. Q&A screening with Bret Easton Ellis. It seemed like you and Alex bristled a bit when the moderator described Philip as a misanthrope. Has that been a common reaction?

I bristle really at nothing. He is and he isn’t. I think he does have redeeming qualities. Clearly he’s trying, but I think that he’s just in a really bad place in his life. He’s on a bit of a downward spiral and not treating people well. He’s mishandling the success from his first book and is unapologetic about it. I think he’s definitely going to get his comeuppance at some point. He can be a prick and sometimes a bit of a brat, but I didn’t want him to be a brat, and I’m glad he didn’t come off as even more bratty. I think the reason why is because he’s not sugarcoating anything. So misanthrope? I don’t know. He’s a writer! He’s lonely. Part of the story is about solitude and people that are lost in their own heads and worlds. It’s portraits of loneliness. Writing is at the top of that list occupationally. He is a misanthrope in that way, and is a lonely man. It’s not helping with his social skills, for sure. He does seem to do very well with the ladies. The wall in the production office had a picture of me, Jonathan (Pryce) and all the people from the movie. Beside me are eight women, and they’re all beautiful, intelligent, incredible creatures and it was like, “Fuck. What the fuck? How did Philip do that?”

In your personal experience, have you had many interactions with real-life authors?

What I think was fun about the writers I’ve played is they’re sort of different. In the Jonathan Ames character, and I just realized I play a writer in “The Darjeeling Limited” as well, they slide into the writer who is struggling to write and have success. Those guys would be jealous of Philip. His book was published and well-regarded. It was a minor hit, which is really a big hit. In the movie, we don’t really have any scenes of him going, “What am I gonna write about?” I think that’s an interesting choice. Instead of being a writer who can’t find anything to write about, he’s probably going through a notebook a week, full of stuff that’s maybe good or bad. But he’s seriously going at it. I know Jonathan Ames, not only know him, but he’s one of my closest, best friends in the world. The amount of alone time that a writer must endure is clearly different than acting or music. You can say, “I’m in a band but I write all these songs alone,” but at a certain point you’re probably going to go tour. If you’re a writer, sometimes they’ll go tour but it’s pretty lonely. Paul Auster had some line, and I’m paraphrasing, “Every great work of art is the result of someone’s solitude.” Jonathan Ames told me that quote, I think.