Written By Scott Sutton Posted: 05/20/2015, 04:17pm

CNN anchor Jake Tapper’s name pulled a Houdini late Tuesday afternoon, disappearing from the Clinton Foundation’s website without a trace.

As USA Today reports, Tapper’s name was listed on the website until late Tuesday afternoon as a “speaker” for a Clinton Global Initiative event in Denver from June 8-10.

USA Today said that when it asked CNN about why Tapper’s name was on the website, the Clinton Foundation “swiftly removed” it.

Below is a screenshot of the listing.

Per USA Today:

Tapper wouldn’t comment on the record. A CNN spokesperson, who asked not to be named, said Tapper was improperly listed as a speaker on the foundation website; he is scheduled to interview former president Clinton at the event and later moderate a panel discussion. The spokesperson said the network-approved interview will be televised. There will be no restrictions on the questions, and Tapper will not be paid by the foundation. Other details are still being negotiated.

It’s no wonder why Tapper’s name was removed from the website. Just last week, ABC News anchor George Stephanopoulos got in trouble for failing to disclose donations to the Clinton Foundation totaling $75,000. Stephanopoulos used to be a top aide for Bill Clinton when he was in the White House, and many decried the failure to disclose the donations as an ethical breach.

Stephanopoulos has since withdrawn from a moderating position at Republican presidential primary debates. CNN is reportedly scheduled to host three three Republican prsidential primary debates.

Tapper’s past reveals a liberal-leaning bias, with a stint writing at the liberal news site Salon between 2000 and 2003 and also a previous job as a spokesperson for a Democratic congresswoman who would later become Chelsea Clinton’s mother-in-law.

However, Tapper has has been revered for his ability to steer clear of partisan politics, and rarely, if ever, has had an issue of projecting bias.

As USA Today reports, conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt, who is scheduled to moderate one of CNN’s Republican debates, said that Tapper is “the equal of any journalist at work today when it comes to fairness, intellect, integrity and seriousness. I’d be honored to work with him anytime, anywhere.”

Lead image via @tvnewser.