The rules remain simple, if not ironic: Want to run the ball for the Broncos? You had better be able to pass block.

“Coach E (Eric Studesville) makes it clear our job is to keep them off Peyton,” Montee Ball said.

Manning threw the ball 659 times last season. The Broncos’ aerial gumbo of audibles and short routes assaults the senses. It also humbles even the best athletes. Ball’s breakthrough last summer ended abruptly. He landed on the bench when he couldn’t keep Manning upright.

The Broncos believe in Ball, inserting him as the starter after Knowshon Moreno’s defection to the Dolphins. Ball possesses NFL-workhorse qualities, including a sturdy frame and a college résumé that included 924 carries and 77 rushing TDs at Wisconsin.

He can run, but can he hold his own in the octagon behind the line of scrimmage? Perhaps nothing is more important over the next six weeks than his ability to take on a fire-breathing blitzer.

That point was driven home Saturday. As part of the Broncos’ first padded practice, the team held one-on-one drills. A daunting exercise involved running backs squaring off against safeties and linebackers, who were permitted a 4-yard running start. No chipping blocker, no tackle to change their paths. Full throttle into the running back. C.J. Anderson stood up T.J. Ward, drawing praise. Kapri Bibbs won against David Bruton.

Ball chose his opponents: Danny Trevathan and Nate Irving. It didn’t insulate him from failure. By design.

“I wanted to make it is tough as possible,” he said.

Trevathan worked him over. Irving overpowered him. The drill tilted toward defenders, but was a reminder of the reps needed.

“I don’t think I was good. I didn’t do well today, but I am challenging myself,” Ball said. “It’s going to make me better. After practice, I am going to watch the film to see what I need to do to improve.”

Ball weighs 215 pounds, and he added bulk in his upper body since last season. The weight won’t hurt if he becomes a 241-carry back, like Moreno last season, and should will help him as a layer of Manning’s security team.

“You have to get your hands into them and have good balance,” Ball said. “We all know how important it is. If you don’t do it right, Peyton will let you hear it. That’s what we expect.”

Ball takes nothing for granted, regardless of the depth chart. He carried off his equipment Saturday, no rookies around as caddies. He had film to watch. And lessons to learn.

“I am looking forward to the next time we do it,” Ball said. “That’s the great thing about practice.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost .com or twitter.com /troyrenck