April 24--U.S. Rep. Bill Shuster, R-Pa., has brought two major pieces of transportation legislation to the forefront during his current term in Congress.

In December, a five-year, $305 billion transportation funding bill, which was introduced by Shuster, chairman of the House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, became law. It was the first comprehensive funding plan adopted in years, following three dozen previous temporary extensions.

The plan allocates $225 billion from the Highway Trust Fund for highways and $60.9 billion for mass transit through fiscal year 2020, while relying on $70 billion of revenue offsets expected to be realized over 10 years in order to cover the gap between anticipated revenues and expenditures.

"We were able to pass a long-term highway bill," said Shuster, who is looking to hold off a challenge from Bedford County businessman Art Halvorson in Tuesday's 9th district primary. "We fully funded it. It wasn't done with deficit spending. It gives the states and it gives the folks that work in those industries that rebuild our roads a five-year build where they will be able to look out and say we're going to spend money on this project, that project."

Then, in February, he introduced the Aviation Innovation, Reform and Reauthorization Act.

It would, in Shuster's opinion, streamline and modernize the Federal Aviation Administration.

One of its key provisions would create a not-for-profit corporation to oversee air traffic control in the country.

"I think reforming -- transforming is what it really is -- transforming the FAA into an entity that can develop and deploy a modern air traffic control system, based on GPS, is absolutely fundamental," Shuster said. "The Canadians are doing it. The Canadians, this August, will launch their first modules, and then, by the end of December, have all their modules launched and put on satellites. The Canadians will be able to see 100 percent of the global air space. Today, we can only see about a third of it.

"We should be leading the charge on that, and the way to do it is take an agency out of government that doesn't need to be in government and turn it into a not-for-profit corporation that goes out there -- and the stakeholders involved -- to develop and deploy this. It can happen if we do it this way.

"The federal government has been trying for 25 years, and they haven't been able to do it.

"If this isn't a conservative proposal that I'm working on, I don't know what conservatism is because it should be right up our alley as conservatives."

The U.S. House of Representatives recently announced plans to use a short-term extension for funding the FAA, which temporarily put the AIRR Act to the side, although Shuster said he still plans to move forward with the legislation.

----The AIRR Act has been controversial for Shuster.

His girlfriend, Shelley Rubino, is a vice president with Airlines for America, which has lobbied for the new air traffic control guidelines proposed in Shuster's bill. Shuster said a policy has been put in place to assure Rubino does not lobby him or his staff directly.

"I've been very transparent about it," Shuster said. "I get lobbied by all kinds of different groups. I pass railroad bills. I pass highway bills. I deal with all kinds of lobbyists.

"I make sure it's very transparent, it's very open on who lobbies me, how they lobby me.

"I feel very good and comfortable.

"I've been a proponent of this FAA transformation for several years and, of course, very, very strongly for three years because I believe it's the right thing to do for America, it's the right thing to do for an industry that moves people and cargo all over the globe."

----Shuster, in his role as chairman, has been an active supporter of the U.S. Route 219 improvement project that, when completed, will create a new four-lane, limited-access highway between Meyersdale and Somerset.

The work is expected to cost about $300 million.

Shuster, along with other federal state and local officials, is already trying to secure funding for a similar four-lane expansion for Route 219 between Meyersdale and Interstate 68 in Maryland

"I was instrumental in making sure we got the dollars to take 219 from Somerset and eventually get it connected to 68," Shuster said.

----The eight-term congressman has been an outspoken critic of President Barack Obama's policies, including the Affordable Care Act.

"That's something we're working very, very hard with to repeal it, to change it, to correct it," Shuster said. "But, right now, we don't have a willing partner in the White House who we can work with to do those things."

He also feels the president has harmed the local coal industry.

"In Pennsylvania, we have one of the largest reserves of coal in the United States, and we've got someone sitting in the White House who has absolutely had a war on coal," Shuster said. "He doesn't like oil. He really doesn't like gas. He'll temporarily support gas until we get enough windmills and solar panels to generate energy.

"But you know what, that's never going to happen. We'll never have enough wind and solar to be able to produce for this country."

Dave Sutor is a reporter for The Tribune-Democrat. He can be reached at (814) 532-5056. Follow him on Twitter @Dave_Sutor.

Copyright 2016 - The Tribune-Democrat, Johnstown, Pa.