This was to be a Fourth of July column, an essay of gratitude for being among the sliver of humans in history fortunate enough to live where freedom, justice and equality under the law are the rule rather than the exception; where a great many people can be trusted a good deal of the time; and where honest people can generally live their lives in peace.

Then 12 leaders of the Wisconsin Legislature pulled a fast one.

In an act of brazen cynicism, they snuck into the state budget bill policy changes that would blow up Wisconsin's long, proud history of open government and access to public records.

They did it without warning after the last workday before a long holiday weekend — a classic ploy for politicians neither honest nor able enough to achieve their goals through full disclosure and open debate, as our nation's founders intended.

They calculated that we would all be too busy visiting family and friends, enjoying cookouts and fireworks, to be paying any attention. And that's exactly what they will be counting on in the days ahead.

Their party controls every branch of state government: the administration, Senate, Assembly and state Supreme Court. Given all that power by the voters, they have had the ability to reshape our government. They passed Act 10, right to work, tuition freezes, tax cuts, concealed carry, voter ID requirements. They replaced a liberal chief justice with a conservative one. They redrew the lines of legislative districts to virtually ensure they will stay in power for years to come.

Our open records laws neither hindered nor threatened them.

But that wasn't enough. It never is.

I can't overstate how important it is that we stop this assault on open government in its tracks. Even if you trust one party to do the right thing at all times, when no one is watching, remember that if these changes are approved, the other party also will be able to operate in secret, wherever and whenever they are in control. You will know less about what the County Board is up to, the Common Council, the secret deliberations of your village board and local school board.

Thanks to public records requests we could report on hundreds of thousands of taxpayer dollars being offered to a conservative propaganda and fundraising outfit masquerading as a sportsmen's group. (You stopped it cold.) We could tell you Gogebic Mining Co. poured money into Republican campaigns, and then helped rewrite state mining regulations.

We could tell you state tribes gave mightily to Democrats and then received generous gaming contracts. We could connect the dots on massive, unregulated fraud in state subsidized childcare during the last administration. That fraud didn't stop until you lit up the phones in Madison, and reforms you demanded continue to save taxpayers tens of millions of dollars every year.

Please ask yourself: Why would legislators no longer want the public to see their communications while writing new laws and regulations? Why would they want to exempt from public view a host of records created by the governor's administration, state agencies and local governments and put new limits on public access to information about dismissed criminal charges? Why would they want to give themselves a broad special legal privilege that would allow them to refrain from releasing records when they are sued, and bar current and former staff from disclosing information?

Why would they want a level of legal privilege and operational secrecy beyond what any other state in America allows?

Whose interests are they seeking to serve? Yours?

These are the Republican leaders who voted Thursday to keep you in the dark about the public's business: Sen. Alberta Darling of River Hills; Rep. John Nygren of Marinette, Sen. Leah Vukmir of Wauwatosa; Rep. Dale Kooyenga of Brookfield; Sen. Sheila Harsdorf of River Falls; Sen. Howard Marklein of Spring Green; Sen. Luther Olsen of Ripon; Sen. Tom Tiffany of Hazelhurst; Rep. Mary Czaja of Irma; Rep. Dean Knudson of Hudson; Rep. Amy Loudenbeck of Clinton; and Rep. Michael Schraa of Oshkosh.

Fortunately, there are only 12 of them. It takes many more lawmakers to pass a bill that the governor must then sign into law.

Please call on your lawmakers to remove all changes to state open records law from the budget bill. If they want to change the records law, they should do it in an honorable way with a separate proposal that includes public notice and hearings.

Please call on Gov. Walker to veto any changes to the state open records law that remain in the budget when it arrives at his desk.

Please lend your moral support to those lawmakers and officials who publicly oppose these changes, on both sides of the aisle.

Our nation's founders built checks and balances into our system of government for a reason. This is one of those times to use every lever they gave us.

I began writing this column on the blessings brought to us by Independence Day, and had collected some quotes to go with it. They seem even more appropriate now:

"The liberties of people never were nor ever will be secure when the transactions of their rulers may be concealed from them." —Patrick Henry

"Educate and inform the whole mass of the people... They are the only sure reliance for the preservation of our liberty." — Thomas Jefferson

"The greatness of America lies not in being more enlightened than any other nation, but rather in her ability to repair her faults." —Alexis de Tocqueville

"Only a free and unrestrained press can effectively expose deception in government." —Hugo Black

"The only security of all is in a free press. The force of public opinion cannot be resisted when permitted freely to be expressed. The agitation it produces must be submitted to. It is necessary, to keep the waters pure." — Thomas Jefferson

"A popular government without popular information, or the means of acquiring it, is but a prologue to a farce or a tragedy, or perhaps both. Knowledge will forever govern ignorance: And a people who mean to be their own governors must arm themselves with the power which knowledge gives." — James Madison

"Let us raise a standard to which the wise and honest can repair; the rest is in the hands of God." —George Washington

George Stanley is the editor of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. He can be reached via email atgstanley@journalsentinel.comand followed on Twitter @geostanley