CHICAGO — When his name was announced as a call-up Friday, the majority of Avalanche fans probably dashed to the Internet for their introduction to Karl Stollery.

Here’s a thumbnail sketch: 5-foot-11 and 180 pounds, from Camrose, Alberta, undrafted by NHL teams, attended Merrimack (Mass.) College, has spent the past three seasons playing for the Lake Erie Monsters. Now his bio can include that defenseman Stollery played his first NHL game Saturday for the Avalanche at age 26.

And according to Avs coach Patrick Roy, Stollery played pretty well.

“For his first NHL game, I thought he did a lot of good things,” Roy said. “He kept his game very simple. I was happy to see him play. He was great in training camp, and I was just happy to see him play his first NHL game.”

Stollery had a plus-1 rating in his debut, playing 17 shifts and 10:55 overall. He was called for a hooking minor on the Minnesota Wild’s Dany Heatley in the second period, but it was a dubious call. Replays showed Heatley grabbing the stick and pulling it to his body.

Chances are Stollery will quickly be back in the minors or on the bench with the Avalanche, because Nick Holden, Nate Guenin and Tyson Barrie all could be back soon. But you never know with Roy, who favors playing guys as long as the team is winning. He has a soft spot for longshots such as Stollery.

“Definitely some butterflies there,” Stollery, a left-handed shooter, said of making his NHL debut. “But once the game got going, it just felt like another hockey game. It was pretty short notice, so I don’t think I’ve had time to let it hit me yet.”

Stollery was in Rockford, Ill., where the Monsters had just played, when coach Dean Chynoweth told him to get on a plane to Minnesota because he had been called up by the Avalanche.

“It was out of the blue. I didn’t follow the Colorado game (Friday), obviously, so I didn’t know anything had gone on,” Stollery said. “I was just excited. It’s definitely taken longer for me, going the college route and then in the minors. But I’ve always felt that I can make it, and just to get this first game is an incredible feeling.”

Stastny update. The Avalanche had Sunday off and will practice Monday in Chicago, where an update on Paul Stastny will be announced. Stastny didn’t play in the third period Saturday because of a leg injury. Roy said after the game he didn’t think the injury was serious and that Stastny would play Tuesday against the Blackhawks.

Adrian Dater: adater@denverpost.com or twitter.com/adater