The Un-likeables

Voters often talk about casting their ballot for the "lesser of two evils" in a presidential election. This year, that seems especially true. As we near the general election, polling suggests both leading candidates will be -- by far -- the least popular party nominees in decades. What does that mean for the rest of the race?

Trump's billions

Everybody knows presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump is an extremely wealthy man, but does he have a history of inflating his own prosperity for public consumption? Is his current heel-dragging over the release of tax returns an effort to hide lower figures?

"First Friend"

Rarely does one person in the White House have the influence that Valerie Jarrett has had. Her title is senior advisor, but she's more than that; the president calls her his best friend. She tells "60 Minutes" she's involved in nearly every decision that is made -- and that has caused some friction.

Ill-gotten gains

Insider trading is one of the hardest crimes to detect; it happens in whispers and phone calls, behind closed doors. But "60 Minutes" was given a rare look at how it actually works, through the experiences of one woman, a former stock analyst named Roomy Khan, who made a fortune in illegal profits.

Cryptic clues

As Egypt sends a sub to probe the Mediterranean for EgyptAir Flight 804's vital black boxes, clues from flight data offer some insight into the doomed plane's final moments -- but the picture being painted is far from complete, and the search continues apace.

Discrimination suits

A female former Autozone worker won $186 in damages over mistreatment based on gender in 2014, and that was just the tip of the iceberg. The number of employees suing for discrimination related to pregnancy or family care is soaring, highlighting a growing cultural challenge -- and legal risk for companies.

More top news:

U.S.

New blow to homeowners hit by massive L.A. gas leak

Suspect in killing of Mass. cop killed in shootout

Fla. police officer fatally shoots car burglar

World

Bombs, rockets tear through Syrian regime strongholds

Obama reverses 5-decade arms policy on Vietnam

2 climbers die, 2 still missing on Mt. Everest

Politics

Mark Cuban: I'd be Trump's running mate.. Or Clinton's

Trump changes his tune on allowing guns in classrooms

Sanders: Clinton should "keep her word" on debates

Party balloons trigger brief White House lockdown

Business

Saved enough for retirement? Not many have

Why Obamacare's "Cadillac tax" is so contentious

Top 10 cities for singles looking for love and real estate

Health

Experimental procedure to mend spinal cord shows promise

Science and tech

World's most endangered sea mammal has a PR problem

Entertainment

Madonna pays homage to Prince at Billboard Music Awards