Buy Photo Charles Michael Allen of Chattanooga broken his pelvis six months ago, and his hip needs to be replaced again. The Army veteran and former postal worker doesn’t have insurance. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

It only hurts when his deteriorated fake hip pops in and out.

But that's nothing. Charles Michael Allen, 57, of Chattanooga, has been through far worse.

About 21 years ago, Allen, then a U.S. Postal Office worker, hydroplaned in a mail truck that flew into the air and slammed into a tree in a ditch. The impact snapped two bones in his leg and crushed his pelvis.

Surgeons fixed his leg and his pelvis, and they gave him a new hip.

But those parts have worn away. Six months ago, sitting having coffee with his wife, Allen suddenly felt incredible pain.

Doctors in the emergency room told him he'd broken his pelvis again. Oh, and the hip parts had worn away so his hip needed to be replaced again.

But Allen could do none of it. He had no insurance from his job at Popeyes chicken. He didn't have coverage from the Affordable Care Act because he couldn't afford that and he couldn't understand how to apply for coverage for the indigent.

He had no insurance from the military because his two years as an Army cook weren't enough to qualify him for the coverage offered to veterans.

And Gov. Bill Haslam's proposal to cover Tennessee's poor through his Insure Tennessee program? That got shot down in the legislature.

"I feel kicked to the curb," Allen said.

A lifelong Christian with 13 years in ministry, Allen said he mostly lives in hope and happiness. There is a group in Chattanooga, Project Access, trying to help him. Allen says Vanderbilt University Medical Center is reviewing his case.

Allen's adult children help pay a bill here and there, and his wife, Dorothy, who has her own medical problems, keeps a bright outlook.

But Allen has dark moments.

"Once a month, I'll go through it for two to three days. I'll just be quiet and not respond to her," he said.

Buy Photo A lifelong Christian with 13 years in ministry, Charles Michael Allen said he mostly lives in hope and happiness. His wife, Dorothy, also has her own medical problems. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)

Most of the physical pain is gone; the broken pelvis has healed, albeit in a way that leaves him "even more lopsided," he said.

Allen uses crutches often, trying to keep as much pressure off his weak pelvis and hip as he can.

Allen also had his cable TV removed. He turns off his heat, air conditioner, lights and water whenever he can so he can keep as much financial pressure off himself as he can.

And he waits. Waits to hear from Vanderbilt, waits to hear from charity organizations, waits to hear from the state legislature.

"I've seen people go through things and come out OK. Things could be worse and things can get better," he said.

"I also have a human side every once in a while that gets downtrodden."

INSURE TENNESSEE

In Tennessee, there are an estimated 29,000 uninsured veterans like Charles Michael Allen who would have benefited from Gov. Bill Haslam's Insure Tennessee proposal. Insure Tennessee would use federal funding to expand health coverage to nearly 300,000 Tennesseans. Many veterans aren't eligible for care through the Veterans Health Administration.

Contact information for Tennessee's legislative leadership and those who did not vote to pass Insure Tennessee when the proposal was revived last month:

Leadership

Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey; 615-741-4524; Lt.gov.ron.ramsey@ capitol.tn.gov

615-741-4524; Lt.gov.ron.ramsey@ capitol.tn.gov House Speaker Beth Harwell; 615-741-0709; Speaker.beth.harwell@ capitol.tn.gov

Senate Commerce and Labor Committee members

(No votes or abstentions on Insure Tennessee)

Charles Michael Allen of Chattanooga broken his pelvis six months ago, and his hip needs to be replaced again. The Army veteran and former postal worker doesn’t have insurance. (Photo: Submitted)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1yoLgiV