Buy Photo Matt Bevin (Photo: The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

FRANKFORT, Ky. – Gov.-elect Matt Bevin announced Sunday that William M. Landrum III will serve as secretary of the Finance and Administration Cabinet in his administration.

Landrum, of Greensburg, is a retired U.S. Army colonel who "has more than 36 years of military service and corporate experience in the areas of resource management and financial operations for sensitive Army Military Intelligence and clandestine programs across the Department of Defense," said a news release announcing the appointment.

The news release said Landrum "possesses a full range of supervisory, managerial and policy-making experience along with a broad knowledge of Department of Defense, Department of the Army, and installation level policies, procedures, programs and systems pertaining to finance and accounting activities..."

The news release lists numerous commendations Landrum won during his military career.

After his military service, Landrum worked as a senior associate for Booz Allen Hamilton Resource Management Consulting Support Team.

He is a graduate of the Virginia Military Institute and received a master's degree in business administration from the University of Kentucky. He and his wife, Justine, own and manage a restaurant in Greensburg. They have two grown children.

"The Finance and Administration Cabinet secretary is one of the most critical roles in state government," Bevin said in the news release. "Col. Landrum is exceptionally qualified for this role. He has decades of direct experience in government finance."

And for the second time in a week, Bevin used a news release announcing an appointment to say he is inheriting financial problems from the outgoing administration of Steve Beshear. Bevin said that Landrum "will serve the Commonwealth well as we work to repair the damage done do Kentucky's financial foundation by recent years of neglect."

Beshear last week rejected Bevin's criticism, saying state government is in better financial shape than when he took office eight years ago.

The Bevin transition office has not yet said how much any of his new appointees will be paid.

Reporter Tom Loftus can be reached at (502) 875-5136 or tloftus@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1QphAYE