Charlie Sheen 'given permission to spend Christmas with his twins by temporary guardian Scott Mueller'

He recently took to Twitter to vent his frustration at not getting to spend the holidays with his daughters Lola and Sam.

But Charlie Sheen will allegedly still get to play dad on Christmas.



The 48-year-old has reportedly been granted permission to celebrate with his twin boys Bob and Max by their temporary guardian Scott Mueller, who is their mother's brother.

Daddy duties: Charlie Sheen has reportedly been granted permission to spend Christmas with his twin boys Bob and Max, pictured with their mother and his ex-wife Brooke Mueller



Mature: The twins' temporary guardian Scott, who is Brooke's brother, allegedly didn't want the boys to be punished for their parents' behaviour



Apparently Scott didn't want the four-year-old boys to be 'punished' for their parents' troubles, so he made an arrangement with Sheen, reports TMZ.



Sheen is allegedly thrilled to be spending the holidays with his sons after he was not invited to spend Christmas by ex-wife Denise Richards to spend Christmas with her and the couple's daughters.

He took Twitter to express his anger last week, accusing the actress of treating him 'like a relative with a one-way ticket', accompanied by a picture showing a chopped up baseball bat that they had received as a wedding gift in 2002.



'I'm done being treated like a relative with a one-way ticket': Charlie Sheen lashed out at ex-wife Denise Richards on Sunday, chopping up a baseball bat wedding gift after being uninvited to spend Christmas with her and their daughters

Denise is said to be heading away with nine-year-old Sam and Lola, eight - her daughters with Charlie - as well as adopted two-year-old Eloise, though it is not known where exactly they're vacationing.

TMZ reports that the 42-year-old mother-of-three is 'confused' about her ex's outburst because he's still very much welcome on the holiday as far as she's concerned.

However, she may be rethinking that stance following this latest incident.



Jet plane: Denise is said to be heading away with nine-year-old Sam and Lola, eight - her daughters with Charlie - as well as adopted two-year-old Eloise, though it is not known where exactly they're vacationing

Troubled Brooke's brother Scott had been granted temporary guardianship of the boys after Denise was forced to give them up following alleged violent outbursts against her own daughters and their pets.

However, while the children might have found a happy home to go to this Christmas Brook Mueller is less than impressed with her treatment.



A source told RadarOnline.com that the star believes the authorities are 'out to get her'.

They said: A source revealed: 'Brooke is beyond furious with DCFS and thinks they are working against her to get custody back of the boys.

'She truly believes the authorities are out to get her and to make an example out of her. The harsh treatment she is getting is because Brooke believes she is a celebrity and was married to Charlie Sheen, who as everyone knows, has been extremely critical of DCFS.'

Drug demons: Brooke was all smiles with her boys in 2011 but she has since relapsed into her past addictions

'Charlie can’t get custody of the boys, even if he were to have round-the-clock nannies because of his past behavior,' explained the insider.

'Brooke’s parents won’t be considered. It’s such a sad situation, but the safety and well-being of the boys comes first. Such drastic action wouldn’t be taken unless it was necessary, and sadly, it is.'

Starship Troopers star Richards was forced to give up the twins because of their alleged violent behaviour towards her daughters, Sam, Lola, and Eloise, and in a distressing letter to child protective services, she explained the harrowing situation.

According to Denise, her 'daughters have been strangled, kicked in the head and stomach, scratched, bit, slapped, punched in the face and head, and spit on' by the boys, as have the family dogs, reported Radar.