He’s already taken the Penguin Plunge. Now it appears Scott Brown is ready to ride the 2014 wave.

The Associated Press reports the former Republican senator from Massachusetts is expected to announce as early as Friday that he will form an exploratory committee to challenge New Hampshire Democratic Sen. Jeanne Shaheen.

Brown’s stunning victory in the January 2010 Massachusetts special election to replace the late Sen. Edward Kennedy foreshadowed troubles to come for congressional Democrats in that year’s midterm elections, driven in large part by the backlash to President Barack Obama’s health care overhaul. With his potential Granite State run this year, Brown would once again be looking to capitalize on voter discontent with the plan.

The Affordable Care Act took center stage in this week’s special election in Florida, where the winner, Republican David Jolly, hammered Democrat Alex Sink for her support of the law. Jolly’s victory bolstered the GOP’s strategy to focus on the health care law and has raised hopes about the party’s chances of expanding their majority in the House and taking back control of the Senate from Democrats.

Senate Democrats must defend seven seats in states that the president lost in the 2012 campaign, with six of those defeats coming by double-digit margins. New Hampshire is not on that list, as the president bested Romney there by nearly six percentage points. But if Republicans were able to put the Granite State in play it would signal a surge in the party’s direction.

Recent polling gives Shaheen an early advantage, with a Suffolk University survey showing her up 13 points on Brown, 52 percent to 39 percent. That comes even as the poll has the president’s approval rating at 40 percent, and 52 percent of New Hampshire voters saying they believed the health care law was “generally bad” for the state.

Brown also faces the challenge of running against an established New Hampshire political brand while he just recently relocated to the state from neighboring Massachusetts. In the Suffolk poll 11 percent of respondents offered the term “carpetbagger” when asked for the first word or phrase they associated with Brown’s name.

Brown is scheduled to address the Northeast Republican Leadership Conference in Nashua on Friday afternoon, the latest move in his courtship of New Hampshire conservatives.

The Associated Press’ Steve Peoples details Brown’s recent outreach to Granite State Republicans:

Brown spent much of the past two weeks calling key New Hampshire Republican officials and influential GOP activists, saying he was going to run and seeking their support. At the same time, Brown’s camp has quietly begun offering paid positions to Republican operatives for a prospective New Hampshire campaign. Several people involved in the discussions said some in the GOP establishment remain skeptical given the former Republican senator’s recent track record. The 54-year-old Brown angered Massachusetts Republicans last year after indicating he would run in the state’s special U.S. Senate election, only to change his mind late in the process.

The New Hampshire Union Leader’s John DiStaso, meanwhile, notes that Brown has doled out $29,000 to various GOP committees in advance of his appearance Friday:

We’ve learned Brown has issued contributions from his The People’s Seat PAC of $5,000 to the state party, $5,000 to the state Senate Republican PAC, $5,000 to the House Republican PAC, $1,000 to each of the 10 county committees and $1,000 each to the Manchester, Nashua and Concord Republican committees. This is in addition to $15,000 Brown donated to the NHGOP in 2013 and 2014.

For Republicans, Brown’s possible entry into the New Hampshire Senate contest would give the party a high-profile candidate in a state that currently favors Democrats. Whether his candidacy would genuinely expand the map for Republicans is an open question, but at the very least it might force Democrats to move additional resources into the Granite State to help protect Shaheen; money that could be used to help red state Democrats in Arkansas, Louisiana and Alaska.

A note to our readers: The Morning Line will take a brief hiatus next week and return Tuesday, March 25. We’ll be joined then by the new head of the NewsHour’s politics team, Domenico Montanaro.

LINE ITEMS

NEWSHOUR ROUNDUP

Elizabeth Summers explores the complexities of the U.S. immigration system through her in-depth profile of Baltimore’s Fofana family.

Hari Sreenivasan spoke with Jared Bernstein of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities and Dan Bosch of the National Federation of Independent Businesses about Mr. Obama’s directive to expand overtime eligibility.

65539 65506 65506 Crunching the costs and benefits of overtime pay reform President Obama has directed the Labor Department to update overtime pay rules for an estimated 5 million workers, but some business owners and Republicans are worried about economic effects for employers. Hari Sreenivasan gets debate on the overtime bump from Jared Bernstein of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities and Dan Bosch of the National Federation of Independent Business. disabled 2365199355 qX1OPnNuPZQ

In the wake of Republican David Jolly’s narrow victory over Democrat Alex Sink in the special election in Florida’s 13th Congressional District, Judy Woodruff spoke with Stuart Rothenberg of the Rothenberg Political Report and Susan MacManus of the University of South Florida about the implications for this fall’s midterms.

65425 65407 65407 Can the GOP turn a Florida victory into midterm momentum? In a closely watched special election, Florida’s right-leaning 13th congressional district voted in Republican David Jolly by a narrow margin over the Democratic candidate. Judy Woodruff asks Stuart Rothenberg of the Rothenberg Political Report and Susan MacManus from the University of South Florida about how the results could sway the forecast for upcoming midterm elections in November. disabled 2365198592 FtDrR3qDFKk

On Making Sen$e, George Cabot Lodge argues that deescalating tensions over Ukraine requires convincing Russian President Vladimir Putin of the former imperial power’s dependency on the world economy.

Keep an eye on the Rundown blog for breaking news throughout the day, our home page for show segments, and follow @NewsHour for the latest.

TOP TWEETS

Colin Powell has a message about selfies and an epic #TBT http://t.co/Xd5KHQ80Cj via @Slate pic.twitter.com/bO3XUrkyQW — Foreign Policy (@ForeignPolicy) March 13, 2014

Forget about @galifianakisz's interview w/Obama. Better story: His uncle Nick needed 2 buttons when he ran in NC. pic.twitter.com/ndfhRfRzSd — Ken Rudin (@kenrudin) March 13, 2014

Scenes from the Capitol: Dave Camp welcoming Dean Heller on a visit to "the other body," seemingly oblivious of Meryl Streep around corner — Jonathan Martin (@jmartNYT) March 12, 2014

Pot brownies: deadly RT @TheFix More people in NBC-WSJ poll think sugar is more dangerous than pot. http://t.co/ZfzLGYP2aB — Daniel Newhauser (@dnewhauser) March 12, 2014

We're at a point in the US Senate where members are using half an hr of floor time congratulating themselves for inviting amendments. — Todd Zwillich (@toddzwillich) March 12, 2014

Pingpong in the NYT Wash bureau!! So far I'm undefeated, but I worry people are letting me win. pic.twitter.com/nPFcHx38tw @davidjoachim — carolynryan (@carolynryan) March 12, 2014

Ruth Tam contributed to this report.

For more political coverage, visit our politics page.

Sign up here to receive the Morning Line in your inbox every morning.

Questions or comments? Email Terence Burlij at tburlij-at-newshour-dot-org.

Follow the politics team on Twitter:

Follow @burlij

Follow @elizsummers

Follow @rachelwellford

Follow @sfpathe