Cherokee Nation Youth Ambassador Ashlee Fox poses next to the Cherokee Nation flag at the Capital Hilton in Washington, D.C., where she is attending the 2014 White House Tribal Nations Conference.



WASHINGTON — Bartlesville High School senior Ashlee Fox spent Wednesday missing her calculus class to meet with Vice President Joe Biden and sit in with tribal chiefs from across the country.



Fox, 17, is in Washington, D.C., this week representing the Cherokee Nation as a youth ambassador for the 6th Annual White House Tribal Nations Conference.



Fox, a Cherokee citizen, was nominated by Cherokee Nation Principal Chief Bill John Baker to serve as one of 36 youth ambassadors at the Dec. 2-3 conference. It is aimed at strengthening the relationship between the U.S. government and 566 federally recognized tribes.



“Ashlee is a wonderful example of a Cherokee citizen who is committed to improving her local community and the larger world. I find that impressive at any age, but especially when I meet and work with a high school student who is so dedicated,” Chief Baker said. “She is concerned with the future of Indian Country, and I know she will continue to be an agent of positive change for Native people.”



The conference is hosted by President Barack Obama’s administration and the National Congress of American Indians.



Fox toured the White House on Tuesday and met with First Lady Michelle Obama’s Chief of Staff. She watched a Memorandum of Understanding agreement between Indian Health Service and N7. Fox also met other cabinet level officials and attended breakout sessions on the Violence Against Women Act, tribal health care, education and the Affordable Care Act.



“This conference is a great opportunity since all Native American youth should have a voice in the decision-making that goes on within the federal government,” Fox said. “I’m greatly honored to have been nominated by Chief Baker for this experience.”



Fox is a member of the Cherokee Nation Tribal Youth Council, a student representative for the Johnson O’Malley Program, a member of American Indian Student Association and attends the Squirrel Ridge ceremonial grounds. She also completed an internship under Cherokee Nation Secretary of State Chuck Hoskin Jr. this past summer. The conference is Fox’s first trip to Washington, D.C.

Cherokee Nation News Release

Julie Hubbard 918-207-3896918-453-5000800-256-0671

© Cherokee Nation - All Rights Reserved