BLOOMFIELD HILLS, Mich. -- It can be hard to get anywhere near likely Republican Senate nominee Terri Lynn Land, even when it comes to protesting her from a distance.

On a recent weekday morning, about two dozen protestors, mostly members of building trades unions, gathered on the sidewalk outside the fenced grounds of the swank Oakland Hills Country Club here.

Inside, Land, who has scheduled few public events since kicking off her bid to succeed retiring Sen. Carl Levin (D), was attending a private fundraising with New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie (R), in town in his role as chairman of the Republican Governors Association.

Outside, the protestors -- holding poster board signs with statements like "We don't know where you stand, Terri Lynn Land" and "Cars not Koch" -- had hoped to circulate across the club's driveway, but a record snowfall in Michigan this season pockmarked the street with deep puddles and potholes, and local police advised the group to avoid the thick barrier of frozen snow and ice blocking the pedestrian path.

But Land is proving hard to reach in other ways, too, particularly for Democrats who had been expected to easily retain the seat Levin has held since 1978.

According to polling data compiled by Real Clear Politics, Land holds a 2.8-point lead over Rep. Gary Peters, the likely Democratic nominee, based on the five most recent public surveys conducted between December and this month.

While Michigan Democratic Party Executive Director Garrett Arwa was among those who showed up to observe Land's fundraiser last week -- he did so from a residential street across a five-lane road from the country club -- he nonetheless dismissed concerns over Land's early lead.

"It's early in the race. Terri Lynn Land was a former statewide elected official, so it's not surprising that people know her. We feel very confident," Arwa said, referring to Land's eight-year tenure in state government that ended in 2010 when she was term-limited out of the secretary of state's office.

Across the street, one of the protestors, Tim Ochalek, an organizer for the International Union of Bricklayers and Allied Craftworkers, explained that he was on hand largely to support Peters.

"I haven't heard much about her campaign, and that's the surprising part. On the other hand, Gary is for people. He understands our plight," Ochalek said, pointing to the state's foundering economy.

Aside from public sparring over a pair of ads sponsored by the conservative Americans for Prosperity in recent weeks -- the ad featured the ex-wife of a local GOP official who stated that her health care costs had increased under Obamacare, then accused Democrats of attempting to silence her after local media reported the ad was inaccurate -- Ochalek suggested the Senate race has yet to garner significant attention in the state.

"This is the start of the season. Yes, this will be settled in November, but we're not going to hold back," he said.

Advertisement

Petroleum coke and the Koch brothers

At the same time, Land has remained low-key about her appearances -- while her campaign's social media accounts boast photos from events last week with the Ottawa County Republicans and Detroit's Most Holy Trinity Church, her campaign does not publicize the occasions beforehand or offer advance notice to reporters -- Peters' campaign has been promoting the three-term lawmaker's "listening tour" across the state.

One of the most recent stops occurred in the state capital of Lansing on Thursday, where Peters' campaign hosted a round-table discussion to promote his record on abortion rights and women's issues, sparked by a recently enacted state law commonly known as "rape insurance," since it requires women to purchase insurance riders to provide for abortion services, even in cases of rape or incest.

While the event was more of a news conference held at a table -- a half-dozen reporters were in attendance as Peters, state Sen. Gretchen Whitmer (D), Ingham County Clerk Barb Byrum and the owners of the small design studio that hosts the event each took turns making statements on the state law -- the House lawmaker got in plenty of digs at his GOP opponent.

"I'm running against a woman named Terri Lynn Land who refuses to take any issues on and hides in a bunker," Peters said. (In a teleconference on health care reform Monday, Land accused Democrats of being "offensive" for referring to the state law as rape insurance, adding: "There's no place for that in a respectful debate.")

During a subsequent question-and-answer session, Peters also made repeated slams about "out-of-state oil billionaires" who are funding the Americans for Prosperity ads that have attacked him, although he called out GOP backers David and Charles Koch by name only once.

It's a theme Peters would carry into an event the next day at the Detroit-based Green Dot Stables, a family-owned restaurant situated just a short distance from the Ambassador Bridge that connects the city to Windsor, Ontario.

"The people of the state of Michigan cannot trust Terry Lynn Land to stand up for middle-class families in this state and take on powerful out-of-state interests like the Koch brothers," Peters said at the event, held to announce the League of Conservation Voters Action Fund's endorsement of the Democratic lawmaker.

In an interview at the restaurant, Peters later told E&E Daily that even if voters do not recognize the Koch brothers or their political nonprofit by name, he believes it is vital to remind Michigan residents that out-of-state interests are attempting "to buy" the election. That's a theme many Democrats will be turning to this election cycle.

"People certainly don't like out-of-state folks who have a lot of money thinking they can come in and tell people in Michigan how to vote," Peters said. "But it's also looking at their agenda. Why would out-of-state oil billionaires spend millions of dollars to support Terri Lynn Land unless they expect something from it?"

He added: "Voters will pay attention as to who's behind these ads. To me, it's not the name that's important. The important thing is what do these individuals want, why are they spending so much money, what's their agenda?"

While Michigan is a top target for Republicans who need to flip six seats to gain control of the Senate next year, Peters said he believes the Koch brothers have also targeted his campaign in part because of his efforts to draw attention to petroleum coke in the state.

The substance, a byproduct of refining oil, gained attention from Detroit residents last year when enormous piles of the material built up along the frozen Detroit River.

In an amateur YouTube video Peters often uses to illustrate the problem, a cloud of petroleum coke -- at the time visible from the windows of the Green Dot Stables restaurant -- can be seen obscuring the Ambassador Bridge from the Canadian shore as wind makes the material airborne.

Peters and Rep. Mike Quigley (D-Ill.) earlier this month urged U.S. EPA to study the health and environmental impacts of storing and transporting the material (Greenwire, March 3). After Detroit-area residents pushed back against the storage of the material along the Detroit River, a company is looking for a new storage site.

"The Koch brothers know I have certainly fought to protect air, water and natural resources in this country," Peters said. "I'm sure that had something to do with why they are engaged as heavily as they are."

But most of the attention in the Senate race to date has focused on impacts from the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare -- thanks in large part to AFP's advertisements.

LCV Action Fund President Gene Karpinski, who appeared in Detroit to endorse Peters last week, concedes that his organization and others like it are unlikely to outspend AFP in the Senate race but said that won't preclude attention to Land's skepticism on climate change or Peters' environmental work.

"There's no doubt that the health care conversation is very high-profile, and a lot of the outside spending is focusing on it right now," Karpinski said. "We're not going to outspend what the Koch brothers and others, obviously billionaires, are going to spend, putting whatever lies they choose to put on TV. But the important point is the voters know the sharp contrast."

Democrats may also find it hard to pin down Land on a range of issues, given the fact that she held an administrative position as secretary of state and did not have to take controversial votes.

Still, a flood of spending is likely in the contest, including from the candidates themselves. The Center for Responsive Politics, which compiles campaign finance data, showed Peters with nearly $3 million in the bank in December while Land recorded $3.3 million in her war chest at that time. Land, whose family owns a real estate development, construction and management company, has self-funded more than 40 percent of her campaign to date with $1.6 million from her own pocket.

Before the November general election, both Peters and Land must first win August primary contests against relatively unknown candidates.

While Land herself isn't talking much, the National Republican Senatorial Committee responded enthusiastically when asked about her bid and her prospects for flipping the seat, pointing to the Cook Political Report analysis that rates the race as a tossup.

"Make no mistake, Gary Peters is in trouble, and his recent campaign shakeup reflects that," NRSC spokeswoman Brook Hougesen wrote in an email, referring to a change at the helm of Peters' campaign earlier this month when campaign manager Julie Petrick stepped aside for personal reasons and was replaced by Paul Tencher, who guided Sen. Joe Donnelly (D-Ind.) to an upset win in 2012.

Peters contends that the tight race is not particularly surprising, pointing to Republican control of the state's four executive branch offices and both chambers of the state Legislature.

"We always knew this would be a very competitive race from day one," Peters said. "Right now it's still very early, and people are not focused on a Senate race in November."