Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Donnie and Polly Potts of Jeffersontown share their advice for having a successful marriage at the annual celebration of marriage led by Louisville Archbishop Joseph E. Kurtz. Marty Pearl, Special to The C-J

Buy Photo Hundreds of married couples and their families come together Sunday at the Cathedral of the Assumption in downtown Louisville for a special mass celebrating marriages that have lasted at least 30 years. (Photo: Mark Boxley/The Courier-Journal )Buy Photo

One hundred thirty-six Catholic couples celebrated going the distance in marriage, as long as 73 years in one instance, at the annual celebration of marriage led by Louisville Archbishop Joseph E. Kurtz.

"You are witnesses to our faith... " Kurtz told couples married 30 years or more at the 2 p.m. mass at the Cathedral of the Assumption on Fifth Street downtown. "Thank you for the gift of love and the gift of family.

"You've gotten to the point in your lives where the air is rare, and we thank you for that struggle. The church thanks you," he said.

Giving is the secret to long lived marriage, many couples said. The longest-married couple (73 years) is Gertrude and Ed Maxwell of Immaculate Heart of Mary Parish in Louisville.

Asked for their top tips for staying together, Donnie and Polly Potts of Jeffersontown said 59 years of marriage has been accomplished with enduring tenderness to each other.

"Never go to bed mad. Always hold hands and kiss before you go to sleep," said Donnie Potts, 83, a retired United Auto Worker.

The total number of years combined of couples present was 6,646, Kurtz said in his homily.

"Stay madly in love. That is the secret," said 88-year-old retired construction worker John Fultz of his wife Jean, who he met in a Germantown pub in the 1950s.

"Always be truthful. Share your faith. Never go to bed mad," said Jean Fultz about her husband of 65 years.

"If you've ever thrown plates at each other, that is OK as long as you say sorry before you go to bed," Kurtz said. "I believe all of you are on your path to becoming saints.... The three qualities that come through so clearly are that when suffering comes your way, you are willing to join your suffering to Christ. The suffering doesn't make the people bitter.

Kurtz spoke directly to couples, standing in front of the first pew.

Pray for God to help us love others who annoy us, Kurtz said.

"I can only imagine people who God has helped you love through his grace," he said.

Joan of Arc, he added, wrote the third piece of advice.

"We must save ourselves together," said Kurtz, quoting the French saint. "What would God think if we arrived in heaven alone?"

"Pray for your family members," he added.

A sense of humor is crucial, said Bill Belanger with his wife Keltah Belanger of 68 years.

"Stay in good health," Belanger said.

Jere Downs can be reached at (502) 582-4669, JDowns@Courier-Journal.com or Jere Downs on Facebook.

This event honored 136 couples celebrating their 30, 40, 50, and 60+ wedding anniversaries. The anniversary breakdown is:

30 years: 17 couples

40 years: 27 couples

50 years: 53 couples

60 years: 24 couples

61 years: 2 couples

62 years: 2 couples

63 years: 2 couples

64 years: 2 couples

65 years: 5 couples

68 years: 1 couple

73 years: 1 couple

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1NiPzBn