POLITICO Pro Perez: I never threatened to end West Coast ports talks

Labor Secretary Tom Perez said Saturday that in bringing resolution to a tense labor-management dispute at the West Coast ports he never said President Barack Obama might impose a solution unilaterally.

“What I did tell them is they have no time, they have to move forward [and] they’re playing with fire,” Perez said in an interview with POLITICO.

Story Continued Below

Friday night’s tentative agreement ended a costly slowdown in freight traffic that developed over nine months of contentious contract negotiations between dockworkers and shipowners. Roughly half of all container cargo entering the U.S. comes in through the West Coast ports.

In a press call Friday night Perez said he’d told both parties, “We can either resolve it this week here in California or we can travel to Washington, D.C., and go to the White House until we’re done.”

That seemed a not-too-subtle hint that the president might invoke his legal authority under the Taft-Hartley Act to end the standoff, as President George W. Bush did when the West Coast ports reached a similar contract impasse in 2002.

But Perez said he never mentioned the president’s big stick, noting that the 1947 law permitted presidential intervention only in the event of a strike or a lockout. Neither occurred, although the dockworkers accused the shipowners of engaging in partial lockouts, and the shipowners accused the dockworkers of work slowdowns.

Craig Merrilees, a spokesman for the International Longshore and Warehouse Union (ILWU), backed up Perez’s account. “That law was never invoked,” Merrilees said Saturday, “because progress was being made and parties were working hard to resolve their differences.”

“I’m heartened that I’m back in Washington,” Perez told POLITICO, “and they’re not with me.”

A federal mediator dispatched in January brought the ILWU and the Pacific Maritime Association (PMA), which represents the shipowners, close to agreement last week, and helped resolve issues over wages, benefits and pensions. But the negotiations remained hung up on one final issue—how future conflicts under the new contract would be arbitrated.

“In consultation with everyone at the White House, the President gave direction that I should get out there immediately and help take this across the finish line,” Perez said.

Though Perez never met face-to-face with the parties until Tuesday, he said the government had been monitoring the situation closely since late 2014 and receiving daily phone call updates over the past month. During his time in San Francisco, Perez checked in frequently with the president, who urged him to “to communicate the collateral damage to the economy.”

Perez said the White House came into the negotiation neutrally and did not have a specific proposal in mind. However, he said the White House was not neutral over the time line to reach a solution.

The negotiations led to a major overhaul of the arbitration system. Members of the ILWU had reportedly asked for the removal of a particular arbitrator. Prior to the negotiations, arbitrators could serve for life. Under the new agreement, arbitrators can be reviewed and replaced.

Perez described the negotiations as “very professional” and commended the leaders of the PMA and the ILWU. He said the two parties were able to find common ground once they got to the core of what their underlying values were for an effective arbitration system.

“When you get a consensus on the goals, then you can get a consensus on the means to get to the goals,” he said.

— Jason Huffman contributed to this report.

Authors: