COLUMBUS, Ohio -- The state opened registration Monday for people who beginning in January can get health insurance through an expanded Medicaid program.

Registration is through a new website officials hope most people will use to get enrolled.

The website, Benefits.ohio.gov, asks users a series of questions to determine if they are eligible for Medicaid under the new regulations, and helps them enroll if they are. If they are not eligible, it also provides a link to the federal insurance exchange site, Healthcare.gov.

Newly enrolled applicants will eligible for coverage beginning Jan. 1.

The state does not anticipate the kind of trouble the federal government encountered with Healthcare.gov in October, said Sam Rossi, a spokesman for the Ohio Department of Medicaid.

“We've had folks working around the clock to make sure the website is functioning," Rossi said. “We're encouraging people, when they are able to, to go through the website."

The state “flipped the switch,” Rossi said, at 6 a.m. Monday. By 11 a.m. about 450 people had enrolled. By later in the afternoon, about 3:30 p.m., the number had risen to 1,165.

The computer system itself is new, replacing one that was 32 years old, Rossi said. By 2015, the state intends to integrate the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, formerly called food stamps, and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families into the same computer system.

The Medicaid expansion is part of an effort to get health insurance coverage for Ohio’s working poor. New regulations under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act allow states to extend coverage to households where the annual income is 138 percent of the federal poverty line or lower.

The health reform law, commonly called Obamacare, commits the federal government to provide money to pay all or most of the annual costs of Medicaid expansion through 2020. State officials say they expect the expansion will add about 275,000 people to the program.

Gov. John Kasich lobbied hard for the expansion, citing the need for coverage for many of Ohio’s working poor, veterans and the mentally ill. But Kasich’s fellow Republicans in the General Assembly withheld their approval. Ultimately, the state’s controlling board, with four legislators among five members, approved use of the federal aid.

Still unsettled, though, is what the potential impact a lawsuit pending in the Ohio Supreme Court could have on expansion of the program. Six Republican members of the Ohio House, joined by Right to Life groups in Cleveland and Cincinnati, sued to stop use of the money and block expansion. All sides, including several outside parties, have submitted briefs in the case. The Supreme Court is expected to rule quickly.

But while the court challenging is still pending, the state is moving ahead with its plans to sign up people.

Rossi would not comment on the progress of the lawsuit, other than to note that "there was no [temporary restraining order] or anything of the sort that was levied down, so we have been able to move forward accordingly."

Governor’s spokesman Rob Nichols said the administration would not comment on pending litigation.