Photo

CALVERTON, N.Y. — Across decades, the great agricultural belt of eastern Long Island has cycled through all manner of crops, from the postwar cornucopia of potato farms to the crazy-quilt of sun-dappled vineyards that blankets the modern farmland. Now the region is farming sunshine itself.

An ambitious array of more than 50 large-scale solar energy farms is in the works across five East End towns. One of them now rising here in glassy display on a former sod farm is a startling roadside attraction, suggesting that at some future point extraterrestrials will appear to displace the meandering John Deere tractors that currently charm summer tourists. More than 30,000 solar energy panels are being installed on 38 acres of countryside, staring up at the sky in orderly legions at an oblique angle, as if awaiting orders from beyond.

Their earthly mission is the production of 6.3 megawatts of renewable, carbon-free energy, and, not so incidentally, a new revenue flow to bolster the budget of the Town of Riverhead. “Our ship has come in,” Sean Walter, the town supervisor, declared last December as he announced the approval of a larger, 7.5 megawatt development that will bring in another $750,000. Private companies are building the farms with approval of local authorities and selling energy to the region’s power authority, PSEG Long Island.

Beyond some initial sod farm conversions, local officials are promising to restrict the energy farms to lands zoned for industrial purposes, so that the region’s agriculture base can be protected from speculators and the power company’s growing hunger for large-scale solar energy.

The debate over the future of these farms is interesting for its differing shades of green politics, since competing environmental interests are involved. Solar power is indisputably cleaner than power generated by any fossil fuel, yet civic groups are starting to notice and complain about futuristic changes across the bucolic landscape brought by fields of glass.

In Brookhaven, Marc Alessi, a former state assemblyman and member of the state’s Long Island Power Authority, is leading opposition to a 60-acre, 50,000-panel energy farm. “This is the beginning of Big Solar running roughshod over communities,” he told Newsday last September, coining a nifty new twist on Big Coal.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

FRANCIS X. CLINES