When Wisdom Amouzou welcomed students back to the STRIVE Prep middle school in Denver’s Montbello neighborhood this week, he saw in his eighth graders scholars and budding philosophers.

The 22-year-old teacher – a product of Aurora public schools in his second year of a Teach for America stint – leads what is called a “Socratic seminar.” He selects a non-fiction text, provides copies to his students and encourages discussion, urging them to break it down and analyze it.

When I met Amouzou last week, he was hunting around for a text he thought would be relevant to his students, who are predominantly African-American. He was interested in articles on the volatility in Ferguson, Mo., after a white police officer shot to death an unarmed black teenager.

“We want to encourage reading, listening, speaking – advanced scholars discussing rigorous text,” the University of Colorado Boulder grad said.

One challenge is finding different texts for students based on where they’re at academically. Amouzou said his students range from elementary to high-school level in proficiency, and he’ll need to find different material suitable for those at different ends of the spectrum and points in between.

No-nonsense, regimented charter schools such as STRIVE – where students wear uniforms and follow rules about raising their hands – are known for traditional, nuts-and-bolts curriculum. Students stay extra hours to drill deeper into reading, writing and math.

But the Socratic Seminar demonstrates that teaching approaches at the school go beyond that. A more recent addition to the curriculum, the eighth-grade seminar is also an example of how classrooms nationwide are changing as states adopt more rigorous standards and clear expectations for what students should know from kindergarten through high school graduation, and build up critical thinking.

STRIVE CEO Chris Gibbons said the seminar was adopted over the past couple of years as the charter school network approached the transition to Colorado Academic Standards. The state’s standards are aligned with Common Core, the multi-state effort to get students on the same page standard-wise that has become increasingly controversial and polarizing as it moves closer to being fully realized.

Gibbons explained that the shift to the Socratic Seminar and similar techniques seek to build student engagement and answer the Common Core State Standards’ call for “Reading, writing, and speaking grounded in evidence from texts, both literary and informational.”

STRIVE’s curriculum changes are broad, Gibbons said. One new curricula, History Alive, uses hands-on activities, game-like reading challenges and online multiple choice tests with automated scoring.

Here’s a snippet from a middle-school writing assignment on Andrew Jackson, from its publisher TCI:

Students read detailed information about Jackson’s policy of forced removal of American Indians, then complete a “letter to the editor” using persuasive writing to protest the removal of The Cherokees.

Students are asked to use specific evidence from the text regarding the physical and emotional hardships the Cherokee people faced during this time.

Students create written dialogue to reflect the feelings of the common people and upper class regarding Jackson’s journey from the frontier to the White House.

Finally, students create a commemorative plaque and a “wanted” poster to evaluate how well Andrew Jackson promoted democracy. This writing exercise assists students with analyzing and identifying the positive and negative contributions of Jackson to American democracy.

Gibbons said STRIVE schools adopted new internal assessments that align with the new standards and the tests coming this spring developed by a consortium of states known as PARCC (for Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers). That switch – a year ahead of time – is one reason Gibbons believes STRIVE’s state standardized test scores dropped in the last TCAP results.

In case you missed it, here’s a link to our recent story about the STRIVE network’s setbacks in this year’s state standardized tests and how the schools’ leadership is responding.

Eric Gorski covers education for The Denver Post. He can be reached at 303-954-1971 or egorski@denverpost.com