The Bel Air studio of Hollywood director Breck Eisner. The 740-square-foot studio is just a few steps from the front door. ‘It’s a great commute,’ said Mr. Eisner, whose last film was ‘The Crazies.’ Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

Mr. Eisner’s home. His Scenario Land production company studio is down a pathway planted with lavender and thyme. Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

Mr. Eisner’s wife Georgia Eisner sits down with their son, Noah, 6, and daughter, Grace, 4. Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

Grace and Noah play in the kitchen. Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

The master bedroom opens out onto a deck. Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

Grace plays in the children's playroom. Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

The infinity pool overlooks Stone Canyon Reservoir. Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

The second floor of the studio opens on a teak deck. Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

Designed by Michael Palladino of Richard Meier & Partners, the 740-square-foot studio has walls of windows on three sides with a panoramic view of west Los Angeles. ‘For the first six months to a year, I would often find myself in the middle of a meeting, staring out the window,’ said Mr. Eisner, 43. Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

Built during an extensive 2007 remodel of his home, the studio was designed as a multipurpose workspace. Mr. Eisner can hold conferences on the first floor, write in the private office upstairs and host lunches on the teak deck. Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

During postproduction, large monitors and other editing equipment are brought into the studio, and the floor-to-ceiling windows are cloaked by black curtains. Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

Grace, 4, Noah, 6, Rose, 7 months, and Georgia Eisner in the garden outside of the studio. Now that Mr. Eisner is off in Pittsburgh shooting his new movie, ‘The Last Witch Hunter,’ with Vin Diesel and Elijah Wood, his family has found new uses for the studio. ‘The last time I Skyped with my wife, I saw kids’ wrapping paper and toys all over the place,’ said Mr. Eisner. ‘I saw a yoga mat.’ Lisa Corson for The Wall Street Journal …

Anthony Blumka, a fourth-generation art dealer in Medieval and Renaissance works, lives above his New York City art gallery. Claudio Papapietro for The Wall Street Journal …

Tony Blumka, right, is pictured with his wife Lois, son Quintin, 16, and dog Phoenix in the entryway of the Blumka Gallery, and his home. Claudio Papapietro for The Wall Street Journal …

Mr. Blumka’s gallery features some of the statuary, altar pieces and ivories that he sells to museums and private clients. Once, Mr. Blumka threw a birthday party for his son there, complete with basketball nets and a juggler. ‘We were going to repaint the gallery anyway,’ he said. Claudio Papapietro for The Wall Street Journal …

‘Madonna and Child,’ a late 15th-century wood sculpture by Hans Klocker, is pictured. Mr. Blumka has lost sleep some nights, when the state-of-the-art alarm system in his gallery suddenly goes off. ‘I run down in my pajamas to see that everything is OK; thank goodness it’s always been a false alarm,’ he said. Claudio Papapietro for The Wall Street Journal …

The view up the staircase from the Blumka Gallery on the first floor to the family’s private residence. During a three-year gut renovation, Mr. Blumka’s architect, Peter Pennoyer, created a European-style townhouse with baronial interiors and an elegant plaster stucco facade. A balcony just off the home’s oak-paneled foyer overlooks the gallery and its lighted vitrines; the gallery offices are tucked under a double staircase. Claudio Papapietro for The Wall …

During large exhibitions, Mr. Blumka installs additional displays in the mahogany-paneled second-floor library, pictured. Mr. Blumka works at an ornate desk from the French Renaissance, just opposite a 15th-century English linen-fold oak cabinet—stained with the words ‘Coward body maketh muche strife’—which houses 16-year-old Quintin’s Xbox. Claudio Papapietro for The Wall Street Journal …

Smaller pieces are exhibited on Italian baroque pedestals in the second-floor dining room, which is hung with an early 16th-century Flemish wedding tapestry. Claudio Papapietro for The Wall Street Journal …

Chuck Binder, a film producer and personal manager whose clients include Sharon Stone and Jon Lovitz, runs his company from an airy 600-square-foot office with white oak floors, exposed beams and equestrian art on wainscoted walls. He built it, along with the three-car garage below, on the property of his Beverly Hills home, a 1937 four-bedroom Colonial assessed at $2.24 million. Michal Czerwonka for The Wall Street Journal …

Mr. Binder’s wife, Lori O’Brien, a psychoanalyst and avid equestrian, works from her own office, a converted 1937 garage annexed to the main house. To prevent awkward encounters between the couple’s two sets of clients, Mr. Binder’s visitors enter through a separate gate; the couple’s three dogs, however, have made unscripted appearances during therapy sessions. Ms. O’Brien is pictured with Downton. Michal Czerwonka for The Wall Street Journal …