Sanders calls for revolution, change



Only one presidential candidate visited Davis County this year, though two got close. Marco Rubio visited Utah last fall, Sharing his goals for the country at the Salt Lake County fairgrounds. Bernie Sanders, Democratic candidate, shared his vision for the country at West High on Monday. Photo by Louise R. Shaw slideshow

SALT LAKE CITY – Raucous cheers greeted Bernie Sanders on his visit to West High on Monday.

The candidate for president on the Democratic ticket received a boisterous welcome back to Utah at the afternoon event.

Even after a three-plus-hour wait from the time the doors opened, the audience was wild with enthusiasm for his proposals.

A $15 minimum wage, a publicly financed college education, health care for everyone, a tax on Wall Street speculators and more drew cheers from the crowd some estimated at 5,000.

“We are doing something very unusual in contemporary American politics,” Sanders told the crowd. “We are telling the truth.”

“It’s no secret Utah is a conservative state,” he said, and the room filled with “boos.” “But it is a state of decent, caring people, people who do not like people who lie all the time. It is a state with people who do not like candidates who insult other people.”

Issues, he said, should be discussed, analyzed and resolved in order to move the country forward.

“The issues are your lives,” he said.

A “corrupt campaign finance system is undermining American democracy,” he said. “Democracy does not need billionaires buying elections.”

America’s economy is also “rigged,” he said.

He specifically pointed out the Walton family, who he called the wealthiest family in America, while their employees “are on food stamps, Medicaid and subsidized housing.”

“Who pays for that?” he asked. “You do.”

“We need to get the Waltons off welfare and get them to pay you workers a living wage,” he said to cheers.

“We need to create an economy that works for all of us, not just the top 1 percent. If you work 40 to 60 hours a week you should not live in poverty,” said Sanders.

Change, said Sanders, doesn’t come from the top down, but from the bottom up.

He referenced the labor movement, the Civil Rights movement and the women’s suffrage movement as examples and called repeatedly for a revolution.

“Change comes about when people look around them and say, ‘the status quo is not acceptable,’” he said.

Sanders spoke in support of minority groups, starting each segment with the words, “this campaign is listening to …” then listing groups and the challenges they face one by one.

“This campaign is listening to our brothers and sisters in the Latino community,” he said. “They are tired of being exploited, tired of living in the shadows, tired of living in fear. We need comprehensive immigration reform and if Congress doesn’t do the job, I will use the executive powers of the president to do all I can.”

He said his campaign is listening to the African American community: “How can we spend trillions of dollars fighting a war in Iraq we never should have gotten into but somehow we don’t have the money to rebuild the Flint water system?”

They are listening to the Native American community, he said, who were lied to and cheated from the Europeans’ first arrival. “We have a moral responsibility to address the many, many bad things we have done to the first Americans,” he said, then honored them for teaching us respect for the environment and segued to the “devastating harm” of climate change.

Other groups he singled out for support were women, who deserve equal pay for equal work – and should get the support of men for that; and youth, who shouldn’t be saddled with debt for getting the education they need in today’s world, he said.

He spoke against a “broken criminal justice system,” the war on drugs, and the fossil fuel industry. He said the Affordable Care Act doesn’t go far enough and pointed out several areas where the U.S. is behind other countries, such as not offering paid medical leave.

“Not for sale,” read one sign hoisted by a supporter. “Utah Hispanics are with Bernie,” read another. Others read: “We are the 99 percent,” “Goths for Bernie,” “Republicans 4 Bernie,” and “Bernie has big hands.”

It was mostly a young crowd that attended.

“He has a clean record,” said Grayson Coppock. “He’s a guy you can believe in.”

“He seems like a genuine guy,” said Rich Vosepka. “He wants to change the way we do things, how the electoral system and works and the economy is organized.”

“I love the message of unity,” said Brent Hamilton, who was there with his wife.

“He seems to have common sense,” said Nick Thomas. “He’s not pulled by all the interests but is willing to speak for what he believes in rather than to please the general public. He’s not afraid to say what will make people angry because he believes in it.”