What’s the best way to shut down the league’s top scorer?

That’s easy. Just don’t let him attempt a shot all match.

Louisville City FC forward Matt Fondy came into Saturday night’s match against the Charleston Battery as the United Soccer League’s top scorer with 22 goals.

The Battery defense smothered the talented striker all night as Fondy did not record a single shot on goal in more than 90 minutes of action. Meanwhile, the Battery got goals from Justin Portillo and Dane Kelly — both on set plays — as Charleston defeated Louisville City FC, 2-0, before a crowd of 3,978 at MUSC Health Stadium.

The victory all but assured the Battery (11-6-10, 43 point) of a spot in the USL playoffs with one game remaining in the regular season. A win over Charlotte next Saturday night will give the Battery the third seed in the USL Eastern Conference and a home game in the opening round of the postseason.

Not only is Fondy the top scorer in the USL this season with 50 points (22 goals and six assists), but Louisville had the top offensive club with 54 goals coming into the match.

“We’ve been trying to buckle down since the middle of July,” said Charleston Battery captain Jarad van Schaik. “We’ve played well the last four or five matches, we’ve really buckled down defensively, got a couple of shutouts and tonight’s effort was great. You have to know where (Fondy) is all the time. He’s right on that offside line all the time and it’s hard to mark him because he works so hard.

“If you go to sleep one time, he’ll punish you. The back four did a great job tonight. They marked him well. I’m really proud of those guys.”

Both of Charleston’s goals came after questionable calls from the referee that went in the Battery’s favor.

The first came in the 64th minute when Kelly was taken down just outside the 18-yard box by what appeared to be minimal contract from a Louisville defender.

Portillo smashed the free kick, which deflected off of a Louisville player and into the net for a 1-0 lead.

“We’ve been working on those set plays all week,” Portillo said. “I felt pretty confident when I was standing over the ball. Their keeper was kind of standing in the middle so I knew the back-post was going to be open. I hit it there and luckily the ball hit off of someone and it went in.”

Less than 20 minutes later, Kelly scored off a set play when he headed in a ball from van Schaik. Kelly had a similar chance in the first half, but his header went wide. This one slipped past Louisville keeper Greg Ranjitsingh for the score on the near post.

“We had the one in the first half and Dane just missed on it, so I figured we’d try the same thing,” van Schaik said. “This time Dane was able to put the ball on frame.”

The Battery extended theirs home streak without a loss to 23 matches. The Battery, which have not lost to a USL opponent since May of 2014, are 14-0-9 in their last 23 matches at home.

“We did a really good job defensively, we shut down Fondy and they have trouble getting scoring from other guys,” said Charleston coach Mike Anhaeuser. “We did exactly what we had to and you’ve got to commend the guys. They played well and Louisville is a good team. We’ll take the three points and I think that puts us in the playoffs.”