WASHINGTON -- President Barack Obama had some fun Monday (April 20) as he welcomed the National Champion Ohio State Buckeyes to the White House. He jokingly even took some political credit for the first-ever playoff system to crown the college football champion.

Obama noted that as a candidate for president in 2008 he touted the idea of a playoff system to select the national football championship, which Ohio State did with a convincing 42-20 thumping of Oregon after qualifying for the final game with a 42-35 upset over Alabama in the Sugar Bowl.

"This was an historic year in college football. The country got to enjoy its first-ever College Football Playoffs," Obama said. "And I will say it -- it was about time. I cannot claim full credit -- I will point out that I pushed for a playoff system in 2008. I'd say I threw my weight around. PolitiFact, which keeps track of whether politicians keep their promises -- this is a promise kept by me. So you're welcome, America."

The president observed that Ohio State won its final three games -- the Big 10 Championship rout of Wisconsin, the Sugar Bowl win over Alabama and the National Championship victory over Oregon with a third string quarterback.

"At one point last year, the Buckeyes were ranked as low as 23rd in the nation. But they kept on battling back -- with the help of not one, not two, but three quarterbacks. "First, they lost Braxton Miller, a Heisman contender, before the season even started. Then J.T. Barrett, the Big Ten Quarterback of the Year, steps in, has an extraordinary run, but then breaks his ankle against a certain team up north -- I guess I'm not allowed to," the president said to laughter, alluding to the University of Michigan.

"And then we learned that Cardale Jones is not your average third-string quarterback. Anybody with a nickname like 'Twelve-Gauge' has to be taken seriously. I told him that I could throw a football 75 yards also, but he didn't believe me. So he clearly is a smart kid."

The president then turned serious.

"This was a team of true character, of true resilience," the president said. "As I said to them when I had a chance to shake the hands of all the players, everybody is going to go through ups and downs in life, and how folks handle it, how the quarterbacks on this team supported each other, that's what every organization wants to see -- is people stepping up for each other."

"And not only did they do it on the field; they made Ohio proud off the field. Each year, the Buckeyes pay forward their good fortune with more than 1,000 hours of community service and charitable efforts in Central Ohio. Visiting young patients in hospitals. Helping second graders improve their reading. Building playgrounds. Supporting the Special Olympics. Stocking shelves for the Mid-Ohio Foodbank."

This has created a special bond between Ohio State students, the Columbus, Ohio community and their football team, Obama said.

"So the love between this team and their community is mutual. I will say when you get 100,000 fans to show up to a practice -- I think it's fair to say that your fans are a little crazy," said Obama, referring to the 99,000 plus who attended Ohio State's spring intrasquad football game on Saturday. But obviously it's working for them and it's working for this extraordinary team."

Welcoming championship teams to the White House has long been a tradition. The first president to do so was Calvin Coolidge who hosted the Washington Senators in 1925 after the baseball team won the World Series.