DORAL, FL - APRIL 23: Bob Williams (L) and Serena Perez join with others to show their support for the Affordable Care Act in front of the office of U.S. Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart and Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL) on April 23, 2014 in Doral, Florida. The protesters wanted to ask the politicians if they still want to repeal their constituents health care now that more than 8 million Americans have signed up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images) ORG XMIT: 486719591 ORIG FILE ID: 486252571 (Photo: Joe Raedle, Getty Images)

It has been more than six years since the Affordable Care Act became law. During that time, Republicans in the U.S. House have voted dozens of times to repeal, defund or dismantle it. Never have they voted on a bill to replace the health reform law. Now we know why: They’re still working on coming up with a plan.

Last week The Hill reported that a group of senior House Republicans is “making headway” in crafting legislation. “Give us a little more time, another month or so,” said House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton, R-Mich. “I think we’ll be pretty close to a Republican alternative.”

Upton is among a four-member task force assigned by House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., to develop an alternative to Obamacare. In December, Ryan vowed to reveal a plan in 2016 that would “replace every word” in the law that has been implemented in every state and insured millions of people. But apparently doing so is more challenging than anticipated. The group is still in “listening mode,” Upton said.

When another lawmaker, Rep. Michael Burgess, R-Texas, was asked about replacing the law, he “pretended to hide his face in a bannister in the Capitol building to avoid the question,” The Hill reported.

Now that sounds like the political party this country knows when it comes to offering workable reform that actually insures Americans. Look the other way. Hide. Ignore millions of uninsured people.

It isn’t a mere six years that Republicans have had to offer a comprehensive plan. They’ve had decades. Under Presidents Ronald Reagan, George Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush, they did nothing while the number of uninsured Americans grew and spending on health care soared. Even when they had healthy congressional majorities to address the health insurance problems plaguing constituents, they sat on their hands.

It wasn’t until Barack Obama was elected and Democrats held majorities in the House and Senate that reform finally became a reality. Those elected officials had been in “listening mode” for years. They knew uninsured Americans were dying and filing for bankruptcy due to medical bills. They acted. Now people with preexisting health problems can purchase coverage. Their plans cannot be canceled when they get sick. Young people can remain on their parents’ plan into adulthood. The law raised taxes on the wealthy to generate revenue and actually pay for itself.

Though Obamacare is not perfect, Republicans in Congress have refused to make minor legislative tweaks to fix it. They refuse to acknowledge that the law, which relies heavily on private-sector insurers, looks essentially like a model for reform that would have been crafted by conservatives.

Instead, they’ve wasted years fixated on repeal. And apparently they still don’t have anything concrete to replace it. The country, which waited decades for reform, is supposed to just give them some more time. Americans won't be holding their breath.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Szn8hx