The Republican congressman behind an anti-abortion bill that was controversially shelved this week has said his legislation will be put to a vote “in the relatively near future”, saying his campaign to limit late-term abortions is a totemic fight comparable to the anti-slavery movement.

Arizona congressman Trent Franks, who introduced legislation to prevent rape victims from obtaining abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy if they have not reported the crime to police, said he had been personally assured by GOP leaders that the bill would still be put to a vote in the House of Representatives.

“The leadership gave me their word on that,” he told the Guardian in an interview.

Two other senior GOP sources, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the party’s leadership had promised to give the controversial bill, the Pain-Capable Unborn Protection Act, floor time in the 114th Congress.

Late on Thursday, Republican leaders passed another bill tightening federal restrictions on abortion through the House, but their last-minute decision to abandon Frank’s legislation, under pressure from several female Republican legislators, has infuriated conservatives.

The clash has peeled back the curtain on a bitter internal fight in the GOP over abortion and rape, and risks the party’s attempt to rebrand itself ahead of the 2016 presidential elections being undermined by another politically toxic debate over women’s rights.

Sarah Chamberlain, the executive director of the Main Street Pac, which backs moderate Republicans, said the defeat of Franks’s bill would allow the party to focus on the fiscal issues voters care most about. She dismissed the notion that the legislation would return.

“I don’t think the women of the GOP are going to change their mind about the same bill,” she said.

However, Franks, comparing the anti-abortion movement to the campaign to abolish slavery, said the issue cut to the heart of the founding principles of the GOP.

“This party was born out of a commitment and conviction of hearts, of certain people that were dedicated to protecting a class of human beings the supreme court said were not human,” he said. “That commitment sustained us in the crucible of a horrible civil war in this country.”

He said if the GOP could turned its back “on protecting the children of God”, the party would slide into “moral and political oblivion”.

Asked whether it was reasonable to compare his push to ban most late-term abortions to the movement to abolish slavery, Franks replied: “There’s never a perfect comparison. But certainly the dynamics and the principles are identical.”

Franks said that the wording in his legislation requiring rape victims to report the crime to police in order to be eligible for an abortion after 20 weeks of pregnancy was not written by him, but inserted by the party’s leadership.

That provision proved particularly problematic for the bill’s Republican opponents, who feared it would alarm female voters. The Justice Department estimates that 70% of rapes are unreported.

Franks said GOP leaders inserted the wording to his bill because they were concerned that “unscrupulous abortion providers”, rather than women themselves, would falsify rape claims.

“Those who kill children for a living are not too concerned about other ethical considerations,” he said.

Franks said both the Republican-dominated House and Senate were both “decidedly in favour of the bill”, although he conceded there was no chance of his bill becoming law with a Democrat in the White House.

“Barack Obama will take his place in history as the abortion president, so I am obviously not optimistic he will sign the bill,” he said.

Franks said he was not given any indication from GOP leaders about the timing for the return of his legislation, but added: “I have every conviction that we will see it again in the relatively near future.”

That would prolong a divisive fight in the so-called “culture wars” that moderate Republicans fear have tarnished the party’s reputation in recent years.



The confrontation comes at a critical juncture for the GOP. The unofficial starting gun for the party’s 2016 presidential contest will be fired in Iowa this weekend, as conservatives gather for the Iowa Freedom Summit. The event is hosted by the local congressman and rightwing firebrand Steve King, whose comments on abortion and rape have proved controversial in the past.

Moderate presidential hopefuls such as Mitt Romney and Jeb Bush are not attending, meaning the event will be dominated by potential candidates from the right such as Ted Cruz, Rick Perry and Mike Huckabee.

Another speaker will be Rick Santorum, a former candidate for the presidential nomination who is backed by evangelicals and who is weighing another run for the White House. He said he was “disappointed” by the decision to pull the bill, but suggested party leadership would return to the issue when they could be confident they would have the votes to pass it.

Santorum reportedly told an event held by the anti-abortion Family Research Council (FRC): “I don’t understand why anyone for any reason would oppose a bill that says we can’t kill these little children.”

Related: Republicans drop abortion vote after revolt by female House members

Supporters of the bill had hoped it would be passed on Thursday to coincide with the March for Life, a huge anti-abortion gathering held on the Mall each year to mark the anniversary of the supreme court’s 1973 ruling to legalise abortion, Roe v Wade.

Instead, House Republicans passed another bill, voting 242-179 to permanently bar federal funds for abortion coverage and block tax credits for many people and businesses accessing abortion coverage under the Affordable Care Act. The White House has promised to veto the bill, which could nonetheless be taken up in the Republican-controlled Senate.

The decision to abandon the Pain-Capable Unborn Protection Act was privately welcomed by moderates within the party. Debates over abortion and rape harmed the Republicans during the 2012 elections and are widely believed to have led to its defeat in key Senate races. Two candidates, Todd Akin in Missouri and Richard Mourdock in Indiana, lost after making controversial remarks about abortion and rape.

The GOP ran a far-more disciplined campaign in the 2014 midterms, side-stepping cultural debates and even embracing issues such as over-the-counter contraception, to appeal to a wider demographic.

GOP strategists acknowledge that legislators are unlikely to change their position on abortion, but are pressing hard for the party to take a less activist stance on the issue.

This week’s events have exposed the unresolved divisions in the party, and the determination in conservative ranks not to abandon an issue they believe is central to their cause.

By Friday the female Republican lawmakers who led the drive to persuade party leaders to shelve the Franks bill, Jackie Walorski of Indiana and Rene Ellmers of North Carolina, were being warned they would punished by conservative factions.

The FRC indicated it might support primary challenges against them. “I believe in political retribution, otherwise you might as well close up shop,” Marjorie Dannenfelser, president of the anti-abortion Susan B Anthony List, told the Hill.

Franks dismissed the suggestion that a concerted push on such a divisive social issue would harm the electoral prospects of the GOP.

“If the Republican party … cannot make protecting pain-capable unborn babies from being dismembered, tortured and killed without anaesthesia a winning issue, then perhaps we need to rethink our entire platform.”