'Don't hate me because I'm beautiful'

Stefanie Johnson

Go ahead, admit it. You're beautiful.

If you're an attractive woman applying for work in a traditionally male-dominated work environment, the best strategy is to go ahead and own up to it. That's the conclusion of a new study authored by Stefanie Johnson, an assistant professor at the University of Colorado's Leeds School of Business.

The results give credence to the wisdom of the line in a 1980s hair products ad, "Don't hate me because I'm beautiful," Johnson said.

When an attractive woman acknowledges her status upon applying for a job in a male-dominated industry, Johnson found, she can benefit because she's "demonstrating an awareness of her gender role" in the eyes of the man considering the application.

Building on her previous research that examined the detrimental effects of beauty for women seeking employment in some male-dominated fields — one aspect of what is known as the "beauty is beastly" effect — Johnson and her colleagues set out to answer a question.

"What do attractive women do, try to look ugly when they go look for a job?" Johnson said. "What's the practical application? I tried to look for a way to mitigate that effect. Acknowledge it? Not acknowledge it?"

What type of sexist are you?

Researchers identified the two main aspects of sexism that cause people to mentally disqualify women from masculine jobs.

Advertisement

One was termed "benevolent sexism," causing people to judge women as needing protection from job difficulties or physical challenges. The other, called "hostile sexism," causes individuals to cast women as violators of gender roles, encroaching on traditionally male job turf.

Acknowledging the female-beauty stigma had a mitigating effect on both strains, Johnson said.

The study divided 355 participants into three groups. Each group considered fictitious applications for a construction job.

One group, made up of male and female undergraduate business students, considered four candidates, one of whom was either an attractive or unattractive woman. The rest of the applicants were men. All of the applications included a photo, a written interview statement and a resume, which the participants rated for employment suitability.

A third of the women's applications acknowledged their appearance; a third acknowledged their sex; and a third didn't acknowledge either.

The raters who received the application of the attractive woman who had acknowledged her appearance or sex gave higher marks than those who received the application of the attractive woman who hadn't acknowledged either.

Another group was composed of male construction workers. They completed a survey to determine whether they were sexist and if so, which type of sexism they represented. Then, they reviewed a similar application package as the first two groups — but the attractive woman and her interview were presented in a video, instead of a photo and written statement.

This part of the study aimed to show how acknowledgment affected the ratings of the two different types of sexists, according to Johnson. It influenced both.

"If you score higher on hostile sexism and the beautiful female applicant acknowledges her appearance and sex, you rate her less negatively — you still might hate her for being there, but a little less. If you're a benevolent sexist and she acknowledges, you rate her more positively," Johnson said.

More questions about beauty

Johnson did not want to suggest that she is picking on construction workers; there are numerous other fields where similar dynamics apply.

She is not finished with the burdens of beauty in the workplace, Johnson said.

"The next step is to look at the effects of women's physical appearance in employment situations on their own self esteem," she said. "If women get the idea that maybe they were hired because of their looks, how does that affect their own self confidence?"

The paper is published in Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. Co-authors are Traci Sitzmann, an assistant professor at CU-Denver, and Anh Thuy Nguyen, a graduate student at the Illinois Institute of Technology.

Johnson noted, for the striking-looking man who might be wondering how he could be hampered in the employment market, that he should not be worried.

Research has shown that "attractiveness is always beneficial for men, or at worst neutral," she said. "There's no 'beauty is beastly effect' for men, so there's no need to acknowledge it."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Charlie Brennan at 303-473-1327 or brennanc@dailycamera.com.