2 years ago

Washington (CNN) – Utah Sen. Mike Lee blamed big government for growing inequality in America, calling Obamacare an “inequality Godzilla.”

Lee’s comments came during his Tea Party response to President Barack Obama’s State of the Union address on Tuesday night.

Follow @politicalticker

“Obamacare – all by itself – is an inequality Godzilla that has robbed working families of their insurance, their doctors, their wages and their jobs,” Lee said. “Many Americans are now seeing why some of us fought so hard to stop this train-wreck over the last four years.”

In addition to Obamacare, Lee cited government surveillance, changing laws without congressional approval, and abortion as issues that also spur disparity amongst “hard-working, play-by-the-rules” Americans.

Responding to the President’s address, Lee stated that inequality stems mostly from three problems, immobility among the poor, insecurity in the middle class, and cronyism in the federal government.

“Government-driven inequality is the reason why, as hard-working families across the country struggle to make ends meet, six of the 10 wealthiest counties in America are now suburbs of Washington, D.C.,” he said.

Lee, who stood alongside Sen. Ted Cruz’s during his marathon filibuster in September over defunding Obamacare, defended the Tea Party movement’s aggressive protest of big government, comparing their actions to those of the Boston Tea Party.

“I believe we need to do what Americans have always done – come together and press for positive change. Protesting against dysfunctional government is a great American tradition, going back to the original Tea Party in Boston, about 240 years ago,” Lee said. "Americans have a natural instinct to stand up and speak out when they know something is wrong. … Unfortunately, in recent years, we have had no choice but to engage in a number of protests against our current president’s Washington-centered agenda.”

Despite his criticism of the Obama administration and its policies, Lee did acknowledge that the Democratic Party wasn’t solely to blame to the mounting inequality in America.

“President Obama and his party did not create all of these problems. … The GOP can be just as out-of-touch as the Democratic Establishment.”