A banh mi sandwich made with roasted turkey might not be authentic, but it's a nice break from the rich, sweet flavors of Thanksgiving. ( Cindy Sutter / Staff Photo )

Oh, Thanksgiving food, how I love you.

Oh, Thanksgiving food, I'm so over you.

Funny how things can change in a day. A day of feasting with stuff like gravy, lots of butter and whipping cream. Who wouldn't look forward to that? And, if you're not used to eating that way, who wouldn't be so over it the next day?

And some stuff is simply not that good re-warmed. I'm looking at you, turkey, especially your white meat.

After the richness of Thursday, I like my meals on Friday to be brighter and totally different tasting.

Thus, the turkey banh mi. Just as your Thanksgiving spread is nothing like what the Pilgrims ate, this banh mi is not an authentic version of the Vietnamese sandwich. Those usually involve Vietnamese ham and other lunch-meaty kinds of things. But you still can capture its essence with some carrot and daikon quick pickle, cilantro, sliced chilies and a spicy mayo.

I really like pate on the sandwich. That brings back some of the richness you're ostensibly trying to get away from, but I look at it as a bridge back to a more typical diet. If you have the time tonight to make pate as you're getting the turkey brined, you can use the turkey liver in addition to chicken livers. If I'm doing something like this, I make a traditional recipe for pate, which usually calls for shallots, wine or cognac, and thyme. I cook the shallots and liver in two batches, one with thyme and one without. Then I puree separately. The thyme batch goes out for an appetizer Thanksgiving Day. To the batch destined for banh mi, I ditch the thyme and add just a pinch of cinnamon, which is traditional. If making pate is something you don't even want to contemplate, use store-bought or leave it off entirely. Those bright flavors still will be good.

Whatever you do, prepare food that you enjoy and remember that the holiday is really more about community than the food. Hold that idea close and everything you make will taste better both the first time around and when it's eaten for leftovers.

Thanksgiving Turkey Banh Mi

For the pickled vegetables:

1 carrot, julienned

1 Daikon radish, julienned

1/4 cup unseasoned rice vinegar

2 tablespoons sugar

½ teaspoon salt

For the spicy mayo:

½ cup good quality mayonnaise

Fish sauce to taste

Lime juice to taste

Sambal Oelek or Sriracha to taste

For the Banh Mi:

Leftover turkey, a mixture of dark and white meat, sliced and seasoned with salt and pepper

Baguette or sandwich rolls

Store-bought or homemade pate

Sliced Fresno or serrano peppers

Several sprigs of cilantro

Directions: For the carrot and daikon pickle: Combine ingredients and let sit at least 30 minutes. The longer they sit, the better they are.

If bread is super pillowy, remove some of the insides. Spread a thick layer of pate on the bottom half of the bread. Add turkey and pickled vegetables. Drizzle on spicy mayonnaise. Garnish with cilantro and sliced peppers.

Cindy Sutter: 303-473-1335, sutterc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/cindy_sutter