Tesei says "I like Mike" in honor of Chiapetta's 100th

Photo: Contributed Photo Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Greenwich resident and N.Y. Giant legend Frank Gifford takes a photo with patron Max Lawrence while dining at The Black Bear Saloon in Stamford last week. Greenwich resident and N.Y. Giant legend Frank Gifford takes a photo with patron Max Lawrence while dining at The Black Bear Saloon in Stamford last week. Photo: Contributed Photo Tesei says "I like Mike" in honor of Chiapetta's 100th 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Scene... Super model and Greenwich resident Stephanie Seymour, wife of newsprint mogul and art collector Peter Brant, was seen having dinner at The Ginger Man on Greenwich Avenue on Wednesday, February 5.

Out there... Oscar winning actress and fitness pioneer and author Jane Fonda will speak at a benefit luncheon to support Family Centers on Wednesday, March 5 at the Greenwich Hyatt Regency. Fonda will discuss her new book, "BEING A TEEN: Everything Teen Girls & Boys Should Know About Relationships, Sex, Love, Health, Identity & More." A copy of the book will be included with each ticket purchase. For more info and tickets (starting at $150,) visit www.familycenters.org or call 203-869-4848. All proceeds will support Family Centers' programs offering health, counseling and education services to children and adolescents.

Out there... Riverside resident and sports commentator Frank Gifford was seen dining at the Black Bear Saloon on Main Street in Stamford last week.

Scene... Political commentator, author and 72nd Lieutenant Governor of New York, Betsy McCaughey, PhD., was seen having dinner at Gabriele's Italian Steak House last week. McCaughey is the author of "Beating Obamacare and "Obama Health Law: What It Says and How to Overturn It." Also dining there was NBA referee and Stamford resident Bennett Salvatore with his brother; and Greenwich resident Alex Cohen, wife of SAC Capital's Steve Cohen, having fun with some friends. On another note, the restaurant is having a 70's/80's Dance Party on Saturday February 22 at 10 p.m. featuring a live DJ spinning some of the greatest hits from that era, and offering drink specials. There is no cover charge. For more info call 203-622-4223.

Out there... The first ever Fairfield County Launch of Business Development for Veterans takes place on Thursday, February 27 from 7-10 p.m. at the C. Parker Gallery on 17 East Putnam Avenue in Greenwich. WABC Senior Meteorologist and Greenwich resident Bill Evans will serve as master of ceremonies at the event hosted by State Representative and Greenwich native Fred Camillo, and featuring cocktails, appetizers, a silent auction and music by The Head Rattlers. For more info go to www.BDVUSA.ORG.

Out there... The Grand Opening of FRIDAYS, after-dinner nightlife, takes place at Blackstones Steakhouse at 28 West Putnam Avenue on Friday, February 21 at 11 p.m. The Friday, weekly event, presented by D'Agostino & M&R Productions, will feature music and videos by DJ's Vinnie Campisi and Kunjan. For more info call 203-661-8700 or contact@rio100.com.

Scene... Actor/director Ron Howard and his wife and author Cheryl, Greenwich residents, helped celebrate Greenwich-based Food Design Catering's 10 Year Anniversary this past Tuesday at a celebration held at the Equinox on Old Track Road in Greenwich. The event also featured complimentary classes and spa services and beverages by Val's Putnam Wines. The Howard's are long-term clients of Food Design, co-owned by Chef Michael William Batt and his wife, Gallia. .

Out there... Greenwich native and resident Mike Chiappetta celebrated his 100th birthday with his wife of 75 years, Lena Bria and sons Peter, Michael and David at Gabriele's Italian Steak House in Greenwich on Friday, February 7. In honor of Chiappetta's centennial, First Selectman Peter Tesei proclaimed February 8 as `Mike Chiappetta Day,' and he received a citation from the State of Connecticut. Happy Birthday and God bless you Mike.

And that's all for now.

Later ...

Got a tip? Seen a celebrity? Email Susie Costaregni at thedish2@yahoo.com.