Taroudant – A young Muslim man spread holiday cheer when he took to the streets of London to give out Christmas cards and presents to homeless people in a bid “to promote equality.”

Nubaid Haroon, a British Muslim blogger, had a heart for those homeless people who could not celebrate Christmas with their families.

The young man posted a video on his YouTube channel Rambo Vlogs, showing his heartwarming mission and the happiness of the less fortunate people after receiving their presents.

In the video, Nubaid introduced the name of the people he gifted and the reason why they live on the streets, in an act to humanize and raise awareness of the misfortunes of others.

The cards read: “Christmas is for everyone! This year, you have a friend in me. Spread Love. Rambo.”

Although Haroon said he does not “really celebrate Christmas to a huge extent, obviously because of [his] background,” he acted with generosity during the holiday season.

The kind-hearted man believes that “we need to do a lot more to spread equality.”

“Sometimes we forget that some people aren’t as fortunate to spend Christmas with the people they love,” Haroon said in the video.

The philanthropic act of the young Muslim man has been received with great love and appreciation from the homeless people. His video went viral on social media, with comments hailing his act.

@RamboVlogs I am sitting down with my wife to xmas dinner with my wife and raising a glass to you Nubaid.You are a beacon for humanity. — Bob Reid (@robertcreid) December 25, 2015

@RamboVlogs really touched by your Christmas post today ?? #spreadlove — Lucy Talbot (@lucyctalbot) December 25, 2015

Haroon wants his act of kindness to inspire more people to do similar acts for those in need.

“A lot of the guys I know have responded really well,” he said, adding that “I feel like some people are feeling pretty inspired to do something similar on a day-to-day basis and that’s all I wanted to gain from the video.”

Join the Conversation. What do you think?