The Fletcher Allen Health Care hospital is seen in Burlington, Vt. The facility initially provided 'aid in dying' in Vermont. (Photo: Toby Talbot/AP 2013 file)

The movement to legalize physician-assisted suicide has progressed slowly since the first “aid-in-dying” law took effect in Oregon in 1997. So far, only two other states, Vermont and Washington, have enacted aid-in-dying statutes, with Montana recognizing aid in dying through a decision of the state supreme court.

But the number of Americans living in an aid-in-dying state may soon jump from 12.7 million to 51.5 million. Last week, the California legislature passed an aid-in-dying bill, and it is awaiting action by Gov. Jerry Brown. Under aid-in-dying laws, patients who are terminally ill and mentally competent may receive a prescription from their physicians for a lethal dose of drugs.

That Californians have become receptive to aid in dying is not surprising. Over the past 18 years, the experience in Oregon and the other states has been reassuring. Concerns about legalized aid in dying have not been borne out. For example, aid in dying is rarely used. In Oregon, less than one-third of a percent of deaths occur that way.

Fears that vulnerable patients would be victimized also have not materialized. Aid-in-dying patients are similar to other dying patients in terms of sex and race; they are just as likely to be enrolled in hospice care; and even before the Affordable Care Act, aid-in-dying patients were just as likely to have health care coverage. Moreover, aid-in-dying patients are more likely to have college and graduate degrees than other dying patients.

Rather than serving as a way to hasten the deaths of the disadvantaged, aid in dying allows physicians to address the physical and psychological distress of their patients. For those in their final days who can no longer tolerate the suffering that their illness imposes, aid in dying provides needed relief. And for those terminally ill patients who worry that their suffering may soon become intolerable, a right to aid in dying provides assurance that relief will be readily available.

The absence of abuse from aid in dying reflects the fact that the laws in Oregon and other states include three critical safeguards. First, it is not a right to euthanasia. Physicians are authorized to prescribe the lethal drugs, but patients must take the drugs themselves. Neither a doctor nor anyone else can inject patients with death-causing drugs. Concerns about abuse in the Netherlands mostly involve euthanasia rather than aid in dying.

Concerns in the Netherlands also arise in cases in which the patients lack the ability to make medical decisions for themselves. That leads to the second key safeguard in the United States — the patient must possess the mental capacity needed to make a voluntary and informed decision about aid in dying. Patients who have impaired judgment from depression or another psychiatric or psychological disorder are not eligible for aid in dying.

Third, the patient must be terminally ill. That is, the patient must have an incurable and irreversible disease that is expected to result in the patient’s death within six months. When Dr. Jack Kevorkian used his suicide machine to help patients die, he especially provoked controversy with cases involving people who did not have a terminal illness, including one person with very early signs of Alzheimer’s disease. There has been controversy as well when aid in dying or euthanasia has been provided in Belgium or the Netherlands to patients who were not terminally ill.

There are other concerns about aid in dying, but they too are not a reason to reject the practice. For example, opponents observe that physicians are healers, with a duty to preserve life, not to shorten it. But physicians also are obligated to relieve their patients’ suffering. Moreover, physicians already act in ways that shorten patients’ lives — by turning off ventilators or withdrawing feeding tubes.

The American experience with aid in dying has developed carefully and cautiously, under strong safeguards. With 18 years of reassuring data, California, Indiana and other states can feel comfortable providing access to aid in dying.

Orentlicher is a professor at Indiana University Robert H. McKinney School of Law. Follow him on Twitter: @orentlicher.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1FbzETF