Topics: Bernie Sanders, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Jon Stewart, Neil Postman, Stephen Colbert, Television, The Daily Show, TV, Entertainment News

The other night, my wife and I did something we hadn’t done for a long time. We binge-watched “The Daily Show.” “He’s still funny,” my wife said afterwards.

“Absolutely brilliant,” I replied.

I feel the need to make this point, because as Stewart prepares to hang up his spurs (and barbs), the consensus that has formed around him is that he’s a national hero, an intrepid truth teller, a kind of secular prophet in an age of folly, and the first Jew perhaps worthy of canonization.

And thus anyone who argues that Stewart might represent more troubling aspects of our age is written off as a self-righteous hater who doesn’t get that he’s just a comedian.

So one more time, for the trolls in back: I get that Jon Stewart is just a comedian, even if The New York Times hailed him as “the most trusted man in America” and a pundit on CNN just suggested he run for president.

In fact, he’s a sensational comedian with impeccable timing, a nose for hypocrisy, the courage to call out bullshit artists and the capacity to impart vast stores of data and wisdom to his audience without ever coming off as pedantic. By nearly all indications, he is also a deeply thoughtful and decent guy.

What else can you say about someone whose next career move is to open an animal sanctuary in New Jersey?

The question haunting me is what Jon Stewart meant in the larger weave of American history.

I have written elsewhere about the moral vagaries of Stewart’s particular approach to satire. But how did Stewart function as a symptom of our historical moment?

Today, a clear majority of our citizens—of every ideological persuasion—share the same disquieting suspicion: that we are somehow powerless to fix our broken civic systems.

For some, religion remains the fount of salvation. Others place their trust in the bluster of conservative demagogues, or simply lose themselves in a fog of frantic material and athletic distraction.

As for the rest of us—the Troubled But Tame Majority, let’s say—we chose to embrace Stewart (and his various cohorts) as our moral authority. Why? Because he was the one capable of articulating the depth of our dysfunction without totally bumming us out.

On the contrary, his job was to convert this dysfunction into disposable laughs, expertly choreographed farces in which Stewart channeled our own helpless bemusement. Over a decade of watching him, we viewers came to see our political system and Fourth Estate as entertainment products rather than sacred institutions with clear moral purposes (to govern, to inform).

There were notable exceptions to this pattern, as Stewart’s many defenders will cite. He was able to help push through a health care measure for first responders to 9/11. He made mincemeat out of various charlatans, most of them fellow television stars.

And he dropped the joker’s mask when confronted by horrors such as the racist murder of nine African-Americans last month in Charleston, South Carolina, though it’s notable that he often stopped short of directly addressing the political roots of such horrors, in this case the power of America’s gun lobby.

Stewart himself recognized his role as essentially therapeutic. When he was given a chance to confront figures of immense power, such as Condoleezza Rice, he tended to flatter and quip.