Topics: From the Wires, News, Politics News

WASHINGTON (AP) — Former Rhode Island Gov. Lincoln Chafee made a surprise announcement Thursday that he was considering a Democratic presidential campaign in 2016. Key things to know about Chafee:

___

THE BRIEF

Lincoln Chafee has built a reputation as a contrarian in a career that has included holding office as a Republican and as an independent. In the Senate, Chafee often clashed with fellow Republicans during the administration of President George W. Bush, then left the party after he lost his bid for re-election in 2006. Elected governor in 2010 as an independent, Chafee found it difficult to build coalitions among the two parties in the statehouse and did not seek another term in 2014. His decision to explore a presidential campaign perplexed many Democrats.

___

RESUME REVIEW

Chafee hails from a prominent Rhode Island political family. His late father was a U.S. senator and governor and he has at least two other Rhode Island governors and a U.S. senator in his family tree. Chafee got his start in politics as a member of the Warwick, Rhode Island, city council, and later served as mayor during the 1990s. He was appointed to the Senate when his father, Sen. John Chafee, died in office, and the younger Chafee won the seat outright in 2000. Chafee was defeated by Democrat Sheldon Whitehouse in 2006, but he resurrected his career as an independent, winning the governor’s office in 2010. Facing poor approval ratings, he became a Democrat in 2013 but opted not to seek re-election.

___

PERSONAL STORY

Chafee grew up on an estate in Warwick, where he developed a love of horses and had an early introduction to politics — his father was elected governor when he was 8. As an 11-year-old, Chafee attended the 1964 Republican National Convention and watched Sen. Barry Goldwater claim the party’s nomination. Chafee later attended Phillips Academy Andover, where he was a classmate of former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and New England Patriots head coach Bill Belichick. After graduating from Brown University, he worked as a blacksmith at harness race tracks in the U.S. and Canada before entering politics.