Sorry, Mr. Trump, I don’t remember it that way. It was the Republican leadership in the House and Senate that BLOCKED the efforts of conservatives and those affiliated with the Tea Party from accomplishing their goals in Congress. Conservative House members that resisted the big-spending business as usual of Speaker of the House John Boehner were removed from committee leadership posts, and others abandoned their conservative promises to avoid being punished.

On Thursday, Donald Trump tweeted what amounts to his analysis of the latest five years of the Tea Party movement: “Remember, it was the Republican Party, with the help of Conservatives, that made so many promises to their base, BUT DIDN’T KEEP THEM! Hi DT” (February 11, 2016, 10:14 am)

The Tea Party movement represents people’s dissatisfaction with overbearing federal government and uncontrolled spending. Senator Cruz was one of the few Tea Party-supported Senators who actually carried out his promise to fight bloated, over-regulating government.

Republican leaders Senator Mitch McConnell and Representative John Boehner continually caved in to Senator Harry Reid and President Obama on spending matters and disparaged those who opposed their appeasement. Senator Cruz led the effort by conservatives to oppose spending on Obamacare, and in essence, said to the President, “If you want to stop us in our efforts to cut out-of-control government, you’ll be responsible for shutting down parts of the government until we resolve this issue.”

As we’ve seen since the first opinion polling showed Senator Ted Cruz ahead of Donald Trump, leading up to the Iowa caucuses earlier this month, Trump has gone all-out against Senator Cruz. Trump says how Cruz is hated by everyone, and is stupid and worthless besides. He neglects the fact that Cruz has a record of following through on what he was elected to do - take a stand against Obama’s policies.

So when Donald Trump accuses Cruz of being hated by everyone, besides telling us that any time someone opposes him they’ve suddenly become the worst person in the world, it also shows his lack of understanding of the political forces at work in Washington, D.C. And as his February 11 tweet shows us, he is also saying about himself that he has no understanding of the conservative movement that he is attempting to co-opt. As further evidence of his ignorance, now he is talking about how he will be the opposite of Cruz and get along with Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid and Senator Chuck Shumer. Get along with them like Boehner and McConnell did?