New interest-free payment plans available for the first time this fall

CU-Boulder freshman move-in What is likely to be the largest freshman class on record will be on campus this week. To alleviate traffic snarls, the university is limiting all parking lots to move-in traffic only. Tuesday: 6 to 9 p.m., 500 students Wednesday: 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., 1,400 students 6-9 p.m., 2,500 students Thursday: 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., 3,700 students For information about move-in: housing.colorado.edu

CU-Boulder payment plan options bursar.colorado.edu/payments/payment-plans/ or call 303-492-5381

"Question: is the amount on our bill for the whole year or just fall semester???"

"Just for the fall semester."

"Sweet God that is a lot of money."

That exchange on the University of Colorado Class of 2019 Facebook group exemplifies the sticker shock many CU freshmen are feeling this week as they look at their first-ever tuition bill before the start of the fall semester.

Though many students have been estimating what college will cost for them for months or years, nothing prepared them — or their parents — for staring at that often five-figure lump sum a few weeks before their first class.

"Actually my mom was there with me," said Juan Guevara, 18, of Thornton. "My mom freaked out. She's like 'Are you freaking serious? Is that just for fall?'"

Advertisement

The tuition bills, which went out by email last week, didn't yet account for financial aid, scholarships and loans, so Guevara tried to comfort his mother by assuring her that the number on the screen in front of them would decrease.

Even so, Guevara's grandmother is taking money from her retirement savings to help him cover tuition, room and board and fees, and he's planning to take out some student loans. He hopes to earn an ROTC scholarship for the final three years of college at his "dream school."

"Half of me is just like, wow, the school of my dreams is sucking the living crap out of me," Guevara said. "They're squeezing every last penny they can."

For in-state students taking 30 credit hours in the College of Arts and Sciences, tuition and fees for the 2015-2016 academic year total $11,091. That total can increase depending on a few factors, such as whether or not the student enrolls in CU's health insurance or if the student selects a more expensive major, such as engineering or business.

Room and board costs can range from roughly $13,000 to $17,000 per year.

When compared to peer institutions, CU-Boulder's in-state tuition rates, plus fees, are average — the campus falls in the middle of many other public schools. When state support gets factored in, the campus's in-state tuition and fees fall near the very bottom of the peer spectrum.

But of course, none of that matters to incoming freshmen, who only see what they'll be paying at CU, not what they could have been paying elsewhere.

The Bursar's Office, which sends bills and collects tuition, fees, room and board and other university-related expenses for the campus, calls this time of year their "Superbowl," said Jean Thomson, the bursar.

"We take lots and lots of phone calls this time of year," she said. "Hundreds a day. It's the beginning of the semester, and for the new students, they do have a bit of sticker shock, but they also have an awful lot of other new experiences so I think it's easy to become overwhelmed."

The Bursar's Office connects students and parents to financial aid and other resources on campus. Thomson said they've also been people letting people know about the new interest-free payment plan options offered by the campus, which can make that cringe-worthy total a bit easier to stomach.

"What the payment plan does is allows people to manage their cash flow, so I may not have $10,000 today, but I know that over the next four months I'm going to have $2,500 a month that I can pay toward my tuition and then I've paid off the bill," Thomson said.

Though Thomson said it's a bit too late in the process for students to apply for financial aid, the campus has increased its investment in institutional financial aid from $59.6 million in 2007 to $121.2 million in the current fiscal year and university budget officials say they've done their best to keep tuition increases low.

Even with CU's middle-of-the-pack tuition and investments in financial aid, college is expensive, no matter where students enroll, and CU's new freshmen are getting their first taste of the cost of their degree.

Marisa Rincon, an incoming freshman who lives in Erie and plans to study marketing, said she was "terrified" when she saw her bill for $17,685 for the semester, before financial aid, scholarships and grants were applied later in the week.

Rincon said she'd been applying for loans for "24 hours straight" without much luck because she has no credit and her parents have poor credit, she said.

"As I get older and I have to do this on my own, I don't think people realize how much of a burden it is to go to school," she said. "If you don't come from money, how much of a struggle it is and I know that this will affect me for the rest of my life. This decision is going to determine my financial stability for the rest of my life, which is terrifying."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta