On Thursday, all three broadcast news networks continued to ignore the latest outrage over ObamaCare and the Veterans Affairs scandal. Instead, CBS This Morning chose to file a 3 minute and 26 seconds report on what Malia Obama’s plans were for her 16th birthday on Friday.

Two audits released Tuesday produced scathing critiques of the health insurance marketplaces under ObamaCare while a top official at the Veterans Affairs Administration resigned Wednesday after refusing to take serious the early reports from whistle-blowers who brought the massive scandal to light. [MP3 audio here; Video below]

Meanwhile, CBS News senior White House correspondent Bill Plante’s piece in the 8:00 a.m. hour gushed over the possibilities of what Malia Obama and her family might be doing to celebrate the day on Friday and other recent milestones such as her first prom and learning how to drive. Exactly what the plans were to be were not disclosed as the lives and activities of the first children have traditionally been kept out of the media spotlight.

As the Media Research Center’s Scott Whitlock reported on Wednesday, ABC and NBC refused to cover news that a veteran was recently given approval to receive care from the VA while battling cancer. Unfortunately, the man passed away two years ago. CBS This Morning did cover the story, but only for a mere 22 seconds.

Further news from the VA came on Wednesday in the form of the resignation of its Office of the Medical Inspector (OMI) director. It was found that OMI did nothing to address the complaints of administration whistleblowers. According to The Washington Times, one example of inaction included an individual being held “at a VA facility for eight years before receiving a comprehensive evaluation.”

In addition, the three broadcast networks (and the two largest Spanish-language news networks) provided zero seconds of coverage regarding two audits from Health and Human Services Department’s Inspector which found that 2.6 million unresolved problems in the applications of those seeking health care on the federal marketplace (used in 36 states). Issues verifying citizenship or residency status, Social Security numbers and applicants who applied over the phone have placed federal and state marketplaces in the position that “may have limited the marketplaces’ ability to prevent the use of inaccurate or fraudulent information when determining eligibility of applicants for enrollment."

The complete segment transcript is transcribed below.