Jonathan Gruber, the so-called “Obamacare architect” and consultant on implementing the Affordable Care Act (ACA aka Obamacare), has had his contract terminated by the state of Vermont.

The reason — those “stupidity of the American voter” comments that have made frequent appearances in the media as of late.

Vermont Governor Peter Shumlin’s spokesman Lawrence Miller issued the following statement.

“As the Governor and I have said, the comments by Mr. Gruber are offensive, inappropriate and do not reflect the thinking of this administration or how we do things in Vermont… As we have also said, we need solid economic modeling in order to move forward with health care reform.”

Miller related to Gruber that “I expect his team to complete the work that we need to provide the legislature and Vermonters with a public health care financing plan. I’ve informed Mr. McGruber [sic] that we will not be paying him any further for his part in completing that work.”

Fox News reports that the original contract in Vermont was worth $400,000, and that Jonathan Gruber has thus far collected $160,000 of that money.

The contract termination reveal was made at an info session for Vermont legislators.

Governor Shumlin was prompted to action by the state’s Senate Minority Leader, Joe Benning.

“I join with my Senate colleague, Sen. Kevin Mullin, in urging the governor to terminate his contract,” Benning, R-Caledonia, said in comments to Vermont Watchdog. “If the powers that be attempted to trick them like that, then those people should be immediately removed from positions of authority, be they elected officials or hired contractors.”

Gruber’s pay is for “policy expertise, research, and economic modeling related to the implementation of Green Mountain Care.” His final report is expected on January 15.

Jonathan Gruber has been a sore spot for Democrats still reeling from the Election Night defeat at the hands of Republicans. Obamacare is the signature domestic achievement not only of President Obama, but also the Democratic-led House and Senate.

Since its passage, Democrats have fallen into the minority in the House (in 2010), and on November 4, they lost the Senate. Starting January 1, both houses will be controlled by Republicans for the first time since President George W. Bush.

Repealing Obamacare has been a big motivator for Republicans, and the comments by Gruber as well as the subsequent denial that he had much to do with building the law from both President Obama and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi has reignited that desire.

But what do you think, readers? Is the firing of Jonathan Gruber a sign of things to come for the healthcare law?