Robert Reich, the secretary of labor in the Clinton administration, is Chancellor's professor of public policy at the University of California, Berkeley and the co-creator of the film "Inequality for All."

Early indications are the Affordable Care Act is working. With less than two weeks remaining before the March 31 deadline for coverage this year, five million people have already signed up. After decades of rising percentages of Americans lacking health insurance, the uninsured rate has dropped to its lowest levels since 2008.

Meanwhile, health care costs have slowed dramatically. The new law may well be contributing to this slowdown by reducing Medicare overpayments to medical providers and private insurers, and creating incentives for hospitals and doctors to improve quality of care.

Some of the confusion has been deliberately sown by outside groups that, in the wake of “Citizen’s United," have been free to spend large amounts of money to undermine the law.

But a lot about the Affordable Care Act needs fixing – especially the widespread confusion and misinformation that continues to surround it. For example, a majority of business owners with fewer than 50 workers still think they’re required to offer insurance or pay a penalty. (In fact, the law applies only to businesses with 50 or more employees who work more than 30 hours a week). And many companies with fewer than 25 workers still don’t realize that if they offer plans they can qualify for subsidies in the form of tax credits.

Many individuals remain confused and frightened. Forty-one percent of Americans who are still uninsured say they plan to remain that way. They believe it will be cheaper to pay a penalty than buy insurance. Many of these people are unaware of the subsidies available to them. Signups have been particularly disappointing among Hispanics.

Some of this confusion has been deliberately sown by outside groups that, in the wake of the Supreme Court’s “Citizen’s United” decision, have been free to spend large amounts of money to undermine the law. For example, Republican Gov. Rick Scott of Florida told Fox News that the Affordable Care Act was “the biggest job killer ever,” citing a Florida company with 20 employees that expected to go out of business because it couldn’t afford coverage.

None of this is beyond repair, though. As more and more Americans sign up and see the benefits, others will take note and do the same. The biggest problem on the horizon that may be beyond repair – because it reflects a core feature of the law – is the public’s understandable reluctance to be forced to buy insurance from private, for-profit insurers that aren’t under enough competitive pressure to keep premiums low.

But even here, remedies could evolve. States might use their state-run exchanges to funnel so many applicants to a single, low-cost insurer that the insurer becomes, in effect, a single payer. Vermont is already moving in this direction, and California may be next. In this way, the Affordable Care Act could become a back door to a single-payer system – every conservative’s worst nightmare.



Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.