ENLARGE The dancers work on perfecting their moves. Ramsay de Give for The Wall Street Journal

At a rehearsal at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the conductor Alan Pierson assigned a siren, a wood block and other musical instruments to apprehensive, sweatpants-clad dancers.

Their job is twofold—to learn the choreography and to help a song come alive: in this case, Edgard Varèse's "Poème électronique," originally composed for tape, which was manually cut, spliced and processed into sound art.

"We do all kinds of things to bring this crazy electronic music to life," said Mr. Pierson.

On Thursday, Mr. Pierson's new music ensemble Alarm Will Sound, along with the performance group Dance Heginbotham, plays "Twinned," a concert that features unplugged versions of electronic works by Varese as well as contemporary electronic-dance-music artist Richard David James, who records under the name Aphex Twin, and composer Tyondai Braxton.

The program at the Met, where Alarm Will Sound is in residence, mixes movement and music so that dancers play instruments and the musicians move.

"It's a huge tradition of great music that wasn't really explored by performers," said Mr. Pierson.

ENLARGE Conductor Alan Pierson talks with dancers during a 'Twinned' rehearsal at the Met. Ramsay de Give for The Wall Street Journal

Since its first concert in 2001, Alarm Will Sound has embraced electronic music and released its album "Acoustica," of Aphex Twin arrangements, in 2005.

Taking music that previously existed only inside a computer or on a tape and arranging it for performers presents various challenges, from imitating electronic beeps to having humans play drum tracks at inhuman speeds.

It's also a reversal of the typical creative process.

"When you're composing, you're starting with your imagination," said Mr. Pierson.

"It's a different kind of challenge when you're starting with something that exists already, and wasn't created with these instruments in mind."

To arrange the Aphex Twin song "Cock/Ver 10," Stefan Freund, a composer who plays cello for Alarm Will Sound, created sound files of the song at slower speeds.

"I just listened to it constantly, took it apart, analyzed it," he said.

Mr. Freund found creative ways to imitate electronic sounds: A gunshot sound in the original became a brass mallet on a thundersheet, a thin sheet of metal used as a musical instrument.

Unusual instruments used in Alarm Will Sound's arrangements include an oven rack, cocktail stirrers and a garbage can. (It has to be metal, "Oscar the Grouch-style," added Mr. Freund.)

For the choreographer John Heginbotham, Aphex Twin's name provided inspiration.

"I thought I would find out what happens when twins exist," said Mr. Heginbotham, who said he was attracted to the strong pulse and complex rhythmic elements of electronic music.

"There's a lot of very interesting and dark and frightening material about that."

Aphex Twin, through his record label, didn't respond to requests for comment.

At the rehearsal, dancer Winston Dynamite Brown, 32 years old, bopped through the Met's Charles Engelhard Court to electronic music by Raymond Scott, which connects the various pieces of Alarm Will Sound's program.

Looking like a videogame character, Mr. Brown imitated the various poses of the statues, which, predictably, declined to respond.

"It's a 'Night at the Museum' kind of situation," Mr. Brown said.