Nine-month-old Grayson Wells finds an alternative use for his brother’s football helmet at the opening day ceremonies for the Woehrle Athletic Complex in Jeffersonville on Saturday. (By Jenna Esarey, special to The Courier-Journal) August 16, 2014.

Jeffersonville leaders and sports enthusiasts celebrated the debut of a synthetic football and soccer field at the new Woehrle Athletic Complex on Charlestown Pike on Saturday.

The complex is "a dream come true," said Paul Duckworth, president of the Clark County Soccer Association, a youth league that uses the facility. "It's already seeing a ton of use. Last night there was a group of about 40 people out here playing a pick up game."

The 22-acre complex, which cost around $5 million, includes five grass soccer/football fields; a Premier Synthetic Turf Field with electronic scoreboard; lighting for night games and grandstand seating; a small playground; concession stands with restrooms; a storage and equipment building; and more than 300 paved parking spaces.

The Jeffersonville Parks Youth Football League held its season-opening Family Fun Day & Jamboree immediately following the opening day ceremonies.

MORE JEFFERSONVILLE: Defense crucial for bigger, quicker Jeff

MORE JEFFERSONVILLE: Indiana high school football: Jeff at a glance

MORE JEFFERSONVILLE: Jeffersonville softball falls to Tucson in World Series

"There's a lot of people to thank for this," Jeffersonville Mayor Mike Moore said. "A lot of volunteers, and John and Shirley Woehrle."

The Woehrles funded the construction of restrooms at the complex a dozen years ago and donated the land to the CCSA.

Besides the youth football and soccer leagues, the complex will be used by Southern Indiana United soccer and two semi-professional teams: the River City Rovers soccer team and the Indiana Bucks football team.

The Louisville City Football Club, a second-tier affiliate of Major League Soccer, which is relocating from Orlando, will likely practice there as well.

The CCSA constructed just over three fields on the land, where it has been playing since 1995, before turning the land over to the city in 2012.

"We donated it to the city and they finished it," Duckworth said. "It's been about a four-year process."

He, along with Jeffersonville City Council member Ed Zastawny and James Lake, a principal with Kovert Hawkins Architects, pitched the idea for the current facility.

"The use and excitement for the fields is beyond anything we could have imagined," said Lake, whose firm designed the complex. "The closest facility like this is in Elizabethtown, then Evansville and then Indy."

The complex's cost included approximately $3.25 million for the grass and turf fields and $750,000 for road improvements to Charlestown Pike including construction of a turning lane at the park's entrance.

While the youth football league held it's opening activities, members of the Louisville Veterans Soccer Club faced off against the Louisville Kickers on one of the back soccer fields.

"There are really no decent fields in Louisville," Veterans player Tim Haertel said. "This is a really good field."

Future plans for the complex include the addition of a large building to host indoor sports such as volleyball, indoor soccer and basketball.

"The city needs things like this," Moore said. "Anytime you see kids playing together, that's great."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/Vvjr56