CARSON CITY — Nevada Commissioner of Insurance Scott J. Kipper announced Thursday his resignation effective July 2.

“It has been an honor to have served the state of Nevada as commissioner,” Kipper said. “I am proud of the division’s accomplishments. I am certain that the Division of Insurance will continue to serve the consumers, protecting the rights of all Nevadans as we regulate the $12 billion insurance industry.”

No reason was given for his departure from the job, which pays $117,000 a year.

Kipper was reappointed in October 2011 after serving as Nevada’s commissioner from December 2008 to June 2010. The federal Affordable Care Act was implemented during his tenure with the division.

The division has been identified as one of the top insurance regulatory agencies in the country.

Kipper served on the Executive Committee at the National Association of Insurance Commissioners and on the Federal Advisory Committee on Insurance at the U.S. Department of Treasury.

The division’s website was also expanded during his tenure to offer Nevadans tools to help them understand various insurance products and to make better insurance buying decisions.

The Division of Insurance, part of the Department of Business and Industry, protects the rights of Nevada consumers and regulates Nevada’s $11.9 billion insurance industry. In 2014, the division investigated more than 2,800 consumer complaints and recovered nearly $4 million on behalf of consumers.

Before serving as Nevada’s commissioner, Kipper was the deputy commissioner in charge of the Office of Health Insurance for the Louisiana Department of Insurance and CEO of the Louisiana Office of Group Benefits. He also served as the Oregon insurance administrator.

Kipper began his career in the insurance industry as an independent life and health agent in Laramie, Wyo. He is a graduate of the University of Wyoming, and holds a degree in business administration.

Contact Sean Whaley at swhaley@reviewjournal.com or 775-687-3900. Find him on Twitter: @seanw801.