Uncle Si, as Silas Merritt Robertson is known to “Duck Dynasty” watchers, has a new book coming out Tuesday, and it promises more of the same of what makes the A&E hit one of the most-watched reality shows in television history: family-friendly tales that highlight the power and grace of Jesus Christ.

In speaking of “Si-Cology 1: Tales and Wisdom From Duck Dynasty’s Favorite Uncle,” Mr. Robertson recounted to The Christian Post how his faith is the key that’s kept him grounded — for 43 years of marriage, through 25 years in the military, with two children and eight grandchildren and, now, through family struggles and challenges, some of which are showcased on the hit cable show.

“When I sign people’s stuff, I put down John 3:16 and 17. Most people can tell you what 16 says — … ;For God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten son.’ But they don’t know nothing about 17,” he said, in The Christian Post. “It says Jesus didn’t come to condemn us. If anybody had a right to condemn someone, it would be the son of God. If he didn’t do it, then hey, we definitely are not qualified to do it.”

Alan Robertson, the oldest son of Phil and Miss K, fellow family members on “Duck Dynasty,” weighed in to The Christian Post and said he’s puzzled by atheists and agnostics who don’t believe in an active, interested God.

“A person asked me one time, what’s the evidence that God is there? And I said, ‘I’ll go out here and pick up an acorn from under a tree. You put it in the ground and water it and 40 years later when you come back, there might be an oak tree as big around as a pick-up truck.’ Inside that little acorn is the resurrection power,” he said. “That has to come from somewhere. It didn’t just exist.”

Christianity is why the “Duck Dynasty” family is still together, Mr. Robertson said.

“I think that without faith we wouldn’t be that way,” he said, adding that the show always ends in family prayer. “We would’ve splintered apart a long time ago and we wouldn’t be together. So obviously, it’s kept us together. One of the things that I like about the show is that it’s subtle, and it kind of reminds me of when Jesus used to teach in parables. Jesus would lay out just a practical teaching, but you really had to dive a little deeper to know more about it. And I think it’s that way with our family’s faith.”