First came the covers, and then the cover-up.

A young member of the presidential advance team might have hired a hooker during the same tawdry trip to Colombia that embarrassed the nation in 2012 and nearly ended the careers of two dozen Secret Service agents, it was reported late Wednesday.

But unlike the accusations made against the Secret Service, the White House staff member’s alleged hijinks weren’t fully investigated, according to The Washington Post.

The White House cleared Jonathan Dach, then 25, of any wrongdoing, according to the report, on account of the fact that Dach — whose work as a member of the advance team was technically done as a White House volunteer — wasn’t actually a government employee and because prostitution is legal in many parts of Colombia, including Cartagena, where the incident allegedly occurred.

Additional details and eyewitness accounts that later surfaced and cast doubt on his denials were ignored for political reasons, the paper claimed.

Dach has insisted he didn’t hire a hooker, but the lead investigator into the debacle subsequently told the U.S. Senate he felt pressured to hold back the new, additional evidence and delay his official report until after the 2012 election, The Post reported, citing documents and exclusive interviews.

One potential factor in the investigation ending prematurely, The Post claimed, was the influence of Dach’s father, former Wal-Mart lobbyist and current administration employee Leslie Dach.

Leslie Dach has been a prominent donor for the Democratic Party and donated at least $23,900 to the organization in 2008 during Obama’s initial presidential run. He now works for the Obama administration as a senior counselor for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, where one of his primary responsibilities is implementing the Affordable Care Act, Obama’s signature legislation.

White House aides were allegedly given information during the initial investigation into Jonathan Dach that showed a prostitute was indeed a guest in the hotel room of a member of the President’s advance team, The Post reported.

But the information was never “thoroughly investigated or publicly acknowledged,” according to the paper.

Moreover, top White House officials, including then-Counsel Kathryn Ruemmler — now a leading contender to take over as U.S. Attorney General — interviewed Dach and other advance team members and repeatedly cleared them of wrongdoing, The Post reported.

On Thursday, the White House denied that any wrongdoing or interference had occurred during the investigation into the situation.

“As was reported more than two years ago, the White House conducted an internal review that did not identify any inappropriate behavior on the part of the White House advance team,” White House spokesman Eric Schultz told The Post.

But Rep. Jason Chaffetz, chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform subcommittee on national security, said Thursday that the response wasn’t sufficient.

"All signs point to a cover-up but I want to give the White House a chance to explain itself," Chaffetz said, adding that he plans to hold hearings on the issue. "The immediate question for the White House is whether or not they're going to share the information they have with the Congress.”

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE FOR VIDEO.