The number of Louisiana's uninsured residents fell slightly in 2013, but the total number of uninsured people remains among the highest in the South, according to data released Tuesday by the U.S. Census Bureau.

Louisiana's uninsured residents fell by about 8,000 people from 2013, bringing the total uninsured in the state to about 751,000, or 16.6 percent of the state's population.

The average is higher than the national average of 13.4 percent. The total number of uninsured Americans is about 42 million.

Louisiana ranks sixth among southern states in the total number of uninsured residents. Texas leads with 5.6 million uninsured people.

Florida, Georgia, Virginia and Tennessee round out the top five southern states with the highest numbers of uninsured people.

Arkansas had the fewest with 465,000 uninsured people.

Department of Health and Hospitals Chief of Staff Calder Lynch said DHH internal numbers show the uninsured rate to be about 650,000 people.

Lynch said DHH has made covering children a priority by expanding the LaCHIP program. The result is Louisiana is a leader nationally in the number of children covered with less than 6 percent of children remaining uninsured.

Lynch said providing health care for adults is a different matter. He said the state is focused on the public/private partnerships to provide more access to patients through decreased wait times, more clinics and more services.

"Coverage does not equate to access. One of the reasons we haven't expanded Medicaid is we don't have the infrastructure to support it," Lynch said.

The numbers will be the final report of a pre-Affordable Care Act America, and next years numbers will reflect if the law is having an effect on lowering the number of uninsured people.

Reports are already surfacing that show uninsured rates are falling nationally, especially in states that accepted Medicaid expansion.

According to the Urban Institute, the national rate of uninsured American adults has fallen from 17.5 percent in the first quarter of 2013 to 13.9 percent in the second quarter of 2014. That rate factors in all states regardless of Medicaid expansion.

States that accepted Medicaid expansion saw their uninsured rate fall to 10.1 percent from 14.8 percent last year. States that did not accept Medicaid expansion dropped from 20.8 percent to 18.3 percent.

Statistically, low income people are far less likely to be insured than middle and upper income people. Medicaid expansion would allow households earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level access to the insurance provided in the program.

"What we're seeing around the country is more people are getting insurance than before, and a lot of that has to do with Medicaid expansion," said Jan Moller, director of the Louisiana Budget Project.

Medicaid expansion remains a highly politicized issue in Louisiana. Gov. Bobby Jindal and his administration have made it clear that they're unwilling to accept the funds. They argue it will cost the state $2 billion in cost over the next 10 years.

"Expansion to Medicaid is not a silver bullet solution," Lynch said.

Moller disagreed and points to the same LaCHIP success as evidence expanded coverage can help more people. He said while the national Medicaid numbers are encouraging, he doesn't expect them to change Louisiana's approach to the Medicaid issue for at least a year, which is when Jindal leaves office.

"My hope is policy makers will look at the gains made in other states and want to duplicate that success in Louisiana," Moller said.

* * * * * * *

Cole Avery is a legislative and state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. You can reach him on Twitter @cole_avery1 or email ravery@nola.com.