Reconciliation bill drops IPAB repeal

With help from Brett Norman, Jason Millman and Sarah Karlin

HOUSE RECONCILIATION BILL HEADS TO THE FLOOR — The House Rules Committee last night moved forward a reconciliation bill that guts major pieces of Obamacare and defunds Planned Parenthood for one year. Though, the committee dropped one provision from the bill.

Story Continued Below

— The bill still repeals the individual and employer mandates, as well as the Cadillac and medical device taxes. However, the committee supported Budget Chairman Tom Price's amendment dropping repeal of the Independent Payment Advisory Board after a ruling from the Senate parliamentarian. The bill also defunds Planned Parenthood.

The House is expected to vote on the measure Friday. The White House issued a veto threat last night, saying the bill would "take away critical benefits and health care coverage from hard-working middle-class families."

W&M CHAIR UP FOR GRABS? — If Rep. Paul Ryan becomes speaker, Rep. Pat Tiberi is planning to run for chairmanship of the Ways and Means Committee. Rep. Kevin Brady is also expected to run for the spot. The Pro story.

— The House Freedom Caucus last night said it won't endorse Ryan, but a "super majority" of members will vote for him. Following the announcement, Ryan tweeted that it was "a positive step toward a unified Republican team."

GOOD THURSDAY MORNING and welcome to PULSE, where we can already feel House Speaker John Boehner's excitement reverberating from the Capitol in anticipation of freedom. Send tips, scoops and best guesses as to what he does next to behley@politico.com and emershon@politico.com.

And if I stay here with you PULSE

Things just couldn't be the same

'Cause I'm as free as a bird now

And this bird you cannot change

CADDY TAX REPEAL WOULD ADD $91 BILLION TO DEFICIT — Repealing the 40 percent excise tax on high-cost health care benefits would add $91 billion to the deficit over the next decade, according to a new analysis from the CBO and the Joint Committee on Taxation. The nonpartisan number crunchers said scrapping the Cadillac tax would reduce projected revenues by $109 billion over 10 years while cutting anticipated spending by $18 billion. The estimate was part of a larger budget score of the House reconciliation bill. Pro’s Brian Faler has more: http://politico.pro/1RoTgo4

VALEANT UNDER FIRE, SPARKING SCRUTINY OVER PHARMA’S USE OF SPECIALTY PHARMACIES — Valeant Pharmaceuticals already had enough problems before yesterday — it's under scrutiny for astronomically hiking the prices of drugs, and it's received Justice Department subpoenas related to the company's pricing, distribution and patient assistance programs. But the company took another blow when stock commentary site Citron Research issued a report accusing Valeant of using specialty pharmacies to store its drugs and record the transactions as sales. The Citron report, which CNBC notes comes from a company that has a controversial reputation of its own, also comes on the heels of a New York Times story earlier this week that questioned the industry's improper use of specialty pharmacies. CNBC’s story: http://cnb.cx/1jB0US4. NYT’s story: http://nyti.ms/1NUsQwV.

… Valeant quickly issued a press release calling Citron’s report erroneous, saying there is no sales benefit to any inventory it holds at specialty pharmacies: http://cnb.cx/1jB0US4. But Valeant’s situation may be putting the entire industry under a microscope. Allergan even issued a release after the Valeant news broke Wednesday to make clear it very sparingly uses specialty pharmacies. Industry analyst Ronny Gal issued a note on specialty pharmacies Wednesday, noting “the market reacted strongly” to the NYT story. The core services provided by specialty pharmacies are not illegal, Gal said. “As for immoral — it’s a matter of perspective,” he said, noting that payers often see drug companies' use of the pharmacies as undermining their attempts to control costs through co-pays and drug tiering. Gal cautioned that the industry is “young” and “may be under regulated.”

** A message from PhRMA: Through personalized medicine, doctors and researchers are better able to direct patient care across health care, from risk assessment and prevention, to detection, diagnosis, treatment, and disease management. With 42% of new medicines in the biopharmaceutical pipeline having the potential to be personalized, patients can live longer, healthier lives. Learn more athttp://onphr.ma/1MsxoEy. **

SCOOPLET: FAH JOINS DRUG PRICING CAMPAIGN — The Federation of American Hospitals is joining the Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing, the campaign will announce today. The group launched after the rollout of Gilead’s pricey hepatitis C treatment, Sovaldi, and has worked to draw media coverage of high prescription drug costs. “Just as consumers are feeling the unsustainable cost pressure on prescription medications, so are the hospitals that purchase these essential, lifesaving prescription drugs for our patients in our care,” FAH CEO Chip Kahn said in a statement. The American Hospital Association is already a member.

OBAMA, BURWELL TALK OPIOIDS IN WEST VIRGINIA — The president, HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell and White House drug czar Michael Botticelli shared the stage Wednesday afternoon with West Virginians who are engaged in the battle against opioid abuse, including a local parent of a heroin addict, a police chief and a doctor. Obama said a bipartisan consensus had emerged that there should be greater emphasis on treatment over incarceration of drug abusers, “but budgets hadn’t caught up with the insight.” CDC is working on guidelines meant to rein in overprescribing. Video of the event, which included emotional stories of families’ struggles with abuse: http://1.usa.gov/1NocAB6

… GOP Sens. Lamar Alexander and Chuck Grassley welcomed the White House action, especially on an issue that both had raised in the past — whether Medicare patient satisfaction surveys incentivize doctors to overprescribe painkillers to boost their scores. HHS will study that issue. A fact sheet on the White House push: http://1.usa.gov/1GTI6Cm

… While providers are committing to new training, insurers have also engaged. The Blue Cross Blue Shield Association is funding a PBS documentary on opioid addiction and highlights other actions taken by its members here: http://politico.pro/1jBvevR

DISPATCHES FROM WISCONSIN: Pro's Rachana Pradhan reports from Wisconsin: A massive collaboration among eight Wisconsin health systems to pool resources and boost quality isn’t just a gateway for mergers down the road, Aurora Health Care CEO Nick Turkal told reporters this week. The AboutHealth network — which also boasts big names such as the Marshfield Clinic and UW Health, and whose entities have a combined annual operating revenue of nearly $12 billion — was set up as a statewide partnership to boost providers’ efficiency and lower costs through higher health care quality. But Turkal said the systems want to maintain their local brands because of the power that has in their individual localities. “None of them have an interest in forming one big company," he said. "There is no discussion of that."

SENATORS: FINALIZE THE RULE ON E-CIGS ALREADY — A group of Democratic senators are pushing OMB to finish reviewing a “long-overdue” rule to regulate e-cigarettes and other forms of tobacco as soon as possible. In a letter to OMB Director Shaun Donovan, the senators urged the administration to include strong guidelines that prevent young people from using tobacco products. Their suggestions include limiting advertising, adding health warnings on the products, banning the use of flavorings, and requiring childproof packaging for e-liquids. The senators also asked the administration not to grandfather products from reviews to determine whether they constitute threats to public health.

GROUP: CDC SHIFTING AWAY FROM RESEARCH ON TERTIARY PREVENTION OF TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURIES — The Brain Injury Association of America sent a letter to the CDC this week expressing its concern that the agency is shifting away from research on secondary and tertiary prevention of traumatic brain injury (TBI). The group notes that the agency’s Injury Research Agenda for 2009 to 2018 reflects “the most immediate TBI-related research needs and those that should be supported first as resources become available.” They ask that CDC clarifies its intent to continue recognizing and supporting Tier 1 TBI research priorities over the next five years.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Erin Mershon

Former Sen. Tom Coburn and another expert from the Manhattan Institute write a WSJ op-ed pushing for faster drug approvals as a cure for high drug prices: http://on.wsj.com/1W5wD9K

Frequent antibiotics may make children fat, the NYT reports — and the new research could help docs do a better job curbing antibiotic use by warning parents that their interventions could have an immediate effect on their kids: http://nyti.ms/1W5vFdt

The Washington Post reports on the new and FDA-approved — and much more serious — 23andMe:http://wapo.st/1W5wwLa

NPR reports on California's overcrowded and violent psychiatric hospitals: http://n.pr/1W5w6o7

CMS will help New York's struggling duals program, Modern Healthcare reports: http://bit.ly/1W5wfYL

Ohio's state House of Representatives will take up a measure to defund Planned Parenthood, after the Republican Senate passed it Wednesday: http://bit.ly/1W5wrXU

** A message from PhRMA: At a time when scientific promise is greater than ever, thoughtful policies are necessary to accelerate advances in personalized medicine to improve care for patients. First, we need strong intellectual property protections and robust funding of the entire R&D ecosystem. Second, we need a clear and transparent regulatory framework for the development of targeted therapies and co-developed diagnostics. Finally, we need value assessments and emerging payment models that are patient-centered and align with the way value emerges/changes over time. Learn more at http://onphr.ma/1MsxoEy. **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **