APPOINTMENT

Dr. Sarah Low has joined UT Health Northeast after graduating from its Family Medicine Residency Program in June. Dr. Low is board certified in family medicine and has a special interest in women’s health. Dr. Low, an assistant professor of family medicine, was named chief resident during her residency at UT Health Northeast. She received her medical degree from the Texas Tech University School of Medicine. In fall 2012, Dr. Low was one of 30 medical residents chosen for the North American Menopause Society Pfizer Medical Resident and Fellow Reporter Award.

ADDITION

Citizens National Bank is pleased to announce the addition of Tom Seale as senior vice president and senior business development officer in Tyler. Seale was most recently with American State Bank in Tyler. Seale is a graduate of the University of Alabama and moved to Tyler in 1978. Seale is a certified public accountant and is a member of the East Texas Chapter of the Texas Society of Certified Public Accountants.

ELECTED

At the Texas City Attorneys Association (TCAA) Annual Meeting on October 10, 2013, in Austin, Ron Stutes was elected as director of the TCAA Board of Directors. TCAA is a statewide organization consisting of over 500 municipal attorneys. Stutes’ practice is focused upon providing a variety of counseling and litigation-related services to municipal clients. He serves as the city attorney for the cities of Palestine, Canton, Tool and Coffee City.

APPOINTMENTS

Feliciano Financial Group has announced the appointment of W. Lane Norvell to executive vice president for executive planning, compliance, and development. Norvell, an Stephen F. Austin University graduate, joined FFG in 1996 after 14 years in the Tyler banking industry and also has served FFG as an insurance agent, financial advisor and as a vice president on the executive team.

Lee Trammell has been appointed vice president of operations. Trammell is a graduate of The University of Texas at Tyler and joined the FFG team in 2008 as an intern in the financial services division. Trammell has assumed roles as event coordinator, marketing director, special projects manager and recently held a directorship position in internal operations. In 2011, Trammell was a member of Leadership Tyler’s Class 24.

PRESENTATION

At the recent Texas Municipal League Annual Conference and Exhibition, held Oct. 8 to 11, the city of Tyler was presented with the 2013 Municipal Excellence Award in Management Innovations for cities with a population of more than 25,000. The award recognizes the city for its City University training program. The Texas Municipal League Municipal Excellence Award recognizes and encourages the achievements of Texas cities in meeting the challenge of municipal governance. After just four years of existence, the city’s onsite training program has saved the city more than $540,000 in training expenses, has helped grow and support highly qualified employees, and has improved communication between city departments.

AWARD

Tyler Allstate agency owner Chip Crist received the Agency Hands in the Community Award for his commitment to helping others. Crist received a $1,000 grant from The Allstate Foundation for Special Wish Child Inc. in Tyler, where Crist volunteers. The Allstate Foundation awards more than $1 million every year to nonprofit organizations across the country in honor of dedicated Allstate agency owners who give back.

GROWTH

According to the U.S. Census, Tyler is in the top 10 for income growth is a hub for a varied set of industries, including education, research and health care, and boasts an active tech startup scene. In 2009, the Tyler Leadership Roundtable began the Industry Growth Initiative, a plan to help the city evolve into an “Innovation Economy” through development of a highly skilled workforce and entrepreneurial culture. The University of Texas at Tyler’s Hibbs Institute for Business and Economic Research is a key player in the growth of Tyler and the rest of East Texas by providing important informational resources that support economic development. Earnings for workers grew 14.5 percent between 2007 and 2011.

ACCREDITED

Parent Services Center Inc., announced it has met the Standards for Charity Accountability of the Better Business Bureau (BBB). As a result, Parent Services has earned the right to feature the BBB Accredited Charity Seal on its website and printed materials. For donors, the appearance of the seal in a charity’s mailings, on its website, in newspaper and magazine advertisements or elsewhere is a clear and concise sign to show that the charity meets BBB Wise Giving Alliance’s “Standards for Charity Accountability.”

APPOINTMENT

Margaret Mullinnix has joined Austin Bank as retail office manager at the Tyler Med Center office.

Ms. Mullinnix brings has more than 25 years of banking experience provides a wealth of information from which she will be able to lead the Med Center location. Ms. Mullinnix is a graduate of Reedley High School in California and attended Hartnell Community College and Cerro Coso Community College

PROMOTIONS

Brookshire Grocery Co. announced the promotions of four key leaders to vice president.

Rae Champagne is now vice president of education and communications Ms. Champagne is a 12-year employee who has had leadership of internal and external communications. Prior to joining BGC, Ms. Champagne was a professor of English and holds bachelor degrees in both English and journalism, a master’s degree in English and a doctorate in literature.

Ginger McCullough is vice president of training and change management. Ms. McCullough has 30 years of experience with BGC and has served in various retail and human resources leadership roles and holds a professional certification in human resources (PHR), is certified in change management, and will soon complete her bachelor’s degree in business management.

Dave Moss is vice president of merchandising. Moss began his grocery career with another supermarket chain 36 years ago Moss started with BGC in 1992 in retail merchandising and in 2008 became project manager for the development of the FRESH by Brookshire’s store, from its inception to its opening in 2010.

Ozzie Osborne, vice president of facility services. Osborne joined BGC in 2011 with 22 years of experience at Florida-based Publix Supermarkets Inc. As director of facility services with BGC, he has overseen store design, construction, capital equipment purchasing and maintenance for all retail stores and some corporate facilities.

WORKSHOP

“Driving Workforce Change” will be the topic for the 2013 Tyler Area Chamber of Commerce Workshop to be held on Friday. Registration begins at 7:30 a.m. at the Tyler Rose Garden Center. The work shop will be held from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. and will include the topics: recruitment 101; avoiding employee claims understanding Obamacare; social media: opportunity or threat; becoming an employer of choice and developing you Leadership.

LUNCHEON

The sixth annual Hispanic Business Achievers Awards Luncheon will be held on Tuesday at 11:30 a.m. at Harvey Convention Center. The guest speaker will be George P. Bush. For tickets or more information go to www.tylertexas.com or call the Tyler area Chamber of Commerce at 903-592-1661.

SPEAKER

The Tyler Young Professional Network will present Series 4 of “The Advantage” with Dr. Andrew Clark, the director of organizational development for Mercy Ships,. The meeting will be on Nov. 8 from 11:30 a.m. to 1 p.m. at the Genecov Room at the Chamber of Commerce and is titled “Let’s do Lunch”.

NOMINATIONS

The Better Business Bureau of Central East Texas is accepting entries for its 2013 awards. The mission of the Awards Program is to promote ethical business practices and the willingness and efforts made by outstanding businesses to ensure our marketplace remains fair and honorable to everyone. These awards are presented to companies in recognition of their outstanding commitment to exceptional standards to their consumers, employees, suppliers, competitors, shareholders and the community. The deadline for entries is Nov. 15.

MEETING

There will be a new monthly gathering to bring together local business people for a quick business update, leadership lesson and a time to meet and mingle called Business Leader Circuit Training. This breakfast event will be held at Lago Del Pino on Wednesday from 7:30 to 9 a.m. Steve McNeely said: “The idea is to provide a monthly interactive forum where iron sharpens iron. The primary learning focus will be leadership and HR issues.”

PETS

On Friday, a new and unique shopping experience for you and your pet will open, featuring items displayed in creative and fun ways. Life With Pets opens its doors at 5304 Old Bullard Road behind Times Square Cinema in Tyler The goal is a relaxing and enjoyable shopping experience where patrons can bring their dog or cat and buy items that are good for them and enhance the lives of both pet and owner. An open house, including free samples, door prizes, adoptable pets, and more is planned for Nov. 16 from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. For more information, call 903-714-2172

CHAMPIONS

The East Texas Men in Harmony recently competed in the Southwestern District competition of the Barbershop Harmony Society, which includes Arkansas, Louisiana, Texas, Oklahoma and New Mexico. The men scored their highest score ever in competition and finished in fourth place overall, but finished the event as champions of the AA division choruses, which is arguably the most competitive of the three classifications which are grouped according to size. The chorus, which began in 2006, is always looking for new singers. For more information call 903-279-7226.