The picture showed a bare-chested woman in a UPS shirt and it was posted last week on a personal website by an Oklahoma City area woman who calls herself Mary Ann, a happiness consultant.

A UPS spokesperson said the company is outraged after a photo surfaced revealing one of its metro drivers had a sexual encounter in the back of a delivery truck.

A woman posted the racy picture online.

News 9 spoke with Susan Rosenberg, a spokesperson at the UPS corporate office, who said this is grounds for termination and the company wants to track down the driver immediately.

The picture showed a bare-chested woman in a UPS shirt and it was posted last week on a personal website by an Oklahoma City area woman who calls herself Mary Ann, a happiness consultant.

The caption says, "Look at my naughty time from yesterday."

"What really shocked me is that a driver would put himself in this position, no pun intended, and then allow the pictures to be posted publicly," said Brian Bates, founder of JohnTV.com.

Bates got a hold of the pictures and wrote about them on his website, which exposes prostitution in OKC.

The picture had already been removed from the website at the time of this article.

Bates shared numerous screen shots of Mary Ann's picture and corresponding post.

Bates said Mary Ann's follow-up post graphically described sex with the driver.

"She was touting much more explicit photos of this encounter on a version of her web site that is locked away and it's only for members," Bates said.

Rosenberg said UPS reached out to Bates after seeing his article and that executives were outraged about the driver's sexual encounter on company property.

"It disrespects UPS drivers and customers. This is not behavior we would ever condone for anyone, let alone for our company. We want to assure other drivers and our customers that this will be fully investigated," Rosenberg said.

UPS said Monday it takes the incident very seriously and is working with an area vice unit to track down the driver using truck clues from the pictures.

"He really had nothing to gain and he has everything to lose and not at the time of year you want to be losing your job," Bates added.

Bates said a lot of UPS employees have reached out to him, extremely upset a coworker would do this and eager for the driver to be caught.

News 9 reached out to Mary Ann through her website, but we have not heard back.