A website attributed to former state Sen. Randy Brogdon says he plans to file paperwork this week to run against incumbent Republican Gov. Mary Fallin.

Brogdon lost to Fallin in the 2010 Republican primary. He announced his run through social media, and the Secretary of State says a "Brogdon for Governor" corporation was formed last week.

Brogdon told the Tulsa World on Thursday he is "compelled" to fight for liberty.

With tea party backing, Brogdon won 39 percent of the vote in 2010. After that race, he took a $99,000-a-year job with the Oklahoma Insurance Department.

In an Associated Press interview in 2010, Brogdon said people had the right to protect themselves from an overreaching federal government and that a state militia was "a great idea."

A post on the site says Brogdon will make his case to GOP primary voters that a constitutional conservative is needed in the governor's office.

"My promise as governor is to protect Oklahoma families from the overreach of federal and state government and to restore your God given unalienable rights of life, liberty and property," according to the statement on the website.

Brogdon's entry into the race will likely mean Gov. Fallin will have to defend her conservative credentials during the primary.

The governor's office told Oklahoma City television station KFOR it would not discuss politics on Christmas, the day Brogdon chose to make his announcement to run.

While in the state Senate, Brogdon championed many right wing causes, including opposition to the federal Affordable Care Act and term limits for all statewide elected officials.

"The election just took on the critical quality of irony that is so often missing from gubernatorial elections," said Keith Gaddie, University of Oklahoma political scientist.

Brogdon lives in Owasso, where he once served as mayor.

His announcement means there will be primary races for both parties, with state Rep. Joe Dorman facing R.J. Harris for the Democratic Party's nomination.

------------------------------

KGOU produces journalism in the public interest, essential to an informed electorate. Help support informative, in-depth journalism with a donation online, or contact our Membership department.