Coming out of the Iowa caucuses, Ted Cruz appears to be a strong contender for the Republican presidential nomination. The results from Iowa are hardly prophecy, and their significance is chronically overstated; nevertheless, Cruz’s current leading status made me want to critically examine one of his chief differences with his Democratic rivals.

In particular, Cruz has pledged to “repeal every word of Obamacare.”

This would be a disaster for millions of Americans. To fully comprehend what Cruz wants to repeal, remember that Obamacare ensures that:

Children are able to stay on their parent’s health insurance plans until age 26

Health insurance companies cannot discriminate against people with “pre-existing conditions”

Health insurance companies cannot charge women more than men

Medicaid can be expanded to reach millions of Americans

Millions of Americans are provided with subsidies to buy health insurance

These are great strides in our country’s ability to provide basic healthcare access to our citizenry. In total, it appears coverage has been expanded to over 18 million people. There’s also evidence that as of a little over a year ago, Obamacare had saved over 50,000 lives.

Cruz has made attacking Obamacare the raison d’être of his political career; he even drove the Republican party to shut down the government in a misguided attempt to defund the law. And to be fair, the law is far from perfect, and there’s much about it that should be fixed or improved.

But Cruz’s proposed alternatives are laughable. In the last Republican presidential debate before the primaries, he laid out a three-point plan for replacing Obamacare:

Allow health insurers to sell plans across state lines Bolster health savings accounts Allow individuals to carry health insurance from job to job

Fox News’ own Chris Wallace–certainly not an Obama supporter himself–pressed Cruz on this plan. Wallace pointed out that though conservative think tanks generally support these ideas, no one seriously thinks they would reduce the number of the uninsured:

Wallace also points out that, despite Cruz’s insistence, there’s no reason to think Obamacare has been a “job killer.” Wallace fails to add that Cruz’s plan would certainly lead to a sharp rise in the uninsured population, since it would undo all of Obamacare’s progress.

Worse still for Cruz, his own plan undermines his case against Obamacare. In the debate, Cruz describes people suffering who have “lost their health insurance, lost their doctors, [and] have seen their premiums skyrocket.”

Cruzcare would do all this and more. Repealing Obamacare would strip millions of their healthcare, whether they gained access through Medicaid expansion or through subsidies on the exchanges. Without subsidies, premiums for millions of families would soar. Health insurance would again be out of reach for many who are economically vulnerable.

Since the entire system is extremely complicated, it’s difficult to be a well-informed consumer and to make rational decisions about health insurance plans. For this reason, many Americans were drastically underinsured prior to Obamacare; this is one of the fundamental failures of a health insurance market. But the first two parts of Cruz’s healthcare plan rely on the market principles to reduce the cost of care, even though we know from experience that this doesn’t help.

Making health insurance “portable” so employees could keep their plans even if they switched jobs sounds appealing. But this really means decoupling health insurance from employment; while this is a good idea in the abstract, practically speaking it would be extremely disruptive to the entire health care system.

This is disingenuous of Cruz, because he frequently attacks Obamacare for the disruptions it has caused. It’s not clear if he’s simply uninterested in actually working out a sound healthcare policy or if he is actively misleading his voters.

Take a look at Cruz’s website; you’ll see that health policy does not feature prominently at all. If this is any evidence, it would seem that Cruz, like the rest of the Republican party, does not actually seem care about helping Americans access health care.

It’s extremely unlikely that Obamacare will be repealed. It has too many popular provisions, and too many people are coming to rely on it for their essential health needs. Any president who tried to actively strip millions of Americans of their health insurance while driving up premiums and the uninsured rate would not just tank their own reputation but likely bring down their party in the process.

But there are countless ways in which Obamacare could be improved upon and expanded. Conservative voices can and should play an important part in the discussion over how to improve the law while not abandoning the progress we’ve made. But given the GOP’s deep repulsion to anything related to Obamacare, there’s little room for the party members to engage in a constructive dialogue.