President Barack Obama has whipped up a novel new strategy for expanding government’s control over our lives and enlarging the power of the executive branch. The reason it’s so hard to see is that ironically enough—actually, it’s almost hilarious—he’s taking portions our freedom by offering to expand our “rights.” You and I now have, Obama asserted, the right to health insurance. Not just the increased access to coverage afforded by Obamacare, but the right to it. Life, liberty, and managed care. But that’s not all. This year, Obama has been suggesting that you also have the right to go to college, to place your kids in early-childhood education classes—that is, daycare—and even the right to join the middle class as long as you put in some effort. Here’s what Obama isn’t telling you: When you start turning desirable commodities into fundamental rights, you must, by definition, have more government, because only government can guarantee “rights.”

Did you know that health insurance and an affordable college education is taking away your independence, your rights as an American? Well, that's what this guy says.And you know what more government means, don't you? He's tricksy he is, that Obama, telling you that he's making your life better by trying to make sure you and your family can afford to go the doctor and get that education that is so critical to your ability to get a halfway decent job. But what he's really doing is enslaving you. He's enslaving you with regulations, he is.

Your true right is to be sick and poor, with no hope of improving your lot in life, because that's how the Founding Fathers and the gods of capitalism said it should be. Freedom!

And you know what else? Congress is his fault. Yep. President Obama "has been delegitimizing the legislative branch" by pointing out that House Republicans have been doing nothing other than holding repeal Obamacare and anti-abortion votes. The Republican House of Representatives isn't delegitimized by the fact that they're trying to nullify existing law. They're delegitimized by President Obama pointing that out.

And, yes, this guy managed to get his drivel published (where else) at Politico. So who's this guy? "Keith Koffler, who covered the White House as a reporter for CongressDaily and Roll Call, is editor of the website White House Dossier." Just another (former, thankfully) member of the "objective" press.