Four Addiction Medicine Fellowship Programs Accredited by The ABAM Foundation

Total Programs Accredited by American Board of Addiction Medicine Foundation Now Stands at 23

Released:

Source Newsroom: Addiction Medicine Foundation

Add to Favorites

Contact Information Available for logged-in reporters only

Newswise — The American Board of Addiction Medicine (ABAM) Foundation today announced the accreditation of four new addiction medicine fellowship programs, bringing the total number of accredited programs to 23.

The fellowship programs, which are modeled on the Foundation’s national guidelines, Program Requirements for Graduate Medical Education in Addiction Medicine, are based at leading medical institutions across the U.S. and Canada. Accreditation of these new programs means that there are now 58 addiction medicine fellowship slots available each year.

“We now have accredited addiction medicine fellowships at leading institutions on both coasts and at a number of locales in between, as well as in two Canadian provinces, and plans for further expansion,” said Patrick G. O’Connor, MD, MPH, FACP, President of ABAM and The ABAM Foundation, and Professor of Medicine and Chief of the Section of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine. “These fellowships train future addiction medicine leaders. Together with passage of our rigorous examination, this clinical training will help make evidence-based addiction treatment more readily available to those who need it.”

The ABAM Foundation hopes to accredit 50 addiction medicine fellowship programs by 2020.

The new fellowship programs are: The University of Colorado Addiction Medicine Fellowship (Aurora, CO); The Summa Addiction Medicine Fellowship (Akron, OH); The Swedish Medical Center Addiction Medicine Fellowship (Seattle, WA); and The Hines / Loyola Addiction Medicine Fellowship (Hines/Maywood, IL). (See table at end of this release for information on these programs, and detailed summaries of all ABAM Foundation fellowship programs at www.abamfoundation.org).

The ABAM Foundation-accredited fellowship programs provide subspecialty training, which is offered to physicians already trained in a specialty such as internal medicine, family medicine, pediatrics, psychiatry, emergency medicine, surgery, preventive medicine, or obstetrics and gynecology.

The American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology offers its own fellowships in the psychiatry subspecialty of addiction psychiatry. There are 45 addiction psychiatry fellowship programs in the U.S.

The new training programs have been established at a time of increasing promise for addiction treatment, as well as an increased need for trained treatment providers. Recent scientific discoveries have confirmed that addiction is a chronic disease of the brain caused by biological and developmental factors, with unique vulnerabilities and pathology, and a predictable course, if not interrupted by effective treatment. An increasing number of medically based addiction treatments have recently become available. Expanded coverage and demand for addiction medicine physicians will increase, as 30 million formerly uninsured Americans become covered under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

Accrediting these and future training programs will help to assure the American public that addiction physician specialists have the knowledge and skills to prevent, recognize and treat addiction. It will also help ensure that trained physicians are available to address common medical or psychiatric conditions related to the use of addictive substances.

Physician training in addiction medicine was lacking prior to the establishment of ABAM and The ABAM Foundation; only the specialty of psychiatry previously offered sub-specialized training and certification in addictions. Separate courses in addiction medicine are rarely taught in medical school, and there are no addiction medicine residencies among the 8,887 Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) accredited residency programs in the nation’s hospitals. Once the Foundation has demonstrated that its fellowships meet ACGME criteria, it will apply to the ACGME to accredit them.

The ABAM Foundation is accepting applications on an ongoing basis from programs seeking accreditation. For more information, please contact The ABAM Foundation accreditation office at AddictionMedicine@buffalo.edu.

The ABAM Foundation’s purpose is to establish and accredit addiction medicine training programs and support the mission of the American Board of Addiction Medicine. ABAM’s mission is to improve the quality of care in the medical specialty of addiction medicine, establish standards and procedures, and certify physicians as experts in this specialized field of medical practice. ABAM's goal is to have a member board of the American Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS) certify physicians in addiction medicine. ABAM and The ABAM Foundation are governed by 16 distinguished physicians from a range of medical specialties, each of whom is certified by a member board of the ABMS. For more information, visit: www.abamfoundation.org and www.abam.net. More detail on the new ABAM Foundation-accredited residencies follows.

Newly Accredited ABAM Foundation Addiction Medicine Fellowships, As Of April 2014 Name of Fellowship Program Hines/Loyola Addiction Medicine Fellowship Summa Addiction Medicine Fellowship Swedish Addiction Medicine Fellowship University of Colorado Addiction Medicine Fellowship Location Hines/Maywood, IL Akron, OH Seattle, WA Aurora, CO Sponsoring Institution Loyola University Medical Center Summa Health System Swedish Medical Center University of Colorado Hospital Medical School

Loyola University Stritch School of Medicine Northeast Ohio Medical University University of Washington School of Medicine University of Colorado School of Medicine Primary Clinical Site Edward Hines Jr. VA Hospital St. Thomas Hospital Swedish Medical Center / Ballard Center for Dependency, Addiction and Rehabilitation, University of Colorado Hospital Program Length One Year One Year One Year One Year Number of Fellows One Fellow Two Fellows One Fellow One Fellow Program Director Christina Girgis, MD Nicole Ballerini, DO James Walsh, MD Patricia Pade, MD Program Director's Primary Specialty Psychiatry Family Practice Family Medicine Internal Medicine Number of Physician Faculty (Including Program Director) Seven Faculty Nine Faculty Nine Faculty Eight Faculty Faculty with Addiction Medicine Certification Two Three Seven Two Faculty with Addiction Psychiatry Certification Two One 0 Four

Reporters: follow Looking for a different expert? Reporters can submit an

Expert Query. follow @Expert_Pitch to receive instant updates via TwitterLooking for a different expert? Reporters can submit an Promote your organization’s experts with Expert Pitch

Comment/Share