No residency? No problem, go ahead and practice in an underserved area, says Missouri. The ACGME sees some big risks, reports Cheryl Clark of HealthLeaders Media.

Following accidents that resulted in anthrax exposure the CDC announced it had shutdown its flu and anthrax labs, The New York Times reports.

The unrelenting opposition by American conservatives to Obamacare may have the unintended consequence of leading the U.S. to a single payer system like Canada's," writes Bob Doherty of the American College of Physicians.

Meet the medical student who wants to take down Dr. Oz. Julia Belluz makes the introduction.

Tell your patients on oxygen to shave their mustaches to avoid burns, says the author of a new case report.

Looking to retire? Here's how to do it the right way, says David Mann, MD. And Andrew Quint, MD, explains why he's retiring at a fairly early age.

Hospital violence is increasing, reports Chicago's ABC7 following an Indiana incident. Here's how to survive a hospital shooting.

Could malaria drugs be useful in multiple myeloma?

One Washington, DC, doctor is prescribing a walk in the park to prevent obesity.

Actos is once again in the headlines for its potential use against Alzheimer's.

Let's extend hospital visiting hours, says a new initiative (The New York Times).

Social media is an opportunity for psychiatrists, says psychiatry resident Holly Peek, MD.

Seeking free sperm, some women bypass commercial sperm banks in favor of unregulated websites to meet men wanting to donate, NPR reports.

Two senators have sent Gilead Sciences for more information about how they decided to price $1,000-per-pill HCV drug Solvaldi.

After a 2-day meeting, an FDA panel found no evidence that currently available methods can prevent accidental spread of undiagnosed uterine cancer during use of power morcellators to treat fibroids.

Morning Break is a daily guide to what's new and interesting on the Web for healthcare professionals, powered by the MedPage Today community. Got a tip? Send it to us: MPT_editorial@everydayhealthinc.com.