Presidential candidate and U.S. Senator Ted Cruz was in Tulsa on Saturday as a special guest of U.S. Representative Jim Bridenstine.The meeting wasn't for major political reasons; it was to celebrate Bridenstine's 40th birthday.Cruz was in Oklahoma City earlier in the day for another event.Cruz is one of many candidates vying for the Republican presidential nomination. He has been vocal in his opposition to many of President Obama's policies and actions.Cruz says his biggest issue with the Obama Administration is the Affordable Care Act. He says the system is flawed and a major component of his race to the White House will be to repeal Obamacare and replace it.Before the birthday party, Cruz spoke about his run for the White House, but he and Bridenstine also touched on the American Energy Renaissance Act they introduced.The ultimate goal for the act if approved would be to expand states' rights when it comes to generating and exporting energy. Both say if it's passed, it'll be the economic boost America needs."When it comes to energy, we truly need an all-of-the-above strategy, not an all-the-above ground strategy. It's not just wind and solar. We need and all of the above for the American excellence that we've all come to expect."Texas and Oklahoma are known for their natural resources, however Bridenstine says under the Obama administration, the two states haven't been able to flourish as they should."The challenge we have is not that Vladamir Putin won't let us export energy,” he said. “The problem we have is that President Obama won't let us export energy."He says getting the AER Act approved would fix that. He says the act would give individual states the right to regulate hydraulic fracking. It would limit the EPA's influence on such matters, and allow foreign exportation of American energy."If we were to export our energy, it would have a crippling effect on the central government of Russia, and at the same time, provide security to our friends and allies in eastern and central Europe,” Bridenstine said.They say the act would lead to more control of energy which will bring more jobs – a benefit Americans shouldn't pass up."We agree on the need for a strong national defense and jobs and economic growth, and that's what this is all about,” Cruz said.Opponents say approving the act would create more pollution by increasing energy use, while others argue fracking has too many negative impacts.Although the two met for Bridenstine's birthday, Bridenstine says it's too early to cast his support behind Cruz for president, but says he has faith Cruz could do the job.