HIGH POINT, N.C., Sept. 9, 2015 – High Point University broke ground on the $88 million School of Health Sciences and the School of Pharmacy facility today – a monumental moment in HPU’s 91-year history.

Gov. Pat McCrory was in attendance to support the economic impact of these programs, which will create 100 new positions in the Triad, bring 700 new students to campus and prepare graduates to take on health care roles that are growing in demand in the Triad and across the nation. HPU will be the only university in the Triad with a School of Pharmacy.

“What you’re doing here today is responding to our future needs,” McCrory said. “If N.C. is going to compete, we need places like High Point University that understand we must prepare for our future instead of reacting to our past. That’s exactly what your leader [President Nido Qubein] has been doing and continues to do. If you stand still, you lose. You’ve got to keep growing and anticipating, and with that, we all win.”

“High Point University is a $465 million economic engine for our community,” said High Point Mayor Bill Bencini. “Now they are building medical programs that will attract accomplished students and professors to our community. That’s in addition to the 80,000 annual visitors they bring to our city. We are proud of the commitment they’ve made to our city, and we’re proud to call ourselves the home of HPU.”

The two academic schools were also officially named the Congdon School of Health Sciences and the Fred Wilson School of Pharmacy in honor of two local families who are supporters of HPU. Earl Congdon is executive chairman of the Old Dominion Freight Line, one of America’s leading transportation logistic companies with 10,000 employees. Wilson is chairman of the board of Piedmont Chemical Industries, Inc. including five companies with plants in North Carolina, South Carolina and Tennessee.

“This is the American dream personified,” Qubein said. “This is what happens when you believe in the fundamentals and principles that built this country. This day is another page in our history book because when you make the right choices and have God’s grace as your guide and your leader in all you do, good things happen.”

The schools represent a total investment of $120 million – the university’s single largest investment. They will be housed in a 220,000-square-foot complex that will include advanced biomedical research facilities, a cadaver lab, standardized client space that will record students’ interactions with patients to allow for critiquing, a medical simulation lab and much more.

The construction, technology and new equipment alone will have a $90 million, one-time economic impact on the Triad. Once completed, the schools will increase HPU’s annual impact to nearly $500 million (adding $33 million to the current $465 million). The facility is scheduled to be completed in spring 2017.

According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the future of health care requires more providers across the board to care for the aging baby boomer population and the millions of individuals being introduced to the system through the Affordable Care Act. Programs offered in these schools will prepare students to fill these roles right here in the Triad, throughout the nation and around the world.

About the Schools:

The School of Health Sciences began offering two new programs this year – a master’s degree in physician assistant studies and a master’s degree in athletic training, in addition to its existing exercise science bachelor’s degree program. It will grow to offer a doctoral degree in physical therapy starting in 2017.

The School of Pharmacy will offer a six-year PharmD degree and is scheduled to welcome its first class in fall 2016.

Jobs in High Demand:

BLS data shows demand for providers in these fields will grow up to 38 percent by 2022 – much faster than the average for most occupations. HPU will house the only pharmacy school in the Piedmont Triad and fourth in the state of North Carolina. The schools will create a cornerstone for medical innovation at HPU.

By the Numbers: