With several city projects coming on line, public artworks also take center stage

Artist Robert Tulley, far left, and welder Jeff Dillon, steady Tulley's sculpture and make sure it is level before welding it to the base while installing the piece Dec. 12 at Mehaffey Park in Loveland. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

For city officials, 2014 was a busy one for public sculpture. Four large projects, each years in the making, all were installed during the year at various public locations.

Big sculptures by the numbers Loveland Service Center: The total cost was $78,160. Loveland Fire Authority's Fire Station 2: $41,000 Equinox at I-25 and U.S. 34: $225,000 (with $163,000 of that from Colorado Department of Transportation) Mehaffey Park art: $52,400

"We haven't had so many happen all at once within a couple months of each other before," said Susan Ison, cultural services director with the city of Loveland.

She said capital projects in the city slowed as a result of the recession, and many building projects had been on hold until the past couple of years, when they were released to be built. By city ordinance, 1 percent of the costs of a city capital project goes toward public art, and the completion of those projects meant the public art associated with each also arrived in 2014.

A sculpture at the interchange of U.S. 34 and Interstate 25, called "Equinox," by Doug Erion, Doug Rutledge and Jack Kreutzer was placed in September after years of planning and working with the Colorado Department of Transportation on colors and logistics.

Advertisement

The new Loveland Fire Rescue Authority's Station No. 2 ( 3070 W. 29th St.) opened in October, and with it, a brick patio and art bench by Ken Williams of Ken Williams' Studio, which stands tall out front and can be viewed from the street.

The city's Public Works Department also dedicated an expansion of the Loveland Service Center in October (First Street and Wilson Avenue), including a large-scale stone sculpture, "Interconnections," by Andy Dufford of Chevo Studios, Denver.

A sculpture titled "Interconnections" by artist Andy Dufford with Chevo Studios, as seen at the Loveland Service Center on Oct. 10. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

And artist Robert Tully recently finished installing three public art elements depicting westward expansion at a new Mehaffey Park west of town. The park's first phase will be completed in 2015.

"The art pieces are highly visible pieces on well-traveled streets and all very different, so they have added diversity to the public art. The public response has been very positive and we're so happy with the end result," Ison said.

Tully used an "Overland Trail theme" for his pieces at Mehaffey Park because the park is along the alignment of the 19th century Overland Trail.

"My goal was to find artwork that related to that historic time as well as the natural setting and have a link to the present day," Tully said. "So I think from there I let my imagination go and came up with a group of three artworks that all address the Overland Trail, but in different ways."

Iron workers from LPR Construction work Thursday, Sept. 25, to erect Equinox, a 50 foot-tall steel sculpture by Loveland artists Doug Rutledge, Doug Erion, and Jack Kreutzer at the Interstate 25/U.S. 34 interchange in Loveland. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

His pieces include a stone column that marks part of the Overland Trail and is reflected in a nearby pond.

A nearby mosaic wall has an image of a landscape as it might have been many years ago with a big sky and rolling prairie.

"The mosaic has taken a lot of effort to find the right pieces of stone," Tully said. "I'm using hand cut pieces of tile. The chokecherry tree has cherries made of pebbles, the sky has storm clouds made of dark pebbles, the land is made out of sandstone pieces."

The third element is a compass structure at the top of a hill.

"In my research, I came across an old compass from the 1800s," Tully said. "A compass is something they would have relied on, and can relate to the present day. People are always making choices on direction."

Ken Williams said the process of building bricks goes back to 700 BC.

"It's not a new thing to make artwork from brick," he said.

The piece he designed for the fire station is an abstract and colorful piece rising over a bench and tile floor.

The sculpture is made from colorful bricks that involved cutting the bricks while they were still clay into the design he wanted, firing them, taking them apart, glazing them with different colors, and firing them again.

"We assembled them at the job site with mortar. It is a tedious and laborious process," Williams said. His four daughters also helped him at various stages at his studio in Broomfield.

The piece was designed to be touched and sat upon, he said.

The former fire chief, Randy Mirowski, also wanted some tribute to the sacrifice of first responders on 9/11, so Williams designed into the floor of the piece the ghost outlines of the twin towers and the energy of the fire going through them.

"It's gone but it's in our memories still," Williams said.

As they reconstructed the piece onsite, Williams said they got to know people in the community.

"There was a lot of interest and enthusiasm by construction workers (of the fire station) as it was being built," he said. "I'm really pleased to be part of the public art collection in Loveland because there is such an emphasis on art there. The public must have appreciated it or they wouldn't have it."

"It has been a good year," Ison said. "We will have to spend some time thinking about what is happening next."

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/jessicabenes.