SCOTTSDALE, ARIZ. — Christian Friedrich’s fresh start gets its first big test on Monday.

The Rockies’ left-handed starter, who missed much of the last two seasons because of a lower-back problem, will start Monday night’s Cactus League game against the Diamondbacks. (It’s the second half of a split-squad day for the Rockies). It’s fair to say the Friedrich is ahead of schedule and will make a bid for a spot in the rotation now that right-hander Jhoulys Chacin is out with a shoulder strain.

“I’m throwing everything now,” Friedrich said Wednesday morning. “Some of the pitches I threw (Tuesday in live batting practice) felt really good. I was really able to let them go. I’ve had no issues with the back. There are no brakes being put on me, so whatever I can handle, I can handle.”

But is he far enough along to compete for a spot in the rotation? “Yes, but I’ve been around this team long enough to know that we are going to need seven our eight guys through the course of our season. So you don’t look at just those five spots.”

Right-hander Eddie Butler, one of the Rockies’ top prospects, will start Thursday’s intersquad game vs. Jayson Aquino. Also scheduled to pitch is right-hander Jon Gray, the Rockies’ 2013 first-round draft choice.

Here is the tentative pitching schedule for the first portion of the Rockies’ Cactus League schedule:

Thursday (Intrasquad)

Jayson Aquino, Raul Fernandez, Tyler Chatwood, Christian Bergman

vs.

Eddie Butler, Kraig Sitton, Scott Oberg, Jon Gray, Nick Masset

Friday at Diamondbacks

Franklin Morales, Tyler Matzek, Greg Burke, Adam Ottavino, Chris Martin, Tommy Kahnle, Rex Brothers, Wilton Lopez (backup), Brooks Brown (backup)

Saturday at Reds

Jordan Lyles, Matt Belisle, Rob Scahill, Pedro Hernandez, Yohan Flande, Brown, Lopez, Sitton (backup), Bergman (backup), Aquino (backup).

Sunday vs. Brewers

Jorge De La Rosa, Brothers, Chad Bettis, Manny Corpas, Oberg, Sitton, Fernandez, Kahnle (backup)

Monday at Mariners (split squad)

Brett Anderson, Lopez, Scahill, Aquino, Burke, Martin, Gray, Kahnle

Monday vs. Diamondbacks (split squad)

Friedrich, Butler, Bergman, Ottavino, Brown

Tuesday vs. Giants

Juan Nicasio, La Troy Hawkins, Belisle, Hernandez, Flande