A hot topic in America today is the income inequality that exists between what men and women get paid for doing the same job

But women are discriminated against not only by income, but also by outgo. That means they pay more than men do for the same item.

Also known as the “Pink Tax”, the problem has even become a legislative issue in France, where the government is considering legal action related to the fact that French women are charged much more than French men for toiletries and clothing. But the problem exists in the United States as well, and extended to something a bit pricier than deodorant: Health care.

In 2010, Consumer Reports did a study of everyday purchases for men and women in the United States, and determined that women can pay as much as $1,300 more than men annually for similar purchases of toiletries, clothing and services. Packages of identical razors, for example, were priced almost $1 differently based solely on color (pink for women, blue for men). Deodorants targeted for women can cost as much as $3 more than deodorants targeted for men, with identical ingredients (although the fragrance may be different).

The same is true of dry cleaning charges. Two shirts made of the same material and differing only in how they are buttoned (buttons on the right versus buttons on the left) can be charged differently by as much as $1.

Women are also charged differently based on their body type. Some companies charge more to plus-sized women for the same piece of clothing offered to smaller women, but extra-large sizes for men cost the same as regular sizes of the same item.

In California, New York City and Miami-Dade County in Florida, gender pricing is illegal. When California banned gender pricing in 1996, it found that on average women spent an extra $13.51 per year in extra costs for regular purchases.

Now the National Women’s Law Center has discovered yet another example of a pink tax, and it is a hefty one. For many insurance policies, a non-smoking woman often pays a higher premium than a smoking man of the same age. The NWLC said women pay $1 billion more on annual health care costs than men.

While some states have banned such practices, and the Affordable Care Act makes such pricing illegal if a state adopts the ACA, many other insurance plans charge women more.

It is true that healthy women visit the doctor more often than men. Not only are there gynecological reasons for a woman to see a doctor that men do not deal with, but women are more likely to visit the doctor for regular checkups. Multiple surveys have found that women are as much as three times more likely to see a doctor at least once a year and are more likely to have a regular doctor.