Senate takes up 'blacklisting'

With help from Alex Guillén, Marianne LeVine, and Timothy Noah.

SENATE TAKES UP ‘BLACKLISTING’: The Senate is this week scheduled to take up its massive defense policy bill, which includes a provision to weaken a proposed regulation that would require businesses to disclose past labor law violations whenever they bid on federal contracts. Under the amendment, only those defense contractors that have been debarred or otherwise suspended for violating federal labor laws would be subject to what business groups have dubbed the “blacklisting” rule. The House passed an its own version of the NDAA last week with a provision that would block the rule entirely for Defense Department and National Security Administration contractors.

Story Continued Below

In addition, Sen. Jerry Moran (R-KS) has pre-filed an amendment to the NDAA that would bar the NLRB from asserting jurisdiction over the Native American governmental employers that control the majority of Indian-owned casinos in the United States. The House passed stand-alone legislation that does the same thing. House Republicans last week also passed an amendment potentially shielding religious groups from an executive order that prohibits discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity. The Obama administration opposed that provision, and the provision on the “blacklisting rule,” in an administrative statement last week.

Also for your legislative radar: A bipartisan deal to end Puerto Rico’s debt crisis will go through markup in the House and Senate this week. Although several key Democrats, including House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), last week praised the compromise, major unions oppose it because it reduces the minimum wage and overtime protections. The House Natural Resources Committee will make opening statements on the markup at 5 p.m. Tuesday, with full markup on Wednesday starting at 10 a.m.

GOOD MORNING. It's Monday, May 23, and this is Morning Shift, POLITICO's daily tipsheet on labor and employment policy. Send tips, exclusives, and corrections to bmahoney@politico.com, tnoah@politico.com, cschneier@politico.com, and mlevine@politico.com. Follow us on Twitter at @politicomahoney, @TimothyNoah1, @CoganSchneier, and @marianne_levine.

SEIU GATHERS IN DETROIT: Notable developments from the SEIU national convention, which began Sunday and ends Tuesday.

—Delegates to approve AFSCME partnership: SEIU delegates on Tuesday will likely approve a resolution that will deepen ties between the union and its public-sector ally AFSCME. “While we recognize the differences in culture and structure between our respective organizations and the divisions that have hampered us in the past,” the unions said in a recent resolution, “the times demand that we build on our common purpose.” The agreement will still need to be ratified by AFSCME members, but it marks a big step in a potential merger between the two major unions.” http://detne.ws/1TBT60I

— Fight for $15 affiliates: SEIU has long funded the Fight for $15 movement, a fast food workers campaign that’s pressed successfully for a $15 minimum wage at the state and local level. Fight for $15 organizers will soon vote to affiliate formally with SEIU, although they won’t be paying union dues, according to Buzzfeed’s Cora Lewis. “We have never let an outdated labor law stand in the way of workers being able to stand together,” SEIU President Mary Kay Henry told BuzzFeed. “We did it 90 years ago for janitors, 40 years ago with every public employee, and 15 years ago for home care workers.” http://bzfd.it/1Tt03O2

— Henry reelected: Henry ran uncontested, winning her second full term. Former executive vice president Gerry Hudson was elected as International Secretary-Treasurer, replacing Mike Fishman, who is retiring after more than 30 years in the labor movement. Full release from SEIU here: http://bit.ly/1TxwInI

Watch Henry’s convention speech here: http://bit.ly/1TCY2Cg

—Core principles: The union also committed to three core commitments: finding news ways for workers to organize and exercise collective power; building a broader movement; and innovating within the union.

ASSESSING OVERTIME BLOWBACK: POLITICO’S Marianne LeVine weighs predictions from opponents of the overtime rule that it will harm workers. Will employers convert salaried employees into hourly ones? Maybe, but “workers are much more concerned with how much they’re getting paid than some perceived status,” says former Deputy Secretary of Labor Seth Harris. What about flexibility? A 2014 study by the left-leaning Economic Policy Institute found that salaried workers in the group newly eligible for overtime “don’t have noticeably greater levels of work flexibility that they would ‘lose’ if they became more like their hourly counterparts.”

The threat of lost health insurance and pensions is more serious, LeVine writes. But firms with more than 50 employees are required already under the Affordable Care Act either to provide health insurance or to contribute toward its purchase. Firms with fewer than 50 employees are not, but only 35 percent of these provide health insurance. As for employer-sponsored pensions, only 38 percent of the newly eligible group are enrolled in any. More for Pros here: http://politico.pro/1RdIXkR

‘SPRING BREAK FOR STRIKE BREAKERS’: CWA’s Verizon strike enters its second month without any resolution. Union and company officials bargained at the Labor Department in Washington, D.C. last week, agreeing to a media blackout. Buzzfeed’s Cora Lewis reports on Verizon’s elaborate replacement worker training center in Leesburg, Va., where the company quickly trains temp workers for deployment to areas where permanent workers are on strike.

“The facility in Leesburg,” Lewis writes, “is proof of that investment and highlights the current corporate approach to battling organized labor: an all-inclusive spring break in the woods for mid-level management and picket-crossers to learn skills and hobnob (face-time with Senior Vice Presidents included), far removed from the front-lines of workplaces and the strikers themselves.” http://bzfd.it/1U6HdM0

DEADLOCKED FEC DROPS MURRAY COERCION COMPLAINT: The Federal Election Commission will not investigate coal magnate Robert Murray, his company, or the company's PAC, after the six commissioners deadlocked on a 2012 coercion complaint. In a statement released Friday, three of the commissioners — two Democrats and an independent — wrote that they could not attract a fourth vote from one of the three Republican commissioners to investigate allegations that Murray pressured employees to make political contributions to favored candidates.

The FEC's Office of General Counsel concluded in February that there was evidence sufficient for the commissioners to vote to investigate. But Murray is active in the Republican Party, and he’s on the hosting committee for July’s convention in Cleveland, and his company downplayed the allegations. The FEC came to a similar deadlock last summer on complaints that Murray forced miners to attend a rally for Mitt Romney in 2012.

NLRB UPDATE

— D.C. CIRC. REJECTS CHALLENGE TO INFO REQUEST: A D.C. Circuit panel rejected a challenge from IronTiger Logistics to overrule an NLRB policy that requires employers to fulfill a union’s request for information so long as the information requested is “presumptively relevant” to bargaining. While denying the broad challenge, the court remanded the case, requesting a demonstration that the information at issue was “presumptively relevant.” Decision here: http://1.usa.gov/259GPo7

— D.C. CIRC. REVERSED BOARD IN UNION THREATS CASE: Also Friday, the D.C. Circuit held that the NLRB wrongly certified a LiUNA local election at the Pennsylvania nursing company ManorCare of Kingston. The court held that the board downplayed several threats of violence from third parties in the case. “We conclude that the board abused its discretion here by finding that the threats did not create a ‘general atmosphere of fear and reprisal’ according to the Board’s own precedent,” the decision said. http://1.usa.gov/1OHnOjt

— COURT NIXES ATTORNEY FEES AWARD: In yet another NLRB-related case Friday, the D.C. Circuit upheld a requirement that the HTH Corporation read a notice informing employees that it had violated the NLRA. The court, however, vacated an order requiring the company to pay attorney’s fees to the union in the case. Full opinion here: http://1.usa.gov/1TPtLfR

— COMPANY WINS FEE BID AGAINST BOARD: From BNA’s Larry Dube: “The National Labor Relations Board was not justified in pursuing a preliminary injunction against a nursing home and must pay the employer's attorneys' fees, a federal district court in Alabama has ruled. The decision is a reminder that smaller organizations that prevail in litigation against the NLRB may have a right under federal law to seek reimbursement for their legal expenses.” Full decision here: http://bit.ly/1Ri6pNU

—NLRB FILES COMPLAINT AGAINST DOD FOOD CONTRACTOR: The NLRB has filed a complaint against the Defense Department food contractor Seven Hills, alleging the company threatened and fired workers for organizing activity with the advocacy group Good Jobs Nation. Complaint here: http://bit.ly/1TsCLI2

NEW RIGHT-TO-WORK LAWSUIT IN WISCONSIN: Two International Union of Operating Engineers locals filed a federal court lawsuit seeking to invalidate Wisconsin’s new right-to-work law.

The new suit claims that the law regulates concerted activities that are protected by the NLRA. It also argues that it violates civil rights by interfering “with the free play of economic forces in collective bargaining over a mandatory bargaining subject, and because it attempts to regulate a subject of collective bargaining that Congress intended to leave for the parties to negotiate, free of state regulation."

It comes more than one month after a Wisconsin state court invalidated Gov. Scott Walker’s right-to-work law, a decision likely to be reversed on appeal. Complaint here: http://bit.ly/1ORVTTh

COFFEE BREAK

— Richard Trumka urges President Obama to speak out on Brazil crisis: http://bit.ly/1RiaLoe

— Organized labor pushing flexible scheduling aggressively in California, from Sacramento Business Journal: http://bit.ly/1To7vPT

— Domestic workers in California speak out to preserve overtime, from SFGate: http://bit.ly/1WJ0A4c

— Manager reportedly urinates on employee, employer fined by EEOC, from Reveal: http://bit.ly/1OHjvo8

— Trump’s New York golf course seeks guest workers, from Buzzfeed: http://bzfd.it/1U6Hs9P

— Honeywell lockout will likely stretch into June, from South Bend Tribune: http://bit.ly/20mVFnP

— Foreign-Born Workers Account for Rising Share of U.S. Labor Force, from The Wall Street Journal: http://on.wsj.com/2432Su7

— “Labor Republicans” stand ground in Missouri, from The Missouri Times: http://bit.ly/1s2TDya

— Clinton taps Dolores Huerta as senior adviser, from The Mercury News: http://bayareane.ws/20mQww2

— ‘Farm labor camp’ proposed for 600 workers in California, from Lompoc Herald: http://bit.ly/1sMpVOB

—Union sues Bath Iron Works after arbitrator’s decision, from Portland Press Herald: http://bit.ly/1ORQ1JN

— Fast food automation tipping point could come soon, from CNBC: http://cnb.cx/259L038

— Democratic Louisiana governor sees workplace priorities blocked, from The Times-Picayune: http://bit.ly/1TobTyl

— New York Attorney General announces wage theft conviction: http://bit.ly/1WJ1OMI

THAT’S ALL FOR MORNING SHIFT.