The Republican debate on Thursday evening was pretty much what you would expect from the remaining candidates. There were, however, some pretty important things to know about this group of men and one woman — Carly Fiorina — who have a shot at becoming our next Commander in Chief. Here are our top 10 moments, complete with GIFs for your viewing pleasure.

There is a massive dispute on whether or not Ted Cruz is eligible to be president.

The once brewing bromance between Donald Trump and Ted Cruz appears to be over, as the former reality television star went on the attack against Cruz for being born in Canada.

"Back in September, my friend Donald said he had his lawyers look at this in every which way, and there was no issue there," Cruz said. "There was nothing to this birther issue. Since September, the Constitution hasn't changed. But the poll numbers have,” referencing his rise in the polls against Trump.

Members of the GOP have long (and falsely) claimed that President Barack Obama was not eligible to be president, pushing conspiracy theories for years over whether or not Obama was a natural born citizen of the United States.

The GOP frontrunner still thinks political correctness is best left out of politics.

"We have to stop with political correctness," Trump said, speaking on his unconstitutional call to discriminate against Muslims based on their religion and ban them from immigrating to the United States.

"All Muslims, seriously? What kind of signal does that send to the rest of the world?" Jeb Bush asked, reminding Trump that Arab nations are needed to build a coalition to defeat ISIS.

There are 1.6 billion people of the Islamic faith in this world, let's not lump everyone together out of fear.

There were promises to overturn President Obama’s historic efforts on gun control.

"I am convinced that if this president could confiscate every gun in America, he would," Marco Rubio said while promising to overturn Obama’s actions to require background checks on people who purchase guns. "I am convinced that this president, if he could get rid of the Second Amendment, he would."

For all of the candidates' talk about fear, the one thing they absolutely do not want you to fear are the weapons which killed 13,352 people last year. Obama is not attempting to take away anyone’s guns; the measures he put in place enable us to better control who obtains them moving forward.

Ted Cruz won't hesitate to jump into another war.

When asked about jobs, Cruz changed course and dove into the 10 U.S. sailors who were temporarily detained by Iran on Tuesday. Government officials confirmed on Thursday that the crew had entered Iranian territorial waters by mistake after a navigational error.

Cruz is ready for war, however. “Any nation that captures our fighting men will feel the full force and fury of the United States of America,” he asserted.

America is finally making progress in fixing its long fractured relationship with Iran. This is no time for fighting words. A mistake was made, we apologized, and no one was hurt.

The environment does not need to be protected.

Marco Rubio has a not-so-friendly history with the Environmental Protection Agency, and he made sure to throw a dig in on Thursday evening. "Regulations in this country are out of control, especially the Employment Prevention Agency,” Rubio joked, referring to the EPA.

The moderators did not ask a single question on climate change. At least this 15-year-old is doing something about it.

Donald Trump claimed that police are the most “mistreated people” in the country.

In 2015, more than 1,000 people were killed by police in the United States. The deaths have led to global outrage and a spotlight on policing in this country. Whether you agree with the protests of the Black Lives Matter movement or not, deaths at the hands of police is at rate far higher than other developed countries and we can do better.

Rubio slammed Christie for allegedly donating to Planned Parenthood in the 1990s.

“Our next president has to be someone that un-does the damage Barack Obama has done to our country. It cannot be someone that agrees with his agenda. Because the damage he has done to America is extraordinary… If we don’t get this election right, there may be no turning back for America.”

Christie denied the donation ever happened, but the International Business Times found a statement from Christie in 1994 to NJ.com, where he said, "I support Planned Parenthood privately with my personal contribution." Christie says he was misquoted then.

Either way, if you're a feminist — anyone, male or female, who supports equality and women — then you probably support Planned Parenthood. The women's healthcare organization provides care to a little over 4.5 million people every year, many of whom would otherwise not be able to afford it. These continued attacks against the organization have got to stop.

Rubio went after Cruz’s tax plan saying it would hurt the elderly, and he’s right.

Cruz has a plan to replace income tax with additional sales taxes, but retired people don’t work, so they are hit with additional taxes without any offsetting benefits. Think about how your grandparents will be affected, and you, every time you'd purchase something subjected to this additional tax.

They really hate Obamacare, no matter what the facts are.

Rubio reiterated a popular Republican talking point that the Affordable Care Act is a "certified job-killer" and added, "It needs to be repealed and replaced." The GOP often claims that the new laws would cause companies to hire fewer workers. The reality though is that the U.S. has added jobs every month since the Affordable Care Act went on the books in March 2010, according to Politifact.

Bonus points: The Affordable Care Act provides birth control with no copay to millions of women.

Rand Paul protesters interrupted the debate.

A protest broke out toward the end of the debate with a chant of, "We want Rand! We want Rand!" Paul did not meet the polling numbers to make it to the main stage of the debate, and skipped the early debate to host a forum on Twitter instead. It seems he made the right choice, as he gained the second most Twitter followers during the debate after Trump. Perhaps the others should all stay home next time, too. We hear social media is pretty game changing in the 2016 race for the White House.

Related: Planned Parenthood Just Majorly Clapped Back Against the Group That Leaked Those Secret Videos