My first steady job was as a bag boy for Jewel Foods at the Evergreen Park Plaza, where service manager Marie Spoo was my boss.

At 16, I was clueless about pacing myself in the workplace. That's because jobs or chores that I had been assigned as a boy were often punishments that I tried to be done with as fast as possible.

So on the first hectic Saturday at Jewel, while I was busy breaking the speed record for stuffing a brown, 50-pound bag with groceries, store manager Wally Ruder came from behind and dumped all the contents on the counter.

I felt my face redden. My first urge was to run. My second was to rip off my apron and toss it at him.

Fortunately for me, Marie came rushing over, shooed Wally away and doubled the empty paper bag before helping me to refill it. At the same time, she patiently asked if my mother would have wanted the heavy cans of beans and tomato sauce on top, crushing the eggs and grapes, had she been my customer waiting in line.

Thanks to Marie, I henceforth perceived work as careful service to my fellow man for which I was compensated.

Though the difference in managerial style between Marie and Wally was extreme, I would learn from dozens of jobs over the next several decades that I was always more productive when my supervisor was female.

While unwritten rules of political correctness make me hesitate to write about character differences between the genders, neuroscientist Regini Verma conducted a study in 2014 at the University of Pennsylvania, confirming that the brains of men and women are different.

Verma concluded that brain tissue controlling language and communication is denser and more active in women, while those sections controlling math and geometry are more pronounced in men.

And then there is the maternal instinct, in a larger part of a woman's brain that Verma would say houses the "social skills." Historically, in most societies, women want to nurture others while men want to control them.

And when this tendency carries over into the working world, who wouldn't rather be nurtured than controlled? Who wouldn't rather be a momma's boy instead of a peon?

Ai-Jen Poo MacArthur Foundation Director of the National Domestic Workers Alliance, Poo has fought to improve conditions and protections for domestic and private-household workers, such as nannies, housekeepers and caregivers. Director of the National Domestic Workers Alliance, Poo has fought to improve conditions and protections for domestic and private-household workers, such as nannies, housekeepers and caregivers. (MacArthur Foundation)

My first significant full-time employment was as an English teacher at the sprawling Chicago Vocational High School on the Southeast Side. Dr. Reginald Brown was a charismatic and effective principal, with a militaristic approach that he believed was called for in a school housing about 4,000 teenagers.

His high expectations of students and teachers was contemporaneously compared to the zero tolerance for deviations from the rules demanded by the drill sergeant played by Lou Gossett Jr. in the 1983 film "An Officer and a Gentleman" who did not like to be questioned.

But since a rookie teacher has way more questions than answers, I needed guidance with his leadership, which I could only get from Maryhelen Ryan, head honcho in the school's attendance office who knew CVS inside out and could spot a doomed idea a mile away.

With no concerns about surrendering knowledge or power, Maryhelen freely gave me hide-saving advice, such as whose orders I could ignore (a certain loud and officious assistant principal) and whose I should follow to the letter (class schedule coordinator Mrs. Fortuna).

Knowing a good thing when I saw it, I thereafter cultivated friendships with the school's mostly female cafeteria staff and the tenured ladies in the English department, taking my lunch and coffee breaks with matriarchal mentors.

Whereas, to some male bosses, a 23 year-old greenhorn might represent a pawn, a threat or an opportunity for exploitation, the ladies saw a fledgling in need of care before being pushed out of the nest.

Nineteen years later, when I began teaching at a community college, the pattern repeated. Deans Sally Hadley, Nancy Prendergast and Jan Geesaman were more like allies than superiors, doling out from deep wells of compassion to their teachers and our students. While even the most cordial among the male administrators seldom seemed to come at you in a straight line.

Male bosses' priorities were their future advancement, their public perception and reputation, and at what angle, if any, an individual employee such as myself affected any of that. True enough, many gave me invaluable help, but it usually came with an IOU.

And this is why I have great hopes for the labor movement that until recently has been in precipitous decline. Women, whom I found more able or more willing to empathize with workers' struggles and feelings, have been lately leading labor's resurgence.

Saru Jayaraman, for example, head of Restaurant Opportunities Centers United, is seeking a national minimum wage for wait staff.

Karen Lewis, president of the Chicago Teachers Union, engineered a successful strike against the Chicago Public Schools in 2012.

Ai-jen Poo, leader of the National Domestic Workers Alliance, is a key figure in the push for immigration reform.

Randi Weingarten leads the American Federation of Teachers; Kay Henry, the Service Employees International Union; Barbara Crane, National Federation of Nurses; Nadia Marin Molina, the National Day Laborer Organizing Network; and Elizabeth Shuler is the secretary-treasurer of the mammoth AFL-CIO.

More women heading labor organizations is no guarantee against the mismanagement and corruption that severely damaged male-dominated unions during the last quarter-century.

But women labor leaders' emphasis on workers' needs and workplace conditions, as they affect the quality of family life at home, promises new hope and new life on this Labor Day weekend.

David McGrath is a former resident of Evergreen Park and Oak Forest and is an emeritus English professor at the College of DuPage. He has been a member of the United Retail Workers, Chicago Teachers Union and National Education Association.

mcgrathd@dupage.edu