Sioux Falls, SD

Farmers markets are a common sight in Sioux Falls, but now, there's a new business in town that's providing more than fresh produce. The New American Garden Market is giving customers a taste of culture from around the world.



With funding from a federal grant, the Somali-Bantu Community Development Council of South Dakota opened their very first farmers market in Sioux Falls. But this organization's agricultural program isn't just about selling fresh produce.

"We want to make our city more diverse, diversity for people, diversity for vegetables," Executive Director Abdul Sidow said.

That's not the only thing the council is giving to the people. Executive Director Abdul Sidow says all funds raised through this farmers market go back to the refugees of the program to assist them with everyday expenses they can't otherwise afford.

"We want the clients to reach self-sufficiency, and this is a way to help them reach self-sufficiency. So, you think this is a community garden, but this is more than a community garden, this is sort of a business," Sidow said.

Even though it's the first weekend this farmers market has been open, there are over 100 different types of plants in the garden.

From potatoes and cucumbers to traditional vegetables from different countries, this farmers market has something for everyone. Even though it'll take a while for many of the plants to start producing food, this market is already catching the eyes of people passing by.

"I think it's amazing. I mean, that they're making good use of the property here and, I had no idea that it'd look this good. It looks good," Jim Miller said.

Which is something the program's executive director hopes to expand upon to a second location in the future.

The New American Garden Market will be open in the Hy-Vee parking lot on 10th Street each Saturday and Sunday from 10 a.m. - 3 p.m. until mid-October.

Business {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:

A misspelling was corrected in this story.