Penelope Adams and her husband, Donald, look through past due statements from the hospital at their home in Bethel Springs. Adams suffered from a ruptured colon and went into debt. Her doctor would not see her without payment, and she traveled to Mississippi to complete her surgery. (Photo: MEGAN SMITH/GANNETT TENNESSEE)

After recovering from emergency, seven-hour surgery to repair a ruptured colon, Penelope Adams was sent home from the hospital in Jackson with some basic training on how to change a colostomy bag and — a pile of bills that she had no money to pay.

The 62-year-old's colon had unexpectedly ruptured, a life-threatening situation. But she hasn't had insurance since retiring in 2007 from her job at a bank, so she rang up more than $10,000 in bills. Nor did she have money to buy replacement colostomy bags that required changing two to three times day, so she had to improvise. For nine months she washed and re-used two dozen colostomy bags instead of buying new ones.

Nearly one in three Tennessee adults had outstanding medical debt — unpaid bills after insurance payment or the full cost without insurance — in 2012, a rate that ranks it seventh in the country, tied with three other states, according to the FINRA Investor Education Foundation. Mississippi has the highest average with 41 percent while the national average is 26 percent, the foundation reported.

Perhaps surprisingly, medical debt is more common among those who have insurance than those who don't. Two out of three people who have medical debt have some type of insurance, according to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. There are more networks in place for people who don't have insurance, leaving those with debt and insurance squeezed in the middle.

Nearly 20 percent of consumers have a medical collection on their credit report, which can impact their credit for years, the CFPB reported. Credit report data, however, does not represent the full burden of medical bills on consumers. Many people take out loans, credit cards or roll medical debt into mortgages.

Hospitals and other healthcare providers often work to provide care at low or no cost to people without insurance. But, in many cases, there are additional costs — treatments or services that are not covered by insurance — that leave people with outstanding debt.

Penelope Adams, 62, stands in her bathroom at her home in Bethel Springs. Behind her hang colostomy bags that she had to wash and reuse after she suffered from a ruptured colon earlier in the year. Adams said she washed her bags with hot water and alcohol and hung them to dry in the bathroom due to rising medical costs. (Photo: MEGAN SMITH/The Jackson Sun)

'Not mega-bills'

The incidence of medical debt is challenging to quantify. Data is pulled from bankruptcy records, credit reports and collection agency data.

But its impact on households is staggering. "The issue of medical bills on credit reports can ruin" people down the road when trying to buy a car, get a home loan or credit card, said Mark Rukavina, founder of Community Health Advisors, a healthcare advisory firm in Chestnut Hill, Mass. "It's a serious headache."

Adams, at one point, owed more than $10,000, including $6,300 to a single doctor. Adams' bill for her first surgery at Regional Hospital of Jackson was paid a few weeks after she was discharged. The hospital tries to identify which patients need and qualify for financial assistance, ranging from a discount to financial assistance or charity care, said a hospital spokeswoman, adding that the services are "part of our commitment to the community, and as required by law." Adams called it a "godsend." She still owed $6,300 to the surgeon, who wouldn't perform the second operation until she paid in full.

The median amount of medical debt that gets reported on consumer credit reports from collections agencies is $207, according to a December CFPB report.

"It's lots and lots of little bills. It's not the mega-bills," said Paul Keckley, a managing director in Navigant Consulting's healthcare practice. Two out of five people exhaust their savings to pay for health care, according to the CFPB; the average amount of medical debt that is in collection is $579.

Discretionary spending that could go toward paying medical bills often winds up going to other expenses. "You probably pay your cable bill before you pay your medical bill," said Keckley.

Tennessee's rate of medical debt is, in part, a manifestation of its workforce. Much of the state's workers have hourly jobs that don't offer insurance, except in more urban areas. The state also has higher rates of heart disease and obesity, which often require expensive long-term care.

Penelope Adams, 62, hold onto colostomy bags at her home in Bethel Springs. Adams had to wash and reuse bags to save money. (Photo: MEGAN SMITH/The Jackson Sun)

Insurance, belatedly

After she was discharged from her first surgery, Adams did get an insurance plan for $28.63 a month on the federal health exchange. This enabled Adams to afford a second surgery last month to repair her colon so she no longer needs a colostomy bag. She's making monthly payments to the Mississippi surgeon but can't afford what she still owes the first doctor.

Unexpected medical expenses, such as those from an accident or unexpected condition, can blindside people, leaving behind a massive pile of bills. Cynthia Podis, a partner at Podis & Podis law firm in Nashville that specializes in bankruptcy, estimates that half of the bankruptcies her firm files a month have a medical debt component.

In some cases it's switching jobs or a job loss that leaves someone uninsured. In others, a change in marital status can lead to being under- or uninsured.

Still for others — Adams included — it's the decision to forgo insurance, trusting that good health will continue, that lands them in financial trouble.

"They're betting on being healthy," said Podis. She has seen clients with $30,000 to 100,000 in medical bills.

"I was healthy enough where I figured I could get insurance later," said Adams. Yet insurance for herself was secondary to getting coverage for Donald, her husband of 43 years who has had five heart attacks and has diabetes.

"I was worried more about him until he got on SSI (in 2012). It was a godsend. I could breathe."

There is often a screening process in place to see who qualifies for charity, whether free or discounted care, or financing options such as sliding scales and interest-free plans.

"We try to help out patients, especially those with unexpected medical debts," said Nola Wyatt, vice president of revenue cycle operations at St. Thomas Health in Nashville. The hospital talks with patients up front to evaluate insurance status or ability to pay, Wyatt said, noting that money is often a chief concern for people coming into the hospital. The conversation up front assures them of the options once they leave.

Penelope and Don Adams at their home in Bethel Springs. (Photo: MEGAN SMITH/The Jackson Sun)

Cost of coverage

The Affordable Care Act individual mandate requiring people to have insurance or, in many cases, face a penalty, isn't expected to solve the debt burden. Some patients will see financial obligations rise. In many cases, employees are paying higher premiums as employers try to manage rising insurance costs by passing them along. "The increased amount being passed to insured patients has been remarkable over the last few years," said Wyatt.

In other cases, people buy plans with low premiums to save money each month, taking the risk that they won't be in the situation to pay the higher deductible. A $2,000 deductible can be overwhelming for many people, noted Rukavina.

Unexpected hospitalization?

Talk with your doctor or hospital about payment plans. Many have extensive programs designed to help make health care more affordable.

Bernard Health is a Nashville-based advisory firm that helps individuals and families as well as businesses with insurance and Medicare concerns. Three locations:

•720 Thompson Lane, Nashville, TN 37204

100oaksnashville@bernardhealth.com

•4501 Harding Pike, Nashville, TN 37205

bellemeade@bernardhealth.com

•1735 Galleria Blvd, Suite 1047, Franklin, TN 37067

coolsprings@bernardhealth.com

Legal Aid Society of Middle Tennessee and the Cumberlands offers resources to low-income people who need help accessing health care. Legal Aid can also assist with issues regarding nursing homes, social security and SSI disability.

Be prepared

Get insurance if you're not already covered at healthcare.gov. Open enrollment runs through Feb. 15.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1JvrOAl