One of the risks of writing about crowdfunding campaigns is that I regularly read (and sometimes write) about products that I want. The reality is I cannot (or should not) back every project that I covet. But I have do admit that I am starting to rack up the backed campaigns. I will always admire the small businesses, striving to become larger businesses, that use rewards crowdfunding to prove a concept or achieve a goal.

Since Princess Leia told Obi-Wan Kenobi that he was her only hope, I have wanted a holographic display. Eventually we will all migrate to 3D displays but the technology takes time with imagination leading the way. With Holus “interactive tabletop holographic display” we are one step closer to ubiquitous and versatile holograms.

Holus is a tabletop holograph platform that takes images and renders them in 3D like representation. Think about rendering any 3D imagery or making phone calls where the person appears to be really there. This will be a first iteration of a consumer product but the creators at H+ Technology have also created a perk for a “pro” version so the creative coding types can go crazy and develop even more amazing uses. Yes I want one. The only challenge is I will have to wait until 2016. Crowdfunding on Kickstarter. This one funded immediately and is going much higher.

Todd Listwin previously ran two Mia Melon crowdfunding campaign’s for women’s outerwear. Each successfully funded and delivered perks to backers. Both topped funding goals in a category, fashion, that can be pretty tough. How did they do it? High quality, stylish, yet affordable design. Now, apparently due to backer demand, he and his wife are offering men’s outwear on Kickstarter. Technical Weatherproof Outerwear uses high tech fabric to deliver superior inclement weather outerwear (for both men and women). The campaign states that their coats can be worn from 5° fahrenheit to 50º. All styles are lightweight, practical and really good looking. This is a small business that is scaling their product line and vision by using a crowdfunding platform. I hope they hit their first stretch goal as I really want the “provider jacket”. Crowdfunding on Kickstarter

It is an inevitability that we will all soon be wearing connected devices. We are in the very early stages of the evolution from transitory uses of technology to always on, wearable tech. Devices like the Pebble smartwatch and Apple Watch are only the beginning. Eventually the cost will come down and the features will increase as use cases expand into areas we are not considering now. Trasense, crowdfunding on Kickstarter, is targeting a different perspective of wearable tech. This team out of China has created the Trasense Movement that is the “smartest daily tracker for under $30″. At that price it is pretty much a no-brainer. Now I must admit that I used to have a Nike Fuel. I hated it. Poor design, limited functions and high price. I regret having ever purchased it. I have graduated to the Apple Watch (and I am pretty impressed by its activity tracker). But if I did not have my Apple Watch (which is a bit pricey) I would definitely consider sporting the Trasense Movement. According to the campaign page, the creators have been working with other OEM customers making wearable devices and they are taking their hard earned knowledge and sharing it, all at a bargain price.

Holus provides a blend between the digital and real world by converting any digital content into a 3D holographic experience.

Holus is a tabletop holographic platform that converts any digital content from a computer, tablet or smartphone into a 3D hologram. To put it simply, whether it is a board game, DNA structure or the solar system, your content comes alive – view it from four different angles and interact with it in ways that have never been possible.

Use Holus at home to learn, collaborate and have fun. It also opens up opportunities for developers to create their own holographic experience.

There are two versions of Holus available- a home edition with two smart phone charging docks and a Holus Pro. Holus Pro includes an HDMI port and SDK tool so that developers can unleash a world of new possibilities.

One Man Outerwear and Mia Melon, leaders in technical outerwear with style and on trend designs, using special developed fabrics

At last! What you guy’s have been asking for will come. We will be delivering One Man Outerwear for Fall 15. Street inspired, technical outerwear using similar high tech fabrics as Mia Melon. For those that are new to our journey, we have been delivering fashion forward, high tech outerwear to women since 2011 under the label Mia Melon. We did our very first KS campaign in April 2014 to develop a much bigger Mia Melon collection. The campaign ended up being KS 4th most successful campaign in Canada during their first year. From this campaign 1/3 of ALL feedback was from men, asking for a men’s version of Mia Melon. We are in an industry that requires a lot of working capital and the development of these products isn’t cheap. So a little over 1 year later, we are able able to deliver what you asked for!

The MOVEMENT delivers the same tracking functions as the industry leaders at a fraction of the cost. SUPPORT our Project Today.

At TRASENSE we are a design driven wearables company that wants to democratize the daily tracker industry; making beautifully designed devices that are affordable.

Our team has re-imagined how connected devices are designed to play a role in your day-to-day life that work in the background, out of sight and out of mind, all the while processing data to make you smarter.

We have spent the past 36+ months designing wearables of all shapes and sizes for our OEM customers, and in the most recent 12 months testing, prototyping, and perfecting THE MOVEMENT, and we’re almost ready to go.

(Editors Note: Raphaël de Courville is correct in claiming Holus is not actually a Holograph in the strictest sense of the term but more of a “holographic experience”. Holus countered questions on its claims in a video posted on the Kickstarter page and demonstrated how they rendered a holographic experience.)