Contribution

Wayne Allyn Root is a bestselling author. His latest book is: “ The Power of RELENTLESS! ” Dubbed by the media as “the Capitalist Evangelist,” Wayne is a former Libertarian Vice Presidential nominee, international business speaker, serial entrepreneur and conservative media personality – appearing on over 5,000 interviews in the past five years. Wayne’s web site: ROOTforAmerica.com .

I feel bad for Charlie Sheen. Despite his reckless behavior, I wouldn’t wish bad health or a deadly disease on anyone. But it is interesting to remember that not too long ago Charlie Sheen’s catch-phrase was “WINNING!” That didn’t turn out so well, did it?

What appeared to be “winning” was actually losing. When you’re in a mental haze, either due to mentally illness, or your mind is shrouded by the fog of drugs and alcohol, things aren’t what they appear to be.

I’m been giving a lot of thought to what President Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton and leading Democrats are doing and saying. Some conservatives have compared liberalism to mental illness. Just like Charlie Sheen, Democrats think they are winning. But they are suffering from delusion. They may be headed for a similar rude awakening.

Hillary’s husband Bill was elected twice by hiding his true liberal views and trying to appear like a moderate Southern Democrat. Obama was elected twice by hiding his true ultra-liberal views and trying to appear as a moderate and “a uniter, not divider.” Today those lessons are lost or forgotten.

Today virtually every position taken by Obama and Hillary, is in direct opposition to the wishes of the majority of American people. That’s not my opinion. Just look at the polls on each issue. The views and policies spewed and supported by Obama and Hillary are getting more and more extreme. America may be a center right nation, or perhaps at times dead center. But one thing it’s not is extreme radical left.

Yet Obama, Hillary and leading Democrats aren’t even attempting to hide or moderate their views anymore. They are out of the closet. It’s the “Full Monty.” There’s no hiding it anymore. They are loud, proud and extreme left. Democrats can’t even see “center” from their homes anymore.

Here are 15 key points and policies where Obama and Hillary and their socialist cabal think they are “winning” but are actually badly out of step with the America people:

Amazingly, Hillary is not only on board with Obama’s agenda, in many instances she wants to go further to the left (with spending, illegal immigration, importation of Syrian refugees, and gun control). These views run clearly counter to the majority of Americans…and yet Democrats no longer care.

Democrats are fooling themselves. Republican landslides in virtually every race in both November 2014 and just this past November 2015 are signs of the displeasure and anger. It’s only the tip of the iceberg.

In reaction to this indifference, Obama has turned the vast majority of America almost completely red on a local basis. In seven years under President Obama, Democrats have lost an unheard of 900+ state legislature seats, 12 governors, 69 House seats, and 13 Senate seats.

The so-called “Silent Majority” has been awakened and they’re focused and motivated like never before to save America for their children and grandchildren. They will also show up and vote in 2016 like never before. Because they understand this indifference to the wishes of the American people must be punished like never before.

Charlie Sheen was never winning. It only looked that way in his foggy, delusional state. Obama, Hillary and their socialist cabal aren’t winning either. It may look like it to them right now. But this isn’t even close to winning. It is pure madness.

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.