An early sketch, with some color added, of a new set for "The Nutcracker." The new sets, created by scenic designer Susan Crabtree, will be unveiled next weekend. ( Courtesy photo )

If you go What: The Boulder Ballet, Boulder Philharmonic and Boulder Children's Chorale present Tchaikovsky's "The Nutcracker" in a new production. When: 2 p.m. Friday, Nov. 27; 2 p.m. and 7 p.m. Saturday, Nov. 28, and 2 p.m. Sunday, Nov. 29 Where: Macky Auditorium, 285 University Ave., University of Colorado campus, Boulder Tickets: $15-$82 Info: 303-449-1343 (ext. 2), boulderphil.org or boulderballet.org

"I want to see a collective gasp."

That is what Wrenn Combs, executive director of the Boulder Ballet, hopes to witness the moment the curtain rises on the first new set for the annual Thanksgiving weekend production of Tchaikovsky's "The Nutcracker."

Thus, she and others involved are careful about revealing actual visual previews of the scenery, constructed to replace the old sets used for the past 20 years at the Macky Auditorium performances. (Those shows are always repeated the following week at Longmont's Vance Brand Auditorium).

The sets are not the only new aspect of Boulder's beloved "Nutcracker" this season.

The Boulder Philharmonic Orchestra announced that longtime conductor Dick Oldberg will pass the baton in the pit to Gary Lewis, new principal guest conductor and the University of Colorado's Director of Orchestras.

Combs said the changes to this production of The Nutcracker" are primarily visual.

"We wanted audiences to feel at home, and we wanted to retain familiarity," she said.

To that end, the choreography is largely the same, although certain elements have evolved. For example, there will be no more juggling during the Russian "Trepak," as the students who did that have since graduated.

Lewis (Courtesy photo)

The most notable aspect of "familiarity" is the return of Peter Davison, former Boulder Ballet artistic director, in the role of Drosselmeyer, which he has always infused with highly individual interpretations.

Davison was on board when the process of redesigning the scenery began, but he left in the summer to pursue a one-man show. That left his partner, Ana Claire, as the sole artistic director. Former dancer Lance Hardin has been appointed associate artistic director.

"It really was time for an update," Combs said, "but I had no clue at the beginning just how large a project we were undertaking.

"Our budget for the redesign was $100,000," she continued, "and I now see why ballet companies rarely make new sets for productions."

She added that the new scenery is meant to last another 20 years, and it has to be adaptable to the very different stage in Longmont.

The ballet entrusted the conception to scenic designer Susan Crabtree, whose work "will blow your mind," Combs said. The promotional line, coined by Davison, is: "See it again ... for the first time."

There are three main scenes in "The Nutcracker." The parlor of Clara's home and the fantastic Snow Kingdom take up the bulk of Act I. Act II is dominated by the Kingdom of Sweets. In addition, Clara's bedroom frames the entire story.

"The parlor will have more magic and growth this year," Combs said. "It has a real Victorian feel."

She said that the famous growing Christmas tree will be retained, as will the iconic clock, although the tree now will be adorned with LED lights.

"Technology has also changed a lot in 20 years," Combs said.

She also mentioned there will be a hint of the next scene in the background, often hidden in windowpanes. The snow is in the backdrop of the parlor, for example. Other connections include figurines on Clara's bedroom bookcase of characters that will show up in the Land of Sweets.

Each scene will also graduate in color, with greens, blues and purples in the snow forest giving way to a halo of orange and yellow at the Sugar-Plum Fairy's castle. As for that Act II scenery, Combs said looks like something out of Grimms' Fairy Tales.

Wrenn Combs gives Boulder Ballet dancers Julianna Bicki, left, Cory Goei and Kathryn Wagner a look at scale models of the new sets for "The Nutcracker." (Courtesy photo)

"Susan said that if we wanted cupcakes and candy canes, that just wasn't her," Combs said. "What she gave us is like an exquisite visual storybook telling the story of a dream." And the snow scene will include prominent deciduous trees, not just evergreens, she said.

The villainous mice in Act I will have new mouse holes, she said. As for Mother Ginger (Mother Goose), whose "children" change character every year, the audience should expect the return of the gingerbread cookies.

Costumes will be mildly adapted to fit with the sets.

As for the principal dancers, the two leads are double cast across the performances. Matthew Helms and Melissa Heslep, who have regularly appeared as "The Nutcracker" Prince and Grown-Up Clara, return to those roles, but they will not dance with each other this time. They are paired, respectively, with Rania Charalambidou and Martin Bernardez. Heslep marks a return to Clara after playing the Sugar-Plum Fairy last year (this year, that role is taken by Julianna Bicki).

A new professional-core company member, Dionysios Mitsios, is the Mouse King.

The Philharmonic's consummately professional interpretation of Tchaikovsky's score always has been one of the most special aspects of Boulder's "Nutcracker," and this will undoubtedly continue under Lewis.

While the order of dances in Act II is usually somewhat shuffled, everything Tchaikovsky wrote typically has been included in recent years.

The superb advanced singers of the Boulder Children's Chorale return for the wordless chorus that closes the snow scene and Act I. Combs said their presence was vital for unveiling the new production.

"The whole project has been a real labor, but a labor of love, and I'm proud of it as a legacy," Combs said. "It's our gift to the community for the next two decades."