After three columns packed with information about the North Lake County Hospital District, residents are starting to consider whether they want to vote to keep the district that taxes them to care for the poor.

Residents who live in Howey-in-the-Hills and to the north pay the tax of $1 for every $1,000 of taxable property value after exemptions. In the past, the tax was simply a giveaway, mostly to the hospitals.

However, state Rep. Larry Metz, R-Yalaha, managed to get a bill through the Legislature several years ago that forced the hospitals and other recipients of the tax money to file claims for each individual treated.

The bill also gives voters the chance to abolish the district on November's ballot.

Here are some observations by readers on how the taxing district and how they may vote:.

I can't foresee any situation today where I will vote for taxing. Taxing authorities do not use or handle our money wisely.

Jean Kaminski

Tavares

I am sick of seeing hospitals and hospital associations crow about all the good they do while earning three times what most professionals could ever hope to. Someone should hold them accountable.

The CEO of Baycare Health System in Florida earns $2.5 million a year, and million-dollar salaries are far too common, in these "not for profit" organizations.

Jerry Palmer

Winter Park

When I moved from Seminole County in 2003 to Lake County, I was shocked beyond belief at the existence of that taxing district. It should never have come into existence.

Now, with Obamacare, Medicaid and all the other socialist taxation, it is beyond time for it to go away.

William Overbay

Howey in the Hills

Friday's article about the hospital tax is 100 percent on the money. It needs to go. The idea that the administrator can make — I didn't say earn — more than, $700,000 per year and still call the hospital "nonprofit" is an insult to the taxpayers.

Gene Smith

Tavares

I'm not voting to tax myself any longer, now that I have some information about the hospitals' cash cow! The only conclusion I can come to is this — greed. When is enough money enough?

Everybody but the hospitals are being taxed to death in Florida. What started out as a worthy cause has ballooned into something out of control.

There is no longer any justification for Leesburg Regional Medical Center and Florida Hospital Waterman getting tax money. The bottom line for me is this: If hospitals are exempt from paying taxes, then some of the major medical services they provide should be free, and they certainly shouldn't be making a profit.

I applaud Rep. Metz for introducing legislation that actually benefits the people — he has earned my respect in this instance.

Larry Turnbow

Eustis

Lritchie@tribune.com. Lauren invites you to send her a friend request on Facebook at www.facebook.com/laureninlake.