Top seed and defending champion Angelique Kerber had to retire during the 2nd set of her semifinal match at the Volvo Car Open on Saturday putting American Sloane Stephens in the finals for the first time in Charleston.

Stephens was dominating the match up 6-1, 3-0 before Kerber retired due to a viral illness.

It's the third final of the year for Stephens and the first time in her career she'll play in a final on clay.

"Making a final is making a final, but I think there's kind of a buildup to that." Stephens said. "It wasn't just because of today she wasn't feeling well. I think the matches I played previously, like yesterday I was down a match point and things like that. So I think going into today I was just looking forward to getting out there, and the same I'll do tomorrow, just looking forward to getting back on the court."

Kerber, who already has won a major this year taking the Australian Open title, would have like to have been able to give a better effort in front of the fans who really got behind her during the title run here last year.

"Yeah, of course I am sad and disappointed because I love Charleston, and I always when I'm going on court trying to give my best, and for sure I wasn't 100 percent today like everybody was showing this." Kerber said. "And yeah, I'm said to retire and to, yeah, couldn't give 100 percent today."

On the other side of the bracket, Elena Vesnina made tournament history becoming the first qualifier to advance all the way to finals with a 3 set win over 5th seed Sara Errani, 6-4, 4-6, 6-2.

This is the second final on Daniel Island for Vesnina who reached the last day back in 2011 before falling to Caroline Wozniacki.

"I knew that it was going to be very difficult coming from the qualifying." Vesnina said. "I know that's how many matches ahead of me. So I was not even thinking about the final. I was just thinking match by match, like improve your game on the clay, because just last week it was Miami, hardcourts, so it's not easy to change it that quickly. And yeah, I'm pretty impressed with my game level, today as well, because Sara, she's a clay court specialist. You know, she had most of her wins on this surface and she really knows how to play. She really understands the strategy on this surface."

The championship match will be just the 2nd all-time meeting between Stephens and Vesnina. Elena won in straight sets at the Hobart International in Australia back in 2013.