The runoff in Mississippi between Sen. Thad Cochran (R-MS) and Chris McDaniel has piqued the interest of national Democrats, who think they have an opportunity to compete in the Magnolia State this fall.

Democrats have been sending money to former Rep. Travis Childers (D-MS), who was elected in a 2008 special election and subsequently defeated in 2010, to boost campaign war chest. Childers reported a mere $82,175 in campaign contributions since he became a candidate in March.

This has been one of the Cochran campaign’s biggest arguments for his renomination. Cochran surrogates are telling Republican voters that Democrats, whom they’re actively courting to vote in the runoff, could swoop into Mississippi and pickoff the seat, potentially putting GOP prospects of taking the Senate in jeopardy.

But this is wishful thinking. Mississippi isn’t likely to be competitive, regardless of whom wins the Republican nomination:

[T]here is no state more polarized than Mississippi. Eighty percent of voters are black or white evangelical Christian. And the problem for Democrats is that they’re on the wrong side of the ledger. In 2012, 50 percent of voters were white evangelical Christians, and they voted 95 percent for Mitt Romney. They form a nearly unbreakable bloc, and they’re augmented by the state’s deeply conservative non-evangelical white voters. Overall, Mr. Obama barely exceeded 10 percent of white voters, if at all. The complete absence of persuadable voters was on display in 2008. Then, Democrats believed they had a shot in an exceptional Democratic year, when a former Democratic governor, Ronnie Musgrove, fought for an open seat against Roger Wicker. Yet in defeat, Mr. Musgrove inched only two percentage points ahead of Mr. Obama, to 45 percent of the vote. There just might not be a road to victory for Democrats in Mississippi. Nor is there a serious third-party challenge to split the G.O.P. vote. The filing deadline was March 1, and the only third-party candidate appears to be Shawn O’Hara, a reform party candidate who runs for office just about every year. He received 1 percent of the vote in the 2012 Senate race.

So why the fuss? Party operatives often put out the notion that a state is competitive, hoping that it’ll coax the other party to spend resources that could be used elsewhere. And in this cycle, Democrats, facing the very real prospect of losing the Senate, are trying to distract Republicans.

Club for Growth Action, a super PAC that has invested heavily on behalf of McDaniel, fired a shot across the bow of national Democrats and Childers’ campaign yesterday, listing some of the positions he’s taken and deeming his record to be “too liberal for Mississippi”:

The Travis Childers Record – Too Liberal For Mississippi Travis Childers opposes repeal of ObamaCare.

Travis Childers voted to make Nancy Pelosi the Speaker of The House, and said he didn’t regret the vote.

Travis Childers has been late on his property taxes 221 times, paying thousands of dollars in penalties.

Travis Childers asked for leniency for Joey Langston, a lawyer for notorious trial lawyer and convicted felon Dickie Scruggs. After Langston was convicted of bribing a judge, Childers received thousands of dollars in campaign contributions from Langston’s family and friends.

Travis Childers voted for the $787 billion dollar Obama stimulus.

Travis Childers voted for the $300 billion bailout of Fannie Mae.

Travis Childers voted for Obama’s wasteful “Cash for Clunkers” program.

Travis Childers voted against repealing the Death Tax and voted to increase it from 35% to 45%

Travis Childers has taken thousands of dollars from national Democrats like Harry Reid Nancy Pelosi, and California Senator Barbara Boxer.

Travis Childers gave $2,000 to Massachusetts liberal John Kerry when he was running for President.

Travis Childers requested an earmark for a company that then gave him thousands in campaign contributions.

Travis Childers voted to increase the debt by hundreds of billions of dollars.

The nursing home run by Travis Childers was cited for having high medication errors, and not investigating injuries to patients.

Take that as a sign that the Club for Growth and other conservative organizations will be heavily involved in the Mississippi Senate race this fall for McDaniel should he beat Cochran in the runoff later this month.