Northampton County is on sounder financial footing thanks to controls placed on spending over the past two years.

That's what Executive John Brown told a friendly audience Tuesday morning during his annual State of the County speech at Northampton Community College. County spending has shrunk to $286 million in each of his two years in office compared to the $319 million spent in John Stoffa's last year in office.

Brown chalked the savings up to efficiencies he's put in place. For example, the county installed a new electronic time card system in 2014 that prevents employees from taking "casual overtime" — unauthorized overtime that the county is required to pay.

"We've found all this, as I like to say, between the cracks. This is money I find frustrating because it's the way we run our government," Brown said. "If we were in the private sector, you would be thrown out on your keister in a heartbeat if you spent $20 million because of inefficiencies."

Brown doesn't expect his track record to change despite continued financial challenges. Personnel costs creep up every year, the pension contribution has shot up nearly $13 million in the last seven years, and state leaders are on course for another budget impasse that will strain county finances. The county is positioned to overcome those impending hurdles, he said.

(Emily Paine)

Although Brown raised employees' health care deductible and installed a 10 percent copay in 2015, union officials filed successful grievances against the changes. However, new collective bargaining agreements went into effect this year, so the county should start seeing more savings, Brown said. The new plan will also assure the county benefit package won't qualify as a "Cadillac plan" under the Affordable Care Act, which carries a steep tax.

An absenteeism policy installed at Gracedale has already produced major improvements, Brown said. The state sets mandatory staffing levels at nursing homes, so the county must either pay county employees overtime or bring in expensive outside agencies to fill in for call-outs. The call-outs cost the county nearly $3 million last year, Brown said, but the new policy has cut call-outs by 75 percent through March.

"I had a $2.1 million operating loss (at Gracedale). If I take care of absenteeism, I just found the kicker to make it revenue neutral," Brown said.

Brown added he will seek county council's permission to roll over a plan to borrow up to $45 million next year in case the state Legislature and Gov. Tom Wolf lock Pennsylvania in another budget showdown. Northampton County was hours away from borrowing money in January when the state released millions of dollars owed to the county. While Wolf eventually signed the budget into law, leaders in Harrisburg are on course for another impasse this year, Brown said.

The county's improved financial figure can't be solely attributed to operational improvements. Brown failed to mention the 1 mill tax increase council passed in the 2015 budget to bolster the stabilization fund, a special account used for emergencies. While some council members wanted to roll back the 9.25 percent tax hike in the 2016 budget, Brown convinced a majority of council to leave it in place to finance overdue capital improvement projects.

Other efficiencies in the works include new software systems in the Civil Division and Orphans Court as well as a private-public partnership to repair about three dozen county-owned bridges.

If the talking points sound familiar, it's because Brown has focused on the same topics and goals since taking office. Most of his speeches sound more like shareholder meetings than political rallies, and Brown said no one should expect any changes to his approach.

"Anybody in business knows you lay out a strategy and you execute it. It all comes down to execution," he said.

One other thing Brown did not mention in his address is his run for auditor general. He is the presumptive Republican nominee running unopposed in the GOP primary and will face off against incumbent Eugene DePasquale in the general election.