A Front Range Landfill operator moves trash in February 2008. Once trash hits the floor of the landfill, there's no taking it back. ( Times-Call file )

Dear Johnnie: As I was deciding if it was worth sifting the detritus swept from the floor to get a few coins, I wondered if the city has a way to capture those coins that make it into the garbage? If so how much is collected?

If not, I can only imagine what a treasure trove the city dump must be. — Curious But Not So Thrifty

Dear Not So Thrifty: Yes, what a treasure trove the dump must be! And it will stay that way.

I reached out to the city of Longmont to see if it captured any money from the trash stream.

"The city doesn't do any sorting for coins," Director of Operations Bob Allen said in an email reply. "The costs to do so would be far greater than the revenue generated from the process."

That makes sense. Even mechanically sorting and sifting through the mountains of trash the city collects would be a massive and messy and smelly undertaking. Really, once it's in the truck, why do anything with the trash other than take it straight to the landfill?

That thought directed me to the Front Range Landfill in Erie, the final resting place for Longmont's garbage.

Everything I needed to know I learned from Jo, who answered the phone. When I told her why I was calling, she started laughing. But she was kind enough to transfer my call to Ben Tucker, assistant district manager.

"Have you ever been to a landfill before?" he said when I asked about recovering money of any kind. (Yes, I've been to a landfill before). "Typically that is trash. Once it hits the floor of the landfill, it's part of the landfill."

Advertisement

However, he recalled a story he has heard on the job.

"About 10 years ago, money was found and was returned to town of Erie," he said. "I don't know the amount or how we found it."

And this one, which he remembered: "There was a wedding ring that got trashed. We allowed the couple to come out, but the realization of what actually happens when it shows up (struck them). They realized it wasn't going to be found."

Dear Johnnie: So it's not news that the Broncos are no longer wearing the vertical striped socks, but I'm thinking about a wardrobe update of Bronco-wear.

I was in King Soopers looking at T-shirts, and I noticed they are selling 2015 Super Bowl Champion shirts with Bronco colors and logos. I thought the Patriots won the 2015 game. Am I confused or has the NFL conspired to confuse us with using Roman numerals then ditching them like a pair of vertical striped socks?

Should I buy up these 2015 shirts like the collectible three-legged buffalo nickels? Which Super Bowl did the Broncos win? — Confused and Aging

Dear Confused: Everyone else is buying them up, so join the crowd.

The problem you have encountered is Jan. 1. The regular season happened before Jan. 1, and the Super Bowl happened after Jan. 1. So, the Broncos won the 2015 NFL championship on Feb. 7, 2016.

The gear is legit.

By the way, next year's game will be called Super Bowl LI.

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com