PLAINFIELD — When Washington was struck Nov. 17 by a tornado, Bobbe Marion was more than 100 miles away. Still, she felt nervous.



The storm that affected Washington, East Peoria, Pekin and Woodford County was moving northeast rapidly. It looked like it might at least come close to Shorewood, where Marion resides. Instead, the storm veered south and caused significant damage in Coal City and Diamond.



Still, Marion — who survived the Plainfield tornado of 1990 — called her son Erik, who was in Joliet, to make sure he was aware of the storm.



He is 31 years old.



"Some people have a hard time understanding, but when it gets bad outside, I have to know where my kid is at," Marion said.



"The day they hit Washington, my next-door neighbor came over and pounded on my back door and said, 'Do you want to stay here? It's going to be bad.' ... Just as I got to the front door, the sirens started going off, and that's when the Xanax (an anti-anxiety medicine) starts going down."



In the years since 1990, Marion said she has tried to educate herself about tornadoes and inclement weather. She will not consider purchasing a house that doesn't have a basement, to provide shelter from storms. Some of the newer houses in the Plainfield area don't have one.



"Those crackerbox houses that have no basement are just going to go 'Poof' if the wind comes through," Marion said. "Those are the people who don't know anything about tornadoes."



Evidently, Marion knows enough to have been invited to discuss her story with a group at College of DuPage in Glen Ellyn. That group included "storm chasers," people who for various reasons pursue severe weather systems.



"They had all their cars outside with all their radar crap," Marion said. "I did my spiel and then said, 'All you guys who have all that equipment, you obviously have never been in (a tornado). To you, I'm not going to say it's a game, but you have fun chasing them. I watch you on television.



"If you ever get inside one of them, in the middle, you will never do it again. Never, ever."



Marion has no hesitation relating her memories about that devastating August day so long ago. Others in Plainfield aren't as effusive. Among them is at least one village employee.



"He says, 'If I never have to talk about the tornado again, fine by me,'" Village Administrator Brian Murphy said.



"He still works for us. He still trains for it. But he said, 'If another event happens like that one, after we get through it, I'm telling you now I am retiring, I am resigning and you will never see me again.' "







Nick Vlahos can be reached at 686-3285 or nvlahos@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @VlahosNick.