DENVER – This weekend, I finally got around to watching the Oscar-nominated film "Philomena," which centers on the Irish “homes” for unwed mothers where women were punished for the transgression of having sex without permission or approval. This week, the U.S. Senate will take up legislation addressing the Supreme Court’s male-majority decision in the Hobby Lobby case, which reflects pretty much the same belief about women.

The five male justices who sided with Hobby Lobby basically said that a boss’s opinion about birth control overrides our own, and women are incapable of independent moral judgment. The Protect Women’s Health from Corporate Interference Act, sponsored by Sens. Patty Murray, D-Wash., and Mark Udall, D-Colo., reverses that and says that for-profit corporations like Hobby Lobby can’t limit any legal health care service for religious reasons.

But the problem these companies and institutions have isn’t with the Affordable Care Act. It’s that women get to use birth control all, and thus have sex on their own terms, have control over their own bodies, and determine their own economic future by deciding when, or if, they want to have children.



[MORE: Cartoons on Obamacare]

As legal expert Dahlia Lithwick has pointed out, at the core of Hobby Lobby and McCullen (another case involving “buffer zones” around abortion clinics) is the increasing infantilizing of American women by the right wing.

As Lithwick puts it, “What is missing from the Hobby Lobby decision altogether … is the very notion of the woman herself as moral circuit breaker, as an agent of her own ethical choices and preferences, whose decision to obtain an IUD, or a condom, or a morning-after pill is a fully autonomous moral choice that supplants the spiritual choices of her employer. Again, it’s almost impossible to escape the conclusion that Hobby Lobby (and) McCullen …rest on the idea that women are in effect children.. and that their choices are to be second-guessed and gently redirected.”

Thanks to the majority opinion, every woman in the country just got mansplained by Alito, Scalia, Roberts, Thomas and Kennedy. Even more infuriating, Alito admits that Hobby Lobby’s facts about contraception, as has been pointed out by no less authority than the American College of Obstetrician-Gynecologists, are scientifically wrong. If you take emergency contraception while you’re pregnant, you’re still pregnant. But that doesn’t matter to the Boys on the Bench, because the beliefs are “sincerely held.”



[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

Word to Justice Alito: Sincerely held bigotry is still bigotry. Would he find Hobby Lobby’s sincerely held beliefs acceptable if they dictated not hiring people of a different race or requiring all their male employees be circumcised?

Needless to say, the women justices are not amused. Justice Ginsburg’s 49-page dissent is a wealth of zingers, among them, "Would the exemption … extend to employers with religiously grounded objections to blood transfusions (Jehovah's Witnesses); antidepressants (Scientologists); medications derived from pigs, including anesthesia, intravenous fluids, and pills coated with gelatin (certain Muslims, Jews, and Hindus); and vaccinations? … The court, I fear, has ventured into a minefield."

That minefield has already started exploding, as companies like Denver’s own Hercules Industries are asking to be exempted from the contraceptive coverage requirement altogether. And the battles that my grandmother fought to secure autonomy for herself and other women are being fought again in the United States Congress 50 years later.