The hundreds of millions of dollars already spent by the Obama Administration and outside groups to advertise Obamacare apparently wasn’t enough. The Department of Health and Human Services, which oversaw the disastrous launch of the federal exchange website, is going to spend even more to push Obamacare during next month’s winter Olympic games, according to Politico:

The Obama administration is planning an Olympic-size ad blitz to push health coverage during the winter games next month. HHS confirmed Tuesday that it has bought advertising time in markets with high rates of uninsured people to air during the Winter Olympics, which run Feb. 7-23. To date, the administration has focused its outreach efforts in areas around Houston, Dallas, Tampa and Miami, dispatching senior officials like HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius to spread the word about new benefits under Obamacare. The ads, which will run in markets like these across the country, will be aimed at young uninsured people and their families, an HHS official confirmed. POLITICO also confirmed that ads will run in North Carolina. According to HHS, ratings for typical primetime and sports programming dip during the Olympics, so the administration moved some of its paid media budget to the NBC Olympic inventory to maximize viewership. No word on the images that might be used along with the usual messaging, although high-injury events such as the giant slalom or snowboarding offer immediate visuals to underscore the risk of going without health insurance.

It just so happens that the Olympic games will take just before March, the final month of the Obamacare open enrollment period, and administration wants to maximize exposure with a controlled meassage. After all, they haven’t really done themselves any favors with the rollout of the exchanges and millions of canceled health plans, not to mention that White House and administration officials, as the National Journal noted earlier this week, keep watering down the “standard of success” for the law.

But, look, it’s not that people don’t know about the law or haven’t thought about the need to purchase health insurance coverage. No responsible adult doesn’t think about the “what ifs” in life, such as getting sick or being in some sort of accident. At the same time, however, they generally base decisions, in part, on cost-benefit and/affordability.

In any event, if you’re planning on watching the Olympics, prepare yourself to see your hard-earned tax dollars be spent by the administration to push Obamacare — a law that most Americans don’t support and want repealed.