St. Louis jury defends Phillip Morris in class-action suit seeking $1.5 billion from tobacco giant Phillip Morris.

The month-long trial was deliberated for less than an hour by the jury in the case where the plaintiffs alleged the company had deceived customers into falsely believing that light cigarettes were safer than regular cigarettes.

Missouri smokers who bought and smoked Marlboro Lights from Feb. 14, 1995, through Dec. 31, 2003, would have been affected by the outcome.

Deborah Larsen, the class representative, smoked about a pack and a half of Marlboro Lights a day between 1979 and when she quit in 2002. Along with the nearly $1.5 billion sought on behalf of the class, lawyers of the plaintiff had asked for $6,800 for Larsen individually. Both actual and punitive damages were sought.

This has been the second time a St. Louis jury has heard the case. The jurors deliberated for four days after a month-long trial in October 2011. The trial reached a deadlock of 8-4 on the plaintiff’s side, where nine votes are needed for a civil case verdict in Missouri.

The lawsuit which was first filed in 2000, claimed that cigarette packages promised lower tar and nicotine though were made from the same tobacco as regular cigarettes, and were in actuality more dangerous for consumers. The plaintiff’s attorney claimed that smokers might compensate for less nicotine by inhaling longer and more deeply.

“They knew it was wrong … they knew they were deceiving people,” said Mark Bronson, one of the attorneys, during Thursday’s closing arguments.

What representations the class relied, deception through “reckless indifference to the rights of others,” or “evil motive,” did not have to be determined by the jurors.

Phillip Morris argued their cigarettes contained less tobacco than Marlboro Reds, with a longer filter and more ventilation. The cigarette maker’s lawyers said inhalation had also been known and publicized by the public health community for years.

Attorney for Phillip Morris, Beth Wilkinson, said the company took the label of “lower tar and nicotine” off the packages in 2003, eventually stopping the term “lights” as well. The suit did not include any personal injury claims.

“Make no mistake, this case is only about money,” Wilkinson said in closing arguments.

During the rough time period covered in the suit, about 700 million packs of Marlboro Lights were sold in Missouri.

Source: St. Louis jury sides with Philip Morris in class-action suit seeking $1.5 billion

Photo credit: www.bloomberg.com

Join the Discussion