CHESTERTOWN — Shore Regional Health, the Easton-based network that is under the umbrella of the University of Maryland Medical System, will hold “listening sessions” in March and April in each of the five counties it serves — including two sessions in Kent County and two others in Queen Anne’s. The aim is to solicit input from residents and health care providers on the Mid-Shore.

The first session is Tuesday, March 29, at the public library in Cambridge.

The sessions in Kent County are Saturday morning, April 2, at the Rock Hall firehouse and Thursday evening, April 14, at Kent County High School in Worton.

“Our intention is to listen to people share the specific challenges they face in living their healthiest lives here on the Shore — from the ability to have a family doctor, nurse practitioner or physician assistant to care for their primary care needs, access to specialists and specialty services, transportation, help in managing their care at home, and the involvement of family in their care,” Patti Willis, regional senior vice president of strategy and communications for Shore Regional Health, wrote in an email Tuesday, March 15. She said Internet access, basic education about living a healthy life, access to prevention, screening and diagnostic tests and how to live with an ongoing disease such as diabetes or heart failure also are concerns for rural communities on the Eastern Shore.

Ken Kozel, CEO and president of Shore Regional Health, and members of the health system board are expected to attend the sessions.

“The focus of these sessions is to seek a wide picture of our communities’ health needs and make sure our strategies incorporate this information,” Willis wrote in Tuesday’s email.

Skeptics and cynics believe this process is a sham and that Shore Regional Health, taking its direction from the University of Maryland in Baltimore, is moving forward with a plan to shutter the hospital in Chestertown and build a regional facility in Easton.

A Save Our Hospital campaign, led by physicians who practice in Kent County and northern Queen Anne’s County, has enlisted thousands of supporters in its bid to retain inpatient beds and surgical services at Shore Medical Center at Chestertown — the current name for what the community founded in the 1930s as Kent & Queen Anne’s Hospital.

Some state officials with significant political clout also appear to be on board.

State Sen. Thomas “Mac” Middleton, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, is the primary sponsor of SB 707, which proposes to convert acute care hospitals to freestanding medical facilities. Middletown has promised to amend the bill to exclude the hospital in Chestertown.

Middleton, Del. Peter Hammen, chairman of the House Health and Government Operations Committee, and state health secretary Van Mitchell have pledged their support of a process to identify the health care needs of the Eastern Shore and how to address those needs. No hospitals on the Shore will close until the process is completed and a plan is developed with the support of the Eastern Shore delegation.

In a Feb. 18 letter to the Eastern Shore delegation, Middleton, Hammen and Mitchell said “the Eastern Shore will be specifically excluded from legislation that provides hospitals with an avenue to convert to freestanding medical facilities.”

Shore Regional Health’s announcement of the community listening sessions comes at the same time the Save Our Hospital campaign appears to be gaining momentum with a battle being waged on the state level in Annapolis.

Willis said that is only coincidence.

Kozel has repeatedly said — publicly and in news releases — that no decision has been made about inpatient beds in Chestertown.

“These listening sessions are part of Shore Regional Health’s strategic planning process and were developed as such,” Willis wrote in the March 15 email.

She acknowledged that the information gathered would be incorporated into Shore Regional Health’s community health needs assessment this year. The Affordable Care Act requires health systems to conduct a CHNA and adopt an implementation strategy at least once every three years.

Willis said the Shore Regional Health board will address its planning decisions in May as part of the strategic planning process.

“However, the discussion about inpatient beds at the hospital in Chestertown is no longer part of the Board’s planning decisions and will not be the focus of these listening sessions, since the announcement of a legislative and health policy study on rural health care in Maryland was announced” by Middleton last month, Willis wrote in email. “Since then, Shore Regional Health committed that any possible conversion of the hospital from acute inpatient care will be tabled for six years — the presumed one year of the State’s study plus an additional five year commitment by Shore Regional Health. After that six years, State policy could guide additional resources to vulnerable rural hospitals in Maryland and the Shore Regional Health Board would want to consider that and all options before making a decision.”

A complete list of the community listening sessions is printed here.

Tuesday, March 29, 5:30 p.m.: Dorchester County Public Library, 303 Gay St., Cambridge

Wednesday, March 30, 5:30 p.m.: Caroline County Public Library, 100 Market St., Denton

Saturday, April 2, 9:30 a.m.: Rock Hall firehouse, 21500 Rock Hall Ave.

Tuesday, April 5, 5:30 p.m.: Talbot County Community Center, 10028 Ocean Gateway, Easton

Monday, April 11, 5:30 p.m.: Hurlock Train Station, 107 Gay St.

Tuesday, April 12, 5:30 p.m.: Centreville firehouse, 212 Broadway

Thursday, April 14, 5:30 p.m.: Kent County High School auditorium, 25301 Lambs Meadow Road, Worton

Sunday, April 24, 2 p.m.: Sudlersville firehouse, 203 N. Church Street