HARWOOD: Some people say, well, that was a tech bubble.

CLINTON: No — well, you know what? It also matters whether you've got good leadership. You can look around the world and see the difference. You can certainly see it here. Because when the Republicans came back in, we got the same old snake-oil of trickle-down economics. Even now, when you listen to the Republicans who are vying for their nomination, it's the same thing.

President Obama inherited the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. In my view he doesn't get the credit he deserves for guiding us through what were really treacherous waters. The Fed played a role. The stimulus package played a role. But his leadership, in my view, was central. And that's why I think it matters who your president is.

HARWOOD: Over multiple decades we haven't in a durable way raised prospects for middle-class families. Your economic policies are quite similar to President Obama's and to your husband's — higher taxes on people at the top, more investments in human capital, education, infrastructure. If we've had presidents espousing those philosophies for 16 of the last 24 years, why shouldn't people conclude that either those policies don't work, or you can't get the political support to enact them in full?

CLINTON: But let's talk about the results that were achieved. I think this proves my point. Elections matter. George W. Bush came in with a very different economic approach, and I think our country paid a big price because of that. This election, when it comes to the economy, is between a return to the snake-oil of trickle-down economics or building on what has been proven to work.

I'm not running for my husband's third term. I'm not running for President Obama's third term. But I am not somebody who is an ideologue the way the Republicans turn out to be. I look at what works. Investing in human capital works. Improving education works. Investing with things like empowerment zones, the new market tech credits in under-invested communities work. So I have a long list of what has worked. I am adding to it, and I am making clear that there's more we can do because the evidence is on the side of what I'm proposing.

HARWOOD: When I talk to Democrats and ask "What's your critique of Hillary Clinton's economic plan?," what they say is "too cautious." Isn't this a time to flip over the table and be aggressive across a wide range of fronts — more aggressive than you've been?

CLINTON: I think I've been really aggressive. And you know, on Super Tuesday more people voted for me than anybody else running on either side. So somehow my message is communicating.

I want us to deploy half a billion more solar panels by the end of my first term, and enough clean energy to power every home by the end of my second term. Those are big goals. I think we can get there. And when we get there, we'll put a lot of people to work.



I want to invest far more in infrastructure. I think it's clear we really need it, not only what we can see with roads and bridges and airports, but what's under the ground with water systems and sewer systems. We can put a lot of people to work with doing that. That's pretty bold.