Editor, Advertiser:

Hospital safety has become an overriding concern among all Americans, particularly since the passage of the Affordable Care Act and increasing consolidations nationwide by health systems looking for efficiencies. The issue has taken on particular importance in Connecticut, where an onerous state hospital tax and cutbacks in Medicaid reimbursements have adversely impacted hospitals throughout the state.

As members of the Board of Directors for Stamford Hospital, we recognize the importance of patient care and safety. Over the last few weeks, the Hospital has been recognized by both The Leapfrog Group and The Joint Commission for its efforts in this area.

Earlier this month, Stamford Hospital earned an “A” rating for patient safety — one of only four hospitals in Connecticut to receive Leapfrog’s top grade. Most recently, The Joint Commission named Stamford Hospital a Top Performer for the second straight year. The hospital joins an elite group of only 9% of Joint Commission-accredited hospitals across the U.S. recognized for attaining and sustaining excellence in six or more areas. Stamford was one of only three hospitals in Connecticut to receive recognition in six areas, namely heart attack, heart failure, perinatal care, pneumonia, stroke and surgical care.

We are fortunate to live in a community served by a hospital recognized for delivering the highest standards of patient safety and quality, a distinction that reflects the standards and quality of life enjoyed in New Canaan. The initiatives introduced by the medical staff and clinical leadership — from the latest in surgical protocols to strict infection control measures — complement the personalized care provided by each and every member of the staff.

We believe these distinctions are a testament to Stamford Hospital’s ongoing commitment to provide the best possible patient experience and are proud to share these accomplishments with our community. We are proud to be part of this evolution in care in Fairfield County and know that when the new hospital opens its doors next fall, these extraordinary efforts will only be magnified.

Mark DeWaele, DMD

Helen Jaffe

David Jahns

Board members

Stamford Hospital