VAIL — It was a double-corked frenzy under bluebird skies Saturday in the Burton U.S. Open halfpipe as the world’s best and youngest riders — minus perennial kingpin Shaun White — spun lofty trickery that marked snowboarding’s most technical showcase ever.

Ten male riders — six of them teenage rookies and only two older than 21 — threw at least two of the back-flipping spins on each run, with varying rotations and grabs and tremendous amplitude. While the doubles were plentiful, soaring straight airs with board-pulling grabs anchored every run.

Steamboat Springs’ Olympian Taylor Gold, 20, lofted a pair of huge double corks, a 1260 and a spectacular straight air on his first run, earning a contest high 51 trick points for a total 87.63 points and the win. Gold, who failed to advance into the finals at last month’s Winter Olympics, marked the biggest win of his career at the U.S. Open.

“I couldn’t be more stoked,” Gold said. “Coming in I wasn’t really expecting much. Having fun was my main goal so walking away with this was way beyond anything I expected.”

Japan’s Taku Hiraoka, who won bronze at last month’s Olympics, won second with his back-top-back double corks earning 86.88 points. The U.S. Open win delivered 18-year-old Hiraoka the TTR World Snowboard Tour halfpipe title.

Swiss rider David Habluetzel, 17, won third with 83.23 points.

Both Hiraoka and Habluetzel voted Gold’s lofty method air as the best of the day.

Both the men’s halfpipe and slopestyle podium at the U.S. Open featured six athletes under age 21, revealing the youthful vigor that defines the high end of competitive snowboarding.

Gold’s run — which he called the best of his life — featured rare grabs that elevated his style. He said he drew inspiration from watching Olympic slopestyle gold medalist Sage Kotsenburg and Olympian Danny Davis, who developed innovative runs this season as they championed style over technical trickery.

“I saw Danny and Sage doing kind of different stuff and I just wanted to do as much as I could to make my riding a little bit different,” Gold said.

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasontblevins