Defensive back had huge game against Texans

Broncos safety Mike Adams nearly intercepts a pass intended for Texans wide receiver Andre Johnson during the first half on Sunday in Houston. (Jason Fochtman/AP)

ENGLEWOOD -- It's all right with safety Mike Adams if his big defensive play Sunday against the Houston Texans started the Broncos' defense on a roll. For that matter, coach John Fox also wouldn't mind if Adams' interception rallies the entire defense for a strong showing against the Oakland Raiders on Sunday and into the playoffs.

If it's possible for one big play to be a catalyst for an entire defense, Adams' pick fit the bill. With the Broncos holding a tenuous 16-13 lead in the fourth quarter, it opened the floodgates. The Broncos scored three touchdowns soon after the pick.

"This game is about confidence," Fox said. "It's referred to a lot amongst players and coaches as swagger. It's hard to develop that unless good things happen. The more good things that happen -- like the Mike Adams play -- those give you some of that swagger."

Denver's defense was also bolstered Sunday by the return of cornerback Champ Bailey, who played with no visible problems. He has missed most of the season with a foot injury.

"I thought it was a good outing," Fox said. "I definitely think he brings something to our secondary as far as leadership and confidence."

Adams, playing free safety because Rahim Moore is out with an injury, accepted the idea his interception of Houston quarterback Matt Schaub's pass was the turning point.

"I didn't think so at the time," Adams said. "Looking back, it was a huge play."

Adams performed some acrobatics near the sideline to intercept Schaub's short pass at the Houston 31-yard line and take it to the 28-yard line. The Broncos scored two plays after the pick on the way to a 37-13 victory.

Advertisement

"I read the quarterback's eyes and anticipated what he was going to do," Adams said. "I had to stretch out to get to the ball and make sure my feet came down in bounds."

The interception was the highlight but Adams had a huge game overall, with nine combined tackles and three passes knocked down.

"I still left some plays out there that I should have made," Adams said in assessing his play.As for what's coming up, Adams said he believes it's a must that big plays become contagious on the Broncos defense.

"We missed Von Miller at the beginning of the season and we'll miss him now," Adams said. "But our defense has to hold up our end. It's a team effort. Name a team that has won the Super Bowl with just offense or just defense."