New analysis from The Commonwealth Institute says 1 out of every 11 entrepreneurs in Hampton Roads is an immigrant.

"We definitely contribute economic impact to this region," Petula Moy, president of the Asian Business Association of Hampton Roads, told those who attended the report's release and discussion last week in Virginia Beach. "We go out there and work, make money and spend it into the economy."

A majority of foreign-born residents in Hampton Roads have become U.S. citizens, and two-thirds of local adult immigrants are employed, according to the "Vital for Prosperity" report, which used 2013 census survey data. More than half of foreign-born residents have been in the U.S. for more than 15 years.

Four in five foreign-born residents are in their prime working years between 18 and 65 years old, report author Laura Goren said. Immigrants are finding work in health care, professional and other services, accommodation, retail, restaurants and construction in high proportions in particular. About 4,000 are self-employed workers, according to the report.

One in three, or 33 percent, of the region's immigrants older than age 25 has at least a bachelor's degree, Goren said. That compares to 28 percent of native-born residents.

A majority of the region's immigrants have become U.S. citizens and have been in the country for a long time, Goren explained. While no one country of origin dominates, 21 percent of Hampton Roads immigrants have come from the Philippines, Goren said. Four in 10 of the region's immigrants were born in Asia and many come from Africa, Europe and Latin America, Goren said.

"All too often the economic contributions of immigrants are either ignored or distorted," Goren said. "There's actually a great story to be told and together we can tell that story."

In terms of levels of education, employment and homeownership, Hampton Roads immigrants and nonimmigrants are generally alike, she said.

Still, Hampton Roads immigrants face challenges, such as high housing costs, Goren said. The report shows 4 in 10 immigrant-headed households spend more than 35 percent of their income on housing costs compared to about 2 in 10 for nonimmigrant headed households.

While 41 percent of immigrants speak English "very well," one-third of foreign-born residents in Hampton Roads aren't as fluent, Goren said.

About 23 percent of immigrants were also lacking health insurance, according to 2013 numbers, before major coverage expansions with the Affordable Care Act.

The language and culture of a new place creates challenges, such as not knowing where or how to get heath insurance, said Beatriz Amberman, founder of the Hispanic Community Dialogue Organization of Virginia. Immigrants also benefit the community by bringing a fresh perspective to problems and cultural diversity, she said.

"Economic growth is historically linked to immigration," Amberman said. And about the negative rhetoric about undocumented workers, she said, "The conversation has to change totally. We have to make sure we view all the contributions that they make."

For more information, visit thecommonwealthinstitute.org.

Bozick can be reached by phone at 757-247-4741.