Overtime angst: New rules from the U.S. Department of Labor up the ante in employer liability, change classifications

$50,440 The proposed minimum pay for an employee to be salaried and exempt from overtime eligibility, up from the current $23,660.

Overtime rules and employee misclassification already seem like hot-button topics in corporate human resources departments, but workplaces haven't seen anything yet, attorneys and statewide business organizations say.



Two July directives from the U.S. Department of Labor, each interpreting the federal Fair Labor Standards Act, could make more than 5 million salaried employees eligible for overtime pay and allow an additional 2 million workers or more to have health insurance benefits or organize into labor unions.



The proposed overtime rules, which President Barack Obama directed the department to update in June, would increase the minimum pay for an employee to be considered salaried and, therefore, exempt from overtime eligibility to $50,440 a year from $23,660.



Labor market analysts have estimated the proposal could increase the number of overtime-eligible employees by as much as 5.9 million.



Two weeks later, Labor also released a new set of guidelines distinguishing a company employee from an independent contractor under the Fair Labor Standards Act's definition of employment as "to suffer or permit to work."



The guidelines suggest most workers are employees — the definition of "employee" is broader than what many employers use and what some court rulings indicate.



The overtime proposal is open to public comments until Sept. 4, and an internal review will follow before Labor issues a final rule. Experts think that could be late 2016 at the soonest, since the last round of overtime and salary exemption rule changes in 2004 were under review for about a year.

More litigation?

The two changes are also likely to accelerate an employment litigation trend in the federal court system. Federal lawsuits alleging violations of the FLSA reached 8,160 nationwide in fiscal 2014, up 8.8 percent from the previous year and the highest since 1993, according to data released in March by the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts.



Detroit's federal court alone has seen six new FLSA cases as of July, up from three in the preceding fiscal year. Since 2012, the Wage and Hour Division of the Labor Department has been ramping up enforcement practices in certain industries that carry a heavy payroll of nontraditional workers.



Heather Ptasznik, an attorney in the labor and employment practice at Kotz Sangster Wysocki PC in Bloomfield Hills, said that law firm alone has handled four claims of employee misclassification against its employer clients since January, compared with probably one case to handle in the preceding five years.



Most are resolved well before litigation, but all have involved recently separated employees or contractors. Ptasznik said that most workers are unlikely to rock the boat while they are still employed and that if they have any classification concerns, they tend to come up later.





Employers at center

Watching the overtime regulation change closely is Jeffrey Magowan, owner of Garceau Insurance Agency Inc. in Escanaba. Garceau offers home, auto, business and other insurance products in Escanaba and neighboring Gladstone in Delta County. A majority of its 18 employees are salaried, Magowan said.



Generally, those workers make between $25,000 and $40,000 a year — a livable wage in rural northern Michigan, Magowan said. But the new federal standard might not take differences between communities into account.



"Salaries in New York City or even Detroit would be far different than here, and the Department of Labor paints with a very broad brush," he said. "I understand why, but to me it puts an unfair burden on paying employees fairly. I don't pay bargain-basement wages. We pay what our local market avails us to."



While the insurer generally keeps business hours, Magowan said, insurance claims will surge after severe weather, and part-time or contingency labor wouldn't have the training or skills to fill that gap.



"There are times where work just backs up, if a hailstorm or weather event comes through town and we all have to spend extra time if we hope to process claims for our customers in a timely fashion," Magowan said.



Restaurants, retailers, health care companies and small manufacturers are the most likely to have salaried workers in the range that could be most affected by the overtime rule, attorneys said. Construction, janitorial services, staf-fing, IT services and other industries are more likely to be affected by the classification guidelines.



About 10.6 million people were in classified self-employed or independent contractor jobs in 2012, up 14.4 percent or more than 1.3 million from 2001, according to Economic Modeling Specialists International, a CareerBuilder company.





Ptasznik and Gary Klotz, a shareholder at Butzel Long PC and an employment attorney of more than 30 years, both said employers probably will make several changes to adapt to the overtime rule. One popular solution would be to give modest raises to employees making nearly $50,000 now as a cheaper alternative to overtime. For lower-paid workers, solutions may vary.



"The idea that employers are going to stay static and simply pay overtime and not do anything else is just wishful thinking," Klotz said. "Some things that even (Labor) has anticipated happening include that people will just be reclassified as nonexempt, or there will be a change in the mix of workplace duties or companies will hire a few part-time people. And some might just be modestly paid more to get them over the new cap."



Klotz said many employers traditionally have used salary as a status symbol to differentiate between the people they consider management or administration versus the rank-and-file worker.



This has changed somewhat over time. The Obama administration probably is stressing overtime because the Bush-era changes that advanced the overtime threshold to $455 a week did not keep up with inflation since the last major changes in the 1970s.



Some businesses could turn to outsourcing certain departments or functions or try adding part-time workers to share the workload. But Klotz said that may not do much to relieve payroll costs from people with limited supervisory roles, such as an assistant manager.



"Many of the people you're talking about are supervisory or administrative people, and just picking up a couple of new people can't really do much to relieve their administrative duties," he said. "The law is as much about work duties as work hours."



Klotz agreed that employee classification and eligibility for benefits is a hot period of litigation, locally and nationally. He expects the overtime rule won't go into effect until late 2016 or early 2017, but it's unclear how much that will add to the trend.



"There may be some of that for overtime," Klotz said, "but the misclassification issue has more potential in court."



Chad Halcom: (313) 446-6796. Twitter: @chadhalcom

Related Links