With another year over and a new one just begun, Long Island finds itself right where it was at the end of 2012: refining its commercial identity and fighting an unpromising residential tide.

That’s not to say Nassau and Suffolk’s 2013 lacked dramatic developments. Cornerstone local issues from hurricane recovery to coliseum redevelopment and lightning-rod national concerns over shutdowns and health-care reform made for another tumultuous year here, full of change and never boring.

Here, then, is Long Island’s 2013 business news in review: A year of people, places and issues that set up 2014 as another make-or-break moment for our suburban home.

BANKING & FINANCE

Five years after the mortgage meltdown and one year after Sandy, Long Island banks largely rebounded in 2013 – but uncertainty over some regulations kept the celebrations to a minimum.

Bankers still bemoaned ongoing low interest rates, which made it difficult to boost profit margins, and to shoulder the burden of new compliance regulations many financial institutions stepped up their IT efforts. Now, finally, the industry appears ready to emerge from the shadows of devastating mortgage scandals.

Regulation, regulation, regulation

If “location” is the No. 1 real estate watchword, then “regulation” must describe banking.

Never was that more evident than 2013, but 2014 promises at least temporary relief, as the long-awaited Basel III regulations – governing minimum capital levels – have been put on hold.

In fact, instead of clamping down further on banks, Congress considered and approved many pieces of legislation this year that will actually loosen restrictions in 2014 – though finance remains one of the most heavily regulated industries in the land.

In 2013, for instance, banks spent time and resources preparing for regulations dividing mortgages into qualified and non-qualified piles, set to take effect in 2014.

“There are a lot of system changes needed to comply,” noted Joe Blaston, head of mortgages for Santander Bank. “There’s training and marketing. There’s always a cost associated with any new regulation.”

Credit competition

Regulators might have given banks a break heading into 2014, but credit unions are giving banks a run for their money.

Big banks still dwarf even the largest credit unions, but some Long Island credit unions grew bigger than many local banks – many by increasing their business lending.

In 2013, Bethpage Federal Credit Union reached $5.7 billion in assets, Hauppauge-based Teachers Federal Credit Union topped $4.9 billion and Westbury-based Nassau Educators Federal Credit Union topped $2 billion.

Nassau Educators CEO Edward Paternostro said such expansion matters because “any organization needs to grow to be sound financially.”

Credit unions also rolled out new brick-and-mortar branches: Bethpage planned to top 30 branches by 2014, Nassau Educators grew to 12 this year and Teachers Federal Credit Union headed into Nassau in 2013 with its 25th branch opening in Merrick.

Upward Mobility

Online banking is old hat, but mobile banking took off in 2013, with customers using smart phones to check balances, scan checks and handle transactions.

New Jersey-based Valley National Bank, which has 14 Long Island branches, launched a free app offering remote check deposits as part of the mobile migration, while Islandia-based Empire National Bank also began marketing its free mobile services via a dedicated app.

Meanwhile, Buffalo-based M&T Bank – which has eight branches in Nassau and Suffolk – debuted “Mobile for Merchants,” letting retailers process credit card payments through smartphones and tablets.

A survey by the Independent Community Bankers of America found that 37 percent of community banks offer the ability to make mobile payments, up 23 percent since 2011.

At banks with between $251 million and $500 million in assets, nearly half – 46 percent – offer mobile bill-paying; for banks with more than $501 million in assets, it’s above 54 percent.

Trimming branches

Mobile banking caught on, but some banks closed branches – while others continued to expand physically.

Suffolk Bancorp closed branches in Water Mill and Middle Island and plans to close four more by March 2014 – in Mattituck, Port Jefferson Station, Manorville and Montauk. But even as it closes those doors, it’s opened new ones, debuting in Garden City almost exactly one year after opening a Melville branch.

Lake Success-based Astoria Financial, meanwhile, made a bid for Big Apple business by opening its first Manhattan business banking office in 2013.

“It’s not a big expansion,” Astoria CEO Monte Redman said. “It’s to help bring about the expansion of our business banking operation. That’s the key.”

Alternative thinking

While banks looked for high credit scores and other signs of solvency, alternative lenders aggressively pursued borrowers.

Asset-based lenders used machinery, vehicles and just about everything else they could think of as collateral in a Herculean effort to extend credit. Even industrial banks – basically, lenders launched by non-banks – made Long Island inroads in 2013. For instance, TAB Bank, a 15-year-old Utah-based lender that originally made loans exclusively to transportation industry professionals, made its first loans here.

Going global

Many Long Island firms capitalized in 2013 as the world continued its slow march toward a single global economy.

Atlanta-based First Data, which has an office in Melville, stepped up its multi-currency transactions, while Long Beach-based Planet Payment, which also processes multi-currency transactions, expanded around the world.

“We can use our technology platform anywhere in the world that banks need us,” Planet Payment CEO Philip Beck told LIBN. “It’s easy for banks to outsource the complexities of credit and debit cards to our platform.”

Planet Payment has signed 62 banks in 22 countries, including the United States, Canada, China and India. It also provides services for Visa and has expanded into nations expecting large international crowds – such as Brazil, site of the 2014 World Cup soccer tournament and the 2016 Summer Olympics.

GOVERNMENT

As always, 2013 provided plenty of palace intrigue, with Long Island’s corridors of power bristling with hot-button issues and enigmatic personalities. Fiscal cliffs, federal shutdowns and fallout from Hurricane Sandy – including scuffling on various levels about the speed and efficacy of government recovery payouts – led this year’s oversized serving of political pugilism.

King blasts House GOP

The federal government started 2013 by narrowly avoiding going over the fiscal cliff, approving a compromise measure late on New Year’s Day, with the nation teetering on the brink. Fireworks ensued, but not celebrating the fiscal cliff deal.

Instead, it was Rep. Peter King, R-Massapequa, making headlines less than a day into 2013 by decrying his own party’s leadership, after Republican lawmakers blocked a $60.4 billion Hurricane Sandy relief package. The House leaders’ decision meant the measure couldn’t be voted on in the 112th Congress, and that the whole lengthy process of getting a storm-recovery bill through the House and Senate would have to begin again.

“I’m saying right now, anyone from New York or New Jersey who contributes one penny to Congressional Republicans is out of their minds,” King said in one of several televised appearances. “Because what they did last night was put a knife in the back of New Yorkers and New Jerseyans. It was an absolute disgrace.”

King later relented on his GOP-bashing, after a $50.5 billion Sandy aid package was approved on Jan. 28.

PSEG replaces LIPA

Also churning in Hurricane Sandy’s wake was the effective end of the Long Island Power Authority – the public utility blamed for weeks-long power outages across the region after the October 2012 superstorm.

In July, Gov. Andrew Cuomo signed legislation transferring all decision-making powers to Newark, N.J.-based PSEG; and the utility will assume management of Long Island’s power grid in 2014.

Former manager LIPA will instead become a holding company, administrating the authority’s $6.7 billion in debt and allowing for tax-exempt financing. LIPA’s staff of about 90 employees – mostly political placements – will also be reduced, to just 20.

“The silver lining to Hurricane Sandy is that it’s ending the LIPA tragedy that went on for far too long,” Cuomo said at the July bill signing at Mitchell Field. “This is a system that should have exited a long time ago.”

Cuomo’s father, former Gov. Mario Cuomo, created LIPA in the 1980s as a vehicle to decommission the Shoreham nuclear power plant and issue public debt. But under Gov. George Pataki, the LIPA concept was expanded to serve as an overseer of the Long Island transmission grid, and also began contracting for power.

Shakeup at NIFA

In September, just two days before he was scheduled to depart public office, North Hempstead Supervisor Jon Kaiman was tapped by Cuomo to lead the Nassau Interim Finance Authority, the county’s state-imposed fiscal watchdog.

Kaiman, who announced earlier in 2013 that he was leaving his town post to take another Cuomo-appointed position, this one as special adviser to the state’s Long Island Storm Recovery task force, replaced long-time NIFA Chairman Ronald Stack.

Stack was first appointed to the NIFA board in June 2000 by Gov. George Pataki. When his term expired on Dec. 31, 2012, Stack stayed on, since Cuomo hadn’t appointed anyone to replace him. The move was panned by other NIFA board members.

NIFA entered a control board status in 2011, giving it final approval on the county’s borrowing and spending practices.

MacArthur lands new airlines

After years of losing flights, Long Island MacArthur Airport got two big wins this year, attracting both Alaska-based PenAir and Nevada-based Allegiant Air to the Town of Islip-owned airport.

PenAir began operating out of MacArthur in July, offering travelers daily flights to and from Boston’s Logan International Airport on its 34-passenger Saab 340 aircraft. PenAir had considered several Northeast airports for expansion – it offers various flights around the Northeast separate from its Northwest flight schedule – and settled on MacArthur because of Long Island’s large population base.

Allegiant Air, which runs routes all over the country, began its own MacArthur operations on Dec. 20, with twice-a-week flights to and from Punta Gorda Airport in Florida. The airline’s MD-83 commercial jets can transport up to 166 passengers per flight.

PenAir and Allegiant joined Southwest Airlines and U.S. Airways as the main carriers at the Ronkonkoma airport.

LIREDC wins $83M

After missing out on the top prize in 2012’s second round of Regional Economic Development Council awards, Long Island once again rose to the top in December, taking home $83 million in grants and awards.

That $83 million is the largest award given to any of the five regional “top performers” designated at this year’s awards ceremony. Millions in funding have been allocated for projects including a new Innovation and Discovery Facility at Stony Brook University, the creation of a Therapeutics Discovery Center at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, high-performance computing and robotics initiatives at Brookhaven National Laboratory and Hofstra University, and infrastructure improvements at the Enterprise Park at Calverton.

Long Island was last named a top performer in the competition’s 2011 inaugural year, when the regional council received $101.6 million. In total, Long Island has been awarded more than $250 million in economic development grants and tax credits through the Regional Economic Development Council program since its inception.

Tonna: Hello and goodbye

In 2013, the Suffolk County Industrial Development Agency welcomed a new chairman, and bid him farewell, within a matter of months.

In February, former Suffolk Legislature Presiding Officer Paul Tonna was appointed chairman of the Suffolk IDA, filling a position Jim Morgo vacated in May 2012.

But just six months later, Tonna stepped down, citing too many instances of having to recuse himself from voting due to potential conflicts of interest concerning companies doing business both with the IDA and Molloy College’s Energeia Partnership leadership program, where Tonna serves as executive director.

There was some speculation that Tonna’s resignation resulted from a memo he wrote lambasting Cuomo’s plan to privatize LIPA operations, but Tonna denied that had anything to do with his decision, saying he had never discussed the memo with Cuomo or the governor’s office.

Joanne Minieri, Suffolk’s economic development commissioner, was elected to replace Tonna atop the IDA.

Mangano beats Suozzi, again

Despite a lackluster off-year election, 2013 did feature one marquee November matchup: the rematch for Nassau County executive between Ed Mangano and Tom Suozzi.

What started as a three-way battle – Suozzi defeated upstart Adam Haber in the Democratic primary – came down to a mano-a-Mangano street fight, complete with smear tactics, nasty ads and other less-than-noble tactics from both corners.

Mangano once again defeated Suozzi, who held the county executive seat from 2001 to 2009, when Mangano unseated him by a narrow margin. This time, incumbent Mangano won by an overwhelming 18 points; poll results showed Suozzi was unable to produce voter turnout in key Democratic communities including Long Beach and North Hempstead.

Mangano begins his second term in January.

LI ladies battle corruption

In the summer of 2013, Cuomo tapped two of Long Island’s leading ladies to stem the corruption perceived as running rampant in Albany.

Cuomo’s 25-member Moreland Commission to Investigate Public Corruption is being led by three co-chairs, including Nassau County District Attorney Kathleen Rice. The commission’s day-to-day operations, meanwhile, are being handled by former Suffolk Chief Deputy Executive Regina Calcaterra, who was named Moreland’s executive director.

The commission, which is scheduled to release a final report by the end of 2014, is Cuomo’s answer to a slew of bills he was unable to get passed in the Legislature before the end of session this past June. The governor filed those bills in response to the indictments of several state elected officials this spring, most from New York City.

HEALTH CARE

Love it or hate it, Obamacare is law.

In a year of momentous change in American health-care policy, the Affordable Care and Patient Protection Act was easily the No.1 national headline – the biggest medical makeover since the 1966 implementation of Medicare, and one of the nation’s all-time divisive political issues.

But there was plenty of local earth-shaking as well, including the ascension of Dr. Alan Guerci to the top of Catholic Health Services of Long Island and CEO Michael Dowling’s attempts to expand the North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System.

Closed in late 2012 by Hurricane Sandy, the Long Beach Medical Center remained shuttered for all of 2013, even as several former employees filed a class-action lawsuit.

And while the federal government’s online health-insurance exchange stumbled badly out of the starting gate, the New York State Health Benefit Exchange enjoyed a much smoother start.

Exchange rate

Riding $185.8 million in federal grants, New York flipped the switch on its digital insurance exchange in October, and according to spokesman Bob Meissner of Families USA, which tracks the progress of federal and state-based health insurance exchanges, the Empire State’s site was among the best.

“The ones that have operated smoothly have been a dream,” Meissner said. “New York seems to be doing well.”

Several thousand New Yorkers have signed up for insurance coverage through the state exchange, thanks in part to an assist from various local organizations lending the Health Benefit Exchange a hand.

“We’ve been extremely busy enrolling individuals and business into insurance plans,” noted Janine Logan, a spokeswoman for the Nassau-Suffolk Hospital Council, which has been helping with the state’s enrollment process.

What’s your policy?

While the exchanges were making bad and good news, health insurance went through other important transformations in 2013 – some lifetime coverage limits disappeared, some deductibles and co-pays increased and some policies were simply discontinued.

In one of the most overlooked changes to health insurance in 2013, many insurers worked hard to shrink their provider networks – the “comeback of managed care,” according to John Sardelis, associate chairman of health administration at St. Joseph’s College in Patchogue.

These attempts were not without their repercussions: UnitedHealthcare – an operating division of Minnesota-based UnitedHealth Group, the largest U.S. Health carrier – faced litigation after removing thousands of doctors from its Medicare Advantage network; in the case of 600 Connecticut doctors pulled from Medicare Advantage, UnitedHealthcare lost, thanks to the efforts of attorney Roy Breitenbach of Great Neck firm Garfunkel Wild.

One reason major insurers began limiting networks and otherwise changing products was stiff competition from providers like North Shore-LIJ, which in July became licensed to sell its own insurance plans. The North Shore-LIJ CareConnect Insurance Co. now offers coverage to residents of Long Island, Queens, Staten Island and Manhattan – “one of the first times in state history that a major health system has created a controlled insurance company to sell commercial health insurance,” according to North Shore-LIJ spokesman Terry Lynam.

While providing their own insurance is a risk for hospitals, it’s also a potential cost-saver through improved care and preventative efforts. Hospitals and health systems providing their own insurance “can be good,” Sardelis noted, “but can they do it without affecting the quality?”

Electric companies

The use of electronic medical records expanded greatly in 2013.

Catholic Health Services, for instance, stepped up its use of its Epic electronic medical records, passing production milestones that led to significant government reimbursements; North Shore-LIJ also increased electronic record keeping among its hospitals and associated doctors.

Benefitting from the surge are various Long Island companies that provide the technologies behind electronic record-keeping. Kevin Scalia, executive vice president of Great River-based Netsmart Technologies, said new federal funding was behind the increased demand.

“The rollout of electronic health records has increased greatly over the last four or five years because of that,” Scalia said.

Quality vs. quantity

The way health-care providers are paid continues to evolve. In 2013, many systems signed contracts through which their compensated per patient, rather than per procedure.

“The key will be competing on the quality of care, since payment systems like Medicare are moving away from paying for volume and rewarding better quality,” Sardelis noted. “This creates a delicate balance in areas where control is an issue.”

The shift drove more doctors into systems and larger practices, however, since it became harder for solo practitioners to compete.

Outpatient care

Out is in: While many hospitals expanded older inpatient facilities in 2013 or built new ones, providers in general shifted toward outpatient care.

When Catholic Health Services opened its new cancer institute at St. Francis Hospital this year, it included an outpatient infusion center; its Mercy Medical Center includes an outpatient rehabilitation center.

Adding to the ambulatory upsurge, more urgent care centers – designed to be a cheaper and quicker alternatives to emergency rooms for minor injuries – cropped up on Long Island in 2013.

Payback’s a…

Health-care providers took a hit from the federal sequestration in 2013, and they’re bracing for another round in 2014, when 2 percent cuts in Medicare reimbursements – another side effect of the sequestrations – are slated to hit hospitals.

And the feds are considering further cuts, in part to avoid gutting the nation’s defense budget.

While nobody in the health-care industry denies a need for a strong national defense, many insiders are starting to feel like the national piggybank.

“Our industry maintains that it’s highly unfair to continue to cut the hospital industry to lessen the impact on another industry,” said Logan of the Nassau-Suffolk Hospital Council. “Especially when we have shouldered the burden in the past.”

REAL ESTATE

After being derailed by the economic downturn that cast a pall over the industry five years ago, Long Island real estate got back on track in 2013.

The improvement was evident across all sectors, as the residential and commercial markets both made significant gains.

Home sales were up nearly 22 percent this year compared with 2012, with prices firming. Activity also soared on the commercial side, with asking rents and sale prices up and positive absorption in the office, industrial and retail markets.

Continued low interest rates, pent-up demand and an improving jobs picture contributed to the rebound and infused confidence among brokers, developers, landlords and tenants. A better overall business climate has also fueled momentum for the Island’s mega-redevelopment efforts and a slew of company expansions, and has given rise to a host of new merchants.

One mega-project starts …

While there was only one groundbreaking among Long Island’s proposed mega-developments this year, growing appetites for rental housing and jobs created momentum for others.

The Albanese Organization broke ground this fall on the much-ballyhooed Wyandanch Rising project, a $500 million reboot of the historic Babylon Town hamlet that in the early 1950s offered the first – and at the time, only – interracial housing on Long Island.

Already 10 years in the making, the Wyandanch overhaul is centered on 60 acres around the Babylon Long Island Rail Road station, currently a mix of struggling retail, shuttered stores and commuter parking lots.

Albanese’s firm has begun construction on the first of three planned buildings in Rising’s first phase, a $38 million, five-story mixed-use structure that will feature 91 rental apartments above 20,000 square feet of retail space on four acres.

About 50 of the apartments, which are expected to be completed late next year, will be priced at affordable “workforce” levels. Next up is a $38 million, four-story structure with 86 apartments over 20,000 square feet. A 60,000-square-foot office building with ground-floor retail space is the third project on the Albanese drawing board, with construction set for some time next year.

Company principal Russell Albanese said other projects, including condos or other for-sale housing, will follow based on market demand.

… other mega-projects inch ahead

Long Island’s largest mega project, the $4 billion Heartland Town Square plan in Brentwood, has been gaining traction. The project, a massive 460-acre redevelopment of the former Pilgrim State Hospital land into more than 9,000 rental apartments, 1 million square feet of retail space and more than 3 million square feet of offices, is awaiting approval of its final environmental impact statement and could come to a vote by the Town of Islip in the next few months.

The planned mix of rental apartments, shops, restaurants and offices will eventually generate about 23,000 permanent jobs, and at least 1,500 construction jobs annually throughout its build-out, which developer David Wolkoff said could easily eclipse 20 years. Wolkoff said he’s hoping to get started on the plan’s first phase, which includes some 3,500 rental apartments, sometime in 2014.

In Glen Cove, the long-awaited redevelopment of 55 acres of property along once-toxic Glen Cove Creek was rechristened Garvies Point. Site-clearing work began this year on the $1 billion mega project that promises more than 800 rental and condominium residences, a 250-suite hotel and conference center and 75,000 square feet of office and retail space, with construction of the mixed-use complex to begin next year.

Renaissance fares

Speaking of major redevelopments, Plainview-based Renaissance Downtowns landed yet another Long Island revitalization gig in 2013.

The Southampton Town Board recently selected the company as master developer to spearhead planning and development for Riverside, a mostly blighted area bereft of commerce that’s home to the Suffolk County jail and has one of the lowest median incomes on the Island.

Renaissance Downtowns is already the master developer for the property surrounding the Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, the downtown makeover of Hempstead Village and the revitalization of Huntington Station’s downtown.

While nothing has been built yet at those projects, a hotel is now on tap as the first development in Huntington Station’s revival and Renaissance says it will break ground on the first construction in Hempstead, a 336-unit rental apartment building, in the first quarter of 2014.

New in store

This year saw a slew of new retailers establishing Island beachheads.

A $40 million, 72,000-square-foot expansion and renovation of Walt Whitman Shops in Huntington Station made room for more than two dozen new stores including newcomers Carhartt, Free People, Henri Bendel, Sophie Reese and Triumph International. Its roster of new eateries features Brio Tuscan Grille and Zinburger Wine & Burger Bar.

In another Long Island retail first, discount retail giant Wal-Mart opened one of its smaller, grocery-only Neighborhood Market stores here in July. The 49,000-square-foot store in the Levittown Mews shopping center was formerly occupied by Waldbaums.

And there were plenty more. Noodles & Company, a Colorado-based fast-casual concept, opened its first Long Island location this summer in the Gallery at Westbury Plaza, the first of an expected two dozen it plans locally. The Island’s first Muscle Maker Grill opened this spring on Merrick Road in Amityville.

Better burger restaurants also made their mark here this year. North Palm Beach, Fla.-based Burger Fi opened its first location in Oceanside, Queens-based Bareburger opened in Great Neck and Smashburger opened in New Hyde Park, its fourth Long Island restaurant in less than two years.

Dairy Queen came back to Long Island after more than 25 years, opening a 2,800-square-foot DQ Grill & Chill on Sunrise Highway in Massapequa in May.

The Island’s first PGA Tour Superstore opened this month in a 44,000-square-foot space at Roosevelt Raceway Center in Westbury. The space leased by the national pro shop chain had been part of the Home Depot Expo store that closed four years ago.

Curtain raisers

Two Long Island downtowns starving for revitalization cut the ribbons on restored theaters in 2013. The historic Suffolk Theater on Main Street in Riverhead was first built in 1933; it had been dark for 26 years. It was acquired in 2005 by construction executive and restoration expert Bob Castaldi, who painstakingly restored the theater to its former Art Deco elegance.

The Space at Westbury, an $8 million redevelopment by Lowes Properties, debuted this fall. The original Westbury Theater opened in 1927. It closed in 2001 after years of decline and was acquired by Lowes for $1.65 million in 2004. Its newest incarnation sports a two-screen art cinema, a multipurpose event space, a restaurant and four live-and-work lofts for artists.

Locals say the revivals of both downtown theaters have been catalysts for other renewal projects in Riverhead and Westbury, and a boon to their existing merchants.

Room to move

Canon USA sent thousands of change-of-address letters to Long Island’s business community this spring, marking the opening of its new Melville headquarters.

The company relocated from leased space in Lake Success, bringing about 1,400 employees to the nearly 700,000-square-foot complex with its own address – One Canon Park.

Canon built its new headquarters on a former pumpkin farm it bought from the Tilles family for $103 million in 2006. The company’s other global headquarters are located in London and Tokyo.

Canon opened its first office in Manhattan in 1955 with five employees. The company moved to Woodside in 1968, and then to Lake Success in 1971.

The digital imaging giant recorded about $40 billion in global revenue in 2012.

Homebuilding returns

After a six-year slump, there was renewed activity at many of Long Island’s new home subdivisions this year.

And while the industry continues to shrink as land becomes scarce and profit margins decrease, there are more new homes being built now than in recent years.

For the Long Island Builders Institute, the regional homebuilding trade group, the mini-boom was long overdue, after the economic downturn took a heavy toll on much of its membership. The builders’ group credits the renewed vigor in new-home construction in 2013 to movement in the region’s overall residential real estate market, where the number of home sales jumped nearly 22 percent from a year ago.

The numbers show permits for new single-family homes were up in most Long Island towns.

In Brookhaven, where the lion’s share of the Island’s new-home construction has been taking place for the past 30 years, the town issued 502 permits for new single-family homes in the first eight months of 2013, a whopping 50 percent jump from the 334 permits approved in the same time last year.

The 55 new-home permits issued by the Town of Islip from January through August were the most the town has issued since 2008, when Islip gave out 71 in the same eight months.

And because there are fewer existing homes listed for sale these days – with inventory down about 12 percent from 2012 – demand for new homes should continue to rise next year, too.

TECHNOLOGY

You win some, you lose some. It’s a healthy outlook for life in general, but when it comes to the technology industry on Long Island – according to most economic insiders, the Island’s last, best hope for a solid fiscal future – every loss hurts.

Many in the tech industry will remember 2013 on Long Island not for product development or significant breakthroughs, but for titanic employment shifts. Among technological enterprises, there were many significant losses on the Island in 2013, including a continued migration of some of the Island’s oldest tech employers. But there were also gains, many of which were equally significant.

Northrop Grumman guts 850

Once the largest employer on Long Island with more than 25,000 employees, Northrop Grumman announced in March that it would severely reduce its local workforce by October 2014.

The consolidation, which began in November, will reduce the company’s 1,400-employee Island workforce by 850, part of a massive reshuffling of divisions that will result in the creation of five “centers of excellence” around the nation. The 850 relocated jobs will mostly be moved to Melbourne, Fla., where Northrop Grumman has created a “Manned Aircraft Design Center of Excellence,” including all of the design work that has for years been done in Bethpage.

Bethpage, meanwhile, will become the company’s “Electronic Attack Center of Excellence,” a designation that carries no regional employment benefits. However, Northrop Grumman officials have said electronic-attack research – including aircraft-mounted technology and cyber-security protocols – has large growth potential because it’s a core government focus.

More losses and gains

Northrop Grumman wasn’t the only tech company moving employees on or off Long Island in 2013.

In May, CA Technologies CEO Michael Gregoire announced the giant software developer would lay off 1,200 workers around the globe – 60 percent of them in the United States – by the end of June in an attempt to boost revenue. CA Technologies posted a 2 percent drop in revenue in 2012.

As part of its plan to build a second headquarters, Melville-based MSC Industrial Supply Co. relocated 120 Long Island employees to its new office outside Charlotte, N.C. Despite building the $37 million, 180,000-square-foot North Carolina sister headquarters, MSC officials have insisted they are not relocating the company to the Tarheel State.

It wasn’t all goodbyes for Long Island. Great Neck-based Genadyne Biotechnologies in March agreed to relocate its Fort Lauderdale, Fla.-based subsidiary here as part of a 10-year deal with the Nassau County Industrial Development Agency. Genadyne, which makes wound-care treatments and therapeutic mattresses, will create 72 jobs as a result of the relocation.

And Estee Lauder announced in January it was moving its northern New Jersey operations to the beauty company’s existing Melville offices, including as many as 31 new jobs.

But in one of the toughest blows of the year to the Long Island economy, OSI Pharmaceuticals – the Farmingdale tech company born out of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories 25 years ago – shocked everyone, including its own employees, when it informed workers in May they were all being let go.

The move, part of a larger restructuring by parent company Astellas Pharma that involved severing all ties with Long Island, resulted in more than 100 OSI employees being laid off.

Astellas purchased OSI, maker of the lung cancer drug Tarceva, in 2010. Despite initially planning to move the company upstate, Astellas officials eventually agreed to leave OSI’s 90 employees in place, following an action by the governor that allowed OSI to expand into the second building at the Broad Hollow Bioscience Park.

That deal was sweetened by $1.8 million in performance-based tax credits Astellas was to receive from the Suffolk County Industrial Development Agency and New York State. In total, Astellas only received roughly $750,000 in benefits as the agreement hadn’t matured yet.

Suffolk IDA attorneys in October were successful in recouping that $750,000 from OSI and Astellas.

3, 2, 1 … LaunchPad

In one of the Long Island tech scene’s most promising new developments in years, a new startup incubator and co-working facility launched this year in Mineola.

LaunchPad Long Island officially opened in February inside a transformed, three-story, 12,000-square-foot building that most recently housed a law firm and deli. Venture capitalists and serial entrepreneurs Andrew Hazen and Richard Foster put up the $100,000 needed to get the facility off the ground, including second-floor offices for companies the duo is personally willing to gamble on.

The space has attracted many companies and organizations, including the Long Island Software and Technology Network, which relocated from the now-shuttered Long Island Tech Mall, which only opened in Hauppauge in 2012.

Beyond the space, though, LaunchPad Long Island also serves as a seed-investment engine. The organization itself made its first investment shortly after opening, throwing a five-figure bone to Melville-based GroupGifting.com, the social gifting service started by Tyler Roye and the Invision founding team.

There’s more of that collaboration coming in 2014. Roye is currently in the process of transforming space in the heart of downtown Huntington Village into LaunchPad Huntington, a spinoff of the Mineola site set to open in January.

Accelerate gains and loses partners

A little more than a year after its official inception, Accelerate Long Island added and lost some powerful allies.

The research commercialization driver announced in November it had forged an alliance with Roslyn Heights-based venture capital fund Topspin Partners. Not only did the $213 million venture capital firm commit an undisclosed amount of money to the Long Island Emerging Technologies Fund – a $1.25 million pre-angel stage investment fund for fledgling tech companies – it also offered Accelerate Long Island permanent space at its offices in Roslyn Heights. Accelerate Long Island had been operating out of the Long Island Association’s Melville headquarters since its inception.

But only a month later, Accelerate Long Island lost the support of its largest private sector backer. Executives from Islandia-based CA Technologies informed Mark Lesko, head of Accelerate Long Island, the company would be severing ties, including withdrawing its $50,000 budget contribution.

Lesko said CA’s board had made a “business decision” to only support initiatives directly related to the company’s core business of software development. Accelerate Long Island has been focusing primarily on startups in the biotech and life-sciences fields.

Topspin Partners will replace CA Technologies on the Accelerate Long Island Board of Directors.