Buy Photo Seniors Sarah Etheridge and Latisa Husband practice putting in an IV in their nursing class at William Carey University. The university’s board of trustees has approved the creation of the College of Health and Sciences, and the School of Nursing is included in this new college along with other health programs at the university. (Photo: Susan Broadbridge/Hattiesburg American)Buy Photo

David Buford is a student in William Carey University's extremely competitive osteopathic medicine program. There were 2,800 applicants for 108 seats for the Class of 2018.

Buford, 38, is in his second year and plans to go on to a three-year residency program, possibly at the University of Mississippi Medical Center in Jackson.

"I chose William Carey because it's the only osteopathic medical school in the state and everything about me was drawn to osteopathic medicine," he said. "Also, I lived in Hattiesburg, and it was a great location for me. I have a wife and three kids."

Buford said osteopathic medicine takes a holistic view of the patient.

"We're going to use our ears to listen to the patient. We're going to use our hands and touch the patient," he said. "We are going to use our minds and heal the patient. It's a patient-centered approach. Rather than treating a disease, we help the patient."

Carey's medical offerings are increasing as the popularity of its medical programs continues. The university's board of trustees recently approved the creation of a new College of Health Sciences encompassing the School of Nursing, the new Department of Physical Therapy, the health information management program and the health education and administration program.

Janet Williams, dean of the new college and head of the nursing school, said before any program is added at Carey, a needs survey is conducted to see if there are people who want to hire program graduates.

"We're all about meeting the need of the community," she said. "We're about meeting the need to improve medical care. We look for and try to fill needs."

But the medical offerings at William Carey are also meeting the needs of students — even those who are not yet in medical school, as President Tommy King explained.

"Having medical students on campus, eating in the cafeteria, fielding intramural teams and participating in other university events provides tremendous motivation for undergraduate students to set high goals and give their best effort," he said in a written statement. "Likewise, the medical school, and other medical programs, have stimulated growth in enrollment. For example, six years ago, the number of biology majors was 80-plus. This past fall, biology enrollment was well over 200."

King said William Carey continues to expand its medical offerings because its graduates can fill a void.

"The greatest needs for Mississippi and the Gulf South are for health care workers," he said. "This area has severe shortages in almost all health care fields. Our new Ph.D. in nursing, our physical therapy program, health information management and other expanded or new programs are in response to this shortage."

The doctor of physical therapy program — officially established in September — is expected to admit its first pre-physical therapy students in August.

Cyndi Scott, professor and program director, said students will need a bachelor's degree and some basic science courses to apply to the three-year program.

"We'll open our applications in the fall of 2015, and admit our first class in the fall of 2016," she said. "We've had lots of calls, and we've directed lots of people to our website."

Scott said demand for physical therapy training is high.

"CNNMoney and U.S. News and World Report consistently write physical therapy as a growing career," she said. "There's only one other physical therapy school and that's at (University of Mississippi Medical School), so there are lots of students out there who can't get a seat in a program."

The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics recently predicted job growth in physical therapy to be 36 percent compared to 20 percent for other medical fields.

Scott said there are numerous types of jobs available to physical therapy graduates.

"(In) hospitals, outpatient clinics, school systems, nursing homes, home health agencies — any health facility that has a physical therapy department would be suitable," she said. "The South Mississippi area — they should be able to find a job."

Scott said the William Carey program was not conceived to train students to practice in Hattiesburg or Jackson.

"The program was really developed to address a mal-distribution of therapists," she said. "There's a lot of demand in the rural areas. Our emphasis is to train individuals who would be willing to practice in a more rural setting."

Scott said the program is not accredited yet, but it is hoped that could occur after the first year.

"(Students) will have to graduate from an accredited program to take the licensing exam," she said.

Nursing student Kerry Parks, 31, of Gulfport will be graduating in three months. He looks back with fondness on the 18-month accelerated nursing training he got at the university.

"The staff show they care," he said. "You feel like you're part of their team."

Parks said having the nursing school as part of the new College of Health Sciences just proves the medical fields at Carey are going strong.

"I think it shows the school is expanding and opening up opportunities for the community," he said. "I think it's an awesome situation."

The establishment of the new college comes as the School of Nursing sees enrollment growth of 18 percent over the past five years on its Hattiesburg and Biloxi campuses. Continued growth is expected for the fall. A satellite location in Slidell, Louisiana, also has positive enrollment numbers.

In 2012, the nursing school introduced the administration and education doctoral program after the Institute of Medicine in Washington, D.C., recommended universities double the number of nurses with a doctorate by 2020.

"It's for health care workers to further their education (so they can) teach or head up departments," Williams said.

In 2014, 21 doctoral nursing students graduated from Carey compared to six doctoral nursing students who graduated from institutions from around the rest of the state the previous year. Twenty-seven are expected to graduate this year, with 40 in 2016.

The health information management program, started in 2014, will graduate 26 students with a bachelor's degree.

Williams said that program teaches students the technology and the coding needed for jobs that deal with the Affordable Care Act.

Williams said the medical programs at Carey keep growing because there is an atmosphere conducive to change at the university.

"We have an administration that encourages us to think in new ways," she said. "The approach is — show us how it's going to help the community and how we can go about it.

"There's this need in the community — how can we fill it?"

Williams said officials also must keep the needs of the students in mind.

"Why do they need this advanced degree, and if you look at what the need is, then you can develop a program to fit that need," she said.

Another program on the horizon is the School of Pharmacy, which will be housed on the Tradition campus.

Sanderson Farms chief executive officer Joe Sanderson Jr. and his wife, Kathy, donated $1.1 million to the venture, along with $125,000 from the Leo W. Seal Foundation. Start-up funds of $4 million are needed for the school, in addition to $12 million to $15 million to construct and equip a new building.

King said the pharmacy school would be a much-needed addition to the state and the Gulf Coast. The only pharmacy school has been at the University of Mississippi, which accepts 115 students a year in the program.

At a glance

•What: College of Health Sciences

•Approved: by William Carey University Board of Trustees

•Includes: School of Nursing, Department of Physical Therapy, health information management program and health education and administration program

•Why: Because of strong growth in these programs

•Dean: Janet Williams, also dean of Carey's nursing school

Carey's medical programs

Pharmacy School

•Where: Tradition campus

•Status: About $1.250 million raised, $16 million-$19

million needed for start-up and construction

Doctor of Physical Therapy Program

•Where: Hattiesburg

campus

•Status: Open applications in fall, admit first class of 30 fall 2016; about $1 million raised toward $1.5 million in start-up costs

College of

Osteopathic Medicine

•Where: Hattiesburg

campus

•Status: Opened 2010, first class of 91 graduated 2014

•Enrollment: 387

School of Nursing

•Where: Hattiesburg and Biloxi campuses, satellite location Slidell, Louisiana

•Status: Carey acquired the Mather School of Nursing in New Orleans and was

approved to offer a

bachelor's of nursing at the Hattiesburg campus in 1969

•Enrollment: 700

Health

Administration and Education doctoral program

•Where: Hattiesburg

campus

•Status: Opened 2012

•Enrollment: 72

Health information management

program

•Where: Hattiesburg

campus

•Status: Opened 2014

•Enrollment: About 70

Read or Share this story: http://hatne.ws/1GQy4Dn