Update at 12:20 p.m. at July 6: If you spent the weekend trying to raise the pile of cash needed to buy one of the “10 Most Beautiful Homes in Dallas,” you might have wasted your time — might.

The law firm holding the note on the Kessler Park mansion now says the sale’s been moved to August 4. The attorney representing homeowner Ken Row says the mansion should be out of foreclosure long before that.

Dax Richard says his client is in the process of paying off the delinquent loan — reinstatement, as it’s known. Says Richard, “the new date is Contingency Plan B if the reinstatement doesn’t get done. But I have no reason believe it won’t be.”

Richard explains how the 90-year-old home wound up in foreclosure in the first place: Row, he says, “was trying to get a better interest rate and used tactics that have been obsolete since the 2008 housing crisis, which is to withhold payment.” Clearly, that was a terrible idea. Says Richard, Row realized that, as did Chase, which is now working to settle the matter before the house lands on the auction block. “The bank very fairly — and that’s not a word you use with banks a lot — made a business decision, just like [Row] was trying to make a business decision,” Richard says, “and they shipped him the reinstatement paperwork.”

The house may still wind up on the market sooner than later. If Row doesn’t get it out of foreclosure, then expect a crowd at the George Allen on August 4. And if he does, well, who knows. Want to buy a house on Stevens Park?

Row, says Richard, “hand-selects every flower in that garden, and you don’t take care of something like that with the intention of having it foreclosed. I don’t know what he’s going to do going forward. All the attention has perked up his ears.”

Original post July 4 at 8:58 a.m.: A virtual browse through Auction.com’s listings reveals one hellacious deal in Oak Cliff: 1704 W. Colorado Blvd., a 90-year-old estate overlooking Stevens Park Golf Course. Per the listing and the county website, the 4,301-square-foot manse hits the auction block Tuesday at 10 a.m. on the north side of the George Allen Courts Building downtown. The estimated opening bid for this foreclosure: a good-God $560,000, or close to half of its market value according to the Dallas Central Appraisal District. (For what it’s worth, Homes.com values the house at $1,183,700.)

A quick skim through The Google Machine reveals The Advocate actually found the find first, back on June 22. We also discovered a few other things, among them: It’s known as the Floreciendo Garden Estate, houses one of Dallas’ few private gardens, rents out for parties (Rachel Stone says that doesn’t sit well with the neighbors), has been a big player during The Garden Conservancy’s Open Day tour and was listed among D‘s 10 Most Beautiful Homes in Dallas back in 2009.

There’s no shortage of virtual tours available for those in need of some July 4 home-tour porn. Here you go. And here. And here. And for those who like to kick the tires before purchase, here’s a recent permit history.

Best I can tell from our archives it was built by one James Robert Binford in 1925; according to our archives it was quite the party house even then. A March 1, 1929, headline reads “Mrs. J.R. Binford Entertains With Tea,” and merely lists some of the 300 guests in attendances, among them women all the way from … New York City.

As Jennifer Mitten notes in the comments, Mrs. J.R. Binford was Estelle Zang — daughter of early Oak Cliff developer John F. Zang, the boulevard’s namesake.

One warning: This is a “Cash Only Purchase.”