Buy Photo U.S. Rep. Todd Young answers questions after the Senate Republican primary debate against U.S. Rep. Marlin Stutzman at WFYI studios on April 18. (Photo: Michelle Pemberton /IndyStar)Buy Photo

This year’s Republican Senate primary can be boiled down to one question: Which candidate offers the better approach to the job of being a U.S. senator?

On policy, despite what the campaigns say, there simply isn’t much daylight between the two candidates in the race. U.S. Reps. Todd Young and Marlin Stutzman, each in his third House term, offer solidly conservative views on immigration and taxes, on abortion and gun rights, and on matters such as the future of Obamacare, the debate over judicial confirmations, and federal regulations that they believe hurt American businesses.

What divides the two men, then, is how they would approach the job. On that question, this GOP primary between two candidates with similar voting records actually offers a clear choice. The winner on Tuesday will face Democrat Baron Hill, a former 9th District congressman, in the general election in November.

Young has exhibited the more productive approach toward legislation and congressional debates during his tenure in the House of Representatives. He has put his efforts behind ideas that have contributed to constructive debates on federal regulations and spending. Stutzman, in contrast, has played the all-or-nothing, gridlock-inducing role of the ideological purist.

Based on their more than five years in the House, Young is more likely to contribute as a senator to a healthy debate, and much-needed action, on the most complex issues facing America. Stutzman talks a good game, and the 3rd District congressman’s unbending ideology has won him many fans. But talk is meaningless without results.

To understand the difference between the candidates look at how they have used their positions in recent months.

Let’s start with a 2017 budget plan proposed by House Republicans. Backed by House Speaker Paul Ryan, the intellectual force behind the productive wing of the conservative movement, the budget sticks to conservative principles and is a rational starting point for a congressional debate.

Still, Stutzman helped block the plan in committee, saying it did not go far enough for those on the far right, seeming not to understand that there are limits to what one party can do in a divided government. That move has prevented House Republicans from moving forward with a budget plan, adding to the perception that Congress is inept. Stutzman has taken similarly unrealistic approaches routinely, choosing symbolic stubbornness over pragmatism.

Young has put his time in Congress to more productive use. For instance, he has pushed for a reform of social welfare programs to promote more accountability and effectiveness. He has become the face of the REINS Act, which would give Congress voting authority over federal regulations with an economic impact of $100 million or more. These are unquestionably serious proposals, and a sign of how Young has approached his job.

Moreover, while Young has joined the many Republicans calling for the repeal of Obamacare, he has done more than offer unrealistic promises to his conservative constituents about a full-scale repeal of the law while President Obama controls the veto pen. He has pushed. for instance, to change the law’s much-criticized definition of what constitutes a full-time work week. It’s a sign that he understands some progress is better than none.

Young’s biggest liability, in the eyes of Stutzman, is that he has chosen pragmatism over symbolic votes. Rather than support a full-scale shutdown of the government he has at times voted to raise the federal debt limit. He also has taken heat for bucking his party with smart bipartisan votes on issues such as housing assistance for people in need, including those with HIV/AIDS, and domestic violence programs.

Those are not signs of weakness. They are decisions that should be celebrated.

Success in Congress relies on building coalitions. Unfortunately, Stutzman has repeatedly diminished his standing with his words and actions, alienating fellow Republicans repeatedly and even hurting his party’s negotiating stance at times with reckless comments. Young has at least called for bipartisanship as he has won critical positions on Capitol Hill, including a spot on the Ways and Means Committee.

It should be noted that Young’s primary campaign has been uninspiring; it has been filled with petty back-and-forth skirmishes with Stutzman and a flood of negative campaigning. The tremendous financial support his bid has received from groups such as U.S. Chamber of Commerce does indeed raise questions about the influence they will have over him. Nonetheless, his time in Congress has been marked by an approach that makes clear he is a worthy candidate for the Senate.

For these reasons, we enthusiastically endorse Todd Young.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1TxrNTs