As poorly as the Avalanche has played at times this season, at least it has been above average in the NHL’s toughest division — the Central, the mighty Central.

After Saturday’s late “Hockey Night in Canada” 5-3 victory over the Winnipeg Jets at the Pepsi Center, Colorado stood 3-1 against a division that includes the Dallas Stars, Chicago Blackhawks, St. Louis Blues, Nashville Predators and Minnesota Wild. All mighty.

Granted, the four-game sample size is small, but the Avs (9-13-1) are in position to build on any positives they can find.

“We played only four games but when you’re playing well against a teams in our division, this is something I’m very happy about,” Avs coach Patrick Roy said. “We need to continue to do that.”

Fourth-line center Chris Wagner scored the eventual game-winning goal early in the third period to give Colorado — which led 3-0 before the game was 26 minutes old — a 4-2 lead. It was Wagner’s second goal in as many games; he has played six with the Avs since being claimed off waivers from Anaheim.

“It’s coming along, for sure,” Wagner said.

The Jets made it interesting late, getting a Jacob Trouba goal at 10:54 of the third period to come within 4-3. The puck slipped past goaltender Semyon Varlamov after it hit Avs forward Cody McLeod and changed direction.

But right wing Matt Duchene iced it with an empty-net goal during the final minute. Duchene had two assists for a three-point night. He has 16 points in his last nine games.

“I like what I’m seeing. I like the resilence of our guys, the compete level tonight,” Roy said.

Winnipeg, which lost at home to Colorado 4-1 last Monday, was playing its third game in four days. The Avs improved to 3-6-1 at home. They became the NHL’s last team to win three games at home.

Blake Comeau, Gabe Landeskog and Carl Soderberg accounted for Colorado’s first three goals.

The Jets (11-12-2) received a fortunate bounce to get within 3-1. Trouba’s shot from the point caromed off teammate Andrew Ladd and behind Varlamov at 9:05 of the second period. Less than two minutes later, the Avs looked to re-establish their three-goal lead on their first power play, but an offensive passing sequence on the half wall between defenseman Nick Holden and forward Mikhail Grigorenko went bad and the turnover led to Blake Wheeler’s short-handed goal off a 2-on-2 rush.

Colorado took its 3-0 lead at 5:55 of the second period. Duchene’s slick area pass from the Jets’ blue line sprang Soderberg for a breakaway, and Soderberg made a nice goal-mouth move for his fourth goal of the season.

It was 2-0 after the first period. Comeau’s caused turnover and unassisted breakaway goal opened the scoring, and Lan- deskog doubled the lead by burying a Duchene rebound from the low slot.

The Avs depart Sunday for their road trip that begins Monday in New York against the Islanders.

Colorado is 6-7 on the road this season.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or Twitter: @MikeChambers