The Friday Filibuster: The one-stop-shop for everything you need to know about this week in politics.

Closing Numbers

57% of Americans disapprove of how Obama’s handling ISIS

53% of Americans would blame Republicans for a partial shutdown of DHS if Congress cannot enact a spending bill to keep the agency running.

58% of Colorado and Iowa voters would like to see the next president change direction from Obama’s policies

61% of Virginia voters would like to see the next president change direction from Obama’s policies

24% of Iowa Republicans would vote for Scott Walker, taking the lead over other potential GOP candidates.

53% of New Jersey voters have an unfavorable opinion of Gov. Chris Christie.

Terror

The week kicked off with tragic news out of Libya, where ISIS militants beheaded 21 Coptic Christians. Egypt’s response was swift, a stark and “bothersome” contrast to what our commander in chief did after learning of Kayla Mueller’s execution. Moreover, in their denunciation of the beheadings, the White House failed to mention the victims were Christians, or that the perpetrators, of course, were Islamic extremists. A very important piece on ISIS in The Atlantic came out this week arguing, in part, that the Islamic State is very much Islamic, contrary to what this administration, including former U.S. attorney general Eric Holder, wants to believe, hence their generic summit on extremism this week, sans the Islamic part.

In related news, the State Department put forth the suggestion that the best way to defeat radical Islamic jihadists is with job opportunities (remember, they have “legitimate grievances,” according to President Obama). After catching must-deserved flak for the comments, the State Department spokeswoman doubled down and said they were just too nuanced for the rest of us simpletons. Meanwhile, the administration has decided they might finally do a bit more to confront the ISIS threat by planning to retake the captured city of Mosul. Too bad they told ISIS what our detailed plans entail.

Obamacare

Despite billions of dollars being spent on the Obamacare website, enrollment didn’t pass without at least one major hitch. But if it isn’t the website, it’s the people behind it. The government sent the wrong tax information to nearly 1 million customers, and has had to ask them to hold off on filing their 2014 taxes because of it. Other Americans on the exchange are experiencing yet another “glitch,” namely, that they’ll have to pay back some or all of their subsidies. Ouch.

2016

Wisconsin Governor and potential GOP presidential candidate Scott Walker fired back this week at those who questioned his intelligence because he didn’t finish college, saying that only elitists would make such an argument. And not content with Walker punting on an evolution question, the media has apparently left no stone unturned in its search for answers. They also did a lousy job fact-checking an article blaming him for teacher layoffs in the state, given Walker wasn’t even in office at the time. Jeb Bush, meanwhile, is trying to distance himself from the political baggage associated with his last name. His mother, for her part, has given him the OK on a potential 2016 run. On the Democratic side, controversy is already stirring after it was revealed that the Clinton Foundation accepts foreign funds. Just a slight conflict of interest. And I know you’ve all been waiting for Debbie Wasserman Schultz to become … a senator. Maybe, if Rubio decides to run. Either way, you can be sure liberals will be bringing back the “war on women” mantra.

Immigration

Late Monday night a federal judge temporarily blocked President Obama’s executive action on illegal immigration by granting a request from 26 states to allow the courts to look its constitutionality before it’s implemented. Conn broke down exactly what you need to know, including an explanation of what the court did, didn’t do, and what happens next. In a follow-up post, he provided analysis of the decision and highlighted five key findings. Sen. Ted Cruz called the injunction against Obama’s amnesty a “major victory” for the rule of law, while, predictably, liberals are throwing a tantrum over the "mean and xenophobic" decision. The White House isn't sure yet how to respond.

Townhall Exclusives

Daniel Doherty caught up with Rep. Lee Zeldin, who’s one of several freshman representatives to watch this session. And I had the opportunity to speak with Florida Rep. Ron DeSantis, who’s doing everything he can to reform Washington.

Graphics by Townhall Graphic Designer Feven Amenu.