Despite bad luck, fifth-year senior remains upbeat

Colorado State senior fullback George Maumau turns upfield after hauling in a pass at practice. This is just the second fall camp where Maumau has been healthy enough to compete for playing time. ( Mike Brohard / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

FORT COLLINS — One has to wonder how George Maumau is able to keep that smile on his face.

Though Mike Bobo has been on campus for less than a year, the first-year Colorado State football coach can already tell the senior helps keep morale up in the program and that his teammates genuinely care for him.

Nu'uvali Fa'apito, who arrived on campus the same time Maumau did, both at the same position, said there isn't another Ram like him. He's always smiling, forever in a good mood and rarely ever serious.

"He's just so cheerful and goofy," Fa'apito said. "He's not like other people. I've never seen him in a serious moment. If he is serious, I don't know how my day would go. If he's cheerful, I'm cheerful and it's a funner environment to be around."

All that cheer is mind-boggling considering what Maumau has gone through since signing with the Rams out of Valor Christian. This fall camp, his fifth in all, is just the second one where he's actually been healthy enough to compete for a job. The first time was his sophomore year, which was former coach Jim McElwain's first. And as soon as McElwain arrived, he announced he had no need for fullbacks, which was what Maumau was recruited to play.

So, he's been a fullback, a defensive lineman, a tight end and now he's a fullback again.

The only task he's done more than learning new positions is rehabbing injuries. He broke his leg his senior year in high school. His first knee injury came his first collegiate season. After that started to heal, he injured the other knee. So most of Maumau's time on the field has been doing some sort of rehabilitation to strengthen his body and recover from one ailment or another.

Yet, still he remains one of the happiest guys around, always with a reason to smile.

"When I started off, it was pretty hard," Maumau said with a laugh. "But then I started growing in my faith and talking with my family. They keep my head on straight. There's no reason to be sad about anything. Life goes on, and I can't sit and pout all my whole life, 'oh, I had this injury.' I can't blame everything. I've just got to keep moving forward and show these young guys to keep pushing and live life to the fullest."

He insists he will only look back on his time at Colorado State with fond memories. While he came to play football and earn a degree, he has gained a lifetime of memories with the players who have shared his journey.

It made it easier when he started growing in his faith. Naturally, his family has always been there in the dark times and remained supportive.

But those teammates, they mean the world to him and always will.

"This is a great group of guys. Special," Maumau said. "They're special. If you just hang out with the guys, there's something building. These are just some great guys.

"I'm going to look back on the memories I cherish with the guys in the locker room. That's the most important thing. I'll never get this type of team atmosphere anywhere else."

There's also the love of the game. If he didn't love to play football, he could have chosen numerous points on his CSU timeline to pack it in and move on to other avenues.

While still somewhat limited in what he can do on the field, Bobo has seen that desire and is happy to see Maumau stuck it out.

"He could have been a guy that could have received a medical hardship," the coach said. "I think three knee injuries. This team meant a lot to him and he wanted to be a part of it, and I'm glad he's out here."

Amid all the rehab, Maumau made sure to take care of the other key reason he came to Colorado State, and that was his work in the classroom. He's in line to graduate in December, which would make him the first member of his family with a degree. Not just one, but two. He's majoring in interdisciplinary liberal arts and sociology with a minor in criminal justice.

That accomplishment is a point of pride for not only Maumau, but for his family. With that work nearly done, he is free to focus on the last task he came to Fort Collins to accomplish.

Play for the Rams. Bobo said there are still some things he's held out from, but Maumau has put himself in the mix on a couple of special teams units and he takes regular reps at fullback.

"For both of us, it's our fifth year, and for the past four years, I've seen Maumau rehabbing in the training room, always doing something," Fa'apito said. "Then when he got better, another thing happened or he had a setback. It's finally like good to see him. He's fully cleared, he's allowed to go and share some reps with me. It's refreshing seeing his big body out there."

The journey has taught Maumau more than he could have imagined. He not only gained in his faith, but learned patience. His support system now extends beyond his home to throughout the locker room at CSU.

To him, it became an attitude, to choose to find the good in front of him and embrace it rather than be overwhelmed by the setbacks.

He smiles to prove his point — a positive outlook is contagious. With one last fall in front of him, he's hoping it spreads to the field of play.

"This is my last go-round. I'm just here for the guys and the coaches, too," Maumau said. "Anything they want me to do to help this team win that championship at the end, that's what I'm willing to do. I'll do anything for these guys."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard