CRYSTAL LAKE – A fledgling organization by the end of the 1990s, Centegra Health System employed 1,200 people with roughly $125 million in operating revenues on the books.

Earlier in the decade, health planners operating separate hospitals in McHenry and Woodstock decided that a unified healthcare system was needed to coordinate health services across the county.

By 1995, the new system – Centegra – had its name, and by 1999, it had its leader after current CEO Michael Eesley joined as chief operating officer. He was appointed to the top executive position in 2002.

Throughout Eesley’s tenure, Centegra has seen its facilities expand along with its community footprint, as it became the largest healthcare provider in McHenry County. After its third hospital in the county opens in Huntley as early as late summer, Centegra could employ as many as 4,400 people with a projected revenue base in the $750 million range.

“We spend a lot of time working on futuristic plans of Centegra, where it’s going to be. We don’t sit back and rest on what we’ve done,” Eesley said. “We’re always looking forward.”

In a wide-ranging interview, Eesley credited Centegra’s “substantial” growth since the late 1990s to its dedicated employees and its progressive culture that has established Centegra as a dominant player in the healthcare industry.

Centegra’s focus on innovation and its economic contributions that have made the healthcare system into the largest county employer are some reasons why a panel of judges last month selected Centegra as a Commitment to Community award winner in the Northwest Herald’s inaugural Commitment to McHenry County awards program.

The program recognizes numerous businesses and nonprofit organizations that have demonstrated a consistent pattern of improving the quality of life in McHenry County.

Centegra secured the overall honor for employers with more than 51 employees. Eesley also won the Individual – Compass Award for his work leading the healthcare system and his volunteerism, including as a founder of Leadership Greater McHenry County.

“The [overall] award matches what Centegra has been doing over the years in trying to be innovative, trying to mentor people and trying to develop and create services in our community,” Eesley said. “It’s really been the hallmark of Centegra.”

A recent innovative project, he said, is the new 128-bed hospital under construction at its Huntley health campus, near the intersection of Haligus and Algonquin roads.

Construction crews are putting the finishing touches on the new hospital for a tentative August opening. Centegra has started interviewing for the 45 physician positions who will be stationed in Huntley, as it looks to add about 425 total full-time staff members for the expansion.