Rams led by 13 at halftime

Colorado State guard Gian Clavell (middle) is sandwiched between Colorado defenders Josh Scott (left) and Dominique Collier on Sunday at Moby Arena in Fort Collins. The Rams shot poorly in the second half, blowing a 13-point lead in an 88-77 loss to the Buffs. (V. Richard Haro / For the Loveland Reporter-Herald)

FORT COLLINS — In case you weren't following the Colorado State basketball team closely this season, Sunday provided the Cliffs Notes for you.

The streaky shooting Rams look great when their shots are falling, not so much when they're not.

CSU was raining 3-pointers and scoring in bunches in the first half, to the delight of a packed Moby Arena. But the Rams went ice-cold down the stretch, wasting away a 13-point halftime lead in an 88-77 loss to Colorado.

Afterward, CSU coach Larry Eustachy said the issue during the team's now three-game losing streak is that the players aren't listening to the coaches.

"This team has to do what the coaches say to reach its potential. And we did the exact opposite in this game," said Eustachy, who fell to 1-3 against CU at CSU. "I feel bad for our fans because it was a great crowd, and it was maybe the most frustrating game I've ever coached, because we knew what we had to do. We had to get stops and not give them second opportunities and we did the exact opposite."

After going 7-of-10 from 3 in the first half, the Rams shot just 21.9 percent from the field in the second half (7-32) as they were outscored 49-25 in the final 20 minutes.

CU didn't take long to erase the double-digit deficit by going on a 15-1 run the first 4 minutes of the frame. After falling behind by six, the Rams managed to tie it back up at 68 with 9:30 to play on a 3 by J.D. Paige, but CSU was outscored 20-9 the rest of the way as they made just two of their final 16 from the field.

Sunday marked the second time in eight days the Rams have blown a double-digit halftime lead after losing to UTEP in double-overtime last Saturday despite leading by 17 at the break.

Such can be an issue when you rely so much on perimeter shooting.

"I think it can be misleading, because we'll hit tough shots, probably not the best shots you want to take, but we'll hit them. Then we'll start settling. I think that is a problem of ours as a team," senior guard Joe De Ciman said. "We've been finding out the problem these last three games, and we're going to have to change it."

After starting the season with a promising win at Northern Iowa — a victory that looked even more impassive after UNI then knocked off No. 9 North Carolina — the Rams are now 5-3 and have proven to be wildly inconsistent.

And they don't have much time to fix things before the start of conference play with just three games left against Division I competition before their first Mountain West game Jan. 2 at Boise State.

"I'm disappointed, I'm not discouraged. I never get discouraged," Eustachy said. "Maybe this team will never buy into playing long, long periods of time. I'd be surprised, it'd be the first team it hasn't happened. I think in time we'll figure it out. It's a rough stretch. We're playing top 50 teams. We're there, and we're not finishing them off. Time will tell."

Josh Scott, who was held to a season-low two points and without a field goal in the Rams' win in Boulder last year, redeemed himself with a game-best 21 points and 11 rebounds to lead CU, which is now 84-77 in the all-time series with CSU.

Scott scored 13 points in the second half on 6-of-8 shooting, helping the Buffs to a 28-2 edge in points in the paint in the second half, continuing a troubling trend of the Rams' poor interior defense recently.

Perhaps the worst part of Sunday's loss for the Rams? It came in front of a sold-out crowd at Moby, which had averaged less than 3,000 fans per game coming in, third-worst in the MW.

"It's very frustrating, ya know, 'cause they won't show up again," senior guard Gian Clavell said. "We're not a bad team. We're not a bad team, we just are struggling real bad right now. We've just got to figure it out soon, because conference is right around the corner. And if we don't figure it out, then I don't know. I don't know what's going to happen."

Colorado guard George King (24) drives past Colorado State defender Antwan Scott (1) in Colorado's 88-77 win Sunday in Fort Collins. (V. Richard Haro / For the Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Clavell led the Rams with 18 points, but had just five in the second half on 2-of-9 shooting. CSU also had Antwan Scott score 17 points, John Gillon 16 and De Ciman 13. But they got just four points from its starting front court duo of Tiel Daniels and Emmanuel Omogbo, who had two each.

But once again, the problem was more on the defensive end as the Rams allowed 80 points for the sixth game in a row.

"Guys are getting layups on us. Guys are getting offensive rebounds on us. It's all stemming from defensive breakdowns," De Ciman said. "We're getting beat off the dribble, not helping each other out, not rotating right. It obviously has to change."

The Rams will look to snap their three-game skid Wednesday against Arkansas-Fort Smith.

Sean Star: 970-669-5050, sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/seanvstar