Kanawha County Commission President Kent Carper challenged Charleston Area Alliance President and CEO Matt Ballard on why the Charleston Area Alliance doesn’t do more community development.

Ballard had just finished talking at Thursday’s county commission meeting about some of the events that the Alliance puts on during the summer when Carper asked why any of those events aren’t located outside of downtown Charleston.

“That’s why I hear things from other parts of the county,” Carper said. “It should just be called the Charleston Alliance.”

Ballard held his ground, saying that the Alliance uses money from the county for economic development, recruiting businesses to the county, while it uses money from Charleston for community development.

“We couldn’t possibly do those in every community,” Ballard said.

Carper agreed that it would be difficult to host events in some of the unincorporated parts of the county, but said that he was trying to make a point that the county should get a say where its money goes.

“We write the check, we should have the say so,” Carper said.

Dave Hardy, the county commissioner who sits on the Charleston Area Alliance’s board, was quick to defend the Alliance.

“It’s an unusual mission in that it does community development and economic development,” he said.

Ballard received the ire of Carper a second time, when he said that one thing that could help bring more businesses to the state is a better airport.

“If I want your advice on what to do with the airport, we’ll consult you,” Carper said.

Ballard was giving an update on the progress of the Alliance as part of an agreement decided when the county was considering budget cuts that the Alliance would give quarterly updates during the year.

The County Commission also recognized Jerry Burgess for saving a woman’s life by calling 911 after seeing her walking on the edge of an overpass ramp leading to Interstate 64.

He stayed on the phone with the Metro 911 operator while the Charleston police and paramedics responded to the call.

Charleston police were able to bring the woman to safety and EMS brought her to the hospital.

“I still say I didn’t do anything to this day except make a phone call,” Burgess said.

Rep. Alex Mooney, R-W.Va., attended his first Kanawha County Commission meeting since being elected to Congress. Carper said Mooney talked told the commission about some of his priority items about economic development and a bill that he has proposed to assist physicians by paying them under the Affordable Care Act. Mooney left after five minutes to attend the Donald Trump rally at the Civic Center.

A resident named Joe Stern presented a petition to the Commission to get a law allowing hunting on park grounds on Sundays on the general election ballot.

Carper decided to send the petition to the planning committee and county clerk so that the next steps could be taken.

The Elk Public Service District will apply for a grant to receive $1.5 million to extend its service to people in Blue Creek/Rt. 119, Young’s Bottom and Reamer.

Reach Daniel Desrochers at dan.desrochers@wvgazettemail.com, 304-348-4886 or follow @drdesrochers on Twitter.