Heritage Irish Dance Company, a new school of Irish dance. Taught by former teachers of the Peter Smith School, the school will hold classes for boys and girls aged 2 1/2 to 18 in four counties

Students of the Heritage Irish Dance Company show off their winnings from the Mid-Atlantic Regional Championships of Irish Dance held in Philadelphia in November of last year, from left to right, Sarah Oldam, 19, from Clinton, Brendan Gaffney, 14, from Harrisburg, Pa., Christophe Bullard, 13, of Chatham and Erin Karlok, 11, of Whippany. (Photo: PHOTO BY KEN OLDAM ) Story Highlights New Irish dance school offers classes in four counties

Prospective students are welcome to take a trial class

The school boasts experienced teachers and various convenient class locations

This month marks the inaugural registration opportunity for Heritage Irish Dance Company, a new school of Irish dance. Taught by former teachers of the Peter Smith School, the school will hold classes for boys and girls age 2½ to 18 in Bernardsville, Chatham, Cedar Knolls, Clinton, Martinsville section of Bridgewater, Metuchen, Middletown, Morristown and Wharton. The school's staff has a collective 70-plus years of experience teaching children of all ages traditional Irish step dancing.

"Irish dance isn't just for Americans of Irish descent," said dance teacher Amy Siegel Loxley. "At the Heritage Irish Dance Company we aim to share our passion for Irish dance with all our students and along the way, we help our students develop self-confidence, stage presence, coordination, discipline and time management."

Loxley attributes "Riverdance, the Show" which came on the scene in 1996, with the public being captivated by Irish dance and music. "For generations, Irish dancing had been enjoyed principally by Americans of Irish descent. Now, thanks to Michael Flatley, the original star and choreographer of Riverdance, people of all backgrounds were able to see and fall in love with Irish dance," added Loxley.

She said the genre is unique. Said Loxely: "No arm movements for the most part and furiously fast feet — Irish dance stands out from all other dance forms. It's incredibly athletic too as the dancers need fantastic core strength to maintain perfect posture while leaping through the air and raising their legs up as high as their heads."

She said all of the school's instructors are licensed by An Coimisiun, the governing body of Irish dance worldwide which is based in Dublin, Ireland. Loxley, a former World, All Ireland and North American Champion, was also was a cast member in "Riverdance on Broadway" and on show's North American tour.

Registration for the fall term is open now. Each class location has one class each week from Sept. 8 until the end of June. "We take a holiday break in the winter and the spring," said Loxley. Prospective students may arrange to attend a class at no charge.

Visit the Heritage Irish Dance Company's website at www.heritageirishdance.com, call 732-317-9409 or email info@heritageirishdance.com for more information and class schedules.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1umIt3y