ADVERTISEMENT

S.Z. Berg

Bake sales, car washes, and 5k races are all good fundraising events, but nothing has raised funds so fast and furious as crowdfunding for one man who is using it to fund medical research at the same level as major federal government grants.

So far, in a relatively short time, Glenn O'Neill and his wife, Cara, have raised more than $1 million with a goal of $1.8 million to fund a cure for a rare disease affecting their young daughter, Eliza, who suffers from Sanfilippo Syndrome-Type A.

Sanfilippo Syndrome-Type A is considered an orphan disease and has no registry, so the numbers of kids affected is unknown. According to the National Institutes of Health, a rare disease is one that affects fewer than 200,000 people in the U.S. There are more than 6,800 rare diseases affecting some 25 million to 30 million people. Because the numbers for each disease is relatively small, it's difficult for researchers to get enough money to find treatments or cures. Even major diseases don't have enough research funding. But given what one family has done for one orphan disease, patients may no longer be at the mercy of government or industry funding. All they'll need is interested researchers and a solid fundraising campaign.

The ONeills knew that, pending funding, at Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus, Ohio, there was a potential breakthrough gene therapy trial scheduled for Sanfilippo Syndrome-Type A of a one-time intravenous injection that crosses the blood-brain barrier. Other parents' fundraisers had paved the way for this research, O'Neill says. So, the O'Neills created a non-profit 501c3 foundation, Cure Sanfilippo Syndrome (Tax ID: 46-4322131), making donations tax deductible. The foundation has no paid employees, and no funds go to personal medical expenses. Using traditional fundraising methods – 5K runs, fundraising parties, golf tournaments, and dance-a-thons – and a Gofundme.com crowdfunding campaign with a homemade video, which itself raised $40,000 – they were able to raise $250,000, but it took them more than 6 months. While impressive for a grassroots fundraising campaign, it was just a fraction of what they needed, and they were racing against time.