Sioux Falls, SD

The search is on for a man who allegedly tried running over a police officer with a stolen pickup. It started at 2:30 am. Monday outside a grocery store at West 10th Street and Kiwanis Avenue, but ended near Garfield Elementary.

Before it was all over, the suspect had hit two vehicles. As you might imagine, one of the owners is upset, but he's also disappointed with police.

This man had a rude awakening this morning when he found a red tag on his windshield indicating his truck had been hit.

"I woke up for a second and saw flashing lights, looked out the window and I didn't see much, just turned around and went back to bed," Tony said.

Tony, who didn't want us to use his last name, had no idea his truck had been hit by a man driving a stolen vehicle until after we told him. As you can see his truck suffered some serious damage. But that's not all he's mad about.

"What kind of upsets me about the whole thing is that I woke up this morning to you knocking on my door asking me if that was my truck and police didn't bother to wake me up," Tony said.

Tony's truck is just one of two vehicles that were hit during the pursuit of the suspect.

Police say it all started at a Hy-Vee, where a man, who was dropping off newspapers, left his pickup running.

When he came outside he saw someone driving off in it. A short time later, officers located the truck in the 200 block of South Elmwood Avenue where they saw the suspect rummaging through the vehicle.

Police ordered the man to get away from the truck, but he jumped inside and then drove at the officer, who was able to get out of the way before being struck.

Police say the suspect then drove the stolen vehicle through a stop light at 12th Street and Elmwood Avenue, where he struck two parked vehicles before he abandoned the pickup.

While the search continues for the suspect, Tony is left lamenting on Labor Day.

"I'd preferred to be woken up in this case, now I have a truck sitting on my curb that I could have taken care of by now," Tony said.

The suspect is described as a Native American man, 6-foot tall, 160 to 170 pounds with buzzed hair and glasses.

If you have any information, contact Sioux Falls Police at 605-367-7000.

Crime {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.