Student loan rates are rising as of July 1. The Daily Ticker's Aaron Task talks with Jen Wang of Young Invincibles about the impact.

Think college is out of reach now? Just wait.

Yahoo Finance senior columnist Rick Newman has some advice for Facebook for any future experiments the tech giant does with users.

Yahoo Finance's Rick Newman and Lauren Lyster talk about a new Gallup poll that finds that Americans are losing confidence in all branches of government.

There are more goofy, silly and absurd apps than ever, as anyone with a bad idea can turn to fundraising sites like Kickstarter to pump themselves up.

And you thought the Yo app was goofy

Imaging Advantage founder & CEO, Naseer Hashim explains why investment in health care needs to be focused more towards models which take advantage of more purposeful, meaningful innovations.

Discussing the M&A space for biotech and health care with Les Funtleyder, Asset Management Portfolio Manager at ESquared, and Michael Yee, BioTech Analyst at RBC Capital Markets

As consumers get savvier about shopping for health care, some are finding a curious trend: More hospitals, imaging centers, outpatient surgery centers and pharmacy chains will give them deep discounts if they pay cash instead of using insurance.

With the absence of a durable power of attorney for health care (DPOAHC) families and health care providers may struggle with directing and providing care for an incapacitated loved one.

One of the reasons health care has become some huge issue for the nation in recent years. KCRA 3’s Brian Heap speaks to Stockton mayoral candidates about their thoughts on health care.

Dr. David Agus wants U.S. health care to focus on prevention rather than just treatment, which is the focus of his new book "A Short Guide to a Long Life."

Dr. David Agus is on a mission. He wants health care to focus on what works -- prevention rather than treatment and, when needed, treatment that's been proven to work.

Agus, a professor of medicine and engineering at USC, has just written a book A Short Guide to a Long Life, which includes 65 rules in order to lead a healthy and robust life.

Related: Latest Obamacare headache: Thousands may not be insured after all

Companies like Dell and CBS (CBS) have reportedly bought massive quantities of the guide for their employees to improve employees' health and help their bottom line.

"One heart costs a company $75,000; one case of colon cancer over $110,000," Agus explains.

On Agus' to-do list:

Get an annual flu shot even if you don't tend to get the flu

Eat real food on a regular schedule

Take a baby aspirin daily

Consider statins even if you don't have high cholesterol. (He says statins can help much more than just heart disease.)

Follow prescribed cancer screening schedules

Related: CVS to ban sales of cigarettes, tobacco products by October

These recommendations are generally common practice among doctors and what patients have come to expect. But Agus' don't-do list may surprise some. He advises:

Avoid vitamins and supplement

Don't juice or detox

Don't pass through airport security backscatter ex-ray scanners; choose a pat down instead

Related: Why a small group of doctors & techies believe they can create an HIV vaccine

The data does not support the benefits of vitamins, supplements, juicing or detoxing, says Agus.

"Men who take vitamin E have a 17% increase in prostate cancer that lasts three years after they stop taking it...smokers and former smokers who take beta carotene or Vitamin A have a dramatic increase in lung cancer and death," he notes.

Related: How to lose 35 pounds without dieting

Agus worries about the lack of data for long-term effects on body scanners: "We have no long-term outcome data...In the 1950s people put their foot in a box to see if their feet fit in their shoes, and we got cancers of the leg."

Underlying all of Agus' recommendations is a belief that health care should focus on preventing disease rather than treating it, and that health care reform should focus on health, not health care finance.

"I wrote this book out of weakness," says Agus. "A couple of times a week I look somebody in the eye and say 'I have no more drugs to treat your cancer.' I don't want to do that anymore. Most of these cancers are preventable or delayable."

He says change will come when incentives -- and disincentives -- for health care change. "A surgeon gets paid for doing an operation," he says. "They don't get paid for saying 'go on a preventive strategy.'"

Agus applauds Obamacare for requiring insurers to cover vaccines for children and adults without charge and for allowing companies to use differential charges based on the behavior of the insured.

"Everybody has a right to do whatever they want...smoke, drink soda or be as large as they want, but does society have the obligation to pay for health care ramifications of what they do?" he asks.

If Agus had his way, companies would install coin-operated elevators. Employees would be healthier for the exercise and companies would save on health care costs.

"Every time an employee takes an elevator instead of walking the stairs they're hurting the bottom line...by increasing the prevalence of disease," says Agus.

Watch the video above for more of the doctor's recommendations!



Follow The Daily Ticker on Facebook and on Twitter (@DailyTicker)!



More from The Daily Ticker

Something’s going right in Washington! Why there will be less fighting over the deficit this year

Will Twitter's earnings justify its stock price?

Harsh weather means white-out conditions for economy