Newsmaker Q&A: Liz Chang

Liz Chang is a certified lactation counselor who runs a bilingual Easton support group for women who are breastfeeding. The group meets at 10:30 a.m. every other Tuesday, beginning Jan. 14, at the Easton Area Community Center, 901 Washington St. She is the subject of this week's Q&A.

A: Two years ago I became a new mom and started nursing my son. I looked for support in my community and saw the lack of it. I then started inviting other women and their children to my home to talk about it. At the same time, I became a certified lactation counselor with the Academic of Lactation Policy and Practice With the support of our local breastfeeding coalition, I started the Lehigh Valley Breastfeeding Moms Group in Easton, a bilingual English and Spanish group.

Q: You run a breastfeeding support group in Easton. What sort of issues do mothers come to you with?

A: The list is long. There are many issues, including the need to connect and see others that are also nursing. I had mothers asking simple and not-so-simple questions, such how to properly breastfeed twins, how to explain to a employer that they need to pump [as it relates to the Affordable Care Act law], how to deal with abundant milk supply, where to donate milk, etc. I've also had moms of premature babies that were in a great need of emotional support. Nursing mothers are always looking to have a community that supports their efforts, and they want to be heard and be reassured that they can do it.

Q: What is your advice for new moms who are struggling with breastfeeding?

A: To find a professional in the subject matter and ask many questions. To get connected in local support groups in the community. To be diligent and have a great determination. To go the extra mile and keep on trying.

Q: Why do they say "breast is best"?

A: Simply because there are a great number of scientific studies, evidence and research over many years that supports this. Many people believe and know that what is biologically created must be the best for both the infant and mother. Breastfeeding my child for the past 25 months has also touched many levels of both our physical and emotional health. The emotional aspect of breastfeeding to me is of equal if not of higher importance to a child.

Q: What are some of the stigmas that breastfeeding advocates are trying to overcome?

A: There are many in the United States. One of them is for public acceptance. Another is for all employers to grant enough time and accommodate the mother that it is in need of using the breast pump, and to protect her decision.

Q: Were you breastfed?

A: Yes! My mother, while working in a factory in Colombia, South America, was able to take maternity leave so, she breastfed me for a while at home. Then she was allowed to pump breast milk, and that is what she did.