MILPITAS, Calif., March 23, 2016 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- RotaCare Bay Area, Inc., a non-profit 501(c)(3) organization with 12 free medical clinics in the Greater Bay Area, has named Jatinderpal (JP) Kaur Sahi as its chief operating officer.



“JP brings strong leadership and organization skills to RotaCare Bay Area (RBA), along with extensive experience in health-related non-profit organizations,” said Elisabeth Whitney, chief executive officer of RotaCare Bay Area. “She will be responsible for providing technical, operations and management support to the 12 RotaCare Bay Area Free Medical Clinics to advance the organization’s mission, as well as participating in program and strategy planning, evaluation, and fund development.”

Ms. Sahi has over 10 years of management experience as a professional in health non-profit organizations. JP has worked with community clinics in the East Bay, including Tri-City Health Center as Quality Director, Axis Community Health as Director of Clinic Operations and Center for Elders Independence as Quality Director.

Her area of focus is health care operations and compliance. Additionally, she has extensive experience in program development and improvement plans, operational assessments, and implementation of EHR and CSR systems.

JP joined RotaCare Bay Area as the director of clinic operations in August 2015, after leaving a position at Safeway, Inc. in Pleasanton, managing the Specialty Pharmacy (Health and Wellness) at the corporate headquarters. She has an M.S. in Health Care Administration and an MBA in Operations Management from California State University, East Bay.

About RotaCare Bay Area

RotaCare Bay Area is a non-profit 501 (c) 3 organization. RBA continues to serve the healthcare needs of many individuals that the Affordable Care Act cannot support. RotaCare Bay Area is “the Safety net for the Safety Net!”

RBA is a volunteer alliance of medical professionals, organizations and community members dedicated to providing free primary, quality healthcare services to uninsured families and individuals with limited ability to pay for medical care.

The organization was formed in 1989 when a local Rotarian, Dr. Mark Campbell and his Campbell Rotary Club identified the need of many local residents who had limited access to primary healthcare services. They resolved to meet the need with a clinic in Santa Clara. That first clinic, located in the former Agnews State Hospital site has since closed, but in its place RBA now has 12 clinics located in Concord, Daly City, Gilroy, Half Moon Bay, Monterey, Mountain View, Pittsburg, San Jose, San Leandro, San Rafael and Santa Cruz. The organization is driven by volunteers and supported solely through locally based philanthropy. RBA’s network consists of 12 free medical clinics located throughout the San Francisco Bay Area.

RBA harnesses the skills and hearts of local physicians, nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, pharmacists, bi-lingual interpreters, social workers, and many others who volunteer their time to provide basic primary health services free of charge to our patients. Our clinics are open one to three nights a week, often sharing a clinic location with a school health center or hospital clinic, but also located in community centers. Only the number of volunteers that can be recruited binds us along with the funds we can raise, because the need is always there. Without RotaCare, patients would have no choice but to use hospital emergency rooms as their source of primary care. Using hospital emergency rooms for non-emergency problems drives healthcare costs up because the care for uninsured patients is passed on in higher healthcare premiums and out-of-pocket expenses. The 12 RotaCare Free Medical Clinics experienced over 18,400 patient visits last year. The clinics receive no government funding or insurance reimbursement.

CONTACT: Elisabeth Whitney Chief Executive Officer RotaCare Bay Area, Inc. 408-263-8175 elisabethw@rotacarebayarea.org