Hundreds of thousands of New Jerseyans opened the mail last week to find their health insurance plan would no longer exist in 2014 because it does not cover all the essential benefits required by the Affordable Care Act.

The news surprised some who were unaware that provisions in the new law known as “Obamacare” were forcing insurance companies to scrap some plans they had previously offered.

“The Affordable Care Act is driving many changes to products and pricing,” said Thomas Vincz, a spokesman for Horizon. “Horizon BCBSNJ is actively working to help our members find new insurance plans that meet their needs and budget.”

The changes will impact more than 800,000 people in New Jersey who purchase insurance on the individual and small-employer markets, according to Ward Sanders, president of the New Jersey Association of Health Plans.

Horizon, Aetna and others have had to create new plans to meet the requirements mandated by the law.

“Aetna has updated its product portfolio for individuals as well as small group customers to ensure our plans were in compliance with the Affordable Care Act and state laws and regulations for 2014,” said Susan Millerick, a spokeswoman from Aetna. “Generally speaking, the products will dock to a similar product that will be available in 2014, but there will be some difference in benefits and price.”

Those in the individual and small-employer markets may shop on the new health insurance exchanges, which opened last week. Individuals can choose from 29 plans offered by three companies: Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield, AmeriHealth New Jersey and Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey. Federal subsidies may help pay for a portion of premiums.

Insurance companies such as Aetna are still offering plans but not on the exchanges created by the Affordable Care Act.

Advocates of the new law hail the change as a win for consumers, arguing that all plans

must now meet minimum standards — that even if these new plans cost a bit more, they will provide much better coverage.

“In the end it could be a net positive for people,” said Linda Schwimmer, vice president of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute.

She pointed out that preventive care, such as blood pressure screening, will now be covered for free.

“You got to think about somebody relatively healthy and pretty good about getting their primary care needs,” she said. “It might actually cost less out of pocket. I think it’s an opportunity.”

Critics, however, say the changes belie the president’s often-repeated claim that if you like your insurance plan, you can keep it.

But state Sen. Joe Vitale (D-Middlesex) said it’s a nuanced promise.

“The president also said he won’t tolerate benefit plans that don’t meet the basic needs of our citizens,” Vitale said.

Those in the individual and small-employer markets aren’t the only ones receiving letters because of the Affordable Care Act. There are changes coming to some Medicare Advantage plans as well, which are due, in part, to the new law.

Horizon sent notices to 50,000 of its New Jersey members explaining to seniors that their current plans will not be available next year.

“Due to increasing health care costs and continued federal government cuts to Medicare Advantage, Horizon BCBSNJ had to discontinue certain MA plans, create new plans, and increase premiums, in order to continue to be the only carrier offering MA plans in all 21 counties of New Jersey,” Vincz said. “We are working with all impacted MA members to help them understand their options, which include new Horizon MA plans, traditional Medicare paired with one of our Medicare Supplemental plans, or even other carriers’ plans.”

One reason for the change is that Obamacare cut about $200 billion from the Medicare Advantage program, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service. Some of that money was used to pay for other parts of the law, including provisions that benefit seniors, such as closing the infamous “doughnut hole,” which will reduce the percentage seniors must pay for prescription drugs.

“We have advised members, in our letters, of other Medicare plans we may have

available to them in their area and we have provided them resources at CMS who can help them choose their new plan,” Millerick said.

Brian McGuire, associate state director for AARP New Jersey, said these changes may be frustrating to seniors forced to change plans, but it is an overall benefit for Medicare recipients. That’s because the Affordable Care Act provides financial incentives to insurance plans that are ranked highest for quality of care and customer service.

“Any time a senior has a plan they like and have to change, that’s not a positive, but we have a much better assurance that there are higher-quality plans being offered,” he said.“

Maryann White, 74, of Toms River said she was frustrated by the news. She liked the plan she had and is worried that whatever new plan she buys will cost more. Though she is engaged in the process, she said, many seniors find it difficult to understand their options.

“This is really a shame,” she said. “I’m not criticizing. I’m just saying, ‘Give us a break.’”

McGuire reminded seniors looking for a new plan they can call 1-800-MEDICARE for assistance.