Elizabeth Esty was in the right place at the right time. In early 2012, she was challenging House Speaker Christopher Donovan for the Democratic nomination for the 5th Congressional District seat. Mr. Donovan was better known and was attracting more money — until his candidacy was brought down by an influence-peddling scandal involving several members of his campaign staff. She went on to defeat Mr. Donovan in the primary and win the general election.

She was lucky, but she put herself in a position to be lucky. Ms. Esty, of Cheshire, was a strong candidate, and she has emerged as a bright and hardworking representative who is learning to use her office to help the district. The Courant endorses her for a second term against real estate developer Mark Greenberg of Litchfield, a Republican who sought the seat in 2010 and 2012.

Why Ms. Esty?

Connecticut is governed at the local and state level. Its five members of the House are its only officials who are elected regionally. In part because they may be able to locate federal funds, the representatives have what Ms. Esty calls "convening power," the ability to bring local and state leaders to the table to solve local problems. Ms. Esty does this regularly, as when she helped arrange needed repairs for the Waterbury Boys & Girls Club.

She is a stickler for constituent services, as any good representative should be, and is proud to have gotten more than $2.5 million in Social Security, Veterans Affairs, Medicare and Internal Revenue Service benefits and refunds for constituents in fiscal 2013 and 2014. She has been an advocate for manufacturing and recently submitted a bill, the Manufacturing Universities Act, that would help universities improve their engineering programs in ways that emphasize manufacturing.

Ms. Esty also introduced the Promoting Women in Entrepreneurship Act, which seeks to promote women in the science, technology, engineering and mathematics professions.

On the energy front, Ms. Esty and Sen. Chris Murphy worked together to pass a law that will allow Canton to reactivate the Collinsville dams, a move that could provide clean energy to 1,500 homes in the area.

Ms. Esty, 55, calls herself a "principled pragmatist" who will break with the party if she feels it necessary. She pays attention to issues involving veterans, seniors, children, farmers. In all, she's had a strong first term. However, as The Courant's Matthew Kauffman reported, her campaign ads distorted the position of her opponent, Mr. Greenberg, on Social Security, an uncharacteristic and unfortunate misstep.

Why Not Mr. Greenberg?

Mr. Greenberg, 60, of Litchfield, believes that Washington could benefit from someone with his business background. He is staunchly conservative: smaller government, strong defense, pro-life, against the Affordable Care Act, in favor of building the Keystone pipeline and drilling for oil off the coast of Florida, and simplifying the tax code. (If every candidate from Maine to Hawaii favors simplifying the tax code, why can't they do it?)

When he ran in 2010, Mr. Greenberg floated the idea of a voluntary opt-out of Social Security for younger workers to a different retirement savings vehicle. But he said in an interview with The Courant's editorial board that he now believes such a step is politically impossible ("It won't happen") and that he will no longer pursue it.

Mr. Greenberg's involvement in the recent trial of former Gov. John Rowland should not be held against him. In 2009, Mr. Rowland proposed what would have been an illegal consulting arrangement to Mr. Greenberg for the 2010 campaign. Though it took him awhile to do so, Mr. Greenberg said no.

Mr. Greenberg is an intelligent and civic-minded candidate, but one whose views are too close to those of the obstructionist wing of the GOP. Ms. Esty will better serve the district.

Ms. Esty is cross-endorsed by the Working Families Party. Mr. Greenberg is cross-endorsed by the Independent Party. Also running is petitioning candidate John J. Pistone of Brookfield.