Defense attorneys Jennifer Wickens, left, and Kathryn Herold sit with Dynel Lane, accused of attacking Michelle Wilkins and cutting the Longmont woman's unborn child from her womb, during her arraignment on attempted-murder charges in Boulder District Court on July 23. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

Defense attorneys for Dynel Lane — the woman accused of cutting Michelle Wilkins' unborn baby from her womb in March — are seeking a gag order on the Boulder District Attorney's Office, police and witnesses, including Wilkins.

Lane, 35, is charged with attempted murder, unlawful termination of a pregnancy and multiple counts of felony assault. Prosecutors allege she attacked Wilkins and removed an unborn baby from her womb on March 18.

Wilkins, 26, survived, but her baby did not.

The defense alleges that statements made by District Attorney Stan Garnett, police officials, Wilkins, her family and a public relations firm after the incident are jeopardizing Lane's right to a fair trial and due process.

"These participants are well aware of the media's thirst for any commentary by any of the trial participants," a defense motion said. "These participants have repeatedly used the media to disseminate inadmissible evidence ahead of trial."

Prosecutors dispute the claim, arguing that any statements made have been within the confines of professional ethics, and police have not made any statements since Lane was formally charged in connection with the incident.

Advertisement

Garnett contends that after a March press conference when charges were announced, he has made limited comments about seeking a "just result" and the case being "treated like any other," court records show.

The DA's office has reminded local police to not make statements that "have a substantial likelihood of heightening public condemnation of the accused" and sent out a letter to this effect, records show.

Prosecutors contend that the court has no authority to prevent Wilkins, her family or a public relations firm representing her from making statements regarding the case, and that Wilkins' statements have not been problematic.

Wilkins has posted online about her recovery and friendly meetings with first responders. Family members and Wilkins' public relations firm have commented about Lane in online posts, one of which called her "deranged."

Most statements issued by Wilkins' public relations firm have been about Wilkins or issued after court appearances, one of which thanked the DA's office for its support or acknowledged that Wilkins knew of developments in the case.

Wilkins has also taped an episode of the Dr. Phil show that airs on Monday, but her public relations firm said that "no other such interviews will occur prior to trial," court records show.

Lane remains in custody at Boulder County Jail on a $2 million bond, and her case is expected to go to trial in February. She is due back in court on Nov. 3.

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme