St. Joseph Mercy's new Pontiac tower puts hospitality into the hospital

St. Joseph Mercy Oakland's new $135 million south patient tower in Pontiac is literally a work of art.



From the 80 original paintings from Michigan artists hanging on its walls to the advanced technology featuring beds embedded with motion sensors and wrist bands continuously monitoring patients' vital signs in its 136 staffed private rooms, St. Joseph's new eight-story tower appears to have it all.



"It was intentional," CEO Jack Weiner said. "Our chairman (Timothy Caughlin) said if we do a bricks-and-mortar project, we want to make a statement and do something different."



The 301,000-square-foot wing, which will have enough space for 72 additional beds, was designed as a safe and calm "healing environment" for patients and families and to feature some of the most cutting-edge medical technologies possible, Weiner said. Thirty-six beds for a neuroscience unit will open this fall on the sixth floor of the new tower.



"We took eight different manufacturers (of health care products), brought them to the table and told them what we wanted," Weiner said. "They had never done that before."



Many hospitals in Southeast Michigan — including Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit, Crittenton Hospital Medical Center in Rochester Hills and Beaumont Hospital Troy — have been renovating patient towers the last several years that offer larger private rooms with more space for technology and family visitors.



Jack Poma, administrative director of nursing services at Beaumont Hospital Troy, said advanced building designs and newer patient-monitoring technologies have improved quality and reduced costs at many hospitals.



For example, Beaumont Troy has tracked financial and quality improvements after opening an inpatient rehabilitation unit in December 2012 and an inpatient oncology unit in May 2013, Poma said.



"There have been a number of innovations in technology and buildings the last five to seven years," Poma said. "There is evidence of improved patient safety and lower costs."



Poma said the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, has incentivized hospitals to install electronic medical record systems and connect the EMRs to patient monitoring devices for improved safety.



"Vital signs can be automatically updated without users needing to enter anything," he said. "There is a lot of video monitoring technology to watch patients. We can monitor them constantly, so if they try to get out of bed without assistance, we see them and can prevent them from falling."



But at 443-bed St. Joseph Mercy, Weiner said the number of new medical technologies installed in its new south patient tower is beyond what most hospitals have done.





"Now we can go out into the community and tell patients if they come here, you have a better chance of surviving and going home," Weiner said.



The new tower and other improvements at the hospital have helped on the financial side as well, he said.



So far, St. Joseph Mercy appears to have increased revenue per patient overall this fiscal year. For example, revenue per patient improved 3.9 percent to an average of $6,457 during a recent 10-month period starting July 1, 2013, compared with average per-patient revenue of $6,213 in May 2013.



On the expense side, average expense per discharge, after adjusting for average sickness of patients, increased 3.1 percent to $6,539 from $6,341 during a 10-month period from July 1, 2013, through April this year.



"There is no question we have been trying to reduce our operating costs, even though we opened a new building," Weiner said. Revenue per case has been dropping because of lower reimbursement and Medicare cuts, he said.



Here are some other examples of technologies at St. Joseph Mercy and the improvements that the administration has tracked so far:





Related Links