Where the Affordable Care Act is working to make qualifying for coverage easier, the Corbett administration has been making it harder.

By Antoinette Kraus

Gov. Tom Corbett will leave office in less than a week. Unfortunately for working Pennsylvanians, his vision for health care – more bureaucracy, higher costs, more complexity and fewer benefits – will remain. That is, unless incoming Governor Wolf immediately begins to reverse course on Corbett's direction for health care.

The Pennsylvania Health Access Network is working everyday to secure quality, affordable health care for all Pennsylvanians; we're helping individuals and families cut through the confusion and red tape to enroll in Healthy PA.

Since December, we have helped over 400 Pennsylvanians complete applications for Healthy PA, and have assisted hundreds more with questions. What should be a simple application process has proven to be too complex, too confusing and too frustrating for consumers.

Streamlined eligibility rules make current monthly income the only factor in deciding whether someone can qualify for Medicaid.

No longer does someone need a disability, or young children, or a life-threatening illness to be eligible; no longer will a $5000 401(k) from ten years ago disqualify someone from getting covered.

Where the Affordable Care Act is working to make qualifying for coverage easier, the Corbett administration has been making it harder.

State applications for Healthy PA still ask applicants unnecessary questions about their assets. Worse still, people applying for Healthy PA are being told to submit bank statements, Kelly Blue Book car values, and life insurance policies.

Take Debbie in Reading. Eligible under the new, simplified rules for Medicaid, Debbie was eager to sign up for coverage. She was thrilled to know she'd finally be insured until she was denied for failure to provide bank records.

After a lot of worry and work to straighten things out, Debbie will get covered – but not without having to file an appeal and muddle through entirely unnecessary red tape.

When people like Debbie turn to the state's helplines, they get conflicting information on what's needed to complete their application. The 30-day window the state has to process their application has come and gone for many, with no response.

People are frustrated across the state. Dorothy of Pine Township in Allegheny County helped her son apply for coverage. Despite submitting all the documents the state requested and completing the new health screening questionnaire, the family hasn't heard a word from the state. For 43 days, Dorothy's had to worry about if and when her son will be covered.

Debbie and Dorothy's experiences only tell half the story: how hard it's been to apply, get a response and enroll in coverage. The other half of the story is how hard it's been for the 1.1 million adults already covered by Medicaid to understand what's changing and when.

These people with disabilities, pregnant women, low-income parents, women enrolled in SelectPlan, and others have received a series of confusing letters warning of benefit changes ahead.

At the direction of the Corbett administration, the state would replace the benefits they've relied on for years with one of two packages – Healthy Plus (high-risk) or Healthy (low-risk) – the Healthy Plan will cover less than the benefits they had, beginning January 1.

Adults who weren't automatically moved into Healthy Plus are forced to complete an invasive and lengthy health screening questionnaire if they want to avoid the harshest cuts.

For individuals who are applying through healthcare.gov and are found eligible for Healthy PA they are also stuck in a never ending bureaucratic process.

Their application is sent to the state who must hold their application for 18 days while individuals are given time to complete the invasive and lengthy health screening questionnaire. whose incomes fall between 100 percent to 138 percent of the federal poverty level and who enrolled in marketplace coverage last year must now move to Healthy PA.

These applicants are facing long wait times and requests for unnecessary information. While they wait many have to forgo filling prescriptions and seeing their doctor for the care they need.

Every day, Pennsylvanians confront the Corbett legacy of headaches, hurdles and hardship as they apply and fight to keep their benefits under Healthy PA.

While the legacy for Corbett on health care is set, it doesn't have to dictate what happens in the next four years.

Gov-elect Tom Wolf has an opportunity to not only reverse course, but to cement his own legacy as a leader who will make our health care system stronger, more accessible and more affordable. He can do that on day one by closing the book on Healthy PA.

Antoinette Kraus is the director of The Pennsylvania Health Access Network. She writes from Philadelphia.