Employees at Johns Hopkins Medicine, as well as medical professionals throughout the state, are among those who were recently targeted in a tax fraud scheme, according to Hopkins officials and the Maryland attorney general's office.

Officials at the attorney general's office said they've been contacted by medical professionals who attempted to file returns, only to find they had already been fraudulently filed.

State officials said they did not have specific figures of those affected. Tax filings were due April 15.

Officials at Johns Hopkins Medicine said "a number" of employees have been affected by suspected tax identity schemes, though they declined to offer details. Hopkins officials said in a statement they are working with law enforcement and initiated an internal investigation "to ensure none of our systems have been accessed inappropriately.

"To date, we have found nothing out of the ordinary," officials said.

Jeff Karberg, an administrator of the identity theft program at the attorney general's office, said he's heard from people across the state expressing concern about potential tax fraud schemes.

The office is warning all residents against scams in which a caller poses as an employee with the Internal Revenue Service who is demanding money or threatening arrest. Officials said the IRS does not call or email asking for money or personal information.

Karberg said he encourages potential victims to contact the IRS to see if their federal return has been affected. He said victims also should alert banks, credit card companies — "wherever their money is," he said — and check credit reports.

"I encourage families to consider everyone at risk," including spouses, he said. In Maryland, parents can request to have their child's credit frozen if they believe their children are at risk, he added.

The attorney general's office said those who believe they may be victims of identity tax fraud may contact:

•Internal Revenue Service Identity Protection Specialized Unit, 800-908-4490.

•Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, 800-366-4484.

•Questionable Return Team at the Maryland Office of the Comptroller, 410-260-7449.

•Office of the Maryland Attorney General Identity Theft Unit, 410-576-6491.

jkanderson@baltsun.com

twitter.com/janders5