Looks like Justin Timberlake has found his next single off of his double disc album The 20/20 Experience. Timberlake, who has released “Suit & Tie”, “Mirrors”, and “TKO,” looked like he was getting ready to release “Drink You Away” as a single after his rousing American Music Awards performance. When no word came we figured maybe we would have to wait, and then Timberlake gave a great performance of “Only When I Walk Away” on Saturday Night Live in January and then we thought for sure that would be his next single, and still, no word. Now we finally have word and its neither of those songs off of Timberlake’s latest release.

According to All Access “Not a Bad Thing,” a mellow mid tempo groove, has been released to Top 40 radio, Rhythmic and other Adult Contemporary stations. Although the acoustic featured song is a great choice, it’s odd considering what Timberlake has put out in the past. While he has grown as a musician, Timberlake’s singles like “Sexy Back” “Cry Me A River” “Senorita” “Suit & Tie” are just some examples of the uptempo, sometimes gritty R&B sound the entertainer markets himself as. Timberlake’s next single, “Not a Bad Thing” will be his first acoustic driven single. It will be interesting to see what his demo does with the song.

If anything the choice of song is just another symbol for Timberlake’s latest release. In 2013 Timberlake announced that he was releasing a whole album of new material a few months before the release date. This was a move which shocked everyone seeing as it came before Beyonce’s surprise album. His second announcement about his second album release in 2013 also came as another unorthodox way of announcing to fans his plans. Perhaps this odd choice of single will work in Timberlake’s favor like the rest.

So far Justin Timberlake hasn’t hit a wrong turn as far as his music goes. He’s been awarded AMAs, Grammys, has been called the new King of Pop, and his albums The 20/20 Experience is the best-selling album of 2013.

In total The 20/20 Experience sold 2.43 million units in 2013, and was the only album to sell over the 2 million dollar mark. The second best goes to Eminem’s new album The Marshall Mathers LP 2 which sold 1.73 million.

This week it was announced that after Timberlake makes his stops at Madison Square Garden, he will head to close out Jimmy Fallon’s first week on The Tonight Show. Timberlake will act as both musical performer and guest.

[Image credit: Antonio Scorza / Shutterstock.com]