click to enlarge Courtesy photo

Dystopia tech: UC Berkeley mechanical engineering professor J. Karl Hedrick is speaking about the science of drones before a screening of “Sleep Dealer,” a Sundance Award-winning science-fiction film about advanced military drone operators in Tijuana, Mexico. [7 p.m., Roxie Theater, 3117 16th St., S.F.]

George Hodgman shares his experiences of leaving his New York writing career to care for his elderly mother in Missouri in his new memoir, “Bettyville.” [7 p.m., Book Passage, 51 Tamal Vista Blvd., S.F.]

Amazons: Adrienne Mayor, a research scholar at Stanford University, looks at the Greek myth of Amazon warrior women, and archaeological discoveries of female warriors through history. [6 p.m., Commonwealth Club, 555 Post St., S.F.]

Insight on Middle East: Vali Nasr, Middle East expert and dean at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, discusses opportunities and challenges in the region. [6:30 p.m., Marines’ Memorial Club, 609 Sutter St., S.F.]

Women and health care: A panel of experts is sharing information on how the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, is likely to affect women. [6:30 p.m., Commonwealth Club, 555 Post St., S.F.]

Open-mic poetry: Devreaux Baker and Doren Robbins, who hail from Mendocino and Santa Cruz, respectively, are reading their poetry. An open-mic poetry session follows. [7 p.m., Bird & Beckett Books and Records, 653 Chenery St., S.F.]

Older Writers Laboratory: Seniors can share their work at the weekly poetry-writing group. [10 a.m., Bernal Heights Branch, 500 Cortland Ave., S.F.]

Homework help: Volunteers can help students complete homework assignments, study for tests, and strengthen language and math skills. [2:30 p.m., Portola Branch, 380 Bacon St., S.F.]

English as a second language: Volunteers are available to help nonnative speakers improve their English. [4 p.m., Ingleside Branch, 1298 Ocean Ave., S.F.].

Writer talk: Caroline Paul discusses her latest book, “Lost Cat: A True Story of Love, Desperation and GPS Technology.” [7 p.m., Humanities Auditorium, Humanities Building, San Francisco State University, 1600 Holloway Ave., S.F.]

Rock show: Orange County-based rock group RX Bandits, which is touring to promote its new album “Gemini Her Majesty,” specializes in groove-tech music. [8 p.m., Bottom of the Hill, 1233 17th St., S.F.]

Hardcore rock show: The Bay Area’s Ritual Control is celebrating the release of its first album and headlining a punk-rock bill that also includes Crime Desire and Face the Rail. [9 p.m., Hemlock Tavern, 1131 Polk St., S.F.]

Open-mic comedy: Doc’s Lab invites the public to take the stage during an evening of open-mic comedy. [7 p.m., Doc’s Lab, 124 Columbus Ave., S.F.]

Dystopia tech: UC Berkeley mechanical engineering professor J. Karl Hedrick is speaking about the science of drones before a screening of “Sleep Dealer,” a Sundance Award-winning science-fiction film about advanced military drone operators in Tijuana, Mexico. [7 p.m., Roxie Theater, 3117 16th St., S.F.]