Lose weight, eat healthier and save money are often popular promises young Americans make to themselves as they ring in the New Year. But for the White House, the New Year’s resolution on Millennials’ minds should be to sign up for Obamacare.

Appearing on Sirius XM Radio’s “The Joe Madison Show” on Thursday morning as part of the White House’s blitz to market the Affordable Care Act, First Lady Michelle Obama capitalized on the holiday season and encouraged Millennials to sign up for Obamacare.

“This act provides a safety net for millions and millions of Americans but we have to take the next step to go check it out, sign up and make sure that we’re covered,” Obama said. “That should be our New Year’s resolutions to ourselves. That’s it.”

After dismal enrollment figures for the months of October and November — a mere 365,000 enrolled in both the state and federal marketplaces — the White House began a marketing blitz to encourage consumers to sign up for healthcare through the Affordable. Care Act. The Obama administration projects approximately 3.3 million would purchase plans by Dec. 30.

Obama went on to note the importance of signing up for health coverage, telling listeners they should be wary of the consequences of falling ill when they don’t have health insurance.

“People do think they’re invincible and then they are hit by an unexpected medical emergency and they are paying hundreds of thousands of dollars,” she said. “They’ve got bill collectors chasing them down right now.”

The First Lady’s appearance Thursday morning was the first of three radio interviews planned before the Dec. 23 enrollment deadline for consumers to receive coverage by Jan. 1.

In addition to radio spots, the First Lady and President Barack Obama met with mothers in the West Wing on Wednesday to explain the role they play in encouraging their families to be proactive with healthcare decisions. The White House has also joined forces with California’s state exchange, Cover California, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and Enroll America to promote a new campaign called “Tell a Friend — Get Covered,” which includes celebrity endorsements and social media blitzes.

For the cost of premiums to remain low for all receiving coverage through Obamacare’s exchanges, more than 2.7 million young Americans between the ages of 18 and 29 need to enroll. The White House, though, has yet to release enrollment figures based on age demographics. However, White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said during a press briefing yesterday the administration didn’t yet have access to such figures.

h/t The Washington Examiner