Most of the candidates jousting to replace David Vitter in the U.S. Senate took jabs at the U.S. government today over what they called stifling federal regulations in the petrochemical industry.

Some candidates called for Louisiana to be allowed to regulate the oil and gas industry within the state’s borders, while others took shots at President Barack Obama for pushing ahead with regulatory acts through executive orders.

“Congress should make the law, not the president,” U.S. Rep. Charles Boustany, R-Lafayette, said at a forum this morning at the 2016 annual Legislative Conference for both the Louisiana Chemical Association and Louisiana Chemical Industry Alliance.

Boustany was joined by four other Republicans—U.S. Rep. John Fleming, former U.S. Rep. Joseph Cao, state Treasurer John Kennedy and ret. Col. Rob Maness—at the forum. Two Democrats, New Orleans attorney Caroline Fayard and Public Service Commissioner Foster Campbell, also participated, as did Troy Hebert, the former Louisiana Alcohol & Tobacco Control head and independent candidate.

The candidates mostly agreed on the need to upgrade the state’s infrastructure, make advances in workforce development for industry and tailor education in Louisiana to prepare future workers for high-paying jobs that are or will be available.

In his closing statement, Hebert says he does not want the support of a super PAC and asked his fellow candidates to do the same, saying they should not have to owe anyone whenever they get to Washington.

The candidates, many of whom are running in a statewide race for the first time, also laid out the possible framework for their campaigns.

Boustany touted his record in Congress against others who repeatedly bashed the lawmaking body, the results of his oversight work on several issues, including against the IRS, and how Congress needs to tackle entitlement programs to fix the country’s debt.

Fleming reiterated many of the talking points he made Monday at the Press Club of Baton Rouge—from the anger of voters at elected officials from both parties to how he fights for conservative values through the House Freedom Caucus and how the Affordable Care Act, also known as “Obamacare,” needs to be repealed.

Cao reminded voters about his time in the House following Hurricane Katrina and his ability to work with his fellow lawmakers on both sides of the aisle. He said many candidates speak well and show great anger, but when it comes to hard work, “no one here can outwork me.”

Campbell spoke of fighting for fair utility rates on the Public Service Commission and stressed how education is a priority for him based on his experience as a teacher and the two education endowment funds he created using gaming and tobacco money.

“No politician in Louisiana has fought more for people than I have,” he said.

Fayard pitched herself as the outsider candidate and someone who has not been invited to the good ol’ boys clubs. She also discussed fighting federal regulations by the Federal Aviation Administration while starting Glo Airlines with her brother and her appreciation for the petrochemical industry.

Maness also touted himself as an outsider candidate with three decades of real-world leadership experience that sets him apart from his colleagues at the table. He added he believes the federal government should not force four-year colleges down the throat of children and wants to eliminate federal caps on oil and gas drilling.

Hebert told of how he cut the number of employees in the ATC in half when he took over, but increased services and helped cut through red tape. He said he would represent the middle class that both parties seem to have forgotten.

Kennedy said he is running for the Senate because he wants his country back. He criticized wasteful government spending, while regaling the crowd with stories of the government spending hundreds of thousands of dollars for soccer fields and studies. He also slammed Congress at every turn and said he would stand tough for Louisiana.

“I’ll be tougher than a $3 steak,” he said.

The general election is on Nov. 8 and a runoff, if needed, is set for Dec. 10.

—Ryan Broussard