The Eye

'The 100' Season 2 Episode 15 Spoilers: Finale Part 1 Photos Show Army Pulling Down Mount Weather's Door [SEE PICS]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook/The 100) "The 100" is a popular show on the CW. Read below for news, spoilers or recaps.

Photos from episode 15, which is part 1 of the season 2 finale for "The 100," show the army of Grounders and Ark People closing in on Mount Weather and eventually trying to pull the door down. We also catch a glimpse of what's going on behind the walls of Mount Weather, where Bellamy tries to release the caged prisoners.



Check out the pics, below from "Blood Must Have Blood, Part 1":



Here's the synopsis for episode 15:



ONE STEP FORWARD, TWO STEPS BACK



Clarke and Lexa (guest star Alycia Debnam Carey) prepare for battle, while Raven and Wick (guest star Steve Talley) experience a major setback.



Meanwhile, Octavia and Lincoln are each forced to make a difficult decision.



At Mount Weather, Jasper and Maya (guest star Eve Harlow) witness a horrible act, Bellamy follows through on a promise and Cage (guest star Johnny Whitworth) goes public with powerful information.



RELATED: 'The 100' Season 2 Spoilers: Producer Gives Clue About City Of Light, Says Truth Will Surprise Fans



In the previous episode, Bellamy's cover at Mount Weather was blown, and his keycard no longer worked. Luckily, he took down a guard and took a working key card from the unconscious/dead body, surviving the close call. With Raven and Wick's help, he succeeded. But not so fast — Mount Weather caught on to his plan and found a way to turn in back on.



However, due to the explosion, Mount Weather no longer had the ability to use the fog. This leaves them defenseless against the mob headed their way. Will the Ark people and Grounders be able to take advantage of this and defeat the Mountain Men once and for all? Find out on the next episode of "The 100." It airs Wednesday, March 4 at 9 p.m. on The CW. Watch the promo:











SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.