Jobs’s activities coincide with a broader Silicon Valley engagement with Washington. | REUTERS Powell Jobs has Hill's attention

SAN FRANCISCO — Two years after the death of Apple co-founder Steve Jobs, his widow, Laurene Powell Jobs, is stepping more visibly onto the national political stage — and generating buzz in Washington, D.C., about her future.

After dropping in on lawmakers late last year, Jobs has become a regular visitor to Capitol Hill to press for immigration reform, meeting last month with GOP leaders, including House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) and House Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.). She’s also weighed in on the current shutdown turmoil in Washington, offering support for the president’s approach to the budget battle and Obamacare in a recently released video. And she has been an active Democratic donor and player for other political causes.

Story Continued Below

Her evolution from a quiet supporting player in the shadow of her charismatic husband to a public figure willing to speak out about hot-button issues is especially notable, given Steve Jobs’s purported contempt for politicians and the political process. And while she’s just beginning to embrace a more prominent role and has largely kept to tightly controlled appearances, Washington is taking notice.

“The word has gone out: If she wants a meeting with you, you meet with her,” said Frank Luntz, a GOP pollster who has done immigration reform focus groups and surveys on behalf of Laurene Powell Jobs. “She is known on the Hill. … The only thing that Senate Democrats and House Republicans have in common is a good relationship with Laurene.”

A spokesperson for Jobs declined to comment for this story.

Along with her increasing profile on policy matters, Jobs also has landed some press coverage amid rumors she’s been spending time with former Washington Mayor Adrian Fenty, now an adviser to Andreessen Horowitz, the Silicon Valley venture capital firm.

Jobs, 49, grew up in New Jersey and worked in investment banking before earning her M.B.A. from the Stanford Graduate School of Business. That’s where she met Steve Jobs, when he came to the school to speak. The couple have three children, and she was often spotted at her husband’s side at local Apple stores on days new products went on sale. But she has always had her own causes.

Described by Forbes as the richest woman in Silicon Valley with an estimated net worth of $11.7 billion, Jobs has been a behind-the-scenes advocate for education reform for years. She co-founded College Track along with journalist and businessman Carlos Watson to help minority and low-income children prepare for college. She also has an organization called The Emerson Collective, which promotes the use of entrepreneurship for social reforms.

It was her work with College Track kids that led her to campaign for the DREAM Act, a longtime proposal in Congress to provide a path to citizenship for undocumented youth.

This spring, when Jobs spoke to the national media for the first time since her husband’s death from pancreatic cancer in October 2011, she talked about the importance of the legislation. Along with promoting the DREAM Act in Congress, she’s launched a website in support of the bill and backed a documentary, “The Dream Is Now,” by director Davis Guggenheim. The film aired at the U.S. Capitol Visitor Center in April.

“Her commitment to the issue has been long-standing, but her visibility has been new,” said Angela Maria Kelley, vice president for immigration policy at the Center for American Progress. “It’s more than opening up a checkbook but adding her creativity. I would list her as the top five game changers for immigration reform.”

While immigration reform is a primary focus, she’s recently ventured into other Washington topics. She backed the president’s stance in the ongoing budget battle in Washington in a video posted on the website of Ozy, the online magazine she co-founded in September.

“He did it right; he stuck to his principles,” she said about President Barack Obama’s approach to Republicans who have sought delays in the Affordable Care Act. “If he really believes in Obamacare and extending insurance to people who are uninsured, which he does it seems, then he has no other option.”

Jobs’s deepening interest in national politics raises the question of what role she ultimately wants to play — Democratic fundraiser, activist or something more.

The question is, “what square does she ultimately want to land on,” said Bill Whalen, a research fellow at the Hoover Institution and onetime speechwriter for former California Gov. Pete Wilson.

Jobs emerged in the national spotlight in January 2012, just months after her husband passed away, when she was seated next to first lady Michelle Obama during the president’s State of the Union address.

Over the past several years, she’s been an active political donor, giving to campaigns for Democratic candidates in her state such as California Attorney General Kamala Harris and Lt. Gov. Gavin Newsom, as well as causes such as school reform, according to California Secretary of State records. She recently made a $7,100 donation to Harris’s reelection campaign.

She has also given to the president and a smattering of Democratic campaign committees and candidates nationally, according to Center for Responsive Politics’ OpenSecrets.org website. This year, she gave $2,600 to Newark Mayor Cory Booker, a Democrat running for Senate, and attended a fundraiser at the home of venture capitalist John Doerr for Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.). In January, she joined her friend Ron Conway, another leading Silicon Valley investor, to help raise money for the anti-gun violence group, Americans for Responsible Solutions.

Jobs’s activities coincide with a broader Silicon Valley engagement with Washington. Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg, for example, has launched the FWD.us advocacy group to lobby for immigration reform, a hot topic for technology companies that want access to more high-skilled workers.

“She has passion for the issues, an innovative approach and the resources to execute,” said Steve Spinner, a Democratic fundraiser. “She has found her own voice. The things she cares about take not only local leadership but national leadership. You are definitely seeing her blossom as a national leader on issues.”