This post has been updated:

In light of outcry from community members, Southern Methodist University has suspended its plans to relocate its feral cat population and is working with community members to come up with a solution after some areas of the campus required treatment for fleas.

The program to help the approximately 45 feral cats living around campus is sponsored by the university and coordinated among SMU employees, students and volunteers. The group also partners with with Cat Matchers to find homes for its adoptable cats.

In a statement posted Friday, SMU said several of its facilities required extensive treatment for fleas and that the community’s health and well-being prompted it to plan safe and humane measures to reduce the feral cat population. The university noted that feeding stations for the feral cat population also can attract other wild animals.

But an online petition started to keep the cats on campus alleges that on Thursday, SMU emergency operations committee removed the cats’ food and changed the locks to the program’s supply room, where food and water for the animals was stored. It also says that on Friday, when the temperature reached 103 degrees, the committee used the Terminix pest control company to trap dozens of cats.

“This is cruelty,” the petition states. The petition collected more than 2,400 signatures by Saturday night.

Some people began triggering or removing the traps out of concern that the cats would be caught in the heat without water, KTVT-TV (Channel 11) reported.

On Saturday, the university released a new statement saying it was appreciative of input from volunteers and community members.

“We had planned to begin a relocation effort this week, but action has been suspended and normal feeding procedures have resumed as we work with feral cat program volunteers on possible solutions,” the statement reads. “We recognize that managing the feral cat population is a complex and sensitive issue, and we ask for patience as we collaborate on solutions.”

Marilyn Swanson, an SMU employee and a volunteer with the group said as of Saturday night the group is still working with the university to determine further actions. The cats are being fed again with the university’s permission, she said.

“I think it’s in response to the outcry in the community and the fact that the leaders in the cat community sat down their emergency operations committee and had a discussion,” she said.

Swanson said the group has been working diligently to treat the cats as well as the feeding and bedding areas for fleas.

“We, as a cat committee, understand that flea infestation is a problem. It’s a problem for SMU, it’s a problem for our cats,” she said.

If the cats are relocated, it’s possible that other wildlife and new cats that may not be spayed or neutered will take their place. Of the 45 cats living in the SMU community, only 5 are not spayed or neutered, Swanson said. The group works with Mercy Animal Clinic in Garland, which performs the procedure.

As to whether the cats can just be treated for fleas and allowed to stay on the campus, Swanson said, “That would be very nice solution for our cats.”