The second day of Broncos training camp got underway Friday, and along with the temperatures (upper 80s) rose the competitive nature of practice at Dove Valley. While the team neither dressed in pads nor hit — per guidelines in the collective-bargaining agreement — coach John Fox detected a heightened sense of intensity on the field compared to the opening day of camp Thursday.

“It’s getting more competitive, and you like to see that,” said Fox. “We’ll start back in pads (Saturday). We haven’t been in pads since February.

“Overall, that’s ultimately how you play the game. Those evaluations become a little more important. In my experience, it really holds true in your ‘fronts’ — both offensively and defensively. We get out of the ‘underwear’ — we’ve been in that since the offseason. It’s always an exciting time.”

Fox was asked about the progress of star linebacker Von Miller, whose season last year started with a six-game suspension and ended with a knee injury.

“I’ll leave that in medical people’s hands,” said Fox. “I know he’s a superb athlete … in my experience, they tend to heal pretty quickly. He’s worked very, very hard — maybe harder than he’s worked in his football career. All that work he’s put into it sure will pay dividends.”

Has Miller progressed enough to land a cameo in the preseason?

“That might be ideal,” Fox said of the fourth-year, pass-rushing specialist, who sported a knee brace on his right knee during practice Friday. “We’ll just adjust to what we get. We won’t hurry it. We won’t rush it. We’ll be smart with it. So far, it’s gone on schedule.”

As for the offense, quarterbacks Peyton Manning, Brock Osweiler and Zac Dysert each saw a chance Friday to run the offense in full-speed, no-hitting drills.

As for the backup Osweiler, who also got the chance to holler out an “Omaha” during the scrimmage, Fox said:

“He had a couple good stretches and series (Friday). I think he’s definitely grown a lot since his rookie year. We’ll get a chance to see how he does under pressure in game situations through the preseason.”

The next practice — Day 3 of training camp — is twofold Saturday, and it will be the first practice during training camp in full pads. There is a morning practice slated for 8:50-11:30 a.m. In the evening, the Broncos will conduct the second of eight walkthroughs during training camp from 5:30-6:30 p.m.

Because of construction here at the team’s Dove Valley headquarters, practices are not open to the general public — with the exception of three open practices at Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

The first of that trio of open practices at Mile High is Sunday from 11:30 a.m.-2 p.m. Each stadium practice is free and open to the public and includes free parking. Gates to the stadium Sunday will open to the public at 10:30 a.m.; parking lots will open at 8 a.m.

The other two open practices at Mile High: Wednesday and next Saturday, Aug. 2. The practice on Aug. 2 will be the Broncos’ fourth annual “Summer Scrimmage.”

Watch: Recap of Denver Broncos training camp Day 2

On if it’s strange not having fans at practice, Fox said: “It is. As I mentioned (Wednesday), our guys are probably more disappointed about it than anybody, maybe even the fans.

“They’ve got three opportunities to go down to Sports Authority. We’ll miss them, but we have to deal with it. It’s a safety issue here with the construction. We look forward to getting them back out here next year.”

Once the Dove Valley renovation project is complete, the fan experience for training camp will see improvements in parking, viewing and rest rooms.

“The improvements made to our facility will be spectacular and significantly enhance the fan experience for training camps at Dove Valley for years to come,” said Broncos president and CEO Joe Ellis in a statement last spring.

Bryan Boyle: 303-954-1311, bboyle@denverpost.com or twitter.com/boyle