TAMPA — Thousands of people flocked to political rallies for frontrunner Hillary Clinton and her opponent Bernie Sanders on Thursday as the fight for the Democratic presidential race zeroed in on Tampa.

The vast majority were at the Florida State Fairgrounds, where a raucous crowd of about 9,000 cheered Vermont Sen. Sanders on Thursday evening as he laid out his plans to rein in Wall Street institutions and reform a “corrupt” campaign finance system.

Earlier in the day, Clinton spoke to an enthusiastic crowd of about 700 people at the Ritz Ybor in Ybor City, saying she would break down the barriers that keep working families from better jobs and affordable health insurance and work to ensure women receive pay equal to men.

Clinton also slammed Republican Gov. Rick Scott for turning down $2.4 billion in federal funding for a high-speed rail link in 2011, pledging to revisit that decision and bring more infrastructure projects and jobs to the Tampa area to support Port Tampa Bay.

Cheryl Seronick, 69, traveled form Crystal River to see Clinton, not wanting to miss “a chance of a lifetime.”

Seronick said Clinton has shown she can handle the barrage of attacks likely to come from the Republican party during the general election.

“I think that she has been ripped apart by the Republicans for the last 20 years and she has proven that she could stand up to things like that,” she said.

Mackenzie Winters, a 23-year-old student from Plant City, attended the Sanders campaign wearing a t-shirt with a large image of the candidate’s face. She said Sanders’ record over 40 years showed his commitment to working people.

“Hillary is the establishment to me and the establishment is everything I want to get away from,” Winters said. “After we won Michigan, that’s when I thought, ‘This might actually happen.’ I have hope.”

At stake for both candidates is Tuesday’s vote in Florida, a key battleground in both the primary and general elections. The pair will also contest primaries in Ohio, Illinois and Missouri the same night. The elections come on the heels of Sanders’ surprise win in the Michigan primary, which breathed new life into a campaign that seemed to have run out of steam once Clinton scored crushing wins in states including South Carolina, Alabama and Louisiana.

Still, Clinton has a big lead in pledged delegates with 760 compared to Sanders’ 546. Unlike the Republican winner-take-all Florida primary, the Democratic contest will award Florida’s 246 delegates proportionately based on the percentage of votes earned.

In her 23 minute speech, Clinton said discrimination still plagues many Americans, including women, minorities, the poor and the LGBT community. She said she will work to improve the Affordable Health Care Act, known as Obamacare, and to make it easier for every American to succeed.

“We realize America’s potential when we make it possible for every American to achieve his or hers,” she said.

Clinton said Port Tampa Bay is one of the region’s most important economic drivers and said she will work to improve infrastructure around the port. She also blasted her Republican opponents for failing to acknowledge the risk of rising sea levels from climate change that already is blamed for flooding in parts of Miami.

“It is the height of irresponsibility and neglect for anybody in a position of authority not to recognize that Florida will be the most at risk from climate change of any place in the United States,” she said.

She also pledged to end the crippling debt of student loans for working and middle class families but not to make education free for the rich like “Donald Trump’s kids.” She would also like to see more jobs tied to renewable energy in the Sunshine State.

“Infrastructure, clean energy, those jobs can be exported; they’ve got to be done right here,” she said. “We need more good jobs – rising incomes is one of the ways we can knock down barriers. That really lights a fire under people.”

Many of the rights earned by progressives over the last few decades are now under attack from Republicans, she said. She promised to fight to preserve abortion rights, marriage equality and to take on the National Rifle Association by introducing “common-sense” gun safety measures.

Sanders’ speech outlined his belief that a “political revolution” is needed to reduce end income inequality, introduce universal health care and make higher education free for all.

He focused on many areas where he is viewed as more progressive than Clinton, including the introduction of free higher education for all, a $15 per hour minimum wage and universal health care.

While Clinton favors making improvements to the Affordable Health Care Act or Obamacare, Sanders said there are still 20 million Americans without insurance and many more hurt as underinsured or by spiraling prescription costs.

“I believe that health care is a right of our people; it is a right, not a privilege,” he said.

Higher education should be free for all students, he said. Too many people graduate and cannot afford to buy a home or a car, or to get married. Making public college and universities free would give the United States a better trained workforce.

“We should be rewarding people for getting an education, not punishing them,” he said.

Like Clinton, Sanders rapped Republicans for not taking climate change seriously. He said he will take on the fossil fuel industry and promote solar energy and other renewable energy sources.

“The state of Florida has an extraordinary natural resource – it’s called sunlight and this state should be a leader in the world,” he said.

The two rallies highlighted the contrast between the two candidates. Sanders drew a large, eclectic crowd that included many young people. Thousands arrived hours in advance of the 7 p.m. event and erupted in spontaneous chants of “Bernie” and “Feel the Bern.”

Clinton’s rally was an enthusiastic but more sober affair with the presence of half a dozen or so local elected leaders, reflecting her support among the established wing of the Democrat party.

Clinton supporters began lining up several hours before her noon appearance, with lines outside the concert hall stretching down Seventh Avenue. An overflow room was needed to accommodate about 300 people who could not get in the main hall, Clinton said.

The event was free but those with $1,500 to spare could meet Clinton backstage and get a picture taken with the former first lady.

The Tampa area is considered vital to electoral success in Florida. Hillsborough County, with roughly 309,000 registered Democratic voters, is the biggest in the so-called I-4 corridor — the swath of Central Florida that runs from the Tampa area through Orlando along Interstate 4.

Polls suggest Sanders faces an uphill battle in Florida. A News 13/Bay News 9 poll released Tuesday gives Clinton a 31-point lead over Sanders with 61 percent of likely primary voters saying they will support the former secretary of state.

But Sanders bucked the polls in Michigan, where some gave Hillary a lead of more than 20 points. He was bolstered by strong support from independent voters. The Florida primary is closed, however, meaning only Democrats can vote.

Steve Schale, a Democratic strategist who directed President Barack Obama’s Florida campaign in 2008, said Florida favors Clinton because of its older electorate and more diverse population, groups who in other states have preferred her over Sanders. The popularity of her husband, former President Bill Clinton, and their frequent visits to the state will also benefit her.

“He made Florida a competitive state for Democrats,” Schale said. “They haven’t got a big campaign here but they’ve got that many friends and family here.”

Sanders’ Tampa stop was his fourth Florida rally in two days after largely ignoring the state before. Based on his victory in Michigan, he may be more inclined to focus more of his campaign war chest and time in Ohio than in Florida, Schale said.

“Every campaign has to make decisions and in Ohio and Illinois it makes more sense for him to spend money where he can sneak another win rather than dump 5 or 6 million dollars into Florida on a hail Mary.”

Tribune staff writer Brianna Kwasnick contributed to this report

codonnell@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7871

@codonnellTBO