Playwright Martin Moranis the first to concede that his own work — first “The Tricky Part” and now its companion, “All The Rage,” which opens Saturday at Curious Theatre — can be a tough sell to audiences.

“To be honest, if I heard a play’s central narrative was about abuse, I think I’d be reluctant to go,” said Moran, a Denver native who attended Christ The King school and parish and Regis High and graduated from George Washington High School.

“I’d say, ‘The world’s tough enough. I don’t need to see that play.’ But, not to name-drop, Mike Nichols read my book, and he said, ‘You know, a story always seems to be about one thing, but it’s really about something else.’

“And ‘The Tricky Part’ and ‘All The Rage’ are about a guy who was abused in Colorado, but they’re really a meditation on human questions that are much larger. They’re about how any of us are able to go on in life, shift a paradigm, gain authority over the past.”

Moran’s past famously includes (by his own autobiographical disclosures) a period of being abused by a pedophile — but his work really is about more than that.

It’s about being a 12-year-old altar boy whose faith in his church, his God and his school, Christ The King, once was unshakable. It’s about the dawning understanding that he is gay. It’s about his anger at Bob Kosanke,his abuser, and Moran’s perplexing jealousy upon discovering that Kosanke had been involved with other boys.

“Both plays are, at their core, about the mystery of compassion and forgiveness in a world where we live through a lot of violations and trespasses,” Moran said. “In a sense, ‘All The Rage’ picks up where ‘The Tricky Part’ left off. But they’re very different pieces. Each was born out of a need, an imperative to answer a question, and that question led to larger territory, and they’re very different stylistically.”

For one thing, Moran is a seated storyteller in “The Tricky Part.” Curious Theatre co-founder Chip Walton compares watching “The Tricky Part” to listening to someone tell a story at a campfire.

But in “All The Rage,” Moran is all over the stage. New York Times theater critic Ben Brantley described his rambles this way: “Loopsand doubles back and slides off the page, as if dictated by a broken compass.”

Moran’s term is “rather mad-professor-y.” Perhaps the incessant pacing is because Moran can’t sit still for “All The Rage” to address the question many audiences had after seeing “The Tricky Part”: Why wasn’t Moran angry at his abuser?

“That was the impetus for ‘All The Rage,’ ” Moran said. “Why wasn’t I mad? Am I avoiding anger? I thought, I better figure this out, and that process took over until I realized, doggone it, now I have to write about this.”

To lump both plays together as “comedies about a pedophile” is as large a disservice as Boulder author Rick Polito‘s celebrated summary of “The Wizard of Oz”: “Transported to a surreal landscape, a young girl kills the first person she meets, and then teams up with three strangers to kill again.”

“What Marty does in both plays, in very different ways, is that he takes a personal story and grows it universally so that the people who have never gone through that terrible trespass can find a way to see how that tale of compassion and forgiveness resonates in their own lives,” Walton said.

“I think these plays are, just in and of themselves, wonderful pieces of literature. And then, when Marty brings his own incredibly unique and warm and wholly accessible voice to it, they become something else altogether.”

Claire Martin: 303-954-1477, cmartin@denverpost.com or twitter.com/byclairemartin

ALL THE RAGE Written and performed by Martin Moran, directed by Seth Barrish. Through October 5 at Curious Theatre, 1080 Acoma St., Denver. Tickets $18 at 303-623-0524 or curioustheatre.org

Playwright martin moran

“All The Rage” ends with forgiveness, not fury.