President Obama and Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts in January 2013, after the court's 5-4 ruling upholding Obamacare. (Photo: Paul J. Richards, AFP/Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — The fate of President Obama's health care law depends once again on how the Supreme Court interprets what Congress wrote — a task the justices have applied literally of late to laws affecting air, land and sea.

Four words in the 906-page statute will be the focus of the high court's attention March 4, when opponents argue that tax credits received by millions of Americans are legal only in health insurance markets "established by the State."

A literal reading of that phrase would seem to exclude health care exchanges operated by the federal government in 34 states. "It's a rather difficult textual argument for the government," said Kannon Shanmugam, who has argued 16 cases at the high court.

The government disputes that interpretation, calling the four-word phrase a "term of art" that includes federal exchanges, from which more than 9 million Americans have received subsidies. Excluding tax credits in federal exchanges "was never discussed" when the law was written, said former congressman George Miller, who chaired one of the committees that wrote the law.

"It was never whispered, never," said Rep. Sandy Levin, D-Mich., who chaired the House Ways and Means Committee when the law was passed.

Nearly five years after its enactment, the Supreme Court will have the final word — just as it did in 2012, when it upheld the law by a 5-4 vote. And in a number of unrelated cases recently that offer clues to the outcome, the justices have been practicing the art of "statutory interpretation." Translation: What were they thinking?

It's a question the justices have asked in cases featuring air marshals, cellphone towers, bank robbers and undersized red grouper — with mixed results. Often, plain language wins. Occasionally, the court demands context.

Taken together, the rulings and rhetoric should give Obamacare's proponents pause, for one reason: Chief Justice John Roberts — who rescued the law from being declared unconstitutional in his 2012 ruling — usually abides by the written word.

THE LETTER OF THE LAW

That was the case two weeks ago, when Roberts wrote the court's 7-2 majority opinion in favor of a former air marshal who leaked information about agency cutbacks. He said Robert MacLean's actions were not "specifically prohibited by law" — the relevant phrase in the Whistleblower Protection Act — because the prohibition was in a regulation, not a statute.

"Congress did not use the phrase 'law, rule or regulation' in the statutory language at issue here; it used the word 'law' standing alone," Roberts said. "That is significant, because Congress generally acts intentionally when it uses particular language in one section of a statute but omits it in another."

Notably, Justice Anthony Kennedy — who may be most likely to save Obamacare if Roberts does not — joined Justice Sonia Sotomayor's dissent. Since the law tasked the Transportation Security Administration with writing regulations, they reasoned, those regulations are prohibited under the law.

Roberts' affinity for the written word was apparent, too, when he dissented a week earlier in a case involving municipal disputes over locating cellphone towers.

The Telecommunications Act specifies that a local government's denial of a cell tower application "shall be in writing." The court ruled 6-3 that such notice also must come in a timely fashion. Roberts said the issue of timing represents "a requirement found nowhere in the text of the statute."

"The city here fully complied with its obligations under the statute," Roberts said. "It issued its decision in writing, and it submitted a written record containing — so far as we know — substantial evidence supporting that decision."

A FISH AS 'OBJECT' LESSON?

The full court's devotion to language was apparent that same week, when it ruled unanimously that a bank robber could face more time in prison for forcing a woman to walk with him from one room to another.

The 79-year-old woman, Mary Parnell, then suffered a heart attack and died after the short stroll. But what mattered was the 80-year-old federal law's establishment of added penalties if a bank robber "forces any person to accompany him" during the crime.

"In 1934, just as today, to 'accompany' someone meant to 'go with' him," Justice Antonin Scalia wrote. "English literature is replete with examples." He went on to quote Charles Dickens and Jane Austen.

Lest the court's verve for vocabulary appear to doom the health care law, however, the justices aren't always so exacting.

That seemed apparent in early November, when a government lawyer argued that a federal law aimed at white-collar criminals who destroy evidence was used properly to prosecute a Florida fisherman who dumped undersized fish into the Gulf of Mexico.

The law, passed in 2002 to crack down on the type of document shredding that occurred in the Enron scandal, criminalizes the destruction of a "record, document or tangible object."

"If you stop someone on the street and ask them, 'Is a fish a tangible object?' the answer would almost certainly be '­­yes,'" assistant solicitor general Roman Martinez said during oral arguments.

"Well," Roberts replied skeptically, "what if you stopped them on the street and said, 'Is a fish record, document or tangible object?'"

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1CWXcYc