The Bureau of Labor Statistics released their new report this morning and oh boy, things aren’t looking good for the ObamaScare crowd.

Republicans have been hissing that ObamaCare is turning America into a “part time economy” for months now, but now reality is here and reality disagrees. Again.

Reality says, “The unemployment rate declined from 7.3 percent to 7.0 percent in November, and total nonfarm payroll employment rose by 203,000.”

Also, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported today that employment increased in health care among other sectors. In fact, “Health care employment continued to increase over the month (+28,000).”

Oh no. Oh no. Oh no.

In 2012, the sector was adding an average of 27,000 jobs per month, while in 2013 it was averaging 19,000 so this 28,000 is a large jump up. Since it happened right as people were signing up for ObamaCare, it makes the GOP’s argument appear disingenuous at best.

America isn’t a part time economy ObamaCare. It’s a rising economy. It is not all better yet by a long stretch, but no thanks to Republicans, who have no ideas for ObamaCare alternatives but have staked their entire party upon selling its demise, it is getting better.

“Both the number of unemployed persons, at 10.9 million, and the unemployment rate, at7.0 percent, declined in November.”

What was causing unemployment numbers to rise for the short term unemployed? Oh, the government shutdown. You know, the one Republicans instigated.

The parting bad news for Republicans trying to sell a bad economy as Just Another Reason Not to Trust Obama and by default vote Republican even though they have no ideas, “The number of long-term unemployed has declined by 718,000 over the past 12 months.”

If Republicans were the logical sort, they would have been advocating for unemployment benefits and SNAP (food stamps) since they claim Obama has destroyed the economy (even though facts demonstrate that it was destroyed by 2007 and imploded publicly in 2008, well before Obama had even won the election). But Republicans have been trying to sell “bad economy means no help” for years now. Austerity, they say, is the only alternative to a bad economy.

So it would follow, were they actually principled, that when things look better, now we can “afford” to ease up on the austerity punishments. But we all know that this won’t stop them from using these numbers to justify even less help for the poor and vulnerable, as if unemployment numbers decreasing means that the people who are unemployed are no longer at risk.

One thing is sure—ObamaCare didn’t create a part time economy and jobs in the health sector actually rose last month. Will the press ask Republicans how they can continue making that claim when the actual numbers disagree or will we be treated to more pretending that fiction carries the same weight as reality reporting?