Abel Braunschweig is thriving despite being born months early, at just over two pounds. [Click to enlarge]

Miracles sometimes come in small packages. And in unusual ways.

In baby Abel's case, you might say he had a helping hand from the Kansas City Chiefs, a bad driver, and a doctor willing to go against the odds.

Abel, third child of Jamie and Shane Braunschweig of Albert City, was born in emergency circumstances on Friday the 13th in a Missouri hospital, at just 2 pounds, two ounces - small enough to fit in his father's palm. He will spend the first few months of his life in that hospital, but is doing well.

The early portion of the pregnancy had gone according to plan, and the baby wasn't due until February 12. The couple planned a weekend getaway to Kansas City in late October, to see the Chiefs play the Steelers.

On Thursday that week, Jamie was taking her son to school when she was involved in a minor accident, with a woman's car coming out of nowhere and smacking into the back of her vehicle. The other driver was uninsured. It seemed like a bad start to the day, but nothing more.

Jamie went on to Des Moines to attend a meeting, but didn't feel right. By the end of the day she had pain shooting down her legs. They went to the hospital in Storm Lake just to be safe, and was assured the sensation was just caused by the way the baby was situated in the womb, and that all should be okay.

They went ahead with the trip that weekend, stopping first at Dillard's in Kansas City to pick up the essential jerseys to wear to the game to root for their favorite team. Suddenly, Jamie gave Shane a panicked look, and raced for the restrooms. Suddenly, she was hemorrhaging blood and probably amniotic fluid.

"Hopefully Dillards will forgive her," Jamie's mother Carol Peterson sighs, as she relates the story.

There was no time to wait for an ambulance, Shane had to get her to help quick. The nearest hospital he could find on his GPS was Overland Park, and he whipped the vehicle in that direction. What they didn't know then was that the facility has one of the finest neonatal units in the country, and possibly one of few that could have helped them.

There doctors would not allow Jamie to leave, saying that she could well bleed to death in the time it would take to drive home. She would have to remain there until she gave birth.

It was much too early for the baby, so the hospital staff tried medication several times to prevent labor and contractions. Baby Abel had other plans.

It was Friday the 13th, the same day that lives were being lost in the Paris bombing, and the world sure didn't need another tragedy. Shane had returned to Iowa to care for the couple's other two children, when an emergency call came in from the hospital.

"I'm in labor. They can't get it to stop," Jamie told him. Shane dropped the children off at his mother's and drove the six hours straight to Kansas City. They hospital has waited for him, and he had made it just in time. As soon as he arrived, they took Jamie into the delivery room.

The parents could not hold their new baby for the first three days, a difficult experience. He was not fully developed, and was born with a collapsed lung. A ventilator was used to help him learn how to breathe. He lost a few ounces in those vital first days, but then rebounded, and as of last weekend, had recovered to his birth weight. His organs seemed intact, and he was able to cry very softly, which is important to the development of his lungs.

"The doctor called him a miracle baby," Carol relates.

It was discovered that Jamie has a rare form of protein deficiency that research has recently learned can lead to miscarriage. By all indications, the child should have been stillborn, doctors said. Her body was hemorrhaging to try to abort the baby.

Jamie had been faced that night with a terrible choice - to go against the odds and try to deliver the baby months early, or allow the miscarriage. Three nurses advised the latter, Carol said. "She decided to go with her own instincts. Jamie is very grateful that the doctor listened to her instincts."

In a strange way, football and bad driving helped to bring Abel into the world, the family reflects.

Had they not been in Kansas City, near the neonatal unit, he likely could not have survived.

And it is possible that the bump from behind in traffic had caused Jamie's placenta to tear and begin leaking amniotic fluid, which led to early labor in time to have a a chance to save the unborn baby. What seemed an upsetting incident at the moment might have saved mother and child. They will never know for sure.

One thing seems certain. If Able had not been born on the very day he was, he would have been stillborn, according to doctors.

"She believes God was in control and it was meant for her to be where she was," Carol said of her daughter.

Jamie had favored the name Abel, which means "breath" in Hebrew, and is also defined in some cultures as "strong" or "fighter," Carol says. Shane contributed the middle name, Jackson.

Jamie must remain on medication for her protein deficiency for life. It is thought that the problem, and the resulting difficulties with her placenta, contributed to a lesser extend in her two earlier pregnancies, each of which required C-section delivery. A couple of cousins in the extended family have had miscarriages, and family members now wonder if the issue may be genetic.

Abel will remain in the hospital for two months or more, until his organs and immune system have finished developing. For now, the parents are traveling home during the week to care for their other two young children, and driving back to Kansas City every weekend to be with Abel while family members help out at home.

Luckily, their employers, Farm Bureau in Storm Lake for Jamie and Highway 71 Service in Newell for Shane, have been understanding in providing time off as needed. The financial outlook is less fortunate. The care is considered outside the coverage area of their medical insurance. And although there is a Ronald McDonald House in Kansas City, it is some distance from the hospital and the family is having to reserve hotel rooms to be stay near Abel.

"If Obamacare is so great, why doesn't HE have it," quips the frustrated grandmother.

Abel's 6-year-old brother and 14-month old sister make the trip when possible, but can't spend time with the baby yet, as there is concern about exposing him to potential illness.

Friends have helped out, and individuals from church. Donations are being accepted to help the family, at their Evangelical Church in Albert City, Bethel Baptist in Newell, and the Farm Bureau office in Storm Lake.

Abel remains on a ventilator, and a feeding tube. Jamie expresses breast milk which is slowly fed to the baby in periods of about two hours at a time, with an hour rest in between, to maintain his weight.

"He doesn't open his eyes yet, but he looks like a perfect baby, only so much tinier. Unlike the other children in the family, he was born with hair," Carol said. "It is hard to see him connected to all those wires and monitors, we we know he is in one of the best neonatal hospitals around, and they take great care of him."

The family is grateful for all the support and concern shown for them, and wishes to share the miraculous accomplishments being achieved by neo-natal intensive care (NCIU) units, the grandmother said. "Keep praying for them, that's the biggest thing. There is a long way to go yet."

And for the record, the Chiefs, who hadn't won a home game all season, upset the favored Steelers in that game the Braunschweigs never made it to. Some thought THAT was the underdog miracle in KC that weekend. One local family knows otherwise.