Article II, Section 3, of the Constitution requires the president to “take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed.” In January, for the first time in history, the Supreme Court announced it wanted to consider what that requirement means.

The context is the challenge by 26 states to President Obama’s announced decision not to deport about 4 million adults who entered the country illegally and had U.S.-born children, and almost 2 million others who were under age 15 when their parents illegally brought them into America. The parties had not raised the issue of the president’s constitutional obligation; the court (with the late Justice Antonin Scalia’s participation) raised it.

The attorney for the president argued to the court Monday that Obama’s decisions were no different in kind from President George W. Bush’s decision not to deport foreign students whose studies were interrupted by Hurricane Katrina, or President Reagan’s decision that Nicaraguan refugees could stay in America even if they didn’t fit the requirements for asylum, during the days of the Sandinista-Contra conflict in Nicaragua.

President Obama relies on well-established rules of prosecutorial discretion. There are more potentially deportable people than there are resources to deport them all, so the president has instructed the immigration officers to go after criminals first, then those who entered illegally as adults, theoretically getting to the categories of individuals he has protected only when these other categories are exhausted (practically speaking, never).

Presidents who prioritize enforcement actions are, in this view, dutifully taking care that the laws be faithfully executed, comparable to a decision made by all presidents to prosecute more dangerous criminals first.

It’s not quite a convincing argument. The prosecutorial-discretion argument works where the president’s criteria are not directed to countervail the fundamental structure of the law itself. Compassion for those unable to finish their course of study because of a hurricane does not undermine the overall structure of immigration law. Neither does serving the diplomatic purposes of putting pressure on the Sandinista regime.

Here, however, President Obama has said he acted precisely because Congress refused to change existing law, which established the complex system for who can stay in our country. If the president also can allow others to stay, it undermines the structure of that law.

There is an established rule of interpreting laws: The inclusion in a statute of a specified category implies the exclusion of others. Members of Congress cannot have intended the president to have authority to grant any group he wants the ability to stay here lawfully when they went to such trouble to establish the rules for whom they wanted to stay.

Alternatively, however, the categories Congress created might have covered those Congress absolutely wanted to stay, leaving to the president’s discretion whether any others could stay, too. Indeed, the Supreme Court adopted just that kind of reasoning in a 5-4 ruling last year upholding the Medicaid subsidies to states that had not adopted exchanges under Obamacare.

The structure of that law (famously explained by Jonathan Gruber, the MIT professor who said states had to be bludgeoned into adopting exchanges in order to get federal money) was undermined if states received money whether or not they established their own exchanges. However, the four liberal justices, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts, whose vote had upheld the constitutionality of Obamacare when it was challenged four years ago, said states that hadn’t established exchanges could also get federal money.

Compared with that reasoning, a holding in the immigration case that Congress’ categories for who can stay are not exclusive is much less of a stretch.

Also pointing in that direction is the language of the federal statute requiring a specific action by the attorney general before any single individual is deported, rather than allowing federal prosecutors just to proceed under power of the law. The scheme Congress created, in other words, intimately involved the attorney general, the president’s chief law enforcement officer, to make an individualized decision before any one person could be deported.

However, there are procedures that have to be followed in announcing major federal agency decisions; and the basis for the U.S. Court of Appeals’ striking down the president’s immigration policy was that those procedures were not followed.

I predict the court will follow that approach, meaning that a new president will then have to decide whether to reissue Obama’s immigration policies. Since only a Democratic president will, and that president will appoint Scalia’s replacement, we can also predict that the question the court asked will be answered favorably for the president, or not answered at all.

Tom Campbell is a professor at the Chapman University’s Fowler School of Law and the author of a text on separation of powers. He served five terms in Congress. These views are his own.