12-year-old Braeden Mannering and train-attack hero Spencer Stone join First Lady Michelle Obama

President Barack Obama and first lady Michelle Obama will welcome business owners, activists and heroes when Obama delivers his final State of the Union tonight.

From a 12-year-old hunger activist (pictured) to Vietnam War veterans, from small business owners to the CEO of Microsoft, the Obamas will have 23 official guests in all.

In addition, there will be one seat left vacant in honor of victims of gun violence because, according to the White House, “they need the rest of us to speak for them.”

Also Read: Obama Warns Democratic Candidates Not to Oppose Gun Control in NY Times Op-Ed

The White House has full bios on each of the guests. Here’s a who’s who:

Sue Ellen Allen (Scottsdale, Ariz.) – Criminal Justice Reformer

A former prison inmate, she founded Gina’s Team, which supports women who are incarcerated in Arizona prisons and helps them give back to the community upon their release.

Gloria Balenski (Schaumburg, Ill.) – Letter Writer

She credits the president’s economic and health care initiatives with helping her family recover after she lost her job, their son’s college savings dried up, her husband’s auto-industry job was threatened, and her husband suffered a heart attack. (He has recovered.)

Jennifer Bragdon (Austin, Texas) – Community College Student

A full-time worker, wife, and mother of a 1-year-old daughter, she benefits from flexible community college programs to pursue her dream of becoming a middle school teacher.

Edith Childs (Greenwood, S.C.) – County Councilmember

A grandmother of six, she came up with the famous “Fired up! Ready to go!” chant that helped propel President Obama’s 2008 and 2012 campaigns.

Cynthia “Cindy” K. Dias (Las Vegas, Nev.) – Veterans Homelessness Advocate

A Vietnam veteran and nurse, she lost her home and job due to post-traumatic stress but moved into Veterans Village, a Las Vegas non-profit where she became a major force in supporting and housing all homeless veterans in Las Vegas.

Mark Davis (Washington, D.C.) – Small Business Owner

The founder of WDC Solar, he trains low-income residents of the nation’s capital to install solar panels and prepare for green tech jobs.

Cary Dixon (Huntington, W.Va.) – Opioid Reform Advocate

The mother of an adult who has a substance abuse disorder, she speaks out on eliminating the stigma that is often attached to those affected by substance abuse.

Lydia Doza (Klamath Falls, Ore., and Anchorage, Alaska) – STEM Advocate

A student at Oregon Tech, she encourages Native American children to pursue careers in science, technology, engineering and math.

Refaai Hamo (Troy, Mich.) – Syrian Refugee

The Ph.D. holder, who now lives in Michigan, gained attention on the website Humans of New York for his story of struggle after a Syrian government bomb killed seven of his family members, including his wife, and he failed to find work or medical care in Turkey, where he was diagnosed with stomach cancer.

Lisa Jaster (Houston, Texas) – Ranger School Graduate

The engineer and mother of two, a 2000 graduate of West Point, was on active duty in the Middle East for seven years before she became just the third woman to graduate from Ranger School — and the first female Army Reserve officer to do so.

Mark Luttrell (Shelby County, Tenn.) – Shelby County Mayor

The longtime corrections and law enforcement leader is a Republican mayor who has worked to reform the criminal justice system through rehabilitation programs and special courts for cases involving drugs, mental health and veterans.

Dannel P. Malloy (Hartford, Conn.) – Connecticut Governor

The governor has successfully implemented many of the president’s key progressive initiatives, including the Affordable Care Act, gun control and a $10.10 minimum wage.

Braeden Mannering (Bear, Del.) – Hunger Activist

A 12-year-old sixth grader in Delaware (pictured), he started the non-profit Brae’s Brown Bags (3B) to give homeless and low-income residents of his community healthy food — and empower young people to take the lead on hunger relief and healthy eating.

Satya Nadella (Bellevue, Wash.) – Microsoft CEO

The powerful tech exec has overseen Microsoft’s initiatives to expand computer-science education and offer substantial paid leave to new parents.

Jim Obergefell (Cincinnati, Ohio) – Civil Rights Activist

An “accidental activist,” his name became famous when the Supreme Court upheld marriage equality in Obergefell v. Hodges, the case in which he was the lead plaintiff.

Kathleen O’Toole (Seattle, Wash.) – Seattle Police Chief

For the past two years, she has worked to improve the Seattle Police Department’s work in community policing, including initiatives involving body cameras and better officer morale.

Ryan Reyes (San Bernardino, Calif.) – Activist

His partner, Larry “Daniel” Kaufman, a job trainer for adults with developmental disabilities, was on his lunch break when terrorists attacked the Inland Regional Center in San Bernardino; Kaufman saved four people before he was shot and killed.

Ronna Rice (Greeley, Colo.) – Small Business Owner

She is the CEO of the family business Rice’s Lucky Clover Honey, which has been in operation since 1924 and recently expanded in Asia, creating growth and job opportunities.

Cedric Rowland (Chicago, Ill.) – Affordable Care Act Navigator

As the lead navigator for Near North Health Service Corporation in Chicago, he works with people to find the best and most affordable health care plans under Obamacare.

Naveed Shah (Springfield, Va.) – Veteran

A native of Saudi Arabia, he immigrated to the U.S. with his Pakistani parents, grew up in the D.C. suburbs and enlisted in the U.S. Army in 2006, after which he served in Iraq.

Earl Smith (Austin, Texas) – Veteran

The veteran met Barack Obama on the campaign trail in 2008, when he gave the then-candidate a military patch that he had worn while serving in an artillery brigade in Vietnam and kept for four decades.

Spencer Stone (Sacramento, Calif.) – U.S. Air Force Staff Sergeant, Hero

He received a Purple Heart and a promotion for his heroics in preventing, along with three others, a terrorist attack on board a train bound for Paris last August, an event that made global headlines.

Oscar Vazquez (Fort Worth, Texas) – Veteran, Dreamer and STEM Leader

He moved to the Phoenix, Ariz., from Mexico at age 12, and earned a degree in mechanical engineering from Arizona State University but couldn’t find work without legal status. After he got a green card in 2010, he enlisted in the Army served a tour in Afghanistan, and is now a U.S. citizen.

9 Most Memorable Political Ads of the 2016 Presidential Race, So Far (Video) After GOP frontrunner Donald Trump mocked a reporter with a disability, Ohio Gov. John Kasich shot back with an ad titled "Is He Worthy?" Kasich, who's been hovering in the single digits in national polls, may not win the 2016 race, but he definitely scored some points with one of the best attack ads of the 2016 presidential election.

Gov. Kasich also had one of the best biographical ads of the season. The spot produced by New Day for America, the Super PAC supporting Kasich, has the Ohio governor speaking directly to the camera, beginning his story by talking about his late father, a mailman.

Sen. Bernie Sanders impressed pundits and voters alike when he launched his biographical ad earlier this year. The spot quickly goes through Sanders’ life introducing him as an “honest leader.”

In an interview with Rolling Stone magazine published in September, Trump made disparaging remarks about former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina, the only woman in the Republican field. "Look at that face!" the real estate mogul said. "Would anyone vote for that?" Fiorina hit back with a sleek ad, paid for by the Carly for America Committee. "This is the face of a 61-year-old woman. I am proud of every year and every wrinkle," Fiorina said.

Hillary Clinton ended years of speculation on whether she would run for president a second time with this political ad in April. The former secretary of state was praised for not focusing on herself but rather on the people she's hoping to help. Clinton appears in the last 17 seconds of the 2:18 minute video that has garnered close to 5 million views. It also made history as the first official presidential announcement video to feature a same-sex couple.

Clinton's scored even more points when she aired four TV ads in Iowa and New Hampshire during the GOP debate in Boulder, Colorado, in October. Simple and to the point, the spots focused on four different women, using their stories to make the case for equal pay, higher wages and affordable college.

Just one day after Trump famously announced Lindsey Graham's cell phone number during a televised campaign rally in July, the South Carolina senator found the perfect way to respond. In a short video produced by IJReview titled “How to Destroy Your Cell Phone With Lindsey Graham,” the 2016 candidate could be seen testing a myriad of ways to obliterate his mobile device. The video not only managed to show the senator's lighter side, it clocked an eye-popping 2 million views.

You don't have to like Ben Carson to appreciate this spot. Titled, "These Hands," the ad features people from all walks of life with the two-word phrase printed on their palms. As they look straight into the camera, the ad lists their individual accomplishments and occupations, with an inspirational soundtrack to strike just the right note.

Perhaps one of the best political ads of the year was one that never aired. Laid to a voiceover from Biden’s commencement speech at Yale University Class Day earlier this year, "My Redemption" was produced by the Draft Biden Super PAC. It was supposed to air during the first Democratic debate in Las Vegas in October but was pulled after Biden said it treaded on "sacred ground." The spot opens with the story of the 1972 car accident that killed Biden's first wife, Neilia, and their 13-month-old daughter, Naomi. Previous ; Next 1 of 9 TheWrap Rewind 2015: From Hillary Clinton’s “Getting Started” to Ben Carson’s “These Hands,” here are the best campaign ads candidates have put out since the race for the Oval Office began this year After GOP frontrunner Donald Trump mocked a reporter with a disability, Ohio Gov. John Kasich shot back with an ad titled "Is He Worthy?" Kasich, who's been hovering in the single digits in national polls, may not win the 2016 race, but he definitely scored some points with one of the best attack ads of the 2016 presidential election.