(New Hampshire Primary Source covers breaking and behind-the-scenes news and analysis on the New Hampshire presidential primary and all things political in the Granite State. John DiStaso is the most experienced political writer in New Hampshire and has been writing a weekly column since 1982.)

A RECORD HAUL. The New Hampshire Republican Party’s First-in-the-Nation Summit was not without its glitches.

Not everyone was entirely pleased throughout the two-day “candidate-fest.” But party chair Jennifer Horn and the party hierarchy are happy this morning.

The NHGOP confirmed to Primary Source on Wednesday it is going to net more than $200,000 from the event, based on actual receipts and sponsorship still outstanding, boosting its total fundraising for 2015 to $265,000. These totals are unprecedented for the state GOP at this point in the cycle.

In retrospect, the summit survived the onslaught of 19 candidates, more than 600 patrons and more than 200 journalists. The quarters at the Crowne Plaza Hotel were tight. Some complained because it wasn’t held in a larger venue, such as the Radisson Hotel Armory in Manchester.

And then there was The Wedding. At 4 p.m. on Saturday, just as Ted Cruz was wrapping up his speech in the ballroom, the hotel staff began breaking down the ballroom and the media room. People scattered. Media members bolted for the lobby to find any available chair and electrical outlet for their laptops to write their stories.

It was messy, but not the disaster that had been anticipated. People coped, the wedding reception went ahead as scheduled and the bride and groom ended up having their photos taken with Scott Walker.

Overall, it was an impressive job by the NHGOP organizers who put on an event that, for them, was historic in its size and scope. See more about the summit below.

HILLARY. Hillary Clinton has come and gone. What did all of us learn?

First, we learned that everything we’d heard about the controlled nature of her visit to Iowa last week was true. Because it was pretty much the same here.

We’re assured by her campaign team that in future visits to New Hampshire, she will be more accessible not only to the media, but more importantly, to real voters. There was precious little interaction with “real” people on Monday and Tuesday. Her events were staged, packed with invited guests and Clinton kept, as expected, almost entirely on message.

But Clinton accomplished what she set out to do here – talk about how to create jobs for “tomorrow,” as her campaign put it, and about affordable education. She touched on the need to preserve Social Security. She talked about the need to close the gap between the rich and the middle-class, adhering to the call of those on her ideological left for a truly populist, Elizabeth Warren-style message.

She did not speak about her tenure as secretary of state, at least not in public. She did not address foreign policy, at least not in public. She did not mention the controversial Trans-Pacific Trade Partnership, which has split President Barack Obama from liberals in her party.

And in her very brief interview with WMUR, she brushed aside as “distractions” questions about her deletion of about 30,000 emails and the charges in an upcoming book that she used her influence as secretary of state to curry donations for the Clinton Foundation.

What Clinton did do this week was re-connect with many old friends and the political elite in the New Hampshire Democratic Party. The result was a sense of energy among Democrats, who have grown tired of watching the fun and games on the Republican side. For two days, at least, they were the center of attention. They were the ones being interviewed by the media. They were the ones being sought out for analysis of a presidential candidate’s visit.

UPDATE: VLACICH CALLS CLINTON TRIP A ‘SUCCESS.’ Hillary Clinton has been accused by political foes of being inaccessible during her two-day visit to New Hampshire this week, but her state campaign director says she engaged Granite Staters in a personal way and called the trip a “success.”

“She outlined the first of the ‘four fights’ that are at the center of her campaign, building an economy that works for tomorrow,” Mike Vlacich wrote in a memo to “interested parties” Thursday afternoon. “From Keene to Claremont to Concord, Granite Staters sat down for conversations with Clinton about the issues impacting their communities and daily lives.”

Vlacich wrote that Clinton’s appearances in small venues “gave Hillary Clinton the opportunity to interact with New Hampshire residents, one-on-one. The results were a series of productive conversations where everyday Granite Staters could share their thoughts and ideas with her.”

The memo recounts each of Clinton’s stops during her visit with positive comments from several of the workers and education with whom she met.

“From day one, Hillary Clinton has made clear that this campaign isn’t about her, it is about everyday Americans. Two roundtables - one at Whitney Brothers, a small family-owned family-friendly manufacturing business in Keene, and the other at NHTI, Concord’s community college - created opportunities for Granite Staters to engage Hillary in a personal way,’ Vlacich wrote.

PAYING HOMAGE. Clinton visited with many top Democrats – in Claremont at a house party at the home of Sen. Jeanne Shaheen staffer Bethany Yurek, and in Concord the home of former state Senate President Sylvia Larsen, with a small group of women Democratic leaders at the home of former state Sen. Mary Louise Hancock, and then with about 100 state lawmakers at New Hampshire Democratic Party headquarters.

And she paid homage to not only the 94-year-old Hancock, but to two other Democratic women dear to party insiders.

Among the invited guests at the roundtable discussion at Whitney Brother in Keene was Patricia Russell, the former Keene mayor and longtime outspoken activist.

At NHDP headquarters, party chair Raymond Buckley gave Clinton a tour of the Anita Freedman Conference Room, named after the late party secretary, Democratic National Committeewoman and co-chair of both of President Bill Clinton’s New Hampshire campaigns.

Much of the memorabilia from Freedman’s home was given to the party after she died in 2010 and is on display in the conference room.

According to Buckley, Hillary Clinton loved the photos, particularly one from the annual “100 Club” dinner in 1992 showing her and former party chairman Chris Spirou presenting Freedman with a top award.

According to Buckley, Clinton asked, “Did Bill see all of this?”

SUMMIT WINNERS. Who impressed at the GOP summit? Uncommitted Republicans we’ve spoken with since Saturday agreed there were no real losers. No one made any glaring mistakes or failed to get his or her message across.

The name we’ve heard most often for being the most impressive – most “presidential,” if you will – was Marco Rubio, who laid out a visionary message in his Friday night keynote address. Perhaps it was because Rubio had just announced his candidacy four days earlier, or perhaps it was because he was the closing speaker for that day and had the biggest audience, but he came across as ready for prime time.

The Saturday keynoter, Scott Walker, was more – let’s just say, “workmanlike.” And more than one Republican told us they believed Walker was upstaged by former Gov. John H. Sununu, who, introducing the Wisconsin governor, made a heartfelt case -- speaking off the cuff, without notes – for unifying after the voters decide on a nominee in the summer of 2016.

Others favorites of the non-committed activists we contacted were Chris Christie, Ted Cruz, Rick Perry and Rand Paul. And it goes without saying that Donald Trump made a huge impression, as only he can.

Paul used the weekend particularly well, holding a series of meetings after his speech with conservatives and young people. And it was an overall good week in New Hampshire for Christie, who came in with accompanied by headlines such as “Dead Man Walking,” and made news for laying out a specific entitlement reform program and his two town halls.

George Pataki had the most unique summit presentation, answering questions submitted to his PAC’s website and on video in a town hall-style format.

GIVE HIM THE HOOK? While The Donald was impressive on the summit podium, he and his entourage ruffled some feathers backstage.

Every candidate was afforded 30 minutes to make a speech and answer questions from the audience, and, according to several Republicans who were on the scene, when Trump arrived as Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal was about half-way through his presentation, Trump staffers told organizers, “Mr. Trump is ready to speak now,” and demanded that Jindal be given the hook right away. NHGOP staff refused, insisting Trump wait his turn like everyone else.

There was no major blow-up, but party leaders were taking about it for the rest of the day.

Trump national adviser Corey Lewandowski took issue with the description of the scene given to Primary Source by NHGOP sources.

“He was honored to be there,” he said. “We had nothing to do with the logistics. We were hold that Mr. Trump would go on after Mr. Jindal, and that’s what he did.”

TRUMP-MENTUM? By all indications, Trump is moving toward a presidential run. As we first reported on Twitter, on Monday, he’ll be the first Republican to return to New Hampshire since the summit when he holds three public events and a private meeting.

In Salem, he’ll talk to area business owners at the Tuscan Kitchen, hosted by owner Joe Faro. He’ll then meet privately with veterans at the Hudson VFW.

He’ll hold his first town hall meeting at New England College and wrap up the day as the featured guest at a “Politics and Pie” event in Concord, hosted by Republican National Committee members Steve Duprey and Juliana Bergeron and the Concord City Republican Committee.

CARLY RETURNS. Carly Fiorina, moving toward an expected presidential declaration on May 4, will return to New Hampshire next Tuesday through Thursday for nine events. She picked up the endorsement of Bettie Lamontagne, wife of former candidate for governor Ovide Lamontagne, on Wednesday afternoon.

BARACK, BRADY AND DEMERS. When the New England Patriots are honored at the White House on Thursday for their Super Bowl XLIX championship, Sens. Jeanne Shaheen and Kelly Ayotte are expected to be there.

So will strategist/lobbyist Jim Demers, who was President Barack Obama’s very first New Hampshire supporter back in 2006. Demers said he received an invitation from the White House for the ceremony.

He said he also has a connection to Tom Brady, through Best Buddies, an international nonprofit that raises funds for intellectually and developmentally disabled children and adults. Brady is also deeply involved in the organization.

Demers said he has played golf twice with Brady at an annual event for Best Buddies and has a photograph of himself with Brady at the top of his Facebook page.

Will he get a “selfie” with Brady and Barack? The pressure is on.

THE CONSERVATIVES’ CAUCUS. A recently formed conservative group, the 603 Alliance, held its own summit at the Crowne Plaza Hotel in Nashua the day after the Republican Party finished its event.

A wrap-up memo to supporters obtained by Primary Source reported that the “consensus among the group” was that “everybody is sick of losing and will support the GOP nominee and not stay home,” “Third party is definitely out” and “603 Alliance members will come together behind a conservative candidate and come up with a list of second, third and fourth choices.”

The group intends to hold an Iowa-style caucus on Oct. 17 to “determine who the conservative candidate is.…Members will be encouraged to turn out 25,000 primary votes for the endorsed candidate.”

While no one questions the right of the Alliance – headed by some of the most prominent conservatives in the state – to hold such a caucus, GOP establishment-types are not happy at what appears to be an effort to choose a single candidate to challenge the likes of Jeb Bush, Chris Christie or perhaps John Kasich should he run.

“They’re all fine individuals and fine conservatives,” said a top party activist, “but that’s not how the primary operates. All of these candidates are pretty capable in their own right.”

QUICK HITS:

O’CONNOR’S FUNDRAISING. Democratic 1st District congressional candidate Shawn O’Connor reported first quarter fundraising receipts of $591,645, with $500,000 of it a loan from himself to his campaign committee. Of the additional $91,645, a total of $6,600 came from itemized contributions of $200 or more from New Hampshire.

PRESIDENT LINCOLN? This didn’t take long. No sooner had Hillary Clinton departed the NHDP premises on Tuesday when Buckley received another call – this one former Rhode Island Sen. Lincoln Chaffee, who is preparing for his first visit to the Granite State since announcing a presidential exploratory committee. Chaffee and former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley are headed to South Carolina this weekend to speak at the South Carolina Democrats’ state convention.

GRASSROOTS TRAINING. The NHDP state committee meeting on Saturday at the headquarters of IBEW Local 490 in Concord will focus on “grassroots training” with sessions on messaging, the online database VoteBuilder, local committees, candidate recruitment and (of course) fundraising.

THE THOMSON PLEDGE. Tom Thomson, the longtime anti-tax champion and son of the late Gov. Meldrim Thomson, Jr., is rolling out his “Presidential Pledge” for the second consecutive cycle. Those who sign it will promise to “work tirelessly to cut taxes, fees, regulations, spending, the national debt; to secure the borders “by whatever means are necessary”; to become energy independent; to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act; and to “follow and protect the United States Constitution. Who will be the first to sign?

SUNUNU WITH KASICH. On the heels of his speech to the First-in-the-Nation Summit, Ohio Gov. John Kasich has set up a 527 group, called “New Day for America,” with longtime friend former Sen. John E. Sununu as a director.

NOT YET READY. Gov. Maggie Hassan is not yet ready to endorse Hillary Clinton for president, telling reporters on Wednesday, “I’m not making any decisions about 2016 until after the budget is done.” Hassan backed Clinton in 2008 and was a campaign adviser on policies affecting children and families – and clearly, the news in this case would be if she does not back Clinton.

BACK TO KELLY. With Hillary Clinton out of the state, the NHDP will resume its barrage against Sen. Kelly Ayotte on Thursday by accusing her of being “at the center of Washington dysfunction with human trafficking victims and the confirmation of the nation’s top law enforcement officer.

CLOSEUP THIS WEEK. This week on WMUR’s “CloseUP,” Political Director Josh McElveen will interview two Republican state lawmakers who are undecided on the gambling debate at the State House, Reps. Katherine Prudhomme-O’Brien of Derry and John Tholl of Whitefield. He will also review the Hillary Clinton visit with her state campaign manager, Mike Vlacich, and the First-in-the-Nation Republican Leadership Summit with state GOP Chair Jennifer Horn. The program airs on Sunday at 10 a.m.

(John DiStaso can be reached at jdistaso@hearst.com or distasoj@gmail.com. Follow him on Twitter: @jdistaso and on Facebook: Facebook.com/JohnDiStasoWMUR.)