U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius arrives to testify at the House Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee on "Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act Implementation Failures: What's Next?" on Capitol Hill in Washington December 11, 2013. REUTERS/Gary Cameron (UNITED STATES - Tags: POLITICS HEALTH) - RTX16E1R

4058361

CGI Federal may have been fired from its role as contractor on the disastrous $678 million Obamacare enrollment website, but American taxpayers are not done paying millions of dollars to the disgraced company, courtesy of the Obama administration department that hired it to build HealthCare.Gov.

CGI Federal is the U.S. arm of the Canadian company CGI Group, and was formed in 2009 to bring CGI into the federal contracting business. Employing Michelle Obama’s Princeton classmate and 2010 White House Christmas guest Toni T0wnes-Whitley as a top executive, CGI Federal is going to be enjoying its contracts with the Obama administration’s Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), a division of Kathleen Sebelius Department of Heath and Human Services (HHS), for at least another year.

Here are five contracts that CGI Federal still holds with CMS, as noted by a review of CMS contracts conducted by informationweek.com:

1. Prime contractor on the CMS Enterprise System Development contract:

“CGI Federal is a prime contractor on the Enterprise System Development contract, a multiple award … performance-based contract for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). The Enterprise System Development contract covers systems development and integration; system and application engineering; and technical support to improve the automated systems and agency-wide applications of the Health and Human Services Department,” according to the CGI website.

“Work under the contract also includes: Design Services, Development Services, and Maintenance Services,” according to CGI.

2. TAS [Technical Assistance Services] website support services for CMS:

CGI still holds this $20.5 million CMS contract through April 29, 2015.

3. TAS Medicare appeals system:

This $7.7 million contract is still in CGI’s hands through May 31, 2014.

4. Medicare Advantage system maintenance:

Obamacare may have raided $300 billion from privately-run Medicare Advantage plans in a sweeping cut that will begin affecting seniors in 2014, but it still needs maintenance work. CGI is making a combined $36.56 million from this contract and its Medicare Part D system maintenance contract, which are both valid through July 31, 2014.

5. Medicare Part D system maintenance:

President George W. Bush took flack from conservatives for creating Medicare Part D. But CGI isn’t part of his chorus of critics. The company will keep reaping the benefits of this contract for more than another six months.

Follow Patrick on Twitter