The state is extending the deadline for Health Republic customers to sign up for a new insurance plan following the health insurance co-op’s collapse.

At the same time, the state Department of Financial Services announced it is investigating Health Republic’s financial reports to the agency.

The news comes days after Gov. Andrew Cuomo said DFS was working with the federal government to help customers and unpack the Health Republic debacle. Other elected officials, including Rep. Chris Gibson, have been calling for an investigation into the co-op’s struggles.

“We will continue to take aggressive action to protect consumers in the wake of Health Republic’s failure,”Acting DFS Superintendent Anthony Albanese said in a statement. “The extended deadline and auto-enrollment option are important steps in helping ensure the company’s customers do not go without insurance. Additionally, while our first and primary focus is protecting consumers, we are also investigating the inaccurate representations Health Republic made to the State about its financial condition.”

Health Republic customers now have until Nov. 30 to pick a new plan through the New York State of Health marketplace, which was established under the Obama administration’s Affordable Care Act. After the end of the month, the state will auto-enroll Health Republic customers in a new plan. In a joint release, DFS and New York State of Health said that additional details regarding auto-enrollment would be announced in the days to come.

“Health Republic customers should act as soon as possible to choose a new health plan,” New York State of Health Executive Director Donna Frescatore said in the statement.

Health Republic’s closure was not expected to have a major impact on the Capital Region because it had announced earlier that it was pulling out of several counties in the area in an effort to consolidate. Only a small network of Capital Region hospitals and doctors participated in the co-op’s plan.

Statewide, some 200,000 people were Health Republic customers.

Some additional background info on the general state of co-ops part of Obamacare from my colleague Rick Karlin:

The (Health Republic) co-op appears to be suffering the same fate as several other such operations nationwide.

Using federal seed money, Obamacare envisioned allowing co-ops, or non-profit organizations similar to mutual insurance firms or credit unions, to compete in state-run health exchanges, or marketplaces for affordable health insurance. The idea was they could keep costs down and eventually be governed by their own members. But some lacked the marketing expertise and didn’t necessarily have the actuarial data, or projections about costs, that established health insurance plans had when they entered the exchanges. Earlier this year, for example, a co-op that had become popular in Iowa and Nebraska for its low rates hit the rocks financially because its insurance payouts were higher than anticipated. And in August, a Nevada health exchange co-op was forced to close as enrollments were too low and the payouts on claims too high. On the other hand, a co-op in Arizona was reportedly growing rapidly.

The full release from DFS and NYSOH follows: