Salinas >> A 56-year-old woman is being investigated, again, for allegedly practicing dentistry illegally in the comfort of her own living room, police said.

Ana Diaz was arrested on Tuesday on suspicion of practicing unlawful dentistry in her home, selling prescription drugs and performing general anesthesia on patients without a license. She was convicted in 2010 for the same violations,

On June 27, a man whom police have not identified showed up at Natividad Medical Center with a broken molar and lacerated gums. He later told police Diaz tried to extract his tooth for more than 90 minutes and broke it, and that the procedure was done in the living room of Diaz’s home on the 700 block of Leese Drive in Salinas.

The 32-year-old said he was in the country illegally and delayed treatment for three days for fear of being prosecuted or deported. He also told police Diaz was selling prescription medication to her patients in the form of antibiotics from Mexico.

On Tuesday, officers arrived at Diaz’s home and upon entering they said they found a makeshift surgical room with a dental chair, table and numerous dental tools.

The dental tools were taken into evidence, and Diaz was booked into Monterey County Jail.

Health care for undocumented immigrants is an ongoing debate among policymakers in Sacramento. While the Affordable Care Act expanded health coverage to many Americans — including providing free or very low-cost Medi-Cal coverage to more low-income Californians — undocumented immigrants are not covered by the law.

That left an estimated 1 million state residents without coverage. In June, the state Senate passed a bill to allow undocumented immigrants to buy coverage on the state’s health exchange — provided the federal government agrees — and extend Medi-Cal to residents under 19 years old regardless of immigration status.

If funds allow, the bill would also extend Medi-Cal to some low-income undocumented adults. The bill awaits a hearing in the Assembly.

Police suspect Diaz has performed illegal dental procedures on other people, and are urging the public to report additional information at 758-7250.

Jason Hoppin contributed to this report. Ana Ceballos can be reached at 726-4377.