Gillian Jones

Banks ombud in push for deposit insurance

THE Ombudsman for Banking Services wants the swift introduction of deposit insurance, particularly to benefit less sophisticated customers.

This echoes similar calls from the International Monetary Fund that SA introduce a safety net for customers if their bank fails, and to protect the financial system.

Ombudsman Clive Pillay said on Friday the banking industry should "step up its sluggish response to the implementation of reforms and adopt a more decisive stance, particularly to deposit insurance".

He said banks had argued that deposit insurance would be expensive. "But I think there is just an unwillingness to investigate the pros and cons fully."

Deposit insurance involves banks paying a small fee on deposits so that if they face insolvency customers will be paid a major portion of their deposits.

This type of insurance is common globally. China is the most recent convert, with the planned introduction of insurance for deposits of up to 500,000 yuan from next month.

Mr Pillay also called for lower remittance costs in SA, the most expensive of the Group of 20 countries for sending remittances, according to World Bank research. The global average cost of sending remittances in the third quarter of last year was 7.9% of the value sent, while it was 11.3% to send the equivalent of $200 to sub-Saharan Africa, the World Bank found. In SA, sending remittances costs an average of 19.5% of the value.

The Payments Association of SA was working on reformulating tariffs for sending remittances, Mr Pillay said.

Despite his criticism of the banks, Mr Pillay said they had always been willing to participate in the ombud processes.

The ombud resolved 4,179 cases last year, 69% in favour of banks and 31% in favour of consumers. In 2013, 60% of complaints were resolved in favour of banks and 40% in favour of customers.

Standard Bank accounted for the highest number of cases (1,630), followed by First National Bank (787). Capitec (640), Absa (639) and Nedbank (635) had a similar number of cases.

Mr Pillay said the favouring of the banks last year was not typical, as historically there had been an almost equal split between cases resolved in favour of consumers and those in favour of banks.

The anomaly last year was due to two factors.

First, the number of ATM card-swapping complaints "increased dramatically" from 27% of ATM complaints in 2013 to 60%. In these cases, customers had tended to be negligent. Second, the ombud and the banks were deadlocked on how to apply and interpret the legal principle of the duty of care. This had been referred to retired judge Frans Malan for a ruling.

While that was pending, all cases related to phishing — where criminals use emails and websites to trick people into revealing their bank account information — were on hold and, therefore, not included in last year’s figures.

ATM complaints have dominated the ombud’s caseload since 2010. Last year, 1,768 cases related to ATMs, with most cases resolved in favour of the banks.

Only 21% of ATM cases were resolved in favour of consumers, as clients appeared to be unaware of the "ploys of shoulder surfers and "helpful’ bystanders", said Mr Pillay. However, when criminals used sophisticated devices that customers could not be expected to detect, the banks were responsible as they had a duty under the Code of Banking Practice to provide secure systems, said Mr Pillay.