2016 election - It’s the corruption, stupid

June 21, 2015

There is a potential winning coalition in America, one including Democrats and Republicans, men and women, and all racial and ethnic groups, who believe in one simple proposition - honest, representative government.

We do not have either.

What we do have is a political-media system representing the interests of an oligarchy, a form of government in which all power is vested in a dominant class. It is composed of financiers and their political and media whores, who finance their avarice by using the tax revenues squeezed from hard-working Americans as a personal hedge fund.

The present American political system is a "totalitarian democracy", one in which "lawfully" elected representatives rule a nation state whose citizens, although granted the right to vote, have little or no participation in the decision-making process of government, nor whose views are ever seriously considered except when they parallel the interests of the oligarchy.

The United States may have traveled too far down the road to perdition to be saved, but if there is to be salvation, the American people must recognize and directly address the single, most important issue facing the country; the hopeless corruption of our political-media culture.

American politicians, collectively, both Democrat and Republican, do not believe in representative government and care nothing about the Constitution or the rule of law, but in the pursuit of personal power and profit through the use of unconstitutional executive power, a warped legislative process and a constant stream of guaranteed taxpayer revenues. Both parties use campaign deception, practice political expediency, engage in crony capitalism and, when necessary, promote voter fraud to sustain the corrupt status quo.

The media support the oligarchy by preserving the illusion of democracy, enabling tyranny by misinforming or manipulating Americans and, thereby, facilitating the very corruption the people's "watchdog" was meant to prevent.

We have developed into something akin to what Sheldon S. Wolin called a "managed democracy," where a governmental cartel stages elections every few years to obtain voter acquiescence in a:

"country where citizens are politically uninterested and submissive--and where elites are eager to keep them that way."

In Commentaries on the Constitution (1833), Joseph Story wrote:

"Let the American youth never forget, that they possess a noble inheritance, bought by the toils, and sufferings, and blood of their ancestors; and capacity, if wisely improved, and faithfully guarded, of transmitting to their latest posterity all the substantial blessings of life, the peaceful enjoyment of liberty, property, religion, and independence."

To paraphrase Christopher Hitchens, the vacant servitude to an oligarchy requires a society to lose any sense of its own history and traditions. Subjected to media deception and leftist historical revisionism, the low-information voter will submit to tyranny through a combination of governmental coercion and the hedonist nihilism of the painless, amusement-sodden, and stress-free consensus managed by the all-intrusive nanny-state.

The Administration of Barack Obama has stripped away any pretense regarding the depth of government corruption, the extent of media complicity or the willingness of Republicans to defend the vested interests of the oligarchy.

Obama's extreme leftist beliefs and his love for, if not strict adherence to Islam, lead him to embrace policies not in the best interest of the United States; while his arrogance and narcissism prevent him from admitting failure and changing course.

Nevertheless, the Republican Party has consistently joined Obama and the Democrats to pass legislation and enact policies opposed by a majority of Americans.

I would like to think that it was all just incompetence, a befuddled political leadership offering unworkable solutions for misunderstood problems executed by ignoramuses.

Unfortunately, it is far more sinister. We have met the enemy and he is government.