WOONSOCKET, R.I., Aug. 26, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- CVS Health (NYSE: CVS) today announced that it is working with three proven telehealth companies – American Well, Doctor On Demand and Teladoc (NYSE: TDOC) – to explore how direct-to-consumer telehealth providers, retail pharmacy and retail clinic providers can collaborate to improve patient care. This represents an expansion of CVS Health's existing telehealth approach.

"During our initial phase of exploration of telehealth in our store-based clinics, we learned that we could deliver excellent quality care and that patients were extremely satisfied with the care provided," said Andrew Sussman, M.D., executive vice president/associate chief medical officer, CVS Health and president, MinuteClinic. MinuteClinic data recently published in the Journal of General Internal Medicine showed that overall, 95 percent of patients were highly satisfied with the quality of care they received, the ease with which telehealth technology was integrated into the visit, and the timeliness and convenience of their care.

"As we examine additional ways to utilize telehealth to improve and expand patient care, we have the opportunity to partner with telehealth organizations in the care of patients at home," Sussman added. "In doing so, CVS Health will add value for patients, clients and health plans by improving access to low-cost quality care."

CVS Health is piloting several different telehealth opportunities, including making telehealth physician care accessible through CVS Health digital properties. CVS Health will also explore enabling MinuteClinic providers to consult with telehealth physicians to expand the scope of care offered at MinuteClinic. In addition, MinuteClinic will continue to provide telehealth care to patients in CVS retail stores and will explore serving as a site for in-person exams to facilitate telehealth medical visits.

"With the increased demand for patient care anticipated in future years as a result of the expansion of coverage through the Affordable Care Act, the primary care physician shortage, aging of the population and epidemic of chronic disease, telehealth gives us the opportunity to offer high quality care to an expanded group of patients in a variety of convenient and cost-effective locations," Sussman concluded.

This announcement is part of CVS Health's broader commitment to connected health, exploring new and effective ways that digital technology can improve the health care experience. "A key pillar of our strategy is forging the right partnerships within the industry," said Brian Tilzer, senior vice president and chief digital officer, CVS Health. "We recognize that some of the best ideas are already being developed, so we're committed to partnering with other companies to explore and expand on these ideas together."

"We are delighted that CVS Health has joined the roster of top health plans, employers, and hospitals that trust American Well for their telehealth services," said Ido Schoenberg, CEO of American Well. "Together we can offer consumers far more convenient access to affordable, quality care in the community and at home."

"We started Doctor On Demand to provide immediate access to some of the best board-certified physicians in the country. We all know how hard it is to get fast treatment for common but acute medical issues," said Doctor On Demand Co-Founder and CEO Adam Jackson. "Working with CVS Health gives us an opportunity to care for the millions of Americans that trust CVS Health with their health and wellness needs."

"Caring for CVS Health customers is a great privilege and responsibility," said Jason Gorevic, chief executive officer, Teladoc. "Consumers are choosing telehealth because it is a convenient and effective way to receive care. Teladoc is the pioneer of this innovative model, and we are excited to partner with CVS Health to increase the ways in which its customers can access high quality and affordable care."

About CVS Health

CVS Health (NYSE: CVS) is a pharmacy innovation company helping people on their path to better health. Through its 7,800 retail drugstores, 1,000 walk-in medical clinics, a leading pharmacy benefits manager with more than 70 million plan members, and expanding specialty pharmacy services, the Company enables people, businesses and communities to manage health in more affordable, effective ways. This unique integrated model increases access to quality care, delivers better health outcomes and lowers overall health care costs. Find more information about how CVS Health is shaping the future of health at www.cvshealth.com.

About American Well

American Well has delivered healthcare into the homes and workplaces of patients for close to a decade. American Well's consumer service, Amwell, connects people with board-certified doctors, dieticians, and psychotherapists for video visits via smartphone, tablet, kiosk, phone, or desktop. Amwell is the #1 most downloaded Telehealth app and averages a 4.8 out of 5 Star rating by consumers. American Well serves the nation's top health systems and health plans and in aggregate serves over 600 major employers and more than 25 million covered Americans. For more information, visit AmericanWell.com. American Well and Amwell are trademarks of American Well Corporation in the United States and other countries.

About Doctor On Demand

Doctor On Demand provides Video Visits with Board Certified Physicians, Psychologists, and Lactation Consultants via smartphones, tablets, and computers. Patients simply download the Doctor On Demand app or visitwww.doctorondemand.com, provide a list of their symptoms, and are instantly connected for a Video Visit. Doctor On Demand's unique offering for health plans and employers combines a $0 PEPM business model with the easiest to use, highest-rated consumer application in the telemedicine space. Doctor On Demand has more 5 star App Store reviews than every other telemedicine app combined. To learn more, please visit www.doctorondemand.com.

About Teladoc

Teladoc, Inc. (NYSE: TDOC), the nation's leader in telehealth, delivers on-demand health care 24/7 via mobile devices, the internet, secure video and phone. More than 12.5 million members connect to Teladoc's network of more than 1,500 board-certified, state-licensed physicians and behavioral health professionals for a range of non-emergency conditions. With a median response time of less than 10 minutes, Teladoc physicians will perform more than 525,000 telehealth visits in 2015. Teladoc is the first and only telehealth company to receive certification from the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) for its physician credentialing process. For more information, visit teladoc.com.

Media Contacts:

Carolyn Castel

(401) 770-5717

CVS Health

Carolyn.Castel@CVSHealth.com

Brent Burkhardt

(410) 986-1303

TBC (for MinuteClinic)

bburkhardt@tbc.us

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140905/143585

SOURCE CVS Health