Regina Holliday is a well-known patient advocate, activist and artist. A widow and mother, she fights for patient empowerment through her paintings, writing and even her Twitter. (Follow her. You won’t regret it.) She is also the mind (and paintbrush) behind the Walking Gallery, a movement devoted to patients and healthcare leaders wearing their stories on their backs, literally. She took the time to answer some questions regarding the changing healthcare landscape, her favorite healthcare moment of 2013 and of course, her work.

How did you become involved full time as an activist-artist? What did you do before? What inspired you to become an activist?

I became a full time activist artist five days after my husband Fred Holliday II died from the effects of kidney cancer. Before becoming an activist I worked in retail sales for 16 years, taught pre-K fine art for five years and painted neighborhood murals.

What’s your favorite piece of art you’ve created for patients’ rights? Why?

73 Cents. Not only is it a monument to my late husband it spread the word about the importance of patient data access around the world.

How do you envision your art impacting the healthcare landscape?

The art I do helps explain complex health policy and sometimes helps shape it.

What project are you most looking forward to? Why?

That is sort of like asking a parent about their favorite child. . . . I look forward to watching The Walking Gallery grow more in both numbers and depth.

How do you begin each painting? Do you start with an idea or an image?

That depends on the project. On Gallery jackets I research the walker online as well as read the story that they have sent. I then wait for the image to come that explains their life and mission. On conference paintings I listen to speakers and attendees and the image comes from the content seen through the prism of the patient view.

What other art projects excite you that are empowering patients?

I love what Ross Martin is doing with the The American College of Medical Informatimusicology. I know it is helping folks embrace the power of music in medicine and information technology.

What do you see as the biggest patients rights challenges for the medtech industry?

Educating the populace on the new rights afforded in data access based on new technology.

What is one simple way each of us can promote patient empowerment?

Every time you write or present try to include the patient experience by sharing your experience or the experience of others.

You attend many of the biggest conferences for healthcare, meet the movers and shakers–you’ve even spoken at the White House. What are the biggest trends you’ve seen in healthcare in 2013?

The focus on BlueButton is a good thing for patients. The OCR’s decision to go after data withholders continues to be great tool for patients to claim access. The decision of more and more facilities to embrace open notes (link added) will directly affect patient outcomes.

What’s been your favorite healthcare moment of 2013 so far?

Eric Topol’s speech at HIMSS. Pure gold.

What do you think will be the next big break for the patient empowerment movement?

Sensor technology used in the inpatient setting.