FLINT TOWNSHIP, MI – About 80 people gathered at Corunna Road Bar for an Old Newsboys of Flint fundraiser Christmas party Sunday, Dec. 15.

Sunday's event helped raise money for their oldest program, the Christmas Program, which gave 5,000 children a Christmas box in 2012 that included clothing, personal care items and toys.

Old Newsboys of Flint, a non-profit group, was established in 1924 and raises money to provide essentials, such as clothing and personal care items, to children in need.

About $650 was raised at Sunday's family-friendly event through 50/50 ticket sales, raffle ticket sales and the year-long penny drive – about $25 more than organizer Diane Trimm's target goal, set following the 2012 event.

"We wanted to do this because no kid should be without at Christmas," she said.

The event was inspired by Barb Young, a Corunna Road Bar employee who'd done penny drives in past years for Old Newsboys.

Trimm said the fundraiser was designed to feel like a family Christmas party, where guests could bring a $5 to $10 gift for a white elephant gift exchange, as well as a dish to pass for a ham dinner potluck.

"We want to keep it affordable," she said. Children could also get their photographs taken with Santa, played by Flint resident Lowell Scowden.

Scowden said he often donates his time to dress up as Santa and the Easter bunny at fundraisers.

"You can't ever do enough for the kids," Scowden said.

Jon Youmans , of Flint, attended the event and said organizations such as the Old Newsboys of Flint are vital to the area's young people.

"There are so many kids out there that just don't have the support that they need," he said.

Trimm said she plans to organize a similar, but larger, event next year to help supplement other fundraisers the Old Newsboys organize themselves.





Sherman's Lounge on Fenton Road also hosted a fundraiser, entitled "The Belles of Christmas Jingle Ball," Sunday afternoon to benefit Old Newsboys.



Bands including Still Rain, Crush, Banshee and Daniel Vitany and Ten Hands Tall performed live at the fundraiser. Multiple 50/50 raffles, live and silent auctions, Chinese auctions and Santa and clowns for the children were all part of the event. Sherman's Lounge also donated half of all food sales to the cause.



Old Newsboys also organize their own fundraisers, such as the newspaper sale which is their largest annual fundraiser that just took place Dec. 13.



At the fundraiser, more than 100 volunteers asked businesses and motorists for donations to fund the Christmas Box Program, which they hope will reach 7,000 children in low-income families this year, Flint Journal records show.



For more information, visit the Old Newsboys of Flint's website at onbflint.org.