Today's Carly Fiorina news: Speaking with talk radio host Hugh Hewitt on Monday, Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina said congressional Republicans should defund Planned Parenthood even at the cost of shutting down the federal government. Fiorina: "Most Americans don't understand that the Democrats' position is it's not a life until it leaves the hospital. Most Americans don't agree with that position. We have to educate the American people about how extreme Democrats are:" Daily Caller

Fiorina channeled former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher at Monday's Voters First Presidential Forum in New Hampshire. Fiorina: "Margaret Thatcher once said, 'I am not content to manage the decline of a great nation.' Neither am I. We need a president who understands the economy, the world, how it works, who's in it, bureaucracy, how to hold them accountable, cut them down to size, technology. I have a proven track record of challenging the status quo and problem solving."

Fiorina said the 2008 financial crisis was "a classic case of where the political class failed," and blamed the crisis on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Fiorina: "We need to repeal Dodd-Frank, just like we need to repeal Obamacare. But we also need to get about what we should have been doing years ago, reform Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac."

On foreign policy, Fiorina said President Obama "has continuously provided to the American people a false choice. The false choice is this: Either you agree with what I'm doing, or not doing, or the option is to go to war. It's not true. There are many things we could and should be doing:" Breitbart News

Fiorina's campaign is preparing for her not to make the cut for Thursday's GOP presidential debate in Cleveland. In a memo sent Monday, the campaign downplayed the importance of being one of the 10 candidates invited to the debate.

"We've always acknowledged that debates are important to introduce Carly and speak to voters," stated the memo from Terry Neese, her national finance chairman. "We know that what polls say in July or August does not predict what voters will say in 2016. We have built an operation that can go the distance and win. Our strategy does not depend on any one single event to propel our candidate forward:" Time

When it comes to candidates relying on their super PACS, "few have gone as far as Fiorina," whose campaign "is essentially being run out of" her super PAC. Staffers at Carly for America "have taken on such core campaign functions as managing rapid response to press questions, rolling out endorsements of the candidate, funding grassroots organizing and organizing advance work for Fiorina's appearances." Federal laws bans certain only types of coordination between candidates and their super PACs, and the Federal Election Commission is divided on how to enforce the rules: Huffington Post