Coheed and Cambria release their new album, The Color Before The Sun, on Oct. 9 via 300 Entertainment. The band is giving fans an early listen, streaming the song and lyrics for “You Got Spirit, Kid” via Coheedandcambria.com, with the digital download of the single available globally on July 10.

The Color Before The Sun is the outfit’s eighth studio album and their first non-conceptual release, with the previous offerings forming the larger story of The Amory Wars, a science fiction saga depicting the story of Coheed and Cambria Kilgannon. The Color Before The Sun was recorded at St. Charles Studio in Nashville, and produced by Jay Joyce (Cage The Elephant, Eric Church).

The Color Before The Sun marks the first time Claudio Sanchez is exposing his raw feelings, narrated from his own perspective. “I kind of want people to know that Coheed can write that sort of record,” he explained of the album’s departure from The Amory Wars. “I’ve always said in the past that there’s never been a limitation on the band. It makes no sense to me to draw a line in the sand and never cross it.”

The New York-based band’s album arrives via the recently formed label, 300 Entertainment who pride themselves on being an independent, creative driven record label that focuses on intense artist development.

300 Entertainment co-founder Lyor Cohen offers, “Coheed and Cambria have created a lane and legacy for themselves that is very much their own. Their DIY approach fits the ethos of 300. They’ve taken some brave artistic steps on this forthcoming new album and we are looking forward to sharing it with the world.”

Funny or Die recently shared an unexpected, new song from the band, with the quartet putting Supreme Court Justice Scalia’s dissenting opinions from the Affordable Care Act and Same-Sex Marriage rulings to music, which can be seen in this clip: http://bit.ly/1eNN7Fs. The video, which has been viewed over 250,000 times, was not only picked up by music and comedy outlets but led a chorus of tweets and re-tweets from politicos including Michael Moore, Paul Begala and Chris Hayes.

Coheed and Cambria return to the road in August with several festival appearances including headlining spots at Riot Fest and Fun Fun Fun Fest as well as a trio of special European performances of In Keeping Secrets of Silent Earth: 3.

Coheed and Cambria on tour:

August 8 – Nashville, TN – Ink-N-Iron Festival

August 9 – Atlanta, GA – Wrecking Ball Atlanta

August 14 – Kent, England – Hevy Fest 2015

August 15 – Amsterdam, Netherlands – Neverender IKSSE:3

August 16 – Holte-Stkenbrock, Geramyn – Serengeti Festival

August 18 – Frankfurt, Germany – Neverender IKSSE:3

August 19 – Cologne, Germany – Neverender IKSSE:3

August 20 – Gampel, Switzerland – Open Air Gampel Festival

August 21 – Hasselt, Belgium – Pukkelpop

August 28-30 – Denver, CO – Riot Fest

September 11-13 – Chicago, IL – Riot Fest

September 13 – Sterling Heights, MI – Chill on the Hill

September 19-20 – Toronto, ON – Riot Fest

October 25 – Sacramento, CA – Aftershock Festival

October 31 – Phoenix, AZ – Monster Mash Music Festival

November 6-8 – Austin, TX – Fun Fun Fun Fest

Coheed and Cambria is Claudio Sanchez (vocals/guitar), Travis Stever (guitar), Josh Eppard (drums) and Zach Cooper (bass).

www.coheedandcambria.com

www.facebook.com/coheedandcambria

www.twitter.com/coheed

www.instagram.com/coheedandcambria

Comments

comments