In other Nebraska GOP primary news, THE WEEKLY STANDARD has learned that private polling in Nebraska by an independent outside group has the race dead even at 31-30, a slight edge for former state treasurer Shane Osborn. However, the poll also shows that, despite being a statistical tie, Sasse is still behind Osborn in name recognition. Given Sasse's polling momentum and much stronger fundraising numbers , Sasse looks to have a bigger opportunity than Osborn to pick up new votes before the May 13 primary election.

Nebraska Senate candidate Ben Sasse has been declared " Obamacare's Nebraska Nemesis ," and in a new ad Sasse explains why he's personally invested in repealing the law. In 2007, his wife Melissa had an aneurysm followed by an arduous recovery, which left his family with $160,000 in medical bills. Sasse ended up waging a months-long battle against the health insurance system, and Sasse is convinced Obamacare will only make these problems worse:

Nebraska Senate candidate Ben Sasse has been declared " Obamacare's Nebraska Nemesis ," and in a new ad Sasse explains why he's personally invested in repealing the law. In 2007, his wife Melissa had an aneurysm followed by an arduous recovery, which left his family with $160,000 in medical bills. Sasse ended up waging a months-long battle against the health insurance system, and Sasse is convinced Obamacare will only make these problems worse:

The Weekly Standard http://assets.weeklystandard.com.s3.amazonaws.com/tws15/images/logo-large.png

The Weekly Standard

2014

Washington, DC

Politics

http://www.weeklystandard.com/senate-candidate-ben-sasses-personal-investment-in-repealing-obamacare/article/786706

2014-04-09T08:19

2014-04-09T08:20

Senate Candidate Ben Sasse's Personal Investment in Repealing Obamacare

Nebraska Senate candidate Ben Sasse has been declared Obamacare's Nebraska Nemesis, and in a new ad Sasse explains why he's personally invested in repealing the law. In 2007, his wife Melissa had an aneurysm followed by an arduous recovery, which left his family with $160,000 in medical bills. Sasse ended up waging a months-long battle against the health insurance system, and Sasse is convinced Obamacare will only make these problems worse: In other Nebraska GOP primary news, THE WEEKLY STANDARD has learned that private polling in Nebraska by an independent outside group has the race dead even at 31-30, a slight edge for former state treasurer Shane Osborn. However, the poll also shows that, despite being a statistical tie, Sasse is still behind Osborn in name recognition. Given Sasse's polling momentum and much stronger fundraising numbers, Sasse looks to have a bigger opportunity than Osborn to pick up new votes before the May 13 primary election.

2014 Elections, Ben Sasse, Mark Hemingway, Nebraska, Obamacare, Senate, Shane Osborn

http://cdn.weeklystandard.biz/cache/280x280-.jpg