Dallas County taxpayers can expect a nearly 10 percent hike in property taxes for Parkland Memorial Hospital next year to cover the cost of its new building.

In a public hearing Tuesday before the county Commissioners Court, Parkland officials complained that the hospital system is struggling from inadequate state and federal funding to support the new facility.

“If you look at our history, our revenues have not kept pace with our expenses, and we have the new hospital coming on,” said Dr. Fred Cerise, Parkland’s chief executive officer.

“We don’t want to come back to the county to make up the gap repeatedly,” he said.

The commissioners must approve the hospital’s annual budget and tax rate by the end of September.

The hospital’s budget for 2015 could reach nearly $1.4 billion. Cerise’s latest spending proposal predicts a $13 million deficit that still must be resolved. County taxpayers would kick in $496 million next year, or 36 percent of the total.

The proposed new hospital district tax rate of 28.6 cents per $100 assessed value would mean a $414 property tax bill for the owner of a $144,733 house, the county average. The owner of last year’s average home paid $377 this year, or $37 less. Part of that increase is because property values in the county went up 6.6 percent this year.

Voters approve in ’08

In 2008, county voters overwhelmingly agreed to underwrite the new $1.3 billion hospital by adding 1 cent to the property tax rate in the future. That is the increase that would go into effect next year.

Cerise said his staff continues to search for outside revenue that would balance next year’s budget, without cutting much-needed medical services.

Parkland’s financial pinch is occurring even as there’s more demand for its services. Emergency department visits are projected to increase next year by 4 percent, including a 29 percent increase in visits to the psychiatric ER.

Community clinic visits could climb by 14 percent next year, while clinics on the hospital’s main campus could see a 3 percent increase.

As Cerise warned of Parkland’s grim financial prospects, he drew supportive comments from all five commissioners.

“This isn’t a sustainable model,” said Mike Cantrell, the lone Republican commissioner. “We’ve got to do something.”

Cerise said he was informed recently by the state that Parkland would lose about $37 million in expected Medicaid funding this year. Large public hospitals, including Dallas County’s, are required to share more of the program’s supplemental funding each year with private hospitals that also provide indigent care.

“This cannot continue,” agreed Commissioner Elba Garcia. “We have to get some of this money back to Parkland.”

Obamacare limits

The county hospital also is seeing only a modest financial benefit from the federal Affordable Care Act, which went into effect last January. As of mid-July, Parkland had received $5.4 million in payments for about 1,100 patients newly covered by the law. The funds reimbursed the cost of their care but did not address other hospital expenses.

Parkland’s financial problems could be resolved if Texas leaders allowed the expansion of Medicaid, Cerise said. An expanded program could give coverage to more than 1 million poor adults of working age, many of them Parkland patients.

Gov. Rick Perry’s administration estimated that the state would have to put up $15.6 billion during the first decade of the program, which the governor and others felt was too much. By not expanding coverage, however, the state leaves $101.1 billion in federal Medicaid matching money on the table for that 10-year period.

Cerise said he was not holding out hope that Medicaid would expand, even if the Texas Legislature takes up the issue next year.

“We didn’t put the Medicaid funds in the budget for next year,” he said.

AT A GLANCE: New Parkland costs

The following are some additional costs to Parkland as the new hospital opens next year.

$28 million for increased depreciation and interest expenses

$10 million for added utility costs and building maintenance

$4.3 million for software and hardware

$1.7 million for educational marketing and community events

$1.3 million for supplies related to a new surge of patients

$1.1 million for medical-surgical supplies

SOURCE: Parkland Health & Hospital System