Appearing on "Meet the Press" on Sunday, Rudy Giuliani asked why protesters upset about a white police officer's fatal shooting of a young black man in Ferguson, Mo. this summer don't pay more attention to violence blacks perpetrate against other blacks.

"White police officers wouldn't be there if you weren't killing each other," he said.

As mayor of New York City, Giuliani was instrumental in implementing and popularizing the "broken windows" theory of policing, which holds that cops should aggressively police even minor infractions to create an atmosphere of obedience to the law. This strategy, many critics feel, leads to distrust and violence between police and citizens.



Former New York mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had a heated debate with Georgetown professor Michael Eric Dyson on NBC's "Meet the Press" on Sunday. (NBC News)

As mayor, Giuliani faced intense criticism from the black community in New York City over accusations of police bias against African Americans, and he clashed sharply with black leaders repeatedly.

Nationwide, following the Ferguson shooting, a poll conducted found that 80 percent of blacks thought that Brown's death raised important questions about race, while about half of whites said race was getting too much attention.

To understand why people see this case in such divergent ways, it's important to keep in mind that America is still a very different place for whites and blacks.

-- Blacks are much more likely to be arrested than whites. In Ferguson, police are about three times more likely to arrest blacks than people of other races, according to an analysis by USA Today, which is more or less typical for the thousands of jurisdictions where the newspaper examined arrest records.

-- About one in four blacks have been convicted of a felony nationwide, compared to about 8 percent of the population as a whole. Among black men in particular, the fraction is fully one third.

-- Unemployment among blacks is about twice the rate among whites.

-- Many whites live in diverse neighborhoods, but blacks are now twice as likely to live in segregated neighborhoods. An analysis of Census data by The Washington Post found that about 28 percent of blacks live in neighborhoods where at least 85 percent of residents are also black.

We could debate the causes of these disparities at length. The important fact is that for whites, both economic opportunity and evidence of racial progress are abundant, and police are largely an unobtrusive, perhaps welcome symbol of security. Blacks, on the other hand, live in neighborhoods that often haven't changed much in the past 40 years. They interact with law enforcement and the criminal justice system on a regular basis, and work is hard for them to find.

That's why whites are able to believe that discrimination is now rare, but that bias against whites is now a greater problem than bias against blacks -- a view that blacks do not share. These numbers are also part of the reason that Brown's death is inspiring such passionate and irreconcilably different opinions on both sides.

Welcome to Wonkbook. To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. Follow Wonkblog on Twitter and Facebook.

What's in Wonkbook: 1) Suspense builds in Ferguson 2) Opinions: Immigration, the economy 3) Long reads: The gas boom, Bill Cosby, U.Va. 4) Marion Barry dies 5) Boy with BB gun fatally shot, Supreme Court will consider online threats, Benghazi and more

Number of the day: $4,200. That's the cost of a solid titanium toothbrush from Reinast. More and more, markets for luxury goods are driving the global economy, so just why people are willing to spend so much for a titanium toothbrush is an increasingly important question. Robert H. Frank in The New York Times.

Chart of the day:

People are starting to drive a little bit more, probably encouraged by an improving economy and falling gas prices. Still, the distance Americans travel on the road every month is still much less than it was before the financial crisis. Bill McBride at Calculated Risk.

1. Top story: Waiting on the Ferguson grand jury



A decision could be reached Monday, but no one knows for sure when it will be announced. Meanwhile, schools are closing, businesses are boarded up, and rumors abound as the suspense mounts. Manny Fernandez and Alan Blinder in The New York Times.

Documents from the investigation will not be released immediately. The county prosecutor had previously said that evidence considered by the grand jury would be made public, but the court has not yet decided whether to allow documents to be released. Kimberly Kindy in The Washington Post.

The FBI has sent a legion of agents to area. About 100 additional FBI agents are in St. Louis, and about 100 more are on the way. The bureau has said it expects violence following the announcement, even though protest leaders say they are laying careful plans for peaceful demonstrations. Josh Margolin for ABC.

Sales tax revenue in Ferguson fell off by a quarter during the protests. Data from the state shows a major economic impact in the first few weeks after the shooting, but business has since picked up again. Todd C. Frankel in The Washington Post.

Police arrest a freelance journalist at a protest. The arrest violates a court order against the police department, according to the ACLU. Kurtis Lee in the Los Angeles Times.

WEMPLE: Officer Darren Wilson has been meeting off the record with television anchors. It's standard practice for anchors to meet beforehand with potential interview subjects, but Wilson's case is worrisome. For one thing, several felony cases have been dropped because prosecutors haven't been able to get him to testify since he went into hiding. The Washington Post.

2. Top opinions: Immigration and the economy



DOUTHAT: Why has Obama betrayed his promise to restrain the executive? Both the president's ambition and Congress's spectacular shiftlessness have led Obama to expand executive authority while in office, after previously saying he thought the power of the White House should be limited. The New York Times.

LEGOMSKY: Obama's action is will within is legal and constitutional authority. Obama isn't doing anything more than what the law explicitly permits him to do and what other presidents in the past have done on a similar scale. The Wall Street Journal.

DRUM: John Boehner is the one overstepping his bounds. If you're concerned that Obama's executive action violates some established way of doing business in Washington, then Boehner's refusal to bring the Senate immigration bill to a vote is surely a more serious infraction. Mother Jones.

O'BRIEN: Obama's choice on immigration will help native U.S. workers. The economy as a whole is stronger when workers are free to make the best use of their talents, which isn't the case for immigrants living in the shadows who have no choice but menial labor. The Washington Post.

IRWIN: Economic indicators are sending contradictory signals. On the one hand, stock prices are rising, but commodities such as crude oil are becoming much cheaper. These trends could mean that the U.S. economy is strong compared to the rest of the world, that the U.S. economy is surprisingly weak, or something else entirely. The New York Times.

KRUGMAN: Six years later, we still don't get what zero interest rates really mean. When interest rates are at zero, policymakers need to do everything they can to create inflation. Now, the global economy remains weak, and it seems too few people have learned this counterintuitive lesson. The New York Times.

Queen Bey interlude: Her new release -- a kind of revised and expanded edition of last year's Beyoncé -- is available Monday. Jessica Contrera in The Washington Post.

Here's the new music video for "7/11," which seems to be about goofing around in your pajamas with all your friends in a hotel room.

3. Top long reads: The gas boom, plus two disturbing stories about rape

North Dakota takes a small-town approach to regulating big-time extraction. One fracking company was fined only $7,500 after 11 potentially disastrous blowouts. Deborah Sontag and Robert Gebeloff in The New York Times.

The accusations against Bill Cosby span decades. Many remember him as the family man he often played on television, but 16 women have now publicly said that Cosby raped them. The transformation of his image and his legacy mirrors the evolution of national attitudes about sex and gender. The Washington Post.



A first-year student waited for justice after her brutal rape at a University of Virginia fraternity. After the story was reported, the university suspended several fraternities. Sabrina Rubin Erdely for Rolling Stone.

4. Marion Barry dies at 78

The 4-term mayor died early Sunday. He was best known for his arrest on drug charges in a law enforcement sting, but was also responsible for establishing the city's government on a professional basis. Bart Barnes in The Washington Post.

Barry made sure that D.C. government worked for its residents. His methods weren't always pretty or clean, but he stood up against white supremacists in Congress on behalf of the district's black population. Adam Serwer at BuzzFeed.

"By now the contrarian Barry takes outnumber the straightforward ones but he was right on the Height Act & that’s good enough for me." -- @mattyglesias

5. In case you missed it

The CIA and the military acted properly during the Benghazi attack, report finds. Nor did the Obama administration attempt to mislead the public. That's the conclusion reached by a House committee (controlled by Republicans) in a new report. Felicia Schwartz in The Wall Street Journal.

Police shot and killed a 12-year-old boy who was carrying a BB gun in Cleveland. The dispatcher apparently did not tell the officers that the gun might be fake, and someone had apparently removed the orange cap from the barrel. Cory Shaffer in The Plain Dealer.

The Supreme Court will take a case on threats and social media. After a man threatened his wife on Facebook, his lawyers say the Internet is a place where threats are made but aren't to be taken seriously. Given all the threats that have been made online against feminists in the gaming industry this year, this case is definitely one to follow. Robert Barnes in The Washington Post.

Conservatives want to replace the head of the CBO. Republican lawmakers claim that Doug Elmendorf doesn't appreciate the magic of low taxes. Lori Montgomery in The Washington Post.

Why can't Congress pass a simple correction to Obamacare? A corrections bill of the type that used to be commonplace would prevent the Supreme Court from having to give the law another look. As the Republican Party has become more conservative, that kind of everyday legislative chore has become impossible. John Harwood in The New York Times.

Figure out how to program your thermostat! A properly used automatic thermostat can save a typical household $180 a year, but studies have found that only about half of automatic thermostats are actually programmed, and surprisingly few residences even have them. Chris Mooney in The Washington Post.