Turmeric, a chemical found in curry may actually repair brains of people with condition

Spicy food has always had hidden health benefits. Now, devotees of spicy Indian food could be better equipped to ward off dementia, research suggests. It's been discovered that a compound in the aromatic spice turmeric, a key ingredient in most curries, may repair the brains of people with neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's.

Spicy food has always had hidden health benefits. Now, devotees of spicy Indian food could be better equipped to ward off dementia, research suggests. Highlights By Catholic Online (NEWS CONSORTIUM) Catholic Online (www.catholic.org) 9/28/2014 (1 year ago) Published in Health Keywords: Turmeric, curry, Alzheimer's, stroke, dementia

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - Aromatic turmerone, commonly found in curry was found in tests to promote the proliferation of brain stem cells and their development into neurons.



Turmerone could now help scientists develop treatments for conditions in which brain cells are lost, including Alzheimer's and stroke.



Help combat infectious disease, protect children and the poor.



"While several substances have been described to promote stem cell proliferation in the brain, fewer drugs additionally promote the differentiation of stem cells into neurons, which constitutes a major goal in regenerative medicine," lead researcher Dr. Adele Rueger, from the Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine in Julich, Germany, said.



"Our findings on aromatic turmerone take us one step closer to achieving this goal."



Researchers examined the effect of aromatic turmerone on endogenous neutral stem cells, or NSCs found within adult brains. NSCs go on to develop into neurons, and play an important role in recovery from neurodegenerative diseases.



The turmeric compound boosted the proliferation of rat fetal NSCs by up to 80 per cent, and increased the speed at which they matured.



In living rats, injections of aromatic turmerone led to the expansion of two key brain regions, the subventricular zone (SVZ) and hippocampus.



Both are sites in adult mammalian brains where neurogenesis, which is the growth of new neurons is known to occur.



Aromatic turmerone is the lesser-studied of two major bio-active compounds in turmeric. The second, curcumin, is a well-regarded anti-inflammatory agent and reputed to have anti-cancer properties.



However -- the findings "are a long way from determining whether this compound could help fight diseases like Alzheimer's," Dr. Laura Phipps, from Alzheimer's Research U.K., warned.



"It's not clear whether the results of this research would translate to people, or whether the ability to generate new brain cells in this way would benefit people with Alzheimer's disease.



"We'd need to see further studies to fully understand this compound's effects in the context of a complex disease like Alzheimer's, and until then people shouldn't take this as a sign to stock up on supplies of turmeric for the spice rack.



"The death of brain cells is a key feature of Alzheimer's, and investment in research is crucial to understand how this cell death occurs and how to intervene.



"It takes many years for fundamental research such as this to be translated into new treatments, and for the best chance of success we need to see a range of approaches being taken."

---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.