The following is from a new e-book chronicling Janet Yellen’s path to Fed chairwoman. To download the full e-book for free, go to wsj.com/fed

When President Barack Obama called on Janet Yellen to become the next leader of the Federal Reserve, he placed in the hands of the five-foot-tall, gray-haired economist from Brooklyn one of the most consequential challenges of our time.

She has to decide when the recovering US economy is ready to stand on its own without the unconventional cocktail of financial medicine the nation’s central bank has administered to it during the past six years of market turmoil, recession and sluggish recovery.

But when that moment of normalcy will come is highly uncertain and government officials have fumbled it in the past, with grave consequences. During the Great Depression, the Fed tightened credit at key moments when the economy was still vulnerable, such as in 1931 and 1937, prolonging the human misery resulting from the deep downturn. In the 1970s, the Fed kept credit cheap for too long and inflation ensued. In the 2000s, the Fed kept rates low after another recession, potentially contributing to the housing bubble that emerged.

Ms. Yellen’s first decision comes Wednesday, March 19, when the Fed completes its first policy meeting under her leadership. These issues will be front and center The Fed started pulling back its bond-buying program in December 2013, a process she has signaled will continue. Next, she has to decide when to start raising interest rates from near zero, a process she wants to defer as long as inflation is low and no new financial bubbles emerge.

“While we have made progress, we have farther to go,” said Ms. Yellen, standing beside Mr. Obama in October 2013, when he announced he was nominating her to the top Fed post. “The mandate of the Federal Reserve is to serve all the American people, and too many Americans still can’t find a job and worry how they will pay their bills and provide for their families. The Federal Reserve can help, if it does its job effectively. We can help ensure that everyone has the opportunity to work hard and build a better life. We can ensure that inflation remains in check and doesn’t undermine the benefits of a growing economy. We can and must safeguard the financial system.”

Who is Janet Yellen? What experiences formed her? Can the nation trust her judgment?

The stories in our e-book on Ms. Yellen — based on decades of Wall Street Journal reporting about the economy, the central bank and national policy makers — form the first in-depth portrait of the woman with the levers of the global financial system at her fingertips.

To download the full e-book for free, go to wsj.com/fed