(Fremont County Sheriff Jim Beicker)

Incumbent Fremont County Sheriff Jim Beicker said he has been in law enforcement for 27 straight years.

He has been the county's sheriff since January 2003.

"I began my career in law enforcement in 1987 under Sheriff William DeBekker," he said. "I became a paid deputy in the detention center in 1988. I worked my way through many positions within the office, to include; detention deputy, patrol deputy, patrol sergeant, senior sergeant, detective, patrol commander."

From 1992 to 1994, Beicker worked at the Colorado Department of Corrections, then he returned to the sheriff's office under Sheriff Dale Rae.

He is running against Skip Moreau for a fourth term.

Beicker gave the following answers in a Q&A with the Daily Record.

Q: Why should people vote for you?

A: I think people will vote for me because I am the most qualified candidate, because I'm not running for this office on promises of what I will do, but on what I have accomplished in the last 12 years. There are no surprises with Jim Beicker. I've brought stability to the office, integrity, responsibility and accountability. I've brought innovation and forward thinking. I've brought sound judgement, and I've proven my leadership to the citizens of Fremont County when crisis has occurred, large scale events like the Parkdale Canyon Fire, Royal Gorge Fire, Duckett Creek Fire and others. Because I've given the Fremont County Sheriff's Office a name outside its borders serving on several governor appointed boards for multiple terms, partnering with fellow sheriffs and police chiefs on important legislation that impacts law enforcement and our citizens. Collaborating with agencies like Colorado Correctional Industries, to help train other countries around the world to become better public safety professionals.

I hope people vote for me because I've been completely transparent in managing the sheriff's office. I've given tours to anyone who had an interest in the jail and invited them to help, look at and scrutinize our budget. I believe these are just a few of the reasons the people of Fremont County will elect me to my fourth term.

Q: Why do you want this job?

A: Because I believe that my Under Sheriff, Ty Martin, and I still are very effective in leading the sheriff's office into the future. We both strongly believe in what we are doing — serving the citizens of Fremont County making it a safer place to raise our children, to work and to enjoy all that Fremont County has for us to do!

Q: What do you see as the biggest challenge the sheriff's office will face in the next few years?

A: This is a very hard question to answer since I don't have a crystal ball. I have so many concerns there isn't space in this column to state them all. I've seen so many serious and violent crimes, that I thought I would never have to deal with. I've watched as our patrol deputies and detectives caseloads have increased significantly. I guess there are challenges we've always had and will continue to face into the future, so if I am forced to choose one, I would have to say I am still very concerned about our budget, but maybe not in a way you might expect.

As most everyone knows, in November of 2013, the voters of Fremont County humbled me beyond words by approving a sales tax to benefit the sheriff's office, because of that, I'm extremely sensitive about how we use those tax dollars! I think it is crucial that we spend those dollars wisely, being frugal and well thought out. My goal is to prove, even to those who didn't support the sales tax, that it was a good decision and that we can be responsible and accountable to the citizens, that we can be good stewards and serve them well. I'm finding this goal to be a bigger challenge than how to do without, but I am committed and determined not to fail!

Q: If you are re-elected, how will you know if you've had a successful term?

I believe the voters of Fremont County will determine that. I do know if I continue to listen learn and grow, if I remain a humble servant of the citizens of Fremont County I will consider my time as sheriff as a success.

Q: What is your personal mission statement?

It's already been summed up, "to serve Fremont County citizens, and provide a safer place to live."