BCHD to assist Beach Cities residents in applying for ObamaCare

Beach Cities Health District (BCHD) in Redondo Beach, the largest preventive health agency in the U.S., today announced its official certification as an enrollment site for the Health Benefit Exchange under the Affordable Care Act in California – officially known as Covered California™.

Effective Monday, Nov. 18, BCHD’s team of Certified Enrollment Counselors are on hand to assist Redondo Beach, Hermosa Beach, and Manhattan Beach residents one-on-one, in person, in applying for health insurance under Covered California — the mechanism through which the state is implementing ObamaCare.

“As a public agency, Beach Cities Health District works to ensure access to health care and social services for the uninsured and underinsured in our district,” said BCHD Chief Medical Officer Dr. Lisa Santora, “and we’ve been successfully doing that for more than a decade. Helping residents enroll in Covered California is the next evolution of that commitment.”

Dr. Santora added that each approved health plan comprises 10 mandatory components, including wellness check-ups and preventive healthcare – elements that many people do not have access to currently.

Covered California is the health insurance marketplace in California, and its open enrollment period lasts until March 31, 2014, though residents who want coverage to begin Jan. 1, 2014 will have to select a health plan by Dec. 15, 2013.

To expedite the enrollment process for consumers, BCHD asks all interested parties to bring documented proof of the following items:

• Name/birth date of each person being enrolled

• Social Security number of each enrollee

• Most recent income tax filings or annual income amount

• Current health coverage status, if any

To schedule an in-person appointment at BCHD, call (310) 374-3426, ext. 256. Scheduling is based on availability, so same-day appointments are not guaranteed.

“If you live in Redondo, Hermosa or Manhattan Beach and need help navigating this process, or simply have questions you would like answered, use Beach Cities Health District as a resource,” said Dr. Santora.

Visit www.bchd.org or call the number listed above for more information.

comments so far. Comments posted to EasyReaderNews.com may be reprinted in the Easy Reader print edition, which is published each Thursday.