Topics: Afghanistan, Chris Hayes, Donald Rumsfeld, Editor's Picks, Eric Shinseki, Iraq, Mitch McConnell, Rachel Maddow, Richard Burr, va, VA Secretary Eric Shinseki, veterans, News, Politics News

For the Republican Party, the VA scandal is a “gift from God,” as Fox News contributor Ben Carson called it.

Obamacare has suddenly become more of a liability for Mitch McConnell than for his challenger, Benghazi is … well, #Benghazi, and … and … and the GOP never really thought they’d need to run on anything more this year. Unlike #Benghazi, the IRS and most other GOP-hyped scandals, the VA scandal is real — and now that they’ve got a big scalp, with the resignation of Secretary Eric Shinseki, they’re sure to be hungry for more, because that’s just the way that they roll.

But, as usual, the real scandal is a good deal more complicated than the GOP would have you believe.

As Rachel Maddow observed on her May 29 program, the military is the only part of government that Congress wants to give more money to than the department itself wants. But the same largess does not extend to veterans.

“When given the chance to vote for an expansion in the care that veterans are waiting too long for, Congress has not treated veterans the way that they’ve treated the defense department,” Maddow explained. “Veterans are treated more like food stamps, or education, or any other kind of funding that Republicans won’t pass in the House and that they will filibuster in the Senate, because they don’t want to pay for it.”

When George W. Bush was president, Republicans were happy to create a massive need for future VA healthcare. Ergo,”The Three Trillion Dollar War” (since updated to $5 trillion). Now, instead of paying the true cost of the war, they not only want to stiff the surviving veterans, they’d like to use the mess they’ve created as an excuse to privatize VA healthcare — and that’s the ultimate, big-picture scandal here.

Let’s break it down a bit into its major parts.

1. A major GOP objective is to privatize the VA — something that veterans themselves are opposed to.

On May 15, the Senate Committee on Veterans’ Affairs held a hearing on the state of VA healthcare, where top leaders of the veterans service organizations testified. The ranking Republican, Sen. Richard Burr of North Carolina, skipped out on their testimony, and then, eight days later — the Friday before the Memorial Day weekend — posted an open letter blasting them all, except for the American Legion, for not calling for Gen. Shinseki to resign (as the AL had done).

This was, ostensibly, the only measure of their worth in Burr’s mind. And they were not on board with his witch-hunting agenda. Indeed, Joseph A. Violante, the national legislative director of Disabled American Veterans, testified that, “we continue to have confidence that VA, led by Secretary Shinseki, can and will correct any problems identified or uncovered. This Secretary has a track record of directly and honestly confronting problems that he has inherited or that were uncovered during his tenure, and then working with Congress and stakeholders to correct them.” He then went on to cite a series of major major systemic problems that Shinseki had tackled and resolved. This was definitely not what Republicans wanted to hear.

But there was actually much more to the story than Burr trying to strong-arm the veterans organizations. Even worse than their reluctance to turn on Shinseki was their reluctance to turn on the VA itself, as Violante also made abundantly clear:

Moreover, let me emphasize one point on which we are resolute: the VA health care system is both indispensable and irreplaceable; there is no substitute for it. Based upon our collective knowledge and experience, we continue to believe that VA provides high-quality health care for the vast majority of veterans treated each year, and that veterans are now and will be better served in the future by a robust VA health care system than by any other model of care. The real challenge facing VA, and the root cause of the issues being reported today, have to do with access to care rather than the quality of care that is delivered.

The exact same sentiment was expressed by Carl Blake, national legislative director for Paralyzed Veterans of America. Blake’s testimony initially focused on the VA’s Spinal Cord Injury/Disorder (SCI/D) system. Following a good deal of detailed testimony — specifically illuminating the problems involved — Blake stepped back to observe:

The statistics reflect the fact that many veterans who might be seeking care in the VA are unable to attain that care. But to be clear, these facts reflect an access problem, not a quality of care problem. Access and quality is not the same thing. Veterans who have incurred a spinal cord injury or disorder and who get regular care at the VA are very satisfied with the care they are receiving. In fact, patient satisfaction surveys bear out this point. Unfortunately, for too long the VA has been provided insufficient resources to properly address the tremendous staffing shortages that exist, not only in the SCI/D system of care, but across the entire system.

Furthermore, in responding to Sen. Burr’s letter attacking the veterans organizations’ leadership, PVA’s president, Bill Lawson, and executive director, Homer Townsend Jr., pointedly stated:

Senator, your continued efforts to simply “fix” the VA’s problem by privatizing health care shows that you are more interested in diminishing the VA health care system and promoting your political interests.

2. Congressional Republicans have blocked VA funding in the past — obviously exacerbating the problem.

There is a long, sordid history of politicians giving lip service to service members and veterans on the one hand, and treating them like dirt on the other. But congressional Republicans in recent years have turned this sordid practice into a high art, and Sen. Burr himself is one the ablest practitioners. As PVA’s leaders pointed out in their response to Burr:

Given the opportunity to support legislation that would remove all of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) budget from the partisan bickering and political gridlock, of which you are an active participant, that has completely crippled the appropriations process, you opposed that legislation. Given the opportunity to support legislation that would ensure all generations of veterans, not just Post-9/11 era veterans, have access to the Comprehensive Caregiver Assistance program administered by the VA, you chose to oppose that legislation. Given the opportunity to support legislation that would provide reproductive assistance to veterans whose catastrophic disabilities rendered them unable to have children, you chose to oppose that legislation. Given the opportunity to ensure that the VA has fully sufficient resources to establish adequate capacity and properly meet the health care demands of veterans, you have chosen to send them out into the private health care marketplace that cares more about the bottom dollar than the health and well-being of those men and women.

Of course, Burr is only one example of his whole sorry party in Congress. On “All In With Chris Hayes,” Jon Soltz of Votevets.org amplified the big picture point:

This is about public health care. And when you look at the attacks from the right, this has been a long time coming, in regards to attacks from the far right. People are attacking the VA because it’s public healthcare. And they see it as something that is challenging to them. Or scares them. And so, really what this is about is privatizing the VA. The VA has been underfunded for years by conservatives on Capitol Hill, and that’s what they look at. And what we have here, not just in the VA, but in the country, is more of a health care crisis, where people are coming to the VA because that is the help that they need, and it’s not prepared, because it’s not funded properly by Congress and it hasn’t been for decades.

Soltz had criticism for Shinseki as well — but not the kind you normally hear:

General Shinseki is not a bad administrator, what he is is a bad public affairs officer, and the first thing I would have done if I was him is say, ‘Hey, Mitch McConnell, you’re the Senate Minority Leader, and you’re blocking a $21 billion package we need so I can do my job.’ That’s all they have to say.

3. The GOP is responsible for creating so many war veterans in the first place — and for going to war in a way that produced even more casualties than necessary from their misguided plans.