President Barack Obama returns to the White House after a campaign rally with Democrats in Wisconsin on Tuesday. Olivier Douliery/Getty Images

President Barack Obama has been under his own type of quarantine – a political one that’s kept him safely away from Democrats on the 2014 campaign trail.

So it had to be liberating for the shunned commander in chief to hop back on the hustings Tuesday night in Wisconsin for Democratic gubernatorial candidate Mary Burke.

“The folks on the other side, they’re counting on you being cynical. They’re figuring you won’t think you can make a difference,” a visibly animated Obama said at a Milwaukee high school in an area where he captured 99 percent of the vote in 2012. “Don't be cynical. Be hopeful. Cynicism is a choice. And hope is a better choice.”

The speech was a reprise of Obama's historic 2008 campaign theme of hope and change at a time when deep disillusionment and disappointment plague the sixth year of his presidency. Not a single Democratic U.S. Senate candidate has campaigned publicly with Obama this year, fearing the appearance would reinforce the central attack line Republicans are launching against them.

“As President Obama appears with Mary Burke, voters must remember that the president’s failed policies are on the ballot this November," Joe Fadness, executive director of the Wisconsin GOP, said ahead of the visit.

[READ: Wisconsin's Amazing Race]

But Obama’s re-emergence on the campaign trail in the final week before the 2014 midterms underscores that he remains a political utility – even if only a very limited one – as he drops into heavily urban areas to motivate his most fervent supporters to vote in a slate of key gubernatorial contests.

Obama will visit Portland, Maine, on Thursday and then make weekend stops in Detroit, Philadelphia and Bridgeport, Connecticut. Each trip is on behalf of a candidate for governor in a blue state he carried in the past two presidential elections.

The question that hangs over Obama’s light, last-minute campaign jaunt is whether he can stir loyal Democrats to participate in midterm elections that Republicans are more enthusiastic about, according to polls.

In Wisconsin, Burke is essentially even with GOP Gov. Scott Walker, who is expected to pursue a 2016 presidential bid if re-elected Tuesday to a second full term. Because there are few undecideds remaining in the contest, Burke is essentially trying to drive up turnout among Democrats who powered Obama’s two victories there.

With an approval rating of 46 percent, Obama is also more popular in Wisconsin than he is nationally and in most other states. Burke’s political brain trust essentially calculated the polarizing president still could provide a boost in a race that will be determined by which party’s base is more motivated.

[ALSO: Enemy at the Executive Mansion Gates]

Burke adviser Joe Zepecki said the decision to bring the president into the state was about “raising buzz and awareness” for Burke, as only a president can do.

“But it feels like the awareness is higher than I’d thought,” he said, taking measure of the mood in the room Tuesday. “I was genuinely surprised by the number of times the ‘Mary, Mary’ chant broke out. They know her and know what she’s about. We just gotta get ‘em out.”

Moving just enough votes – perhaps even as few as a couple thousand – could make the difference in races in which the president is being welcomed to campaign.

In Maine, one poll taken last week showed Democratic Rep. Mike Michaud tied with GOP Gov. Paul LePage. In Connecticut, the latest Quinnipiac University survey found Republican Tom Foley knotted with Democratic Gov. Dan Malloy.

[ALSO: Two Races Making the Right Nervous]

Obama isn’t talking to Republican voters, or even trying to convince undecideds at this late point in the game. He’s stoking issues like a minimum wage hike, pay equity for women and Medicaid expansion paid for by his Affordable Care Act to animate his own.

“Four years ago, Democrats lost the governor’s race in Wisconsin by just 10 votes per ward. Ten votes,” Obama said Tuesday night. “Ten votes could be the difference between an economy that works for everybody, or an economy that just works for the few. Your vote will decide the course that Wisconsin takes.”

Obama undoubtedly will shoulder a considerable portion of the blame if his party turns over the Senate and sheds a significant amount of House seats.