By Maggie Thurber | for Ohio Watchdog

Ohio is projecting $404 million in savings by expanding Medicaid eligibility, and everyone wants a piece.

Policy Matters Ohio wants more spending for police, fire and other government workers. Innovation Ohio says it should go to schools and local government. Lawmakers have their own ideas — across-the-board tax cuts, veterans, workforce development and paying off federal loans for the state unemployment fund.

But something doesn’t add up. If Ohio expands a program to include more people, where are the savings?

“It’s a bit of a shell game going on,” Greg Lawson, a policy analyst at the Buckeye Institute, says.

Since the federal government is picking up the tab for all these new people enrolling because of expanded eligibility, Ohio won’t have to pay for them. So, if the state isn’t paying, it must have saved that money – or freed it up to be spent elsewhere, the argument goes.

But what about the “woodwork effect” from the Affordable Care Act, which describes what happens when people who are eligible but not yet enrolled in Medicaid come out of the woodwork to sign up for Medicaid through healthcare.gov?

A policy brief from the Governor’s Office of Health Transformation estimates the cost of the woodwork effect at more than $500 million. It says planned reforms and policy changes will “help mitigate the $521 million state budget impact … and ensure the long-term financial stability of the Medicaid program.”

The October enrollment numbers for Ohio showed 57 percent of people who registered under healthCare.gov is, in part, attributed to the woodwork effect.

In February, Greg Moody, director of the Health Transformation Office, told the House Finance and Appropriations Committee the $404 million would come from policy modifications such as moving prisoners onto Medicaid and reducing state payments to hospitals.

But some of those expansion savings are from the same reforms meant to offset the woodwork effect.

In the end, the $404 million isn’t savings, Lawson said. Some is new revenue from sales taxes and other health insurance taxes included in the ACA. The shell game comes from shifting expenses, such as prisoner health care, from one part of the state budget onto the Medicaid budget, where the federal government pays more than half the costs, he said.

Matt Mayer, president of Opportunity Ohio, says the cost shifting is more dramatic.

“About $1 billion in state funds were being cut from hospitals in the budget, but the expansion would replace the cuts the hospitals got by giving them new customers,” Mayer said. “This is why the hospitals went for the Medicaid expansion. They understood what Kasich was proposing and realized they needed the federal funds they’d be getting.”

Unbeknownst to most lawmakers, earlier in the year Gov. John Kasich applied for and received approval from the Department of Health and Human Services to expand Medicaid.

“This was the way he was going to play the game,” Mayer said. “He got the HHS waiver approved. The controlling board needed to accept the federal funds because, if not, the state would have to foot the bill for the additional people.”

“He was threatening lawmakers by saying, ‘I’ve done it and if you don’t get us the additional federal funds, we’ll blow through the (state) funds quicker and then you’ll have to deal with a bankrupt system,’” he added.

The board accepted the federal money, but several members of the General Assembly filed suit to stop the expansion.

Mayer said taxpayers don’t stand a chance.

“The House and Senate turned down his budget, fought against Medicaid expansion, fought against the severance tax ,and now Kasich is going to end up getting everything he wanted,” he said.

Lawmakers recently introduced House Bill 375, a modified severance tax increase bill that has the support of the oil and gas industry.

“In the long run, government spending has gone up more under Kasich than any other governor,” Mayer said. “Kasich believes in the ‘starve the beast’ approach – that cutting taxes results in forcing government to shrink. Unfortunately, history shows the beast never starves. Other sources of revenue are found to continue the feeding. At the end of the day, Kasich has not reduced government spending at all.”

Lawson agrees, especially when it comes to Medicaid. “The state may call the $404 million ‘savings,’” he said, “but the overall cost is still increasing.”

State budget documents project a 7.9 percent increase in Medicaid costs in fiscal 2013; 3.9 percent in 2014.

Amy Hanauer, executive director of Policy Matters Ohio, said taking care of people who need health care should be a priority, and the state is optimistic it can control Medicaid costs.

“Our point is that there are unmet needs that are not included in the state budget, and another tax cut would be the worst possible use of those funds,” she said.

But in three years most of the $404 million goes away, Mayer said, and the spending will still be there.

“Then what?” he asked.