WASHINGTON (MarketWatch) — The U.S. economy in second quarter matched its best performance since the recession, but whether an accelerated pace of growth in the year ahead can be sustained is still unclear.

Gross domestic product — the value of all goods and services produced by the U.S. — grew at a real 4.6% annual rate in the second quarter, the Commerce Department said Friday. That’s up from a prior reading of 4.2% and an initial estimate of 4.0%.

The even faster pace of growth stemmed from stronger exports and business investment than the government originally calculated. The snapback in business spending was a particularly good omen that might suggest the economy is on its firmest footing in five years. Business investment has generally been soft since the U.S. exited recession in mid-2009.

Yet slow growth around the world could dampen exports, the pace of consumer spending was unchanged and a relatively large inventory buildup during the spring could induce companies to taper production, at least temporarily.

The U.S. grew at a 4.6% rate in the fourth quarter of 2011 and a 4.5% pace in the third quarter of 2013, but in each case, those spurts were followed up by slower phase of growth.

The biggest contributor to the upward revision in second-quarter growth came from business investment.

Spending on structures such as plants and office buildings was revised up to 12.6% from 9.4%, while spending on equipment was raised to 11.2% from 10.7%.

Yet the gain in business inventories was little changed at $84.8 billion, a high level that could induce companies to scale back a little in the third quarter and perhaps impinge on growth. Economists polled by MarketWatch predict the economy is likely to expand at a 3.2% pace in the June-to-September period.

The rise in exports was also raised in the second quarter to 11.1% from 10.1%, signifying the biggest increase in three years. Still, Europe remains mired in a slump and growth has tapered off in Japan and China, potentially limiting future gains in U.S. exports.

Imports also grew a bit faster — 11.3% vs. a prior estimate of 11%.

The growth in consumer spending, meanwhile, was unchanged at 2.5%. Americans spent more on health care, but the gain was offset by lower spending on other services, the government said.

Consumer spending, the main engine of U.S. economic activity, has been lackluster since the recovery began five years ago. While Americans have done a good job of reducing debt, slow wage growth has dampened their ability to spend. Economists say paychecks need to increase to move the U.S. closer to its historic growth rate of 3.3% from the postrecession average of about 2%.

Inflation as measured by the PCE index was unchanged at a 2.3% annual rate. Inflationary pressures have waned recently, however.

More from MarketWatch