The new Supper restaurant opened in the Shorecrest on the east side this month, in an Art Deco space previously known for fine Italian food and a colorful past. Credit: Michael Sears

Carol Deptolla Dining Critic SHARE The steak Delmonico at Supper has a noteworthy crust. The rib-eye is served with red wine sauce. Michael Sears A banquette plays up the Art Deco lines of the Shorecrest, home to Supper. Michael Sears Dressed parsley and capers offset the richness of roasted garlic aioli and egg yolk in the beef tartare appetizer. Michael Sears

It tells you how much modern dining has changed when a new restaurant that's retro feels fresh and distinctive.

Supper opened in the Shorecrest on the east side this month, in an Art Deco space previously known for fine Italian food and a colorful past — colorful past being a euphemism for reputed organized-crime hangout, when it was Snug's beginning in the mid-1970s.

Supper's co-owner is Gina Gruenewald, who also owns the Top 30 restaurant Wolf Peach; her business partner is the beverage director at Wolf Peach, Erich Wilz. The chef is Erik Hansen, whose cooking I admired a few years ago at the restaurant at Erin Hills golf course.

Gruenewald has said she's a fan of Wisconsin's supper clubs and wanted to open one of her own, tying elements of the classics with modern sensibilities.

It's a combination that worked when I stopped in to gather a first impression about a week after Supper opened — spot-on food, smart service and well-made cocktails (as well as interesting beer and wine lists).

Like a proper supper club, Supper says "welcome" with food — a bread basket of tender rolls and yeasty slabs of marble rye with salted butter and lemon-herb butter, and a relish tray of raw and pickled vegetables.

Guests can order a full Lazy Susan for $22, but with the relish tray already on the table, picking three items for $11 made sense — the rustic house-made braunschweiger, smoked trout mousse and deviled eggs felt very Wisconsin, even if the eggs were fancified with black truffle.

The menu keeps a foot in the past and in the present, categorizing main dishes as classics or modern. When so many restaurants serve small and shareable plates, the idea of a big ol' entree just for one feels revolutionary.

One of the classics is Delmonico steak ($42), a 16-ounce bone-in rib-eye with a fantastic crust and superior flavor, served with potato puree and bordelaise sauce.

On one of the modern plates, celery root, roasted mushrooms and a bed of smoked onion puree made gnocchi ($19) hearty; preserved lemon, peas and pea shoots kept flavors buoyant.

Creamed spinach ($6), enough for two, was exemplary; the fresh spinach, chopped fine, was held together with cream sauce, so light it was almost souffle-like.

At dessert, Supper kept to its modern and retro sides. The baked Alaska ($10) was made from old-fashioned flavors (as in the Wisconsin version of the cocktail, orange and cherry) — a lovely classic that looked completely contemporary.

First Impression provides an initial look at new high-profile restaurants. A full review will appear later.

Contact Carol Deptolla at (414) 224-2841, cdeptolla@journalsentinel.com or on Twitter @mkediner.

SUPPER

1962 N. Prospect Ave., in the Shorecrest building

(414) 509-6074

supper.restaurant

Fare: Steaks, chops, seafood, vegetarian

Hours: 3-10 p.m. Sunday-Thursday, 3-11 p.m. Friday-Saturday

Prices: Entrées, $17-$44

Parking: Small lot on north side of Shorecrest (spaces along building)

Wheelchair access: Yes, at entry and restroom in restaurant

Payment: MasterCard, Visa, American Express, Discover

Reservations: Recommended Friday-Saturday