Sunshine, warm temperatures and spicy enchiladas and cold beers at Frank and Lupe’s restaurant in Old Town Scottsdale. Ah, spring training! Rockies pitchers and catchers report to Salt River Fields at Talking Stick on Feb. 17, a mere 31 days from now.

Baseball optimism must always spring eternal (I think it’s in the U.S. Constitution), but there are major issues facing the Rockies. Here are three big ones:

• Rockies’ crowded outfield

With the addition of Gerardo Parra, Colorado has talent to spare in the outfield. Problem is: Carlos Gonzalez, Charlie Blackmon, Corey Dickerson and Parra are all considered starters, and all are left-handed hitters. Something has to give.

There has been widespread speculation that Colorado would trade Gonzalez (and the two years and $37 million left on his contract) this winter for starting pitching and perhaps a reliever. That doesn’t look like it’s going to happen. There are growing indications that Gonzalez will stay put, at least until the July trade deadline.

“I did speak with CarGo,” general manager Jeff Bridich told me last week. “I told him that there’s a lot of media rumors, speculation and guessing going on about his status. (I) reminded him that if he reads something but doesn’t see me quoted directly, then it is likely a rumor or a guess and nothing more.”

If Gonzalez stays, that leaves Blackmon and Dickerson on the trading block. Dickerson has the bigger upside as a power hitter, but he remains a below-average left fielder. Blackmon, in my opinion, keeps getting better and would bring more in return. The problem is this: If the Rockies trade Blackmon, who patrols center at Coors Field? Parra is a two-time Gold Glove winner, but he earned those as a corner outfielder. I don’t think he would be as effective in center at Coors.

If I had to make a guess, I’d say Dickerson is the most likely to be shipped out of Denver, which would put Parra in left field.

• Rockies’ starting pitching

I speak with players throughout the offseason, and one of the first things they ask me is “So, are we going to get any new pitchers?” I keep saying yes, but I’m starting to have my doubts.

I’ve said many times that I think Rockies ownership and management owe it to their fans and their current players to acquire a solid veteran starter for this season. Time is running short to do so.

I understand that this year’s Rockies won’t contend for the postseason, but if the Rockies bring in another Kyle Kendrick type, or simply settle for the young arms they’ve got, the clubhouse is going to be an unhappy place.

• Jose Reyes’ future with Colorado

News broke Friday that the shortstop has a trial date set for April 4, the day the Rockies open the regular season at Arizona. Reyes was arrested Oct. 31 for allegedly assaulting his wife in their hotel room in Wailea, Hawaii. He is facing charges of domestic abuse.

It’s a complicated situation because there is precedent to be set.

Reyes’ case is being investigated under the joint Major League Baseball-Players Association domestic-violence policy instituted in August. Commissioner Rob Manfred is expected to rule on the case, possibly before spring training opens and no later than March 1.

Manfred does not have to wait until the case goes to trial before he makes a ruling. Manfred can order a suspension as well as counseling for Reyes.

It leaves the Rockies in a hard place. Reyes, acquired in the trade that sent Troy Tulowitzki to Toronto last summer, is owed $22 million in both 2016 and 2017. The Rockies hold a club option for 2018 that is worth $22 million and includes a $4 million buyout. Bottom line: Colorado owes Reyes $48 million.

If he is suspended by MLB, how long would he be out? How much money would he lose? How would that affect the Rockies’ contract obligations? Those remain unanswered questions.

One thing seems certain now. If the Rockies had any plans to attempt to trade Reyes, those plans are shot now.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders @denverpost.com or @psaundersdp