Obamacare is taking a big bite out of Pennsylvania's uninsured population, extending health insurance to nearly 800,000 people since early 2014.

Yet when dentists offer free dental care, people continue to line up, including many with aching teeth.

The fact is, the gain resulting from the Obamacare exchange and related Medicaid expansion doesn't extend to dental care.

"Right now the focus is on health care. The dental has really taken a back seat," says Heather LaManna, the office manager Camp Hill Dentist.

At that West Shore practice on Friday, a parking lot had been converted into a waiting room, and dozens people of all ages, including disabled people, waited their turn for free dental care. LaManna expected well over 100 patients to pass through.

In May, a free two-day dental clinic at the Pennsylvania Farm Show Complex drew hundreds, with the line forming hours before doors opened at 6 a.m.

The Affordable Care Act — Obamacare — requires dental coverage for children, but not for adults. States have the option of requiring medical plans to include dental care, but there's been little uptake in Pennsylvania and elsewhere.

Pennsylvania has also greatly expanded its Medicaid program, making it available to most adults with lower incomes. Medicaid does cover dental care for adults, including things such as regular checkups and fillings. State employees passed out brochures for the program during the free clinic at the Farm Show Complex.

Still, the program doesn't routinely cover crowns and root canals, and has a lifetime limit of one set of dentures. Advocates and dentists say the coverage falls well short of the needs of many people, especially those who have gone a long period without coverage and need major work.

Bernie Dishler, a Montgomery County dentist and member of the Pennsylvania Coalition for Oral Health, says the limit on dentures is especially troublesome.

He says dentists can end up recommending pulling all of a relatively young person's teeth, in order to give them full dentures rather than exhausting their limit on a partial set. "That's a really serious issue," he says.

Medicaid patients can obtain special permission to get things such as a root canal if their medical health is directly affected. But Dishler says those exceptions are rare.

It's not that the need for dental care isn't great.

Antoinette Kraus of the Pennsylvania Health Access Network, which helps sign people up for Obamacare coverage, says many peoples' most urgent need involves their teeth, and they are disappointed to learn health plans sold in the exchange generally don't include dental.

Stand-alone dental plans are sold on the exchange, but the federal subsidies to help cover premiums don't apply to them. And while plans cost as little as $10 or $20 per month, they can involve extensive cost sharing for someone who needs a lot of work, according to Kraus.

Meanwhile, the long-running issue of dentists refusing to take Medicaid remains.

Fewer than a third of Pennsylvania dentists accept Medicaid, also known as medical assistance, according to the Pennsylvania Coalition for Oral Health.

Dentists have long said the program falls far short of covering their costs, and complained of bureaucratic issues.

But there seems to be some progress on that front.

Dishler credits the state with dramatically speeding up the process for approving dentists into the program, which he says used to take up to nine months.

Meanwhile, the Pennsylvania Dental Association will soon launch a program called "Take Five" to urge dentists to care for five Medicaid families. In addition to improving access, the effort is intended to dispel a widespread view among dentists that Medicaid patients are unreliable about keeping appointments.

At the recent free dental clinic at the farm show, about 170 dentists volunteered to help.

Yet even among them, many, including Dishler, don't accept Medicaid patients.

Dishler attributes this to shortcomings in the program rather than lack of concern for people on Medicaid. He says many dentists, like him, are involved with free clinics, and also treat a limited number of cash-strapped patients for free rather than deal with Medicaid.

Brice Arndt is a partner at Camp Hill Dentist, which held the free clinic last week.

Although Arndt had treated about two dozen patients for free before lunchtime, he doesn't accept Medicaid, citing bureaucratic problems. It was the third year his practice has offered the free clinic.

Arndt, who plans to run for the seat of state Sen. Pat Vance if she retires, said improvements to government dental benefits will be a top priority.

Meanwhile, many people continue to rely on free clinics, which fall well short of meeting the overall need.

Vern is a Harrisburg resident in his 60s who didn't want his last name used. Waiting his turn at Camp Hill Dentist on Friday, he said dentists have told him the needed work could cost as much as $7,000.

That's far more than he can afford, so he decided he must find a way to obtain partial dentures to get him through the short term. He said his dental situation has greatly impacted his life. "I'm a social person. It affects my smile. It makes me unsociable sometimes," he said.

Dishler, in caring for people who lack dental coverage, has seen painful, heartbreaking situations. "Some of them are unemployable because of their dental situation. If they had a decent mouth and a decent smile, they could get a job," he says.