More Video...

The night a Wichita teen has been waiting has finally arrived.

Northeast Magnet student Holden Hunsinger landed a date with Miss Kansas to the senior prom after popping the unlikely question on social media.

As Hunsinger made his way to meet his highly sought after date on Saturday night, he was dressed in his best with nerves running high.

"I guess the main thing I'm nervous about is pictures," he said. "I don't know why but the pictures have to look good."

When Miss Kansas Hannah Wagner arrived for pictures, a long awaited hug came three months after Hunsinger asked her on twitter. The deal was that he needed to get 250 re-tweets for Wagner to be his date. He got over 500.

"It was exciting at first because it was very unexpected," Wagner said. "It kind of happened literally overnight that I was going to prom with him."

"It felt like it would take a year to come, but I just kept waiting," Hunsinger said. "I had a countdown going and when that countdown hit zero I was like, yes."

After pictures came dinner, then the grand event where his friends were admittedly very jealous.

"That's incredibly lucky, but also charismatic, like who just does their homework and says I want to go to prom with Miss Kansas," said NE Magnet student Craig Barkus.

"I would feel like the luckiest man in the world," said student Ian Englenright. "Get to go out with a beautiful woman and she actually wants to go out with you too so if I were him I'd be one lucky dog."

The pair then took center stage for a dance under dim lights.

"It's like a dream come true for me, it's great," Hunsinger said.

"I'd say I'm the lucky one," Wagner said. "Who gets to go to prom again? I'm very lucky."

Holden says if there's something to learn from asking Miss Kansas to prom it's that others shouldn't let the fear of rejection keep them from going for what they really want.

"If there's even a doubt in your mind if something is possible just go ahead and try it, things might work out like they worked for me, but it's just worth a shot," he said.