Getty Images

It’s not always obvious which words you can trademark and which ones are off limits. We learned recently, for instance, about a company that trademarked “Jesus.” But what about the word “Obamacare?”

A Florida insurance agency is trying to register “Obamacare Enrollment Team.” And an HR outsourcing firm based in Texas wants to trademark “Obamacare calculator,” according to trademark records.

The companies recently heard back from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, which turned down both applications for the same reason: the word is too closely associated with a living person, namely President Barack Obama.

Federal law bars the registering of a mark that “consists of or comprises a name, portrait, or signature identifying a particular living individual except by his written consent.”*

The trademark office in letters to the companies last month said the public would “readily associate” the word Obamacare with Mr. Obama. The agency explained:

President Barack Obama became President of the United States of America on January 20, 2009. For this reason, he is the subject of frequent media attention and his name is often in the public view. The proposed mark would be construed by the public as a reference to Mr. Obama.

The trademark office helpfully attached the Wikipedia entry for Barack Obama as supporting evidence. So unless the companies get the president’s written consent, they’re out of luck.

Marc Reiner, an intellectual-property lawyer at Moss & Kalish Pllc in New York, said he quibbled with the government’s reasoning. The term Obamacare — how people commonly refer to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act — is really identifying a law, rather than a person, he said.

Still he doesn’t see how anybody could have an exclusive trademark on “Obamacare enrollment team” or “Obamacare calculator” because both terms merely describe a service.

* The restriction doesn’t apply to dead people unless they used to be president of the United States.