ORLANDO -- This is my fifth year attending the gathering of the Gerontological Society of America, and the very first impression that struck me about people who study aging for a living is what still seems paramount: These people, as a group, are not only serene and gentle, as you would expect from their field of expertise; they are also remarkably fit.

Among thousands of scholars, you only see one or two sneak outside the convention hall for a smoke. And escalators? They're mostly empty because these folks prefer climbing stairs. You could say that this tiny slice of the global population -- highly educated but also supremely focused on the last third of what they like to call "the life course" -- is capable of doing something very difficult for most of us: imagining their future selves. And they know, from the data, that everything will go that much better for them then if they stay in shape now.

The difference this year is where we are: Disney World. The black-clad, bespectacled academics seem a bit bemused to find themselves in a terrain of grown-ups wearing mouse ears and gobbling funnel cakes. I myself haven't ventured inside a theme park since maybe 20 years ago, when my Florida children got their fill of mass-produced magic.

So my husband and I thought it might be fun to buy some pricey tickets, climb aboard the water taxi, and see what kind of memories floated by us in the sugary air. We had some. But mostly we noticed how the place has changed in two decades, and I can't help thinking about what this means for the future of aging.

The first big Disney difference: The crowds are bigger. Well, not the crowds themselves; the people in them. You can't just stroll around Epcot any more; you have to negotiate your way around barricades of wide bodies, drifting at an incremental pace, and dodge scooters carrying parkgoers who cannot bear their own weight. Obesity statistics are one thing, but the visual evidence you find along the park's pretend streetscapes is inescapable.

This underscored a major theme of the conference: As we get better and better at keeping people alive despite our less-than-stellar lifestyle habits, what does this mean for the kind of "dignity and independence" that we all hope to enjoy in our later years?

"We might want to think about what we’re doing that is so fantastic that we have more chronic illnesses in old age," said Ezekiel Emanuel, the University of Pennsylvania health policy specialist who gave the keynote speech at the conference.

And the other obvious trend we noticed at Disney? The wealth gap. This has been imagineered by something called the FastPass Plus, which allows families who pay a premium to walk onto rides while the lowly masses swelter in correspondingly longer lines. This, too, has interesting implications for our health care system, and our future as an older society.

Among the baby boomers just now beginning to retire, "Health and wealth inequities will be paramount," predicted Jacqui Smith a psychology professor at the University of Michigan. "That wasn’t actually salient in previous cohorts, and that may well be increasing as time goes on. We’ll really only start to see how that plays out in the next 15 to 20 years."

Maybe at that point, I'll return to Disney World and see how we're doing.

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.