Buy Photo Julie Sheppard, is the founder and president of First Healthcare Compliance, a consulting company that assists healthcare providers, billing companies and nursing facilities comply with the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: JENNIFER CORBETT/THE NEWS JOURNAL)Buy Photo

Nurse. Lawyer. Mother of three.

Julie Sheppard has held many titles. Recently, she added one more: small business owner.

The 45-year-old is the founder and president of First Healthcare Compliance (FHC), a tech company based in Greenville that specializes in helping doctors, nursing homes and medical billing companies meet stiffer rules and regulations imposed by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, more commonly known as Obamacare.

“There’s a big gap in what the government expects providers to track and know, and what the providers know they should be tracking,” Sheppard said. “We’re here to make life a little easier for those providers by helping them to make sure they're meeting all those requirements.”

Demand for First Healthcare Compliance’s services is evident by the growth the company has experienced since its 2013 launch.

Sales jumped 300 percent in just the last year and the company has expanded its customer base to hundreds of clients in more than 25 states.

Sheppard said she now expects FHC to double the size of its 15-person workforce by 2017, mostly by beefing up its sales staff.

“Right now, for example, we’re signed up to attend 16 trade shows this year that are just focused on the private practice market,” she said. “My goal is to expand our attention to more long-term care facilities, billing companies and, especially, the small, rural hospitals that seem to need us the most.”

FHC’s main product is a customizable, online platform where customers can track and verify whether their staff is meeting a wide range of regulatory requirements.

That includes mandates designed to protect patient information under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, or HIPAA; safety and facility standards mandated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or OSHA; and rules meant to eliminate fraud, waste and abuse related to Medicare and Medicaid.

“A lot of these things have been around for years, but the audits and enforcement were really stepped up under the Affordable Care Act,” Sheppard said. “The days of getting a paper set of policies and procedures and putting them on the shelf are over.”

In addition to helping healthcare providers avoid fines and mitigate risk, FHC’s platform also helps keep track of other obligations, such as mandatory orientation for new employees, continuing education and professional licensing requirements.

“If you’re a really large group spread out across multiple locations, it gives the compliance officer or the supervisor real-time insight into what’s happening at each location,” Sheppard said. “That’s important because they bear responsibility for all of that.”

The company also provides around-the-clock support for clients with routine questions and sudden emergencies, along with video seminars that can be used to ensure annual training requirements are being met.

Total Care Physicians, a primary care medical group with more than 50 employees at three locations in New Castle County, was among FHC’s first clients in Delaware.

Michael Wolf, the practice’s administrative assistant, said FHC’s platform has proven to be invaluable.

“Before, keeping track of all this information fell to the individual office manager,” he said. “You try to stay compliant, but your main focus is on providing medical care and there a lot of things going on in the day-to-day operations that can make doing both difficult.”

FHC’s platform, he said, does most of the compliance work for the medical group.

“When you log on, you get a list of employees and a breakdown of who meets what requirement, from who can deal directly with patients to who is up to date on their Hepatitis B shots,” he said. “I don’t know of any other tools on the market that are that comprehensive.”

Julie Sheppard, is the founder and president of First Healthcare Compliance, a consulting company that assists healthcare providers, billing companies and nursing facilities comply with the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: JENNIFER CORBETT/THE NEWS JOURNA)

Sheppard said it was her background in both law and nursing that helped her anticipate the need for a product capable of addressing a broad range of compliance demands.

A native of Wheeling, West Virginia, Sheppard earned a nursing degree at Clemson University. It was there that she also met her husband Will, now an ear, nose and throat doctor in Wilmington.

Sheppard worked in the field for about five years while Will attended medical school. Following a stint as a full-time homemaker, she earned a law degree from Widener University Law School in 2006.

Sheppard passed the bar in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, but opted to start her own company rather than secure a position at local law firm.

“My kids were still young and my husband’s practice was still growing,” she said. “I thought this would be something enjoyable to do part time, which is kind of funny because running a company is a 24/7 job.”

Sheppard has received some help in that regard thanks to some key hires.

Dr. Jill Brooks, former radiologist at Jennersville Regional Hospital in West Grove, Pennsylvania, serves as FHC’s senior director of education, while Sheba Vine, a former biomedical engineer and attorney who specialized in employment law, joined the company as the senior director of regulatory compliance.

“We’ve been extremely lucky in building our team,” Sheppard said. “That’s the biggest part of getting your business off the ground. If you don’t have the right people, you aren’t going to go very far.”

FHC’s in-house expertise and ability to address a broad range of compliance demands has helped the company form partnerships with more than a dozen state medical societies, most recently Virginia, Michigan and Mississippi. Those groups refer their members to FHC, which gives those clients a lifetime discount.

Sheppard said she’s been pleased with her startup’s rapid expansion, although not necessarily surprised by its success.

“The regulatory climate in healthcare has changed a lot in recent years and that’s not going to stop anytime soon,” she said. “I think we’ve just scratched the surface in terms of markets and products we can offer.”

While FHC may have high-growth potential, Sheppard said her goal is to build the startup into an attractive acquisition for a larger company.

“Right now, it’s sort of like my fourth child,” she said. “I love it but I’ll have to let it go one day. Then, it will be time to move on to something else.”

Contact business reporter Scott Goss at (302) 324-2281, sgoss@delawareonline.com or on Twitter @ScottGossDel.

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1Mud7Vv