LIKE THE PRESS-TELEGRAM ON FACEBOOK Like Long Beach news? Like us on Facebook!

Two local campuses in the California State University system have seen sharp drops in the number of uninsured students since a campaign was launched last year to encourage students to sign up for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

The percentage of uninsured students at both Cal State Long Beach and Cal State Los Angeles is down to 9 percent, from 15 percent and 19 percent respectively in April 2014, according to a poll conducted by the CSU Health Insurance Education Project.

Earlier, in October 2013, more than one-third of all Cal State L.A. students were uninsured.

Walter Zelman, who is chairman of Cal State L.A.’s Department of Public Health as well as director of the project, said the percentage of uninsured students at the two campuses may be at an all-time low, with Latino students seeing the most dramatic drop among those uninsured, including at Cal State L.A., where their percentage fell from 41 in October 2013 to 10 percent last month.

At Cal State Long Beach, the percentage of uninsured Latino students declined from 19 percent at the end of the first open enrollment period last year to 12 percent at the end of the second open enrollment period in February.

The two-campus polls, conducted Feb. 17-23, also found that 41 percent of Cal State L.A. students and 26 percent of Cal State Long Beach students reported at least one member of their family, not including themselves, had signed up for insurance through Covered California or Medi-Cal.

“I was struck by the significant decrease in the number of Cal State students who were uninsured, and I was particularly struck by the really dramatic reduction in the number of Latino students who are uninsured,” Zelman said

The two schools were part of an outreach conducted by the Health Insurance Education Project, Covered California and Cal State L.A. and funded by a $1.25 million grant from the state health-care exchange to talk about health care coverage on 15 of the CSU system’s 23 campuses.

The result was orientations and faculty gatherings, as well as campus forums and Internet-based outreach. Project coordinators gave nearly 2,700 classroom presentations and conducted more than 400 enrollment events across the 15 universities.

Advertisement

“Sharing the importance of having health insurance and the ways CSULB students can go about getting it has been a campuswide priority from the beginning,” said Mike Uhlenkamp, a spokesman for Cal State Long Beach, in an email.

Zelman said the new findings suggest fewer than 10 percent of CSU students statewide remain uninsured. He said if the second open enrollment period reduced the numbers of uninsured students on other CSU campuses only slightly, then just about 7 percent of CSU students remain uninsured.

An estimated 25 percent systemwide were uninsured before the first open enrollment in fall 2013, Zelman said.

In a seven-campus poll conducted in April and May last year, the following campuses had these percentages of uninsured students: CSULA, 19 percent; CSULB, 15 percent; Cal State Fullerton, 10 percent; San Jose State, 8 percent; Cal State Sacramento, 8 percent; Fresno State, 7 percent; and Cal State Northridge, 7 percent.

Contact Josh Dulaney at 562-714-2150.