Busload of clothes, blankets, pillows, books delivered to school

Sterling Middle School students, from left; Lauryn Luft (eighth grade), Mikayla Farquhar (sixth grade), Angel Thompson (seventh grade) and Ryan Peras (eighth grade), were busy, Thursday, putting together packages to be delivered Friday to children at Milliken Elementary who were affected by the flooding earlier this year. Over the past couple of weeks, SMS students collected a bus load of new clothes, blankets and books to donate to the children. (Callie Jones/Journal-Advocate)

— Just call them Santa's little helpers. Sterling Middle School students collected a bus load of items that they took to Milliken Elementary Friday, to help students who were affected by the devastating flooding back in September.

The idea for Project Milliken came from Assistant Principal Nita Gillham. She contacted Carol Brom, with the local Red Cross, in October, thinking maybe students in the service clubs at SMS could collection donations for someone affected by the flooding in a location outside of Sterling.

“Sometimes we get so caught up in our own problems, that we don't realize there's a big world out there,” Gillham said. “I think we have to always look outside of ourselves at what someone else is going through.”

Sterling Middle School teacher Terrie Serrato, front right, and her life skills class pose for a picture with some of the fleece pillows they gave to children at Milliken Elementary who were affected by the flooding earlier this year. The students purchased pillow kits and made the pillows themselves. (Callie Jones/Journal-Advocate)

She asked Brom to put her in touch with someone from the Red Cross in the Johnstown, Milliken, or Evans, areas that were hard hit by the flood. Brom ended up giving her a contact in Milliken, who started stalking to Gillham about student needs at Milliken Elementary.

Ironically, Milliken's superintendent happens to be a former RE-1 superintendent, Dr. Martin Foster.

After talking to her contact, Gillham started working with the SMS's Positive School Culture Committee to put together a project.

“The teacher's thought it was a great idea and the kids would really get behind it,” she said.

They decided to try to get all the student involved and made it a schoolwide project.

Advertisement

For the project, Milliken provided a list of 25 students, in kindergarten through fifth grade, with their names, ages and grades, and each last hour class at SMS was assigned a student to collect items for.

The children they collected items for are predominately from families that lived in a trailer court that was pretty much washed away. With no rental housing or new homes available in the area, they now have as many as five families living together in some cases.

When Gillham asked about what kind of support the children needed, she found out that at the beginning of school year the school had worked to make sure every child had a pair of socks, a hooded sweatshirt and school supplies, but the students were now in need of some warmer things for winter.

With that in mind, the students at SMS went to work collecting mittens, caps, sweatshirts and sweatpants, as well as fleece blankets and books for children to read. Terrie Serrato's life skills class went as far as to purchase pillow kits and make fleece pillows for every child in Milliken.

The students also raised over $251 in funds, which Gillham used to by Payless gifts cards for each elementary student, so they can buy shoes.

In addition to all those items, some classes have also included notes to the children and a picture of each class is being sent with their gifts.

“It's been a very heart warming experience to see the response of the kids,” Gillham said.

The students have gone above and beyond to help the Milliken students out.

“I thought if it were me, if I was in their shoes I would want some people to help me,” said eighth grader Ryan Peras, about why he wanted to donate.

“My family is all about helping people,” said seventh grader Angel Thompson, adding that her family knows what it's like to need help.

SMS even got help from people outside of the school. Patty Estes, of Aurora, a friend of school counselor Anne Zellers, donated $150 to purchase books in memory of her daughter.

Gillham and Zellers thanked the teachers and staff at SMS for all their support.

As the items were collected teachers and a parent volunteer, Gracie Jimenez, helped wrap and organize them, so that Gillham, Serrato and students Peras, Thompson, Mikayla Farquhar and Trevor Smith can deliver them. Those four students were the lucky one's to have their names drawn out of a hat to go. Gilliam said about 50 percent of the school entered their names, wanting to be one of the one's to help deliver the gifts.

“I'm just so proud of our faculty and students who made this happen,” Zellers said.

Callie Jones: (970) 526-9286; cjones@journal-advocate.com. Follow cjones_JA on Twitter.