A Westerville-based insurance company dropped Ohio Health from its coverage. That decision upset thousands of people who had planned on those doctors being covered.

Several people emailed ABC6/FOX28 saying they bought the insurance plan a few weeks ago and didn't want to lose their current doctors.

In Health officials said they called people who had seen Ohio Health doctors before but some people didn't learn about the change in coverage until it was too late to switch plans.

"I did my due diligence and researched all of the plans to make sure that all of my doctors, my children's doctors, all of our hospitals were currently part of this plan," said Ann, who asked us not use her full name. "We did not make that decision lightly."

Ann is a two-time cancer survivor. She specifically chose to sign up with In Health because her Ohio Health doctors were covered under her plan.

The deadline to sign up for insurance under the Affordable Care Act was January 31st. She was emailed and received a postcard about dropping Ohio Health February 4th.

"I felt that we had been cheated," she said. "I feel that we did our research the way we are supposed to."

In Health said it received official word from its network of providers just two days before the deadline. It started calling people within an hour of finding out.

"It's been a very difficult process," said Barbara Freeman, the chairman for In Health. "(It's been) a very timely, time-consuming process, not necessarily timely process but our decision has been reached."

In Health called only existing customers who had seen Ohio Health doctors.

"The new people, we didn't know who they were going to use," Freeman said. "We did send postcards to each one of them letting them know."

The insurance company said it would make exceptions for people who were already getting treatment from an Ohio Health doctor.

Ann said she is hopeful she'll be one of those exceptions, but she's still not happy.

"We're evaluating our plans based on the hospitals and the doctors that we want to go through and at any time our insurance company can make a decision and change that and we have to deal with it."

In Health said it hopes dropping Ohio Health will only be temporary. It said it was able to get 15 percent of Ohio Health doctors back in network.

Ohio Health said in a statement they were surprised and disappointed to learn it was dropped. It said In Health made the decision all on its own.