Good morning,

Apple Picking

Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway disclosed yesterday that it had made a $1 billion bet on Apple stock earlier this year, boosting the iPhone maker’s market value by more than $18 billion. But to the cottage industry that fervently follows the world’s most famous investor, it just didn’t seem like a move Mr. Buffett would make. It wasn’t, as it turns out. Instead, it was among the largest investments yet by the two former hedge-fund managers that Mr. Buffett brought on board as potential successors to run his company’s $129 billion stock portfolio. Todd Combs and Ted Weschler have shown a willingness to wade into corners of the market that Mr. Buffett won’t touch, including the tech sector. The investment shows the amount of rope Mr. Buffett is willing to give his protégés, as the legendary stock picker prepares Berkshire for a future without him at the helm.

Split Decision

The Supreme Court, unable to resolve the dispute between religious employers and the Obama administration over contraception coverage in the government’s health-care law, sent the matter back to lower courts to seek a compromise between the parties. The move prolongs the four-year fight over whether the groups must offer contraception coverage under the Affordable Care Act and highlights how Justice Antonin Scalia’s death has hobbled the court’s ability to resolve the most contentious cases. The justices returned the contraception issue to the lower courts to review whether recent movement in the parties’ positions had paved the way to possible compromise. Days after the justices first heard arguments in the case in March the court issued an extraordinary order seeking an agreement between the sides, but the April briefs filed in response to the request didn’t appear to put the parties much closer to a compromise.

Club Class

At a star-studded New York event in late April, LendingClub founder and Chief Executive Renaud Laplanche was lauded as a leader in “disruptive innovation.” Two weeks later he was told to resign, as the company’s board dug into the online lender’s sales practices. We chronicle the events leading to Mr. Laplanche’s exit, and the tough questions it raises for the fast-growing fintech industry. Since his resignation was announced last week, roughly half of LendingClub’s stock-market value has been erased, and investors and analysts say they have grown more cautious about the entire online-lending sector, which had been seen as a potential threat to established banks. Yesterday, LendingClub disclosed in a securities filing that it received a grand-jury subpoena from the Justice Department on May 9, the day the company announced Mr. Laplanche’s departure. In the filing, LendingClub said its internal review found the company had “control deficiencies.”

Run the World

Women and girls, not long ago an afterthought in distance running, now own it. They made up 57% of the 17 million U.S. race finishers in 2015. While many women run to win prize money or medals, millions more have taken to treadmills, sidewalks and running trails to achieve personal bests, socialize and improve overall health. Women have flocked to running more than other endurance sports and a surge in charitable organizations forming training groups and raising money through road races has largely been driven by women. Moms Run This Town, a training and social group, now has about 700 chapters, most of them in the U.S. One result of the rise of women’s running: recent years have brought an avalanche of apparel, from boutique designers to major manufacturers such as Under Armour and Adidas.

Today’s Video Centuries Apart ENLARGE Michael Jackson fans are bringing new fame to a forgotten 16th-century composer.

Number of the Day 77 The number of North American energy companies that have declared bankruptcy since the start of 2015. SandRidge Energy, an early player in the American shale boom and onetime Wall Street darling, became the latest yesterday in what is becoming the largest wave of corporate restructurings since the financial crisis.

Quote of the Day ‘I don’t want him to tone it down. I think it’s working very well…He will tone it down once he’s in the White House.’ —Carla D’Addesi, 44, a radio talk-show host and mother of three in Berks County, Penn., on supporting Donald Trump. For Mr. Trump to win industrial states like Pennsylvania, he will need to appeal to his political base without turning off the Republican professional class in adjacent cities and urban suburbs.

Today’s Question Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on Berkshire Hathaway’s Apple disclosure? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—Compiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response Responding to yesterday’s question on the drop in retirement-plan fees, Sandi Berman of Texas wrote: “It is past time for employers to look into the fees their employees are being charged. Most of us do not even know where or how to look for the fees and we are limited by our employer to which funds we can utilize. We work hard and struggle to save, only to lose more than necessary to line the pockets of greedy fund managers.” William E. Dove of Alabama shared: “To the extent that an IRA is invested in cash or other near risk-free assets, managers should receive no fee. There should be no investment adviser fee until the investor receives a 5% return on so-called risk asset investments. Returns in excess of 5% on so-called risk asset investments should be shared 80%/20% between the investor/adviser.” And Rich Irwin of Ohio commented: “I think that lowering fees will benefit retirees and, in the long run, the companies that pay the fees and the companies that administer the retirement plans by forcing them to be more effective in their administration.”

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.