What makes us eat healthfully, or stick to an exercise regimen?

For most of us, it's because we want to look good to others, or maybe think more highly of ourselves — and often this turns out to be a feeble, flickering desire, too easily losing out to the comfy couch, late-night TV and a box of jelly doughnuts.

But what if you had a family history of Alzheimer's disease — or had already noticed in yourself some signs of cognitive impairment — and you learned that sprucing up your lifestyle habits could lessen your chances of suffering from the ravages of dementia?

Fear of losing your mind, it turns out, can be a powerful incentive to take care of your body.

A year ago I wrote about a local venture called Sci-Brain, a partnership between the nonprofit Roskamp Institute and Youthful Aging Home Health. The idea was to evaluate people in terms of their "Brain Reserve Index," or BRI.

The BRI, derived from an algorithm developed by Roskamp researchers, takes into account a person's fitness, diet, mental activity and medical history and calculates his or her risk for diminished capacity over the next decade.

After a month-long evaluation, clients of the program are given the option to sign up for personal coaching in clinically proven methods — exercise, a Mediterranean diet, socializing and mind-challenging activities — to lower their risk for cognitive loss.

Out of 33 clients so far, 20 have opted to stick with the program. And for the 30 percent who have completed the evaluation, five-month coaching period and re-testing, the results are striking: an average improvement of 50 percent in their personal BRI score (on a scale of zero to 200); and an average improvement of 15 percent in performance on memory tests.

"We did not expect that in a six-month period we would see any type of memory improvement," said Stefan Crynen, chief scientific officer for Sci-Brain, who analyzes the data. Crynen attributes the success so far to a "cascading effect" of lifestyle and medical interventions that delivered such benefits as lower cholesterol levels, better diabetes management and "significant weight reductions" for clients aged 49 to 75.

The numbers, while statistically significant, are small and preliminary, said Roskamp Institute director Mike Mullan.

"The ultimate test will come five years from now," he said, "when we look at conversion rates to Alzheimer's from mild cognitive impairment, or to MCI from normal. We'll need a much larger database."

But he said the results feel like a validation for researchers at the institute, more used to watching brain reserves decline in the people they work with every day.

"What the data show is you can change people's risk profiles," Mullan said, "and we know these things are associated with Alzheimer's disease.

"We all know we're supposed to eat right and exercise and socialize," he added. "We know we should, but we just don't. What this shows is that you can actually modify people's behavior to get their associated risk lower."

Sci-Brain co-founder Nicci Kobritz, president of Youthful Aging, said it is clear that "memory is the driver" motivating clients to trade cookies for kale.

"When they first get their BRI scores," she said, "clients are concerned that we're giving them a memory diagnosis." But after education about how cognitive reserve can fend off dementia symptoms, "as they're moving through the coaching sessions, feeling physically better, and mentally better, it drives ongoing compliance."

Kobritz is working to expand the program, which will enlarge the research database, by seeking partnerships with health care providers. One national contract, she said, has just been signed.

Mullan said these early results underscore the power in helping people see how brain health involves every aspect of life.

"We're giving them real tools they can measure their progress with," he said. "And I think it's about the integrated program; it's about tackling everything. That's what the algorithm is built on. It's not one thing. Nothing in human medicine is all one thing."