When a magnitude 5.2 earthquake hit just before 10 p.m. Saturday, June 28, a lot of you felt it throughout Southern Arizona, and you let us know it via email and Facebook.

Here's some of the descriptions you sent us. Thanks for contacting us!

You can see more comments on this Facebook post.

Sonny Kaye: "There was a slight sound and small shake just before the big rumble. Felt house shake considerably. Our chairs shook. Shutters on room rattled. There was a rumbling sound like thunder. We live in Sun City, Oro Valley in Rancho Vistoso."

Donna Balsiger: "Earthquake felt on Patton St in St. David, Arizona. Floor in house shaking at 3 on scale of 1-10. Chair moved. Nothing fell off tables or bookshelves."

Alex G: "My house in Douglas shook. Heard lots of sirens."

R. Walker: "My Aunt ... was sitting on her bed waiting for Channel 13 Newscast, her bed started shaking and she thought someone was under her bed. I came over and looked under the bed just to assure her there was no one in her room."

Tari Mills: "Felt the earthquake here in Oro Valley. Whole house shook. No damage. Freaky!"

Dawn Savageau (Corona de Tucson): "I was woken up at about 1005 from a sound sleep with my bed violently shaking along with my glass shower doors.

Ivonne Garcia: "I felt it here at my home in Rio Rico Az. Been in earthquake before in Mexico city so it was unmistakably sensation of the earth moving."

Barbara Lace: "I felt it very distinctly here in Bisbee, and I couldn't figure out what it was...and I'm from San Francisco!"

Donna Heath: "Our mobile home shook and alarmed our dogs. But was mild, here at Bopp and Kinney."

Tammy Williams: "We are in Marana and felt the earthquake pretty well. Off Tangerine and Gladden Farms. Lasted only 5-10 seconds. We are from California and it felt like we were back there. LOL."

Susan Snasdell: "I live in Marana near the Twin Peaks exit off I-10 and felt a slight tremor around 10 p.m. My dining room chandelier swayed and heard my glasses clinking!"

Nichole Philips: "I felt the tremors here in Willcox, AZ. No damage thank God."

Ron K. Miller: "The entire house shook for about 5 seconds. Freaky Deaky, Definite earthquake. I've lived in Tucson since 1985 and never felt one before."

Christina Ramirez: "I live at Speedway and Pantano, house shook for 2-3 seconds. My husband at Northwest Hospital said the whole building shook."

Donna Collister: "Walls were creaking, water in fish tank was sloshing..."

Copyright 2014 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.