The Kalamazoo Gazette has long been publishing editorials, using the platform to foster community conversation on a wide range of issues.

In recent years, the Gazette's editorial board has given our take on everything from the demolition and redevelopment of Western Michigan University's East Campus to the local ramifications of the Affordable Care Act, and many points in between.

As the Kalamazoo region continues to grow and change, there will be no shortage of issues to delve into in the coming months, but we want your help in shaping the conversation.

We want to know what local issues are important to you.

We know there are challenges and promises ahead for Kalamazoo and surrounding areas that have the potential to be game-changers for our Southwest Michigan communities, and many are already on our radar.

City administration, for one, took steps in 2014 to address the city's $188 million unfunded health care liability, including issuing $90 million in retiree health care bonds, but the work on legacy cost reduction is far from finished.

Over in the Edison neighborhood, Kalamazoo Valley Community College's Healthy Living Campus will take shape this year and could have a major impact on the food climate in Kalamazoo and on revitalization of the area.

City elections will be held this year in Portage and Kalamazoo, which will elect its mayor in a separate vote for the first time in city history.

Whether it's these topics or others - environmental cleanup at the Allied Paper site, successes or challenges of the Kalamazoo Promise or the region's political landscape -- we want to know what matters most to you.

So tell us: What topics -- large or small -- would you like to see us keep an eye on as an editorial board in 2015?

You can leave your thoughts in the comments below, or email us at kzletters@mlive.com.

Your voice is important to us and to this community, and we are listening.

This is an editorial from the Kalamazoo Gazette. For more Kalamazoo Gazette opinion pieces and letters visit http://www.mlive.com/opinion/kalamazoo/.