Buy Photo In Point Pleasant Beach, a stuffed monkey waves goodbye to the blizzard that wasn’t. (Photo: Tom Spader/Staff photographer)Buy Photo

Mike Gasior looked outside his Marlboro home Tuesday morning and saw a giant makeshift plow obliterating six inches of snow on the street.

"It was this rig of an 18-wheeler with a cinderblock on the back to weigh it down," he said with a laugh.

That a vehicle fit for Alaska's tundra ended up roaming a Monmouth County suburb neatly summarized the Blizzard That Wasn't.

"They missed it big-time," Gasior said of forecasters who warned of accumulation topping two feet. "I would love to have a job like that, get paid to be wrong."

In the end, this winter storm left the shore with anywhere from 2-10 inches and a whole lot of reckoning.

"Pumping this up a day-and-a-half out was pretty ridiculous," Keyport resident Nicole Henn said. "The worst part about this is the next time we're expecting something blizzard-like, people aren't going to do anything about it. They're going to go about business as normal. This will totally desensitize us to blizzards."

Her husband, George Henn, said he "could not remember the last time they were off this much."

"I was buying in," he said. "This shows it's still not foolproof."

That may be the storm's lasting impression. Gasior compared meteorologists to the boy who cried wolf.

"People are not going to believe them anymore," he said. "They're going to be like, 'This is hype.' Look at all the doom and gloom with Hurricane Irene, and when Sandy came (a year later), people weren't prepared."

As Irene came up the East Coast in August of 2011, Gov. Christie declared a state of emergency and famously warned New Jerseyans to "get the hell off the beach." Irene caused significant damage but did not live up to apocalyptic predictions.

RELATED: National Weather Service: 'Deepest Apologies'

EDITORIAL: The blizzard was a fizzard

Juno induced similar hysteria, from the long lines for food and gas to the short-lived statewide travel ban.

"I was disappointed after the forecast called for a blizzard," said Steve Lang, assistant manager at the Wawa on Drum Point Road in Brick. "I'm from the Canadian border and I like snow, I'm used to it."

J.T. Yuschak, who had been out since midnight to clear snow with a front-end loader from business parking lots in Neptune City, had braced for three feet.

"It's still a lot snow that needs to be pushed around and no place to put it," he said. "We still have over a foot here and the drifts make it so much worse."

The key to avoiding hysteria is knowing where to look. Beth Major, who lives in Tinton Falls and whose husband Scott works outdoors, was not the least bit surprised after following Freehold-based meteorologist Steven DiMartino's website nynjpaweather.com.

"We knew it was going to be either three feet or this," Major said. "All along he said it was a matter of whether the storm shifted 30-50 miles over a couple of hours. People don't understand the variables that go into this. They see this color band that says 20 inches or more and they run out to buy bread, eggs and milk."

No one's going to run out of food now. Patience is another story.

"They got it wrong, but I'd rather be safe than sorry," said Manalapan resident Brad Butash. "What I'm not OK with is how in today's social media, everyone has to bash someone's mistake. Whether it's a forecaster or a player in a game, they didn't try to screw up."

Speaking of games, Gasior has an interesting theory.

"Maybe the New England Patriots had something to do with it," he said. "They deflated our snowfall totals."

Create your free online surveys with Create your free online surveys with SurveyMonkey , the world's leading questionnaire tool.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Cdyt2V