Binh Rybacki of Loveland encountered 334 children in need when she was was in Vietnam with her nonprofit Children of Peace International earlier this year. During June, Mike Severance, owner of Cactus Grille, is donating a portion of its proceeds to help feed these children. ( Binh Rybacki / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

Want to learn more Visit www.childrenofpeace.org or www.facebook.com/childrenofpeaceinternational.

When Binh Rybacki of Loveland "accidentally" encountered 334 children in Vietnam surviving on one meal a day, she wanted to pay for their meals for one year.

Rybacki, founder and executive director of Children of Peace International, also happened to be in Loveland for longer than a month to address a medical issue, so a business owner wanting to do a fundraiser for her humanitarian nonprofit organization for years figured now was the time. Rybacki spends half the year in Vietnam and half in the States, often a month at a time.

Mike Severance, owner of Cactus Grille, is donating a portion of the proceeds from his restaurant starting Thursday, June 11, through the end of the month with the aim to raise at least $8,350. That's enough to pay for 250 nutritionally balanced meals during the school year for the children at a cost of 10 cents per meal.

"I've known Binh for some 20 years and have seen how hard and tirelessly she works for the kids over there," said Severance, who plans to do the fundraiser every year. "If there's any way I can help her to help those kids, that's what I'm going to do."

COPI's Founding

Advertisement

Rybacki founded COPI in 1993 — it became a nonprofit in 1996 — after visiting her home country of Vietnam, which she fled in 1975 with her family before Saigon fell to communist troops. While there, Rybacki encountered children working the streets as peddlers, beggars and prostitutes and, to help a few of them, built an orphanage for 27 children. Through COPI, she built four more since, but now provides food for the orphanages from the second harvest and scholarships for students there, on the streets and from economically-disadvantaged families.

Building the orphanages didn't help solve the problem of getting children into safety, because there still were children not going to school living near the facilities, Rybacki said.

"We realized a lot of these children are not in school; they are children of the working poor. Their parents couldn't afford school," Rybacki said. "We couldn't just care for homeless and orphaned kids; we have to care for any kids that need help."

To get the children to school, COPI pays for their school fees and uniforms, which cost $45 a year for students in grades K-12. The fee for college students is $250 a year — Rybacki also shops for the college students at thrift stores back at home to bring clothing with her on each trip.

"Her dedication is unparalleled," said Michael Kirchner, a COPI board member and a West Stockbridge, Mass., resident, about Rybacki. "She's met a lot of obstacles. The government hasn't always been cooperative, but she's managed to establish a good presence in Vietnam."

COPI, which receives financial support from service clubs and donations, provides an average of 200 scholarships a year over and supports 18 orphanages and schools.

Since its founding, the organization, operating with volunteers in the United States and four paid staff members in Vietnam, has helped 7,821 orphans, street children and other children through shelter, food, health care and schooling. It organizes medical missions and assists survivors of human trafficking and domestic violence through education and rehabilitation programs.

The Medical Team

The medical team, consisting of 35 members, half Vietnamese and half from the United States, visits different areas of the country twice a year to set up temporary clinics. The team conducts a needs assessment of issues particular to an area, providing any needed testing and treatment escorts to Saigon or Hanoi for more significant problems.

COPI, which sends the team on a mission every March and July, has provided 35 missions since 1997.

During the latest trip at the end of March, Rybacki and her missionary team planned to set up a clinic in a school in Nam Dinh, but the principal blocked COPI's efforts. The new principal of the school called the police to arrest Rybacki, but the mayor protected her and told her about 334 children in Lao Cai needing help in a remote valley.

On that day, the team could help 100 of the children by providing clothing and medical treatment. Rybacki plans to return during the July mission to visit with the remaining children, she said.

What bothered Rybacki, she said, was many of the children only eat one meal a day while at school and have to walk there and back.

The meal typically is soup made from greens from the parents' yards, ramen noodles and leftover fish, she said.

"What I want is real soup with greens and protein," Rybacki said.

Rybacki, after 40 years of living in Loveland, is grateful to have a neighbor supporting the organization, she said. She hasn't had the time to seek out corporate sponsors, she said.

"I just want this vicious cycle broken. No more," Rybacki said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm