Topics: From the Wires, News

TUCSON, Ariz. (AP) — Down the street from a row of trendy restaurants and boutiques, government workers scurry to work past dozens of wooden sleeping pods and tents. The growing camp in a Tucson city park near the highway exit that leads to a revitalized downtown is the scene of a pitched battle between city officials concerned with nurturing its core and protesters who say the city has unfairly criminalized homelessness.

The protesters at Veinte de Agosto Park say the growing encampment on a small, one-acre green space is a way to combat city regulations they believe unfairly target the homeless. For city officials and business owners, it’s an eyesore that unfairly takes space from pedestrians and chases away visitors and tourists and their dollars.

City officials point to the human and dog excrement left behind on city sidewalks. They say the wooden pods, which are big enough only to fit two people, restrict walking space. And on Thursday, police conducted a sting that resulted in the arrest of six camp members, including its leader Jon McLane, who was charged with possession of marijuana, sale of marijuana and possession of drug paraphernalia. Tucson police said they’d received several complaints about drugs sales at the park over the last several weeks.

The battle between the campers, a spinoff of the Occupy movement that sought social and economic equality, and government officials is also being played out in the courts. An ongoing lawsuit filed in 2012 accuses the city of targeting homeless people. A federal judge recently issued a temporary injunction against a city rule that allowed homeless people to sleep on sidewalks only if they had no more than three belongings with them.

“The District Court’s order has converted the sidewalk into a 1,260 square-foot property storage facility, and if applied city-wide would effectively convert any sidewalk within the city of Tucson wider than five feet into a personal property storage facility,” city attorney Mike Rankin wrote in an appeal to the injunction in the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. The city is also seeking Bury’s clarification and amendment to his injunction and will go before the judge on March 10.

After first trying to legislate the camp away with the three possessions rule, the city now will try to entice the campers to move.

The city council on Tuesday approved a plan to move the protesters to a designated site and to create a city ordinance that would essentially ban camping in public spaces, but details have not been hashed out.

Councilmember Regina Romero said at a meeting that she supports the protesters’ First Amendment rights and sympathizes with their plight, having also struggled with homelessness in her youth.