MENDON, Utah (AP) - Plastic Barbie Jeeps aren’t just for kids anymore.

A new northern Utah group recently held its first “Extreme Barbie Jeep Racing” event, with grown men and women squeezing on the tiny jeeps as they hurl down a steep hill, The Herald Journal newspaper in Logan reports (http://bit.ly/1IJIwdX ).

The motors and chassis are removed from the Jeeps to keep anything from slowing the rough ride, so the trip down the steep hill starts with a push. From there, the little plastic cars bump, thump and collide as they descend. The riders try their best to stay on board, hands on the tiny steering wheel and legs hanging over the sides or folded in the little seats.

At stake were donated prizes and “redneck braggin’ rights,” organizer Lolli Bunce said.

The race is reserved for people over the age of 18, and helmets are required for good reason: One particularly gnarly wreck left a man with a broken collarbone. But participant Ron Anderson said he wasn’t too concerned about the injury and is already gearing up for next year.

“I give it to the racers,” Bunce said. “It’s a risky event.”

The event took place on private land in Mendon, about 80 miles north of Salt Lake City. It was a fundraiser for Rocky Mountain Rebels, a 4x4 club of off-road enthusiasts that has grown to include about 17 families since it was started in April.

Bunce, who is the club’s president, said she wants to put on affordable, family-friendly events and support efforts to keep public lands accessible.

She got the idea for Barbie Jeep racing from videos of events put on by the motorsports production company Busted Knuckle Films. With its blessing, the Utah group planned its event and advertised with thousands of fliers, signs posted all over town and postings on social media.

They also secured the services of an announcer, a spare Jeep that was auctioned off to a prospective racer and prizes for top Barbie racers. A special prize went to the winner of “The Bash for the Last,” a last-ditch all-in race. Fittingly, the Racer’s Choice crown for most gnarly wreck went to Anderson and his broken collarbone.

The turnout was higher than expected, and Bunce said she’s hoping to make the race an annual tradition.

“People have already been begging us to bring this event back next year,” she said.

___

Information from: The Herald Journal, http://www.hjnews.com