“In West Africa, Ebola is now an epidemic the likes of which we have never seen before,” President Barack Obama said Tuesday after visiting the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention headquarters in Atlanta, where he was briefed on West Africa’s Ebola situation. “Hospitals, clinics and the few treatment centers that do exist have been completely overwhelmed. An already very weak public health system is near collapse in these countries, patients are being turned away and people are literally dying in the streets.”

Earlier Tuesday, the Obama administration announced a plan described by the president as “the largest international response in the history of the CDC.” On the agenda for the American Ebola response is the construction of more than a dozen new treatment facilities and a Department of Defense hospital that will specifically cater to health care workers particularly susceptible to Ebola infection, according to Reuters and a White House statement.

More than 240 aid workers had been infected by Ebola as of Aug. 25, according to the World Health Organization, and roughly half had died from the disease. More aid workers, including two of the four known American Ebola patients, have since tested positive for Ebola.

[READ: U.S. Military Combats Ebola With 3,000 Troops]



"If the outbreak is not stopped now, we could be looking at hundreds of thousands of people infected, with profound political and economic and security implications for all of us,” Obama said. “This is an epidemic that is not just a threat to regional security. It’s a potential threat to global security if these countries break down, if their economies break down, if people panic. That has profound effects on all of us, even if we are not directly contracting the disease.”

The four American Ebola patients, all aid staff or doctors working in Liberia, were flown out of West Africa after their diagnoses to receive treatment in the U.S. A West African facility designed specifically to treat vulnerable doctors, nurses and aid workers could provide them with higher-quality treatment more quickly – and potentially without a costly and stressful extradition.

“For us, that could be a game-changer in a positive way,” says George Salloum, vice president of finance and operations for SIM USA, a humanitarian aid group that has played a major role in Ebola containment and treatment efforts in West Africa.