Carlos Gomez accepts his 2013 Gold Glove award Saturday. Credit: Associated Press

INSIDE PITCH

PLAYER OF THE GAME

Brewers catcher Jonathan Lucroy participated in a remarkable double play to end the top of the eighth and delivered the decisive run in the bottom of the inning with an RBI single off Pirates reliever Mark Melancon, one of the top setup men in the league.

TURNING POINT

With the score tied, 2-2, in the eighth, the Pirates had runners on the corners with one out when Andrew McCutchen fouled out to Lucroy. Travis Snider broke off first base for second and Lucroy threw down to shortstop Jean Segura. Speedy Starling Marte tried to go home on the play, but Segura threw to reliever Jim Henderson, who covered the plate and tagged out Marte.

BEHIND THE BOX SCORE

■ Though the Brewers were facing a right-hander (Edinson Volquez) after two consecutive left-handers, manager Ron Roenicke started right-handed hitting Mark Reynolds at first base for the fifth consecutive game. Roenicke wants to get lefty-hitting Lyle Overbay some playing time — and indicated he would start him Sunday — but stayed with the hot bat of Reynolds (.630 slugging percentage entering the game).

"You do (want to stay with a hot hitter) but you don't want to sit a guy so long that he loses something also," Roenicke said.

■ Centerfielder Carlos Gomez received his 2013 Gold Glove Award before the game. Gomez wasn't born when a Brewer last won a Gold Glove — shortstop Robin Yount in 1982. He then led off the bottom of the first with a home run to center field, his fourth of the season. He has driven in a run in four consecutive games.

■ The Brewers wore their Retro Friday uniforms for a second consecutive game. The starting pitcher usually makes the call on the evening's attire and Yovani Gallardo decided to stay with the retro look.

STATITUDES

■ Gallardo's season-opening streak of 142/3 scoreless innings was fifth-best in Brewers history. Jim Slaton set the record with 20 scoreless frames to start his 1976 season. The Pirates scored twice in the third inning to end Gallardo's streak.

■ Reliever Tyler Thornburg has retired 14 consecutive hitters over his last four outings.

■ Brewers closer Francisco Rodriguez converted his 308th career save. He needs two more to tie Hall of Famer Goose Gossage for 20th on the all-time list.

RECORD

THIS YEAR: 9-2

LAST YEAR: 3-8

HOME: 3-2 (0-0 roof open; 3-2 roof closed)

ROAD: 6-0

ATTENDANCE

SATURDAY: 42,828

TO DATE: 159,203(31,841 avg.)

2013: 151,038 (30,208 avg.)

ON DECK

TEAMS: Brewers vs. Pittsburgh Pirates (6-5).

WHEN: 1:10 p.m. Sunday.

WHERE: Miller Park.

BROADCASTS: TV — FS Wisconsin. Radio — AM-620.

PROBABLE PITCHERS: Milwaukee RHP Kyle Lohse (1-1, 4.50) vs. Pittsburgh RHP Charlie Morton (0-0, 3.75).

Tom Haudricourt

IN THE MINORS

NASHVILLE (AAA): Ariel Pena struck out eight in four innings as the Sounds stopped the Omaha Storm Chasers, 5-2.

HUNTSVILLE (AA): Mitch Haniger's solo shot in the bottom of the ninth tied it, but the Pensacola Blue Wahoos got a run in the 10th to send the Stars to a 2-1 loss.

WISCONSIN (A): Clint Coulter cracked a grand slam and Preston Gainey struck out eight in six innings during a 6-4 win over the South Bend Silver Hawks.