Nelson Mandela isn't easily summarized, but we aren't good with complexity. So it's a safe bet that in death, he'll be simplified and sanitized, made safe and cuddly and acceptable. In life, he embodied his Xhosa name "Rolilahla," which means "trouble maker," but now that will soon be forgotten - if it isn't already.

Just as Martin Luther King Jr. has been largely recast as a wistful dreamer who just wanted black people and white people to get along nicely, Mandela already seems to be getting summed up by the end of the opening statement he made in his 1964 trial for sabotage.

President Barack Obama began his heartfelt remarks about Mandela's death Thursday with that excerpt: "I have fought against white domination, and I have fought against black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all persons live together in harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live for and achieve. But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die."

This is where it would help to read the entirety of Mandela's lengthy opening statement. He does say that he and his group, the African National Congress, had opposed the idea of black domination, but they were all fighting the reality of white domination. Taking that quote out of its context suggests that everybody in South Africa was at least a little bit wrong and that Mandela was some kind of raceless referee. But let us be clear: The problem with apartheid was white supremacy. He took up arms against that.

Newt Gingrich, conservative talking head and former Republican Speaker of the House, lambasted fellow conservatives who have the gall to criticize Mandela's decision to fight an openly murderous apartheid regime with force. He demands that they say what they'd have done under those circumstances.

Another famous conservative, Bill O'Reilly, talked with former Republican presidential candidate Rick Santorum on the day of Mandela's death. They oversimplified him in another way. O'Reilly said, "He was a communist. All right? But he was a great man. What he did for his people was stunning -- the sacrifices that he made.... He was a great man. But he was a communist."

Mandela addressed that allegation at his trial. His cooperation with communists, he said, didn't make him one. Just like the United States' alliance with Stalin against Hitler didn't make us red.

In agreeing with O'Reilly, Santorum gave Mandela a pass for his alleged communism because he was fighting such a great injustice. The big injustice today, Santorum said, is Obamacare.

I thought it took time for the establishment to use a freedom fighter's legacy against the people he would have supported. But Santorum got to work before Mandela's body was cold.

Read the opening statement from Mandela's trial and use the comments section to share your thoughts about the complexities of positions and how you think he'll be remembered.



Jarvis DeBerry can be reached at jdeberry@nola.com. Follow him at twitter.com/jarvisdeberry.