Judicial elections are not new, though they have grown in intensity. California voters, embroiled in a debate about capital punishment, ended the tenures of three State Supreme Court justices in 1986. In Iowa, voters chose in 2010 to remove three justices who were part of a ruling that legalized same-sex marriage in the state. But conservatives increasingly see judicial races as a way they can have a substantial impact on public policy with a relatively modest financial investment.

Unlike the Iowa justices, the Tennessee jurists have actively raised money and campaigned across the state to keep their jobs, even if the justices find themselves uncomfortable with the politics involved.

When Justice Clark came to raise money at her former law firm here in Franklin, a Nashville suburb where her family has lived for generations, her voice broke not long after she began to speak.

“People who are here are the people who know the best and the worst about me,” she said. “So you know what’s true, and you know what’s not.”

In Tennessee, governors appoint Supreme Court justices with the assistance of a nominating commission. Those justices are subject to retention elections soon after they join the court, as well as public votes at the end of every eight-year term. Contests seldom include active campaigning, and only once in Tennessee since 1994, when the system was expanded to apply to the Supreme Court, have voters forced a justice from the bench.

Photo

Critics of the three justices accuse them of limiting the rights of crime victims and antagonizing business.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Some of the complaints are linked to the court’s decision in 2006 to appoint Robert E. Cooper Jr., a Democrat, as state attorney general. In Tennessee, the court appoints the attorney general, who then serves for eight years. Critics of the justices argue that because the court selected Mr. Cooper, it bears some responsibility for his decisions, like one not to join a lawsuit challenging the federal health law. But the justices’ supporters note that the court has not issued an opinion in a case focused on the Affordable Care Act.

Justice Clark said the attacks on the justices rested on stretches in logic, as well as opinions that have been stripped of context. But she said she recognized the challenge of connecting with voters who know little about the court.

“The issues we talk about are not made-for-media issues,” she said after campaigning in Smithville, the seat of rural DeKalb County. “They are not 30-second sound-bite issues. They require a lot of discussions, sometimes arcane discussions.”

Mr. Ramsey’s office did not respond to interview requests, but one leading outside group defended its decision to participate in the election here.

Matt Walter, the president of the Republican State Leadership Committee, which has spent at least $196,000 to oppose the justices, said: “This is an issue that has percolated out of Tennessee and will be resolved by Tennessee. Our goal is simply to provide as much information as we possibly can.”

In addition to television ads, direct-mail pieces have flooded Tennessee. One paid for by Mr. Walter’s group, which argued that the justices “are too liberal and do not share our Tennessee values,” landed recently in the Nashville mailbox of Lew Conner, a veteran donor to Republican campaigns in Tennessee who once sat on the State Court of Appeals. Mr. Conner said the literature had an effect that was the opposite of what was intended.

“I kind of look at it like they’re carpetbaggers,” Mr. Conner said of the outside groups opposing the sitting justices. “Why do they have to come in and tell us in Tennessee how to elect our judiciary?”

He added, “It’s the harbinger of perhaps the new American politics: being able to say and do anything and get away with it if you have the Yankee dollar, the almighty Yankee dollar.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Many lawyers supporting the justices have argued that the Republicans who are supporting an ouster are undermining Tennessee’s selection process for judicial posts.

But critics like Ms. Kaestner say the challenges are consistent with the law.

“Generally, a retention election is not an election; it’s a coronation,” she said. “I think these justices were assuming they were going to be coronated, and they allowed their partisanship to be exposed. And now they’re going to be held accountable to it in a very constitutional way.”

In Tennessee, conservatives see an opportunity to shift the balance of power on Tennessee’s five-member court. By early September, two justices appointed by Gov. Bill Haslam, a Republican, will be on the Supreme Court. If the critics of the justices on the August ballot can remove just one, Mr. Haslam, who has not campaigned against the jurists, will have an opportunity to name a third person to the Supreme Court bench.

“Success on Election Day is winning one because that flips the complexion of the court,” Mr. Walter said.