By Erica Goode

Their websites show peaceful scenes — young women relaxing by the ocean or caring for horses in emerald pastures — and boast of their chefs and other amenities.

One center sends out invitations to a reception with cocktails and hors d'oeuvres. Another offers doctors and therapists all-expense-paid trips to visit and experience their offerings, including yoga classes.

The marketing efforts by these for-profit residential care centers are aimed at patients with eating disorders and the clinicians who treat them. The programs have proliferated in recent years, with some companies expanding across the country.

The rapid growth of the industry — there are more than 75 centers, compared with 22 a decade ago — has been propelled by the Affordable Care Act and other health insurance laws that have increased coverage for mental disorders, as well as by investments from private equity firms.

The residential programs, their directors say, fill a dire need, serving patients from areas where no adequate treatment is available.

“Only 15 to 30 percent of people have access to specialized care for eating disorders, which means there are a lot of people out there who have zippo,” said Doug Bunnell, the chief clinical officer for Monte Nido, a program that began in Malibu, California, and now operates centers in five states.

But the advertising and the profusion of centers, which typically cost $1,000 a day, is raising concerns among some eating disorders experts. In the companies’ rush to expand, they argue, quality of treatment may be sacrificed for profit. And they question whether the spalike atmosphere of some programs is so comfortable that it fosters dependency.

“For the most part, the people who are running and working in these programs believe they’re doing the right thing,” said Dr. Angela Guarda, the director of the eating disorders program at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore. “But it’s a slippery slope. Money can cloud your view.”

The eating disorders world

Many specialists agree that some patients require the supervision of residential programs and benefit from the treatment. But studies showing the programs’ effectiveness are scant, Guarda and other experts said.

The quality and form of treatment varies widely, and in some cases includes approaches — equine therapy or “faith-based” treatment — with little or no scientific evidence behind them. Some programs have full-time psychiatrists and medical doctors on staff, but others lack the expertise to handle emergencies or treat coexisting medical or psychiatric problems.

The perks offered to clinicians who might refer patients include free trips, restaurant meals, educational seminars and small gifts like pens and key chains. Critics liken them to pharmaceutical industry tactics that led to policies requiring financial disclosure, though on a smaller scale.

In an article in the journal Psychiatric Services, Dr. Evelyn Attia, director of the eating disorders program at Columbia University Medical Center, called for more transparency, and urged clinicians to be mindful of efforts to influence their recommended treatment.

“The effect of these clinician inducements, which are aimed at building a program’s patient referral base, may not be fully recognized by the professionals they target,” wrote Attia and her colleagues.

Industry representatives said the trips and seminars offered to clinicians were primarily educational.

“I don’t think anyone in the eating disorders world is giving out swimming pools and trips to Europe and things like that,” Bunnell said.

Jillian Lampert, president of the Residential Eating Disorders Consortium, a group that represents about 85 percent of the centers, said, “Health care’s always been a business.” If there are concerns, she said, “we are incredibly open to having those conversations.”

A deadly mental illness

Eating disorders are among the most difficult mental illnesses to treat.

Anorexia, in particular, has stymied many of psychiatry’s best efforts. The illness has the highest mortality rate of any mental disorder, with patients dying from starvation or suicide. The most severely ill patients require hospital treatment just to stay alive.

But even after being stabilized, many patients need time to regain weight and learn new behavior. The average length of stay in residential centers ranges is 83 days.

In the past, few insurers were willing to pay for 24-hour care after a patient was out of immediate danger. But the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act in 2008 and the Affordable Care Act two years later mandated equal treatment.

Wall Street investors saw profits in providing treatment for eating disorders, alcoholism and drug abuse.

“The number of covered lives is growing faster than the availability of services to treat them, creating compelling investment opportunities,” the accounting and consulting firm BDO noted last year.

Larger centers have acquired smaller ones and expanded across the country.

For example, Monte Nido, founded by Carolyn Costin, a former teacher who recovered from an eating disorder, began with a center in Malibu. But in 2012, with financing from an equity firm, Monte Nido began opening new programs in Oregon, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and New York.

“I believe that the Monte Nido’s approach to eating disorder treatment is what you and others like you have been waiting for,” Costin wrote in a letter to potential patients on the company’s website, which includes images of beaches, mountains and the Boston skyline on its home page.

Cold-calling for patients

With a need to fill more beds, marketers for some centers make cold calls to psychiatrists, psychotherapists, medical doctors and others who treat eating disorders, offering to inform them about a program’s advantages and inviting them to visit.

The Denver-based Eating Recovery Center has a call center and employs 20 “professional relations liaisons” who contact clinicians. On its website, the company, which began with a single center, bills itself as “the only national health care system devoted to serious eating disorders at all levels of care.”

Prospective patients or family members searching for a treatment program sometimes turn to edtreatmentreview.com, where former patients describe their experiences, evaluating the staff, critiquing the food and noting whether cellphones are allowed.

Melissa R., 28, said after several hospitalizations for anorexia, beginning when she was 21, she found a residential center in the Southwest on the Internet. The center, which she described as “more like a resort,” was “somewhat helpful,” she said, but not worth the time and money.

“People were nice, and the food was really good,” she said. “I had fun, I enjoyed rock climbing and stuff, but that’s not why I was there. I’m paying a lot of money to get well, not to rock climb.”

Last year, she spent two months at Eating Recovery Center in Denver, and began to gain control of her illness.

“ERC was the best place I’ve been,” she said. “They were very individualized.”

Ashley Bilkie, 29, had a different experience with ERC. When she returned home in February 2015 after about six months — her fourth stay in an inpatient program for anorexia and her second at ERC — “I was getting sicker and sicker,” she said. She lost the weight she had gained back at the center. “I had to buy children’s clothing,” she said.

It was also expensive. Her father Robert Bilkie, a financial adviser in Michigan, calculated that over three years, he paid at least $350,000. ERC, he said, sent him bills for $30,000 each month. He paid willingly, but no program seemed to produce lasting results.

“We spent an outrageous amount of money for what really amounted to ineffectual treatment,” Robert Bilkie said.

Something that worked

Last fall, Ashley Bilkie entered the eating disorder center at Johns Hopkins, a university-affiliated program.

The staff weaned her off high doses of Xanax, a tranquilizer, and Adderall, a stimulant. In group therapy, other patients put pressure on her to change her behavior. It was a switch, she said, from previous groups, where patients talked about their problems.

With the program’s stress on weight restoration — studies show that it is the best predictor of how anorexic patients will do once they leave, rather than, say, elevated mood — her weight returned to normal. She was discharged in November and continues to do well.

“I hated every single solitary second of it,” she said. “But that’s a good thing, because I was not comfortable, and it meant that something was working.”

A history of ups and downs is not unusual for patients with eating disorders.

“In many cases, you see one step forward, two steps back,” said Dr. Mark Friedlander, the chief medical officer for Aetna Behavioral Health.

His company, Friedlander said, considers residential care essential for some patients. But, he said, a lack of outcome studies and a patchwork licensing system make it difficult to evaluate care.

“We would love to see greater consistency and higher standards,” he said.

To that end, a group of eating disorder specialists from treatment centers, including Eating Recovery Center and Monte Nido, have developed requirements for accreditation of residential programs. The Joint Commission, an independent company that accredits health care facilities, has adopted the requirements, which go into effect July 1.

In the meantime, many patients and families will continue to rely on word of mouth and any information they can find online.

“These are black boxes,” Dr. Scott Hadland, an adolescent medicine specialist at Harvard Medical School, said of the residential centers. “People get the idea that these are places that can heal just based on what they see on a website or in the photos.”