President Barack Obama made his first visit to South Carolina since being elected.

Air Force One landed in Columbia just before noon.

Watch as Tim Waller reports here.

To see pictures of the arrival, click here.

Full text of speech and Q&A

In his first visit to South Carolina as president, Obama said at a rally at Benedict College Friday afternoon that young people should engage in service to their communities to keep the country moving forward.



Obama spoke on the eve of a trip to Selma, Alabama, to commemorate the 50th anniversary of civil rights protests there. He told students at a historically black that Selma was possible because of the young people who stubbornly insisted on justice.



He noted that one of the most famous leaders of the Selma march, now Georgia Rep. John Lewis, was just 23 years old at the time.



He discussed initiatives including My Brother's Keeper, his 1-year-old program to improve the lives of young minority men.



Obama also took questions from the audience on the Keystone XL pipeline and tuition prices.



Obama said the Justice Department investigation into police in Ferguson, Missouri, has exposed a "broken and racially biased system."

Obama says it's now up to the city to decide whether officials want to enter an agreement with the Justice Department to fix it. He says the country's top goal has to be preventing similar circumstances elsewhere.

He says it was striking that Ferguson officials were sending emails that proved their bias against blacks.Obama was responding to a questioner at a town hall who asked why no federal charges were filed against the officer who fatally shot 18-year-old Michael Brown last year.

Obama replied that the standard for federal charges is very high, and the officer is entitled to due process.This is the first time Obama has been in South Carolina since the 2008 primary campaign in which he and Hillary Rodham Clinton fiercely fought for the state's black voters.

South Dakota and Utah are the only two states Obama hasn't visited.