St. Baldrick's event raises $6,500 and counting for childhood cancer research

Ten-year-old Caydee Bauers winces as stylist Christy Mascarenas uses clippers to shave her head as part of the St. Baldrick's fundraising event Saturday at the Thompson School District administration building. Caydee also donated her hair to the Locks of Love program. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Lea Grundy of Loveland has never had short hair, but she decided to "go all the way" and go bald Saturday for the sake of childhood cancer research.

Grundy was one of 30 people to voluntarily lose her hair during the 4th annual St. Baldrick's fundraising event hosted by the Team Thompson Community Saturday at the Thompson School District administration building.

"We found out last week that my kids' cousin was diagnosed with bone cancer. It was my daughter, Lexi, who said to be brave, be 'brave to shave,'" Grundy said, quoting the St. Baldrick's slogan for the head-shaving events that have been held worldwide since 2000.

Grundy got her head shaved by stylists from Shear NV Salon, alongside Lexi, 5, and her son, Wyatt, 8. Her son, Justin, 11, and husband, Mark, shaved their heads at home, because Justin had a baseball tournament the same day.

"My head feels really light and cold, and it's drafty," said Grundy, who donated her hair to Locks of Love. "I still feel like me, but it does look different. I'll find out how much self-identity I had with my hair."

Grundy said she shaved her head to let children with cancer know that "there's people that can be brave," she said.

Sixteen-year-old Makayla Dennis also went bald for the first time, though, like Grundy, she's donated to Locks of Love in the past and again on Saturday. She shaved her head to honor her friend, who is a survivor of cancer.

"I feel like you're taking a part in their suffering, a small part, so I think that's kind of cool," the Loveland High School 10th-grader said.

Caydee Bauers, 10, shaved her head in honor of a family friend who died at age 5 of a brain tumor that traveled to his spine.

"I wanted to raise money, so other people wouldn't die like that," said the fourth-grader, who attends Loveland Classical Schools, adding, "I don't feel my hair. ... I don't feel my bangs. I don't feel them brushing against my eyes."

Attendees went up in groups of three to get their heads shaved by Shear NV and other volunteer stylists with Irish music playing in the background. There was raffle drawings for gift bags and other prizes, face painting and a personal story from a Loveland cancer survivor during the three-hour event.

Halie Justice, 16, explained how at age 4, she was diagnosed with cancer.

"I was a very energetic 4-year-old that had a brain tumor," Halie said.

Her father, Larry, explained that at first, doctors couldn't come to a diagnosis, but then a Magnetic Resonance Imagining found a tumor the size of three golf balls in Halie's brain. Halie went through radiation treatment, but she got another tumor, this one the size of a marble, at age 7. She got another round of treatment and has since remained cancer-free.

"You'd see something like this standing there and you realize your day wasn't so bad," Larry said, referring to his daughter. "Enjoy what you've got."

Larry said seeing his daughter go through cancer made him realize the importance of raising money for childhood cancer research.

"Everything starts with the kids," he said.

Team Thompson Community collected $6,523 by the end of the event, but not all the donations had come in yet. In the past three years, the event generated $38,064.

"It's really about the community coming together to support such a good cause," said Charlie Carter, lead organizer of the Loveland event. "I'm struck by the kindness of people wanting to make a difference."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm