Parker Conrad, co-founder and chief executive of Zenefits Bloomberg News

The latest software company valued at over $1 billion doesn’t make a dime selling software.

Rather, San Francisco startup Zenefits is luring small businesses with free employee-benefits tools in hopes of selling them health-insurance plans. That unusual business model is upsetting the brokerage industry, frustrating regulators and giving investors a reason to bet big.

On Wednesday, Zenefits said it raised $500 million from a group of investors led by Fidelity Management and private-equity firm TPG.

The round of funding values the company at $4.5 billion, a staggering nine times the price investors paid just 11 months ago. After only two years, Zenefits is now valued at more than many publicly traded business-software makers including Box and Zendesk.

To live up to those expectations, Zenefits will need to rein in its massive costs, overcome regulatory resistance and prove it can eventually turn a profit.

Unlike most enterprise software companies, which charge customers a subscription fee, Zenefits gives all its software away for free. The software aims to provide a kind of automated human-resources department for small businesses that can’t afford a full-time HR staff, helping them manage hiring, payroll, paid time off, 401(k) and health-insurance programs. It generates revenue by acting as an online brokerage for insurance plans, helping users pick between plans and taking a percentage fee each time a user signs up for insurance using its software.

As Zenefits has expanded to more than 10,000 companies, those commissions have added up. Inside a typical customer using Zenefits as its insurance broker, about 70% of employees have signed up for insurance using the program and each employee generates about $450 a year for Zenefits, the company says.

Zenefits doesn’t share its annual revenue but said it expects to reach an annual revenue run rate of $100 million by the end of its fiscal year in January, meaning it plans to take in more than $8 million in sales that month. That’s up from a run rate of $20 million last January, or about $1.6 million in revenue for that month.

By this measure, Zenefits co-founder and chief executive Parker Conrad calls his company “the fastest growing [software-as-a-service] company in Silicon Valley history.” He estimates Workday, his closest competitor in the HR field, and Salesforce.com each took more than five years to surpass $100 million in annual recurring revenue.

That claim is hard to verify because neither of those companies disclosed detailed revenue figures prior to going public. It also may not be a useful or fair comparison, because they sell software; Zenefits sells insurance.

While revenue is growing fast, Zenefits is far from profitable. The company expects to burn through about $100 million this year developing software and expanding its fleet of salespeople, said Lars Dalgaard, general partner at Andreessen Horowitz and a member of Zenefits’ board of directors. The investor said he expects that number to go down next year.

Conrad came up with the idea for Zenefits while at his last startup, online wealth management firm SigFig. There he discovered the frustration and difficulty of HR-administered payroll and benefits for employees, and the increasingly burdensome government regulations. He also saw that most small businesses would be ill-prepared to navigate the Obama administration’s complex Affordable Care Act.

After a disagreement with his SigFig co-founder, he left to create Zenefits and brought over a star engineer, Laks Srini, with him.

Conrad designed Zenefits to comply with the 2010 health law. When an employee is hired or leaves, the software enables the employer to check a few boxes, letting the software do the work of connecting to back-end payroll, insurance and other systems, gathering information and filing whatever is needed.

The company already has more than 1,000 employees. In November, it opened a new facility in the Phoenix area where it plans to hire at least 1,300 employees over the next three years.

“I’m not just parking this money in a bank account,” Conrad said. “This round gives us the capital we need to go do some pretty incredible things.”

Zenefits offers small businesses free software to help with human resources, while also acting as a health-insurance broker. Zenefits Inc.

The CEO predicts Zenefits will reach profitability before it needs to raise another round of funding. He said he hasn’t seriously considered an initial public offering.

Zenefits’ growth has invited scrutiny from regulators and the entrenched players in an insurance brokerage industry worth tens of billions of dollars a year. They argue that Zenefits is violating state laws which prevent brokers from giving customers a rebate in exchange for using their product. Instead of giving a money rebate, Zenefits is giving away software.

The startup overcame its first major regulatory threat last month, when the state of Utah overturned a ban that would have forced Zenefits to charge customers for its software.

Conrad said the Utah ban had been the result of insurance brokers pressuring politicians in the state to protect their industry.

One executive at an HR and insurance firm told the San Jose Mercury News last December that “every broker in the country is scared now of Zenefits.”

“The way I understand these battles now is that they are not really legal battles but they are political battles,” Conrad said. “They are basically reaching out for protection from the state regulatory authorities.”

Zenefits is licensed as an insurance broker in all 50 states. It’s unclear whether the company has faced regulatory challenges in other states.

Zenefits has raised a total of more than $580 million from investors including Andreessen Horowitz, Maverick Capital, Venrock, Founders Fund, Khosla Ventures and Insight Venture Partners. The startup represents the single biggest capital investment made by Andreessen Horowitz since the venture-capital firm’s founding in 2009.