Referendum No. 2 C would allow retail marijuana establishments in Cañon City.

Supporters and opponents of the potential sale of retail marijuana in Cañon City wait for the General Government committee meeting to begin in May. More than 100 people were in attendance. ( Christy Steadman / Daily Record )

Cañon City Referendum 2C "Shall the establishment and operation of retail marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana product manufacturing facilities, retail marijuana testing facilities and retail marijuana stores (collectively called 'retail marijuana establishments') be permitted in the city of Cañon City, Colorado subject to the requirements of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code and Regulations to be adopted by the Council of Cañon City?"

Cañon City Referendum 2D Shall the City of Cañon City taxes be increased by $100,000 annually in the first full fiscal year of such tax increase, and by whatever additional amounts are raised annually thereafter, by imposing a new excise tax on (1) the first sale or transfer of unprocessed retail marijuana by a retail marijuana cultivation facility and (2) the sale within the City of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products permitted by Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution at the rate of five percent (5%) [ which rate may be adjusted from time to time by the council so long as it does not exceed ten percent (10%) ] of the price paid by the purchaser or transferee of the retail marijuana and retail marijuana products in accordance with any ordinances hereafter approved by the council of Cañon City; provided that any such tax shall be imposed only if retail marijuana establishments are permitted within the City; and shall the revenue received by the City from the collection of such new tax be used by the City to maintain, repair and reconstruct public streets within the City; and shall the City be authorized to collect and spend such revenue as a voter approved revenue change under Article X Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution?"

In just a couple of weeks, voters will decide whether or not to allow retail marijuana establishments in Cañon City.

Two referendums on the General Election ballot ask voters if they want the City of Cañon City to allow retail marijuana establishments in the City and if there should be an excise tax imposed on retail marijuana or marijuana products.

Cañon City Referendum 2D says revenue received by the City from collections of a proposed excise tax on the retail sale of recreational marijuana, if approved by voters, will be designated to maintain, repair and reconstruct city streets.

The ballot issue would authorize a 5-percent excise tax on the sale or transfer of retail marijuana and marijuana products. The rate of the excise tax could be adjusted by the council from time to time "so long as the rate would never exceed 10 percent."

During the June 3 Cañon City Council meeting, City Attorney John Havens said TABOR requires every tax question be approved by voters, and when tax questions have been referred by a council to voters, there typically has been a designated use of the tax revenue, but it is not required by law. If the dollars are not earmarked, he said, they would go into the general fund. Councilwoman Pat Freda said the money should be earmarked.

"It is a good faith measure, and it reassures the citizens exactly what the money is going to be used for," she said.

In the 2012 statewide election, 4,718 voters in the City of Cañon City voted against legalization of marijuana for recreational use by adults, while 4,366 voted in favor.

In Fremont County, 10,311 voted against, and 9,813 were in favor, according to Fremont County Clerk and Recorder Katie Barr. Statewide, about 55 percent of voters were in favor, and about 45 percent voted against.

Local residents attended council and committee meetings earlier this year and spoke in favor and against the issue that has divided the community. Residents addressed marijuana from several standpoints, including financial, moral, legal, health and safety.

Ashley Smith and her children, Kyle and Jamison, each spoke out against the sale of retail marijuana in Cañon City.

"I want to keep our town safe," she said. "We need to keep our town drug free and safe."

During a General Government committee meeting in March, resident Jan Fead said by making marijuana legal, profits will be taken from gangs and cartels. She said a background check to become a retail clerk is "incredible."

"You have to pay $75, fill out an eight-page application, you have to tell them that they will be able forever to research your background for any purpose whatsoever," she said. "If someone is going to be selling an adult marijuana, I would much rather it someone like that and I would much rather it be a product that has been approved and checked for deadly pesticides to know that it is pure enough for someone to eat or smoke."

Ballots may be mailed or dropped off at the County Administration building at 615 Macon Ave. Voters also may vote in person at a voting service and polling center at the County Administration building now through Nov. 4, Monday through Saturday. Hours are 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday thorough Friday and 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. Saturdays.

On Election Day, voters also may vote in person in Florence and at the Howard Volunteer Fire Department from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., the same as County office on Election Day only. Fremont County voters may vote at any of the Fremont County locations.

Monday is the last day to submit changes to an individual's voter record through the mail, via the State's online voter registration system, or through a voter registration agency and receive a ballot in the mail. Election officials will accept and process the registrations and changes up to and including Election Day. Tuesday is the last day to file an absentee ballot application to receive the absentee ballot by mail.