Moody's: Top 10 Hospitals Most Exposed to Medicaid

Hospitals with high percentages of Medicaid patients often have stretched budgets. With state and federal cuts for the insurance program for the poor going into effect, those budgets are likely to be strained even further.

Moody's Investors Service recently released a report indicating the delays of the employer insurance mandate under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act are a "credit negative" action, especially for hospitals with high proportions of Medicaid patients.

Delays of the insurance mandate postpone coverage for the uninsured, which was one of the primary benefits of the law for nonprofit hospitals. Consequently, bad debt is likely to increase, and hospitals with Medicaid-heavy payer mixes will have to fight to maintain their margins.

Within the report, Moody's analysts listed the top 10 hospitals and health systems in its rated portfolio that have the highest Medicaid mix as a percentage of their gross revenue. Moody's does not necessarily plan to downgrade the hospitals, but the ratings agency "will monitor the ultimate credit impact on them."

Here are the 10 nonprofit hospitals and health systems that are most exposed to Medicaid in Moody's portfolio. Note: To see the 15 nonprofit hospitals and health systems that are most exposed to Medicare in Moody's portfolio, click here.

Hospital/Health System Moody's Credit Rating Rating Outlook Medicaid as % of Gross Revenue Hurley Medical Center

(Flint, Mich.) Ba1 Stable 39.7% Loma Linda (Calif.) University Medical Center Baa3 Negative 35.6% The MetroHealth System

(Cleveland) A3 Negative 33.3% Westchester Medical Center (Valhalla, N.Y.) A3 Rating Under Review 33.1% Community Medical Centers

(Fresno, Calif.) Baa2 Positive 33% Einstein Healthcare Network (Philadelphia) Baa2 Stable 30.9% University of Florida Health Jacksonville Baa3 Stable 29.5% Antelope Valley Hospital

(Lancaster, Calif.) Ba2 Negative 29.3% Holyoke (Mass.) Medical Center Ba3 Negative 29.3% Mission (Texas) Regional

Medical Center Baa2 Negative 28.3%

More Articles on Hospitals and Medicaid:

Hospitals in Red States Continue Push for Medicaid Expansion

Moody's: Academic Medical Centers Maintain Strong Credit

Fitch: 2014 Does Not Look Good for Nonprofit Hospitals

© Copyright ASC COMMUNICATIONS 2016. Interested in LINKING to or REPRINTING this content? View our policies by clicking here.