If you go What: "Ham McBeth," presented by square product theatre When: 8 p.m. Thursdays-Saturdays, through March 21; also 3 p.m. March 14 Where: The Dairy Center for the Arts, East Theater, 2590 Walnut St., Boulder Tickets: $15-$20 Info: 303-444-7328 or thedairy.org; squareproducttheatre.org Parents' guide: Adult themes and references might be inappropriate for pre-teenagers

Former math and science majors who barely survived required Shakespeare readings in college English classes don't have to worry about enjoying "Ham McBeth."

The new comedy from the Boulder-based square product theatre company might feature a reference to one of the Bard's densest and most demanding dramas in its title, but the original work features more laughs than tragedy. According to co-author and company founder Emily Harrison, the piece features enough absurdist humor and modern pop culture references to please those with any strong aversions to Shakespeare.

"We don't want people to be scared by the fact that 'McBeth' is in the title of the play. It's a comedy, and it's ridiculous in a great way," said Harrison, who co-wrote the piece with company member Michelle Moore. "It goes off the rails at times, but there's still enough of an explanation of Shakespeare's 'Macbeth' in the play to help anyone who's not super familiar with it."

Those explanations come via a plot that revolves around a mother and a daughter, two protagonists struggling with questions of ambition, separation and solitude. Ham Jones, a proud mother with a deep love for Stevie Nicks and goals of rising to the top of the political hierarchy of her trailer park, also is dealing with the drama of her rebellious teenage daughter, Aquanetta. Aquanetta, a sensitive soul who harbors a fondness for "Game of Thrones" and Goth culture, navigates her own questions of identity as she delves into "McBeth" in preparation for the SATs.

As Aquanetta unpacks the literary and thematic riches of one of Shakespeare's most epic tragedies, mother and daughter deal with looming questions of transformation and evolution. Ham must come to terms with the eventuality of her daughter packing up for college, even as she seeks to unseat her rival Christa, the bossy trailer-park association president. Aquanetta, meanwhile, seeks to formalize her own version of the American dream, looking to escape the trailer park through the promise of academic success and college.

With its references to American television, Bartles & James wine coolers and trailer park culture, "Ham McBeth" might seem leagues away from the political intrigue and Scottish climes of Shakespeare's signature drama. Shakespeare's story of the oblivion brought about by unchecked ambition and grisly murder offers no references to a mother and daughter struggling to transition to the next step in life. Even so, the fundamentally American soap opera of the work has deep roots in the work of the Bard, according to Harrison.

The piece started as a creative experiment, a work that emerged from a fundraiser for the Boulder Fringe Festival in 2013. Harrison and Moore were asked to consolidate the major plot points and characters of "Macbeth" into a 15-minute stage piece as part of a larger showcase. The basic structure of the current comedy was the result, and the duo wanted to mine the creative possibilities past a 15-minute experiment.

"We had so much fun doing it, we just decided to just develop it into a full-length show and see what happened," Harrison said. "We came up with a comedy and it's a pretty broad comedy with elements of 'Macbeth.' "

Those elements include sly references to Shakespeare's cast of characters, including trailer park denizens named after King Duncan and Macduff. One of the eeriest and most unsettling scenes in "Macbeth" featuring phantoms finds a much lighter parallel in the lead character's hallucinatory visions thanks to an over-the-counter drug.

Those nods to an Elizabethan masterpiece reveal a respect for the source material. While Harrison has made it her creative mission to present new, original work with strong ties to contemporary themes, she hasn't escaped the sway of the Western world's most popular playwright.

"Shakespeare continues to be the most produced playwright in this country," Harrison noted. "That's a fact for a reason. His works are really enduring. Going back to this text, there's a lot that people can identify with in a play like 'Macbeth.' "

Harrison and Moore worked to incorporate those timeless components with the square product theatre company's signature stamps. In addition to themes that summon familiar questions of the American dream, the show revels in the troupe's uninhibited approach to comedy and improvisation. The three-week run will include guest appearances by Buntport Theatre ensemble members Hannah Duggan and Erin Rollman; the show will feature the latest work of the metro area's local theater brain trust.

It's a matter of balancing old and new, classic and contemporary.

"We haven't made a piece like this since 2010," Harrison said. "Having an idea, improvising on our feet — it's something that we really enjoy doing. It's nice to be back in the saddle doing that."