By of the

Could Waukesha's 13-year quest for Lake Michigan drinking water be thwarted by its own leaking sanitary sewers?

And if those sewers overflow in heavy rains, would the untreated wastewater flow all the way to the Root River and the lake under Waukesha's plans to discharge to the river?

Those are among questions residents asked both at public meetings this month on Waukesha's plan and in comments submitted to the state Department of Natural Resources.

In a request to switch to a lake water supply, Waukesha proposes to return the water as fully treated wastewater to the Root River, a lake tributary. A Great Lakes protection compact would require the return flow if Wisconsin and the other seven states bordering the lakes approve the city's request to divert water beyond the subcontinental divide.

Since wastewater pouring out of overflowing sewers is not treated, Todd Brennan of Racine asked how Waukesha handles its sanitary sewer overflows. Brennan represents the Root-Pike Watershed Initiative Network.

There are none to handle, according to wastewater treatment plant manager Jeff Harenda. There are no relief pipes or outlets that would allow a sewer to overflow anywhere in the city's collection system, he said.

The city's plant currently discharges to the Fox River at Sentry Drive.

Waukesha Water Utility General Manager Dan Duchniak promised repeatedly at four recent public meetings that Waukesha would discharge only "fully treated" wastewater to the Root River, under the city's plan to use lake water to replace its current radium-contaminated water supply.

Fully treating the wastewater comes with the added benefit of preventing movement of invasive species from outside the Great Lakes basin to Lake Michigan, he said.

Yet records show Waukesha did not discharge "fully treated" wastewater to the Fox River during at least three rain storms in the last five years.

Wastewater flows can exceed the treatment plant's ultraviolet light disinfection system during heavy rains when storm water enters cracks in sanitary sewers. The extra water fills sewers and pushes the treatment plant near capacity.

The UV system cannot disinfect the same volume as the plant can treat during excessive flows. Rows of submerged UV lights can kill or disable bacteria in up to 28 million gallons a day while the plant's maximum capacity is 33.5 million gallons a day, according to Harenda.

During heavy rains in June 2008, 74.7 million gallons of treated wastewater were diverted around UV lights and discharged to the Fox River, state DNR records show.

The diverted wastewater had gone through all other steps in treatment, including screening of debris and grit, removal of solids, digestion of nutrients by microbes and filtration.

The plant reported diverting 8.7 million gallons of treated wastewater around UV disinfection during July 2010 storms.

In the most recent incident, the plant diverted about 190,000 gallons of treated wastewater around UV disinfection on June 26 of this year, Harenda said.

Increased capacity

A revised state discharge permit for the sewage treatment plant requires the city to complete construction of a higher-capacity UV disinfection system by spring of 2017. This expansion will boost UV capacity to 39 million gallons a day, according to Harenda.

Additional capacity will guarantee he makes good on his promise, Duchniak said.

Even so, the city's request for lake water proposes a new structure at the sewage plant — designed for a different purpose — that would provide a fail safe, he said.

A weir, or short wall, would be built along one side of a channel carrying treated flows to a pumping station. All treated wastewater up to a volume of 16.7 million gallons a day would be pumped through a pipeline to the Root River.

Treated wastewater flows exceeding 16.7 million gallons a day would rise above the weir and be discharged to the Fox River.

The 16.7 million gallons a day is the maximum day volume of water that Waukesha projects it would need to buy from Oak Creek at mid-century.

The weir height was set to ensure fully 100% of the maximum day diversion was returned to the lake but no more.

Waukesha negotiated a water purchase deal with Oak Creek in 2012.

A 2008 Great Lakes protection compact would require Waukesha to return the water as treated wastewater, less any portion lost to landscape watering or incorporated in commercial products. This is called consumptive use and the water utility estimates an average of 8% of water distributed to customers is not returned to the sewage treatment plant.

Though state regulators might not require the city to return more than 92% by volume of the water it buys from Oak Creek to comply with the compact, Waukesha officials say they will return 100% or more of the volume.

Looking at the return flow, consultants estimate it will contain between 24% and 44% of non-lake water.

How could non-lake water get in there? Leaks of storm water — rain or melting snow — into cracks of sanitary sewers, loose manhole covers and other openings.

Racine County Supervisor Ken Hall said in an email to the DNR that such heavy volumes of non-lake water in the return flow would violate requirements of the Great Lakes compact.

"We will minimize the amount of out of basin water being returned by aggressively going after" leaks of storm water into the sewers, Duchniak said.

Twitter: twitter.com/conserve

***

How to comment

The state Department of Natural Resources will accept written comments on Waukesha's lake water proposal until Dec. 2.

Email comments to: DNRWaukeshaDiversionApp@wisconsin.gov.

Mail comments to:

Wisconsin DNR DG/5, PO Box 7921

Madison, WI 53707-7921.

Attn: Kassie Lang.

The DNR expects to publish a draft environmental impact study of the proposal in late January and issue a preliminary judgment on whether the request complies with the Great Lakes compact.