Photo by George Lauby Patty Clark Paulette Jones and Patty Clark are two of the 33,000 Nebraskans who fall into the Medicaid “coverage gap.” People in the gap earn too much to qualify for Medicaid but earn too little to qualify for insurance premium tax credits under Obamacare (Affordable Care Act.) So, people in the gap have no health care assistance, even though they might live at the poverty line. Many of them work part-time jobs, but health care remains unaffordable. Federal poverty lines: • $11,770/year per single • $15,930/year per couple • $24,250/year per four-person household “It’s estimated that two-thirds of this uninsured population are the working poor in Nebraska,” state Sen. John McCollister of Omaha said recently, “and over half of these people come from rural areas.” The Obamacare program encourages states to expand Medicaid programs for the poor, but Nebraska and several other states have declined to do so, citing high costs to both state and federal budgets. Paulette Jones testified Thursday about an alternative Medicaid expansion plan proposed in the Legislature. She said her income currently puts her $42 over the limit to qualify for Medicaid, making it difficult to manage her chronic health conditions. “I worked my family off of the [public benefit] system and showed them the importance of self-reliance,” she said. “I am currently applying for and interviewing for jobs and I need to be healthy.” Patty Clark is on Social Security disability. She recently moved back to North Platte from Wisconsin to be closer to family, and was dismayed to find out that the disability payments she receives are enough that she falls into the coverage gap. She said she has about $1,500 per in accumulated medical bills but doesn’t have the money to pay them. A bill to provide coverage for such uninsured Nebraskans was discussed Feb. 10 in the Legislature’s Health and Human Services Committee. Introduced by McCollister, LB 1032 would create a Transitional Health Insurance Program to provide health coverage using the private health insurance market. Individuals ineligible for Medicaid with incomes below 133 percent of the federal poverty level would be enrolled in private health insurance, with help from Medicaid dollars. McCollister said the plan would provide eligibility in two other ways, too. • Someone whose employer pays at least 50 percent of the total cost of the employee’s coverage would get help to buy employer-sponsored insurance. • Participants exempt from enrollment in Obamacare premium assistance, including individuals who are determined to be medically frail, would be enrolled in Medicaid. McCollister said participants with incomes over 50 percent of the federal poverty level would be required to contribute 2 percent of their monthly income as a health insurance premium, along with an enhanced co-payment for non-emergency emergency room use. Clark agrees that it’s a good idea for individuals to pay something for the coverage. She suggests $50-$175 a month, depending on income. And, she thinks recipients should also work or volunteer 18-20 hours a week. She said those should be minimum requirements, so recipients value their benefits. McCollister’s bill also would refer participants to employment and education, and it would also create a pilot training program targeted at specific needs of employers, according to a report in the Legislature’s official news service, the Unicameral Update. The bill also calls for data collection and analysis of whether providing health insurance limits the ability of individuals to get off public assistance programs. “We contend that we’re offering the country’s best Medicaid expansion plan,” McCollister said. The bill brought mixed reviews in the hearing. The Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services estimates the bill would cost nearly $1 billion over the next 10 years. Gov. Pete Ricketts has already noted the high costs of Medicaid. He noted that the state is paying about $1.8 billion every two years, or nearly 19% of state spending, without expanding Medicaid. And, that amount is increasing steadily as medical costs continue to increase. No action has been taken in the Legislature. For now, the bill remains in committee. Clark, who is dealing with medical bills she cannot pay, is out of patience. “Gov. Ricketts, wake up. Get your head out of the sand,” she said.



The Unicameral Update contributed information for this report. - Editor.