During the Clinton hour of the Democratic infomercial on CNN in Columbus earlier this month, the moderator called on victim of Obamacare. Office manager Teresa O’Donnell told Clinton about how her monthly costs for health care insurance for her family of four went from $490 to $1,081 a month. “I know Obama told us that we’d be paying a little more. But doubling, over doubling, my health insurance cost has not been ‘a little more.’ It has been difficult to come up with that kind of payment every month. I would like to vote Democratic, but it’s cost me a lot of money, and I’m just wondering if Democrats really realize how difficult it’s been on working-class Americans to finance Obamacare?” O’Donnell asked.

Ms. O’Donnell to the contrary notwithstanding, Obama actually promised that Obamacare would lower premiums by an average of $2500 per family. It was one of the several core promises Obama made to cram the law down our throats. Each one of the promises was a calculated lie. O’Donnell must have missed that, but she certainly asked a good question.

Clinton struggled to answer the question. In order to buy some time she first quizzed O’Donnell about her coverage. Then she unspooled a run-on sentence of Faulknerian length. “OK, well, first of all let me say, I very much want to get the cost down and that is going to be my mission because I do think that for many, many people, but there are exceptions, like what you’re telling me, having the Affordable Care Act has reduced cost, has created a real guarantee of insurance, because if you’d had a pre-existing condition under the old system you wouldn’t have gotten affordable insurance, so it’s done a lot of really good things, but it has become increasingly clear that we’re going to have to get the cost down,” she said.

Are price controls and the consequences they entail in the future under Madam Hillary?

The video below has Chelsea Clinton decrying the “crushing costs” of Obamacare. She reports that Madam Hillary is open to using “executive action” to reduce “crushing costs” of Obamacare. The video appears to be taken at an event with the camera turned to the audience rather than Chelsea, but her voice is clearly audible.

The video picks up with “…cap on out of pocket expenses. This was part of my mom’s original plan back in ’93 and ’94, as well as premium costs.” The two go together. Otherwise a cap on out of pocket expenses would simply require higher premiums. Capping both will make private insurance unprofitable and lead to the imposition of the Bernie Objective.

Chelsea’s exposition continues: “We can either do that directly or through tax credits. And, kind of figuring out whether she could do that through executive action, or she would need to do that through tax credits working with Congress. She thinks either of those will help solve the challenge of kind of the crushing costs that still exist for too many people, who even are part of the Affordable Care Act and buying insurance…”

It’s a preview of coming attractions under the Clinton administration. Ed Morrissey elaborates in “We gotta fix Obamacare’s crushing costs says…Chelsea Clinton.” The Daily Mail reads the entrails in “Chelsea Clinton attacks Obamacare’s ‘crushing costs’ and hints her mother would change Democrats’ key policy.”

Via Shoshanna Weissman/Weekly Standard.