Maybe it's just the contrast of new energy after nearly three months with the political lame duck.

Maybe it's a calculated attempt to build momentum by acting on the things you can control before the talks get serious with the Republican-controlled Legislature.

Maybe it's the advent of the CEO governor, something Pennsylvania really hasn't seen since the days of the late Milton Shapp.

Whatever the explanation, Gov. Tom Wolf has not hesitated to "be the governor" in his weeks in office, and many of the governed are noticing.

You may not like all the moves - Wolf is already in court for one contested personnel move - but you have to acknowledge Pennsylvania's 47th governor hasn't been shy about pressing the levers of government.

"I don't remember anyone moving this quickly with so many things," said G. Terry Madonna, the Franklin & Marshall political scientist and a longtime observer of state politics and government.

"He's been extremely bold and vigorous in his approach... and a lot of it has taken place in a manner that has surprised people."

Here's a recap of Wolf's busy Week 3:

Healthy PA

Wolf got the week off to a fast start Monday by launching his promised move away from former Gov. Tom Corbett's built-for-Pennsylvania "Healthy PA" program to the standard-issue Medicaid expansion envisioned by the Affordable Care Act.

This wasn't a surprise to those who had followed the 2014 campaign. Wolf had consistently stated his intent to trade Corbett's plan for a more traditional medical assistance program.

In fact, some observers gave credit this week to Wolf for getting the process started early, so there's maximum time for a smooth implementation to the revised program later this year.

Top GOP lawmakers reacted, but mostly with pledges to keep any medical assistance programs fiscally accountable.

Taxing natural gas

Wednesday, Wolf unveiled one of the marquee items of his upcoming budget proposal, a natural gas production tax projected to quickly grow to $1 billion in new revenue annually, most of which would be targeted for state aid to public schools.

On its face, it's a smart, bold stroke: getting a huge pot of money for education through a new tax that will land primarily, some say, on energy companies and out-of-state consumers.

But the devil will be in the negotiations ahead.

Wolf can't get this done without passage by the Republican-controlled Legislature. And they have presented their own wants as a key to discussion of any revenue-raisers this budget season, including liquor sales and public pension plan reforms.

And as one of the old saws at the Capitol goes: The governor proposes. The legislature disposes.

Death penalty

Wolf closed out the week by making good on another campaign promise - declaring what amounts to an indefinite reprieve for all 186 of Pennsylvania's death row inmates.

Wolf said Friday he will not sign off on any executions until he is satisfied that historic problems with the capital punishment system have been explored and corrected.

This one got more immediate public pushback and outright criticism - from angry prosecutors, police officer unions and victims rights groups - than any other of Wolf's early moves.

But again, it is a course that Wolf had promised during his campaign.

Here's a fun fact.

All of this week's moves follow the controversial firing of state Office of Open Records executive director Erik Arneson and Wolf's stop on the leasing of any new gas drilling rights in state forests and parks.

Add 'em up and that makes at least four policy or personnel reversals that Wolf has made on his own in little more than three weeks in office.

That's more first-month rollbacks than former Govs. Tom Ridge, Ed Rendell and Corbett combined. We looked it up.

It doesn't mean the honeymoon is over.

But some Republicans at the Capitol are starting to get a little edgy.

"In a lot of ways, he's bringing the dysfunction of Washington up here by unilaterally making public policy," said Steve Miskin, a spokesman for House Republican leadership.

His reference was to Congressional GOP leaders' criticism of President Obama's growing reliance on executive orders to drive his agenda.

"Either [Wolf] didn't listen to his inauguration speech [heavy on calls to bipartisanship and working together] or his entire staff is just ignoring it." Miskin said.

Other observers said it appears to them that Wolf is just trying to tick off campaign promises, and has largely avoided backing people into corners just yet.

"I think he's acting just like the Tom Wolf I've always known," said Beverly Mackereth, a York countian like Wolf who served as Corbett's secretary of human services.

"When he believes something, he follows through - if he can."

"Do I think he's taken an energetic approach? Yes," said Sam Marshall, president and chief executive officer of the Insurance Federation of Pennsylvania. "But if you're not energized in your first three weeks of being governor, then this state's got a problem."

Wolf, asked for his own thoughts about his first month at the Capitol Friday as he prepared to leave for a visit to the Great American Outdoor Show, had little interest in discussing other's reactions to his early moves.

"I'm just doing what I think I have the ability to do under the Constitution," he said.