ATLANTA, Nov. 26, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- Arnall Golden Gregory has expanded its healthcare and public policy practice through the addition of Alan K. Parver, a partner in the growing Washington, D.C. office. Mr. Parver has three decades of experience providing clients with health policy advice, developing effective advocacy strategies and working with Congress and federal agencies to advance clients' health policy objectives.

(Photo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20131126/CL23322 )

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20121205/CL22808LOGO )

Mr. Parver has significant experience handling a broad array of Medicare coverage, payment, coding and claims processing issues for providers and manufacturers of health care equipment and products. He advises clients in the medical nutritional support, home infusion therapy, and post-acute care sectors, and has been instrumental in advancing policies that protect Medicare, Medicaid and CHIP program beneficiaries' access to critical therapies. Additionally, Mr. Parver dedicates a substantial amount of his time to counseling clients on issues related to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and the evolving health care environment.

Mr. Parver is a frequent speaker on health policy and reimbursement issues. He is a former managing partner of Powell Goldstein's Washington, D.C. office.

Also joining the Washington, D.C. office is Leah Mendelsohn Stone, an associate, and Cathy Fortney, a legislative assistant. Ms. Stone works closely with Mr. Parver to counsel clients on regulatory, legislative and policy issues.

"I am very pleased to be here at Arnall Golden Gregory," Mr. Parver said. "I think my practice fits very well with the firm's long-term care practice, and I have long valued and appreciated the firm's supportive culture."

Glenn Hendrix, Arnall Golden Gregory's Managing Partner, said, "Alan is a great addition to our firm and particularly to our long-term care team, which is one of the largest in the country, presently representing seven of the nation's 14 largest nursing home chains in significant matters across the United States. Alan has a wealth of healthcare policy and reimbursement knowledge that will help us better meet the needs of those clients. That expertise will also benefit our FDA and other life science clients seeking reimbursement solutions for their business."

Mr. Parver is a graduate of Cornell University Law School. Ms. Stone graduated from Emory University School of Law.

ABOUT ARNALL GOLDEN GREGORY LLP

Arnall Golden Gregory, with more than 150 attorneys in Atlanta and Washington, DC, employs a "business sensibility" approach, developing a deep understanding of each client's situation in order to find a customized, cost-sensitive solution. Selected for The National Law Journal's prestigious 2013 Midsize Hot List, the firm advises on corporate, litigation and regulatory matters for numerous industries, including business services, healthcare, life sciences, logistics and transportation, real estate, franchising, information services, energy, and manufacturing. AGG is a solutions partner that subscribes to the belief "not if, but how."

CONTACT

Kevin Duffy

404-873-8131

kevin.duffy@agg.com

SOURCE Arnall Golden Gregory LLP