THD Health Care Summit brings major players to table By B.L. Azure

THD PIO Acting IHS Billings Area Director Dorothy Dupree gives concerns about the limitations of the IHS health care delivery system. Patricia Iron Cloud of Fort Peck is on the right. (B.L. Azure photo Acting IHS Billings Area Director Dorothy Dupree gives concerns about the limitations of the IHS health care delivery system. Patricia Iron Cloud of Fort Peck is on the right. (B.L. Azure photo NINEPIPES LODGE — More than 50 people with health care ties shoehorned into the Ninepipes Lodge conference room last Tuesday for the first of its kind Health Care Summit that was hosted by the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes and its Tribal Health Department. “We’re all here for the same reason: the health care for our people, not just Indian people but all people,” said Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes Tribal Council Chairman Ronald Trahan in his welcoming that including an appreciation for Sen. Jon Tester’s (D-Mont.) attendance. Tribal Health Director of Operations, Planning and Policy, Anna Whiting-Sorrel, told the summit participants that the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) has created the opportunity to vastly improve health care in Indian Country. Health and Human Services Regional Director Kim Gillan discussed HHS’s tribal outreach and collaboration efforts. (B.L. Azure photo) Health and Human Services Regional Director Kim Gillan discussed HHS’s tribal outreach and collaboration efforts. (B.L. Azure photo) The new health care delivery paradigm that all Americans by law, including American Indians, must participate in is a monumental switch from the beleaguered federal Indian Health Service system. It contains health care options that the IHS, due to historical underfunding, has not been able to offer its beneficiaries because it is not a health insurance program like the ACA with its mandate for private insurance coverage. Tester said the CSKT THD health care delivery system should serve as the model that other Tribal Nations should emulate to improve the health of their citizens. “This is an incredible opportunity to improve health care in Indian Country from the federal level to the local level,” Sen. Jon Tester (D-Mont.) said in his opening remarks. Tester chairs the U.S. Senate Indian Affairs Committee and the IHS and the state of health care in Indian Country has been a focus of his. He also sits on the Senate Appropriations Committee and understands remedies must be creative due the limitations and pulls on the federal purse. “This effort will not be successful if you only look to the federal government. Top down solutions don’t work. It’s got to come from the ground up.” Tribal Health Director Kevin Howlett, in an overview of the present incarnation of Tribal Health, said the journey from the past to present has been filled with a lot of peaks and valleys. THD Director Kevin Howlett addresses folks at the Health Care Summit and Sen. Jon Tester (D-Mont.) listens in. (B.L. Azure photo) THD Director Kevin Howlett addresses folks at the Health Care Summit and Sen. Jon Tester (D-Mont.) listens in. (B.L. Azure photo) “In order to get where we want to go we can’t be afraid to take risks,” Howlett said. “The changes come from within.” Howlett said the period from 1993 to 2002 on the Flathead Reservation was a very difficult time for the CSKT and the health care provision. “It was a period of dependence upon the private sector and the Indian Health Service,” he said, adding that the last year under that scenario IHS allocated $8 million to the Flathead Reservation but the private sector bills amounted to $18 million. The CSKT came up with the difference. That period caused a shift in thinking on how to best meet the health care needs of the beneficiaries. Tribal Health moved from a payer of health care delivery bills to third party providers, to a health care provider that bills third parties such as private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid and Health Montana Kids, among other such entities for services it provides at its five clinics on the Flathead Reservation. “One of the reasons we’ve been successful in doing this is we have really worked hard to bring our own (medical professional) people home,” Howlett said. “There was a time when tribes feared educated Indians and a lot of Native students didn’t want to come home because of the politics and stress. But this meeting isn’t about complaining; it’s about the opportunities we have to better health care in Indian Country. What we have done here on the Flathead other tribes may want to follow.” Patricia Iron Cloud of Fort Peck talks about personal health care issues she has experienced as an American Indian. (B.L. Azure photo) Patricia Iron Cloud of Fort Peck talks about personal health care issues she has experienced as an American Indian. (B.L. Azure photo) Howlett said the other tribal health officials need to convince tribal politicians and the tribal people they serve that the business model switch and the embracing of the ACA is paramount to creating a successful health-care delivery system. “You need to offer increased quality services to increase the revenue and you have to know what you have the capacity to do,” he said, adding that THD will not ever be an inpatient health care system with surgery and a wide array of diagnostic services. It will focus on what is doable and do it the best it can. “We have to be receptive and responsive to the people we serve. We have made the commitment to do things differently.” That commitment has resulted in a Tribal Health Department employee growth from three to 160 people that serve beneficiaries at five THD clinics. The new clinics and clinic upgrades have all been paid for with third-party revenue that by law has to be spent on health care provision. “Everybody has an opportunity to do this,” Howlett said. Indian and non-Indian Health care officials gathered at Ninepipes for the CSKT THD Health Care Summit. (B.L. Azure photo) Indian and non-Indian Health care officials gathered at Ninepipes for the CSKT THD Health Care Summit. (B.L. Azure photo) The main driver in the new opportunity is the Affordable Care Act. By law American Indians must participate in it. The ACA offers health care options that heretofore were unavailable through the Indian Health Service. Many of the federal, regional, state, local and tribal officials as well as insurance companies in attendance acknowledged that the ACA would result in better health care delivery for Americans but said the Indian and non-Indian public have been slow to buy into it because of the politics and confusion about the law. They all have a stake in the success of the ACA but figuring out how to capitalize on it successfully, especially in Indian Country where IHS has been the only health care system American Indians are familiar with, will take a concerted effort of all affected parties. The first step in that effort was taken last week on the Flathead Indian Reservation. Building Better Health Care.