Ursheet Parikh has been both a successful and not-so-successful entrepreneur, but he says he never could have succeeded without failing first.

Those lessons now help him as a venture investor. In July, Mr. Parikh joined Mayfield Fund to invest in cloud, networking and storage startups. He has worked at both Cisco Systems Inc. and Microsoft Corp., where he was a general manager in the server, cloud and tools business after Microsoft bought his latest company, StorSimple, in 2012.

Mayfield Fund Mayfield Fund Partner Ursheet Parikh

He talked to Venture Capital Dispatch about the lessons he learned when his earlier startup failed, about the big technologies he sees coming, and about what makes a good entrepreneur. This conversation is edited for clarity and length.

StorSimple was a successful company—you said Microsoft Chief Executive Steve Ballmer told analysts it was one of his favorite acquisitions–but earlier in your career, you started a company that failed (streaming media startup Jalva Media). What did you learn from that experience?

Success is more important. You can be shooting blanks everywhere, but you have to learn to shoot the target. If you’re always in a rose-tinted-glass kind of world, it’s hard to deal with startup failure.

I had a lot of growth to do on the emotional quotient–for me, that failure was important. I found that the CEO job took an unnatural amount of thinking time. With every crisis I could go back and think of some bread crumb, something that happened three or six or nine months ago that I should have paid attention to.

When I compare my first startup to StorSimple, yes, course corrections early can help, but the first thing is that the core value system has to come together.

StorSimple was about intellectual honesty, accountability and passion. When you wake up in the morning, do you absolutely believe everything you’ll tell your employees and customers and partners today? If not, don’t do it.

When customers criticize, the instinct is to go on defense. Don’t go on the defensive—shut up and listen.

[Also], know what business to walk away from. For anybody, it’s easy to find five customers. The challenge is how to build a scalable, repeatable business.

You started StorSimple in 2009, in the depths of the global recession. What was that like?

We were fortunate to get funded quickly, and [recession] instills serious discipline. The core team comes together well—they are believers who want to change the world. It was before storage was an interesting sector—it was the graveyard of startups.

[But] great storage companies happen with the intersection of big technology and business trends and the inability of incumbents to move fast…[and] Microsoft emerged as a key partner. We had this initial thing where Amazon was a partner, but they built a competing product.

Companies are movements—you want exceptional people who are better and smarter than you to be part of that movement, to channel their competitive energies into winning in the marketplace.

What types of startups are you looking for now?

I think Google’s acquisition of Nest is as seminal as YouTube. One of the best opportunities today is to deliver a platform for the Internet of Things.

As you start looking at different markets, economies, industries and applications, you find a need today—Tesla Motors had to reinvent it, Nest did it, Chevy Volt did it, GE the same thing. You see transformations—the fact that hundreds of millions of PCs are connected and a few billion mobile devices and tens of billions of others. Clearly, you need the software infrastructure that makes these devices work.

A natural leap from there is into what happens in networks. When Moore’s Law got to a certain point, you could take the device in your hand and put a camera on that device. Now we have software-defined data centers, and we can see mobile service providers putting a disproportionate level of investment into how that will change things.

The next part you see [is] the sheer volumes of data with phones—big data. Nobody wants to delete data, so it all has to be online.

It’s interesting to see Amazon say, this is old storage and we’ll shut down the servers and call them glacier and boot them up once a month. Space is not as expensive as power and cooling, and if people don’t want to delete data, especially when they’re emotionally attached…there’s the next level of innovation around storage.

It’s hard to know which data is cold and hot, but you get a flavor here for infrastructure storage platforms, and how each of these things transforms individual industries.

I think this is a great time, [but] I try to ask how would this company do in 2008–is this thing a fad. People tend to spend a lot of money when everybody is feeling good, versus if they have money and they’re not feeling positive, they hold on to it.

I think early-stage companies should have hypotheses on why what they’re doing should be essential for customers to have.

Write to Deborah Gage at deborah.gage@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @deborahgage