The Keene Swamp Bats, who lost in the first round of the NECBL playoffs last year on the heels of winning it all the season before, will have an entirely new look for the 2015 season.

Sure, the purple uniforms and Ribby will be back, but after that, you’ll need a scorecard.

“We’ve got some kids from some new schools for us,” Bats director of baseball operations Marty Testo said Friday while looking over the roster. “We’ve expanded our pool a bit, and that’s exciting.”

The only player on the 2015 roster that lost in Sanford to the Mainers in Game 3 of the Northern Division opening round last summer is Central Connecticut catcher Connor Fitzsimons.

The roster features one familiar name around Alumni Field in Lucas Luopa, a Keene High graduate and junior infielder at Eckerd College.

Luopa, who played for the Winchester (Va.) Royals of the Valley Baseball League last summer, will be playing his first summer in the wooden-bat NECBL.

Keene figures to have players from Indiana University, Butler and Northern Illinois for the first time, along with players from the usual feeding schools Virginia, St. John’s, Louisville and Washington State.

The Bats will have two New Hampshire kids for the first time since the 2012 season. Along with Luopa, Boston College pitcher Carmen Giampetruzzi of Manchester also is expected to spend the summer in Keene.

Luopa is also the first Keene native on the roster since Southern Maine infielder Brett Barrett in 2012.

Giampetruzzi, a 6-foot-3 and 210-pound left-hander, was named to the NHIAA’s All-State first team as a junior and senior at Trinity. He was ranked 91st nationally in the 2014 senior class and entered his BC career as the top-ranked left-hander in New Hampshire.

Giampetruzzi, who graduated 10th in his class, also led the Pioneers to a football title in 2011 and basketball crown in 2013.

The University of Virginia, which lost in the College Baseball World Series to Vanderbilt last season, will send three pitchers to Keene this summer in sophomores Derek Casey, Tommy Doyle and Bennett Sousa.

All three will be getting their first look at Cavaliers baseball when the preseasons No. 3 team opens the season at East Carolina on Feb. 13 at 3 p.m.

Casey, a right-handed hurler out of Mechanicsville, Va., was a 22nd-round pick by the St. Louis Cardinals in the 2014 Major League Baseball draft, while Doyle, also a righty, was taken in the 35th round by the Nationals.

Casey and Doyle are part of a 13-member freshman class that was picked as the nation’s second-best recruiting class by Baseball America, marking Virginia’s highest ranking in program history. LSU was picked No. 1.

Kade McClure, a pitcher from Mentor, Ohio, is also expected to be in Keene this summer. The 6-7 right-hander is headed to Louisville for his freshman season with an 86 mph fastball to accompany a few deceiving off-speed pitches.

Lincoln Henzman, of Lexington, Ky., will also come up from Louisville for the summer.

In the infield, Butler shortstop Garrett Christman of Noblesville, Ind., represents the only other MLB Draft pick on the roster. A 37th-round pick by the Giants, he was named an honorable mention for Perfect Game’s All-American team in 2012 and 2013.

Christman led his high school team to an Indiana Class 4A state title his senior year, hitting .342.

Washington State’s Wesley Leow and Shane Matheny, along with Luopa and Dan Cellucci of Bryant are the only other infielders currently on the roster, although several pitchers also can fill in on the corners.

Cellucci, of Sudbury, Mass., was the fourth-leading hitter for a Bryant squad that finished the season at the NCAA Regionals with a 42-16 record a year ago. The junior hit .249 with 12 doubles, two home runs and 36 RBIs. Defensively, Cellucci made just 12 errors on 255 chances, posting a .953 fielding percentage at shortstop.

The Bats also have multiple players coming from St. John’s for the fifth time since 2010 in pitcher David Moyer and outfielder Anthony Brocato.

Of the five outfielders listed, three are left-handed, with one being Cornell’s Ryan Karl, a 6-2, 215-pound senior who started his college career at Louisville.

Karl, who transferred to Cornell from community college, started all 39 games and posted a team-high .280 batting average. He added nine home runs, 32 RBIs and a .552 slugging percentage. Karl’s father, Brian, played in the Milwaukee Brewers organization.

St. John’s outfielder Anthony Brocato, a sophomore, ws the New Jersey player of the year out of high school.

Adam Fournier is the lone Franklin Pierce representative and first since Paul Covelle in 2013.

UMass pitcher and first baseman Michael Geannelis was the Atlantic-10 rookie of the year last season, and Hartford pitcher Kyle Gauthier, a senior right-hander, is the brother of 2012 Bats player Tyler Gauthier.