To quote the band Styx from the classic 1977 song “Come Sail Away”:

“I tried … Oh Lord I tried … to carry on …” and not give the Bully Award to Barack Obama once again. However, I had no choice. Mr. Obama has taken bullying to a whole new level not seen since, maybe, Hugo Chavez (another liberal darling).

The protesters in Ferguson, Missouri, are waiting their place in line, hoping to get next week’s award, but in the mean time, the unmitigated gall shown this week by Mr. Obama is nothing short of terrifying.

On Nov. 20, 2014 - Mexican Revolution Day (coincidence?), Mr. Obama made promises that he has no legal authority to keep; granting amnesty for more than 5 million “anchor baby parents” and illegal immigrant children.

As someone who is a supposed to be a constitutional scholar, Mr. Obama has conveniently forgotten about that pesky Separation of Powers thingy written very clearly in U.S. Constitution. I expect that from some Third World country, maybe a dictator or a king. But not in United States of America! Not now, not ever! This is a very bad precedent, and one even Democrats will regret.

Let’s say it’s 2016. It’s a cold, wintry January morning. Newly elected President Dick Cheney rides into office on a wave of anti-Obama sentiments, just like what happened in this year’s midterms. President Cheney has an agenda he wants to push through, but has neither the votes nor the authority he needs to do what he wants right away — repeal Obamacare, gut Common Core and build a big ol’ uncrossable fence at the border. Hmmm, what to do, what to do? Follow the lesson learned from President “Bully” Obama? Stroke of the pen, law of the land!

Why not? Congress can be a real pain. It takes time for the representatives of the people to do things. Why not just get rid of Congress and let President Cheney do whatever is he thinks is best for the country, his power and his party?

Hollywood elites agree with this weeks Bully. In 2010 Woody Allen said, “It would be good … if he [Obama] could be dictator for a few years because he could do a lot of good things quickly.” Earlier this year, actress Gwyneth Paltrow said, “It would be wonderful if we were able to give this man all of the power that he needs to pass the things that he needs to pass.”

If Woody Allen and Gwyneth Paltrow’s pal get to have those kinds of powers, why not President Dick Cheney or President Rand Paul or President Scott Walker or President Rick Perry, etc.?

Megyn Kelly, host of “The Kelly File” on Fox News, interviewed a gleeful Geraldo Rivera, who said in a stereotypical, hypocritical response, “I don’t care what Obama said before … The Republicans had it coming.” Another example of the left embracing the “justifying of the means.”

The president may be losing far more political capital than he thinks. Just hours after his speech on Thursday, I attended an early screening of the new blockbuster “The Hunger Games: Mockingjay Part 1.” (It’s very good by the way.) Ironically, much of the film centers on an out-of-control president who stops at nothing to keep power and inflict his will on everyone. Before the preview began, a PSA ran featuring a number of Hollywood types. Near the end of the spot, Vice President Joe Biden speaks, and the sold-out crowd immediately roared with laughter, (not the intended response, I promise you). A few moments later Mr. Obama appeared and the audience exploded in boos and jeers. Anecdotal, sure, but the president has a far more difficult task ahead of him if this trend continues.

The president’s actions are very dangerous and the “Bully from The Bully Pulpit” is ramming down laws he has no power to create while stealing authority from Congress, all with the intent to increase the power for himself and his party — and at the expense of the American people and the Constitution he swore to defend.

As we have learned from the past, when it comes to promises of border security, Democrats always — let me be clear, always — willfully drop the ball and endanger our safety, security and jobs. We must not fall for the lie again.

Every American, no matter party affiliations, should be against this amnesty move. Even if you agree with amnesty, this is not the way to do it.

So, for your lawless behavior, intentional lying to the American people and all-around dangerous, aggressive behavior toward Congress and the U.S. Constitution, President Barack Hussein Obama, you (once again), are the Liberal Bully of the Week.