Last week, abortion protesters on both sides of the issue braved the cold outside of the U.S. Supreme Court as eight Justices heard arguments on Texas' strict abortion clinic laws - which require clinics to maintain hospital-like standards.

Cases like these could be mainstays in the coming years, with the prospect of the Supreme Court taking a liberal slant for the first time in decades - after the death of conservative Justice Antonin Scalia.

"It would shift American law in significant ways, a lot of the conservative rulings we've seen come out of the court over the past 15 to 20 years would likely be threatened," says John Hudak, a Brookings Institution senior fellow and the deputy director of the Center for Effective Public Management in Washington, DC.

Many of those rulings have already covered very politically polarizing issues such as abortion, gun control, campaign finance, voting and civil rights, immigration, and the environment. No matter which side of those issues Americans fall on, new rulings are sure to impact their way of life.

Hudak points out, "With a new liberal on the court, it won't just be a couple of liberal rulings happening from time to time. It will be a consistent record of liberal rulings."

According to a recent CBS News poll, 49% of Americans approve of the Supreme Court and 37% disapprove. Add to that, Democrats give the court a higher approval rating at 55% versus 46% from Republicans.

Experts point out that the last summer's rulings striking down state bans on same-sex marriage along with a second upholding of the Affordable Care Act - also known as "Obamacare" - are the likely drivers of those differences in approval.

In those cases, it's also important to note that even though presidents aligned with a particular party may be likely to nominate a justice with a history of rulings that may fall into that president's party line, justices don't always vote in that ideological block. For instance, Chief Justice John Roberts - who was nominated to the court by Republican President George W. Bush back in 2005 and confirmed that same year - has been the deciding vote twice, in challenges to the Affordable Care Act.

Meanwhile, President Barack Obama has said he will submit a nominee for consideration of the vacant seat. Senate Republicans have vowed they will not consider a nominee until after a new president is chosen November's general election. That means the fight to fill the vacancy could drag on well into next year.