Lettice (Laura Gordon) and Lotte (Carrie Hitchcock) don’t see eye to eye in the comedy “Lettice and Lovage.” Credit: Ross E. Zentner

By ,

We've all been there: Stuck on one of those interminable tours from hell with a well-meaning docent, who must somehow convince us that the intricate latticework — or some such obscure detail we won't remember — actually merits our attention.

Pity the poor docent who goes by the name of Lettice in Peter Shaffer's "Lettice and Lovage," receiving a pitch-perfect production from Renaissance Theaterworks under Jenny Wanasek's direction.

Assuming the role of Lettice when the late, great Laurie Birmingham was forced to withdraw because of cancer, Laura Gordon foreshadows what's to come, as Lettice quickly gives four tours of a Tudor home.

Insisting that "fantasy floods in where fact leaves a vacuum," Lettice increasingly strays from the script, allowing her initially boring recitation to become a thrilling re-enactment of life in Elizabethan England.

With each succeeding tour, lighting designer Alan Piotrowicz makes the world brighter; Jason Orlenko follows suit, draping the initially comatose but now-enraptured tourists in more colorful clothing. Through the power of imagination, a once dreary house — symbolic of our often gray existence — comes alive.

It's therefore no surprise that Lettice was raised in the theater, where lies and illusions fudge details to deliver larger truths.

Nor is it any surprise that the personnel director for Lettice's employer hates theater. Her name is Lotte, and when we first see her as embodied by Carrie Hitchcock, she is dressed in gray and looking dustily dour.

Shaffer's play explores whether this improbably odd couple might actually become friends, given what they share despite all their differences: an abiding love for history and art, related to a despairing sense that modernity cares for neither and has, therefore, left each of them — aging and alone — high and dry.

Theatrical to her core, Lettice delivers her perspective in dramatic flourishes and a heightened cadence, while Gordon does what such good actors do: She never lets us forget, even in this play's many farcical moments, that there's a fervently beating heart beneath all the outrageous flimflam.

There's something forlorn and lost — as well as vulnerable and desperate — about Gordon's Lettice. She acts as if her life depends on it, because it does: Gordon's Lettice uses disguise to tell the truth about who she is. It's both funny and almost unbearably moving to watch this sensitive soul revealing herself through her roles, while desperately hoping to connect.

As so often happens with theater, Lettice's brave performance inspires the best from her audience, including a fussy lawyer (Bryce Lord) and Lotte herself, whose long-dormant lust for life undergoes a great awakening.

Both dryly funny and poignant, Hitchcock gives an expertly paced and textured performance in which we watch Lotte thaw. Hitchcock's initially rigid posture slowly softens and her severe mouth begins twitching its way toward a smile; both convey the consequent embarrassment as well as begrudging but pleased wonder of a woman newly discovering the joy of being alive.

That joy carries us toward a glorious conclusion, true to what's promised by Lettice's motto and delivered by this stellar production: "Enlarge! Enliven! Enlighten!"

And, we might add, thoroughly entertain.

IF YOU GO

"Lettice and Lovage" continues through May 3 at the Broadway Studio Theatre, 158 N. Broadway. For tickets, visit r-t-w.com.