State Rep. Jason Conger of Bend was forced to defend his votes in favor of setting up the Cover Oregon website when the Oregon Republican Senate candidates met in separate forums Tuesday night and Wednesday morning in Bend.

All five GOP candidates for the seat held by Democratic Sen. Jeff Merkley participated in a Tuesday night forum sponsored by the Deschutes County Republican Party and three of them -- Conger, former Linn County GOP Chair Jo Rae Perkins and Salem information technology consultant Mark Callahan -- appeared in an hour-long radio show on KBND Radio on Wednesday morning.

In both events, Callahan criticized Conger for voting to allow the state to set up its own health care exchange linked to the Cover Oregon website, which has had several well-publicized software problems preventing it from working properly.

"Rep. Conger here voted the 10 bills that make up what I refer to as 'Kitz-care'," said Callahan on KBND, referring to Gov. John Kitzhaber, "or the Oregon version of Obamacare."

"Legislators don't get to vote on federal law," Conger responded, saying that it wasn't true his votes were the "equivalent of Obamacare."

In the Tuesday night forum, Conger said he thought it would be better for the state to have its own health exchange instead of joining the federal exchange, the Bend Bulletin reported.

Before the forums, Conger had also sought to distance himself from Cover Oregon by announcing last week that the state should shutter the web site and allow consumers to to go directly to health insurers for coverage.

Conger, who is the only one of the five candidates to serve in elective office, argued that past elections show that it's extremely hard to win statewide office in Oregon without this experience.

Callahan disputed that, saying that the fact Conger is an elected official doesn't "anoint you to hold higher office."

"That's like me saying you're not more qualified to do IT stuff than me," responded Conger. "The fact of the matter is, this is not a dog-catcher race you're running in. This is serious business."

Conger and Portland pediatric neurosurgeon Monica Wehby are the two GOP candidates who have attracted the most attention in the race. Wehby announced earlier this week that she raised $500,000 in the last quarter of 2013.

Conger said in a fundraising invitation that he had raised $200,000 but in an interview Tuesday he said he didn't know if that total covered the last quarter of 2013 or the amount he has raised until now.

-- Jeff Mapes