Small, intimate courses could connect new students, faculty members

The University of Colorado is considering a freshman seminar program that would provide incoming students with an immediate and close connection to a faculty member and, officials hope, excite them about learning in their first year of college.

Though still in the early stages of development, CU academic leaders are hoping to roll out the courses sometime next year, possibly as early as the fall semester.

The proposed seminars are part of the Boulder campus's efforts to increase the number of freshmen who return for a second year and, eventually, graduate from CU.

The campus is trying to improve its graduation rate, or the number of students who start and finish their degree at CU in six years or less.

The university loses the largest number of students between their freshman and sophomore year — about 16 percent of freshmen don't return after summer break — and is working to improve the first-year experience, in a number of ways, as part of the broader graduation-rate initiative.

The semester-long seminars are, in theory, designed to be intimate, with small class sizes to help students build a relationship with the faculty member leading the course. Proposed topics range from poetry to science to musical composition.

Advertisement

"One of the most important predictors of student attrition is whether they feel like they belong, whether somebody cares about them as an individual," said Michael Grant, vice provost and associate vice chancellor for undergraduate education. "The mechanisms where students feel like they belong oftentimes relates to their attachment to a faculty member, an adviser, a staff member at the university that connects with them personally."

'Game-changer'

Traditionally, first-year students are busy taking introductory courses required for a CU degree, such as those in calculus or physics.

A freshman seminar would give them something to be excited about, said Paul Chinowsky, associate vice provost for student success.

"I want someone to wake up on a Tuesday morning and go 'I want to go to that class,' instead of going 'Oh, I have intro to whatever it is,'" he said.

He said one faculty member proposed a course using bees and ants as examples of social systems and decision-making. Another proposed a course that ties the history of CU to Colorado controversies, he said.

Chinowsky said he hopes the seminars will replace a faculty mentorship program the campus started in 2013.

CU's peers, including the University of Texas, University of North Carolina and the University of California, all have some form of freshman seminar course, and Chinowsky believes CU has some catching up to do.

"They have the potential to be a game-changer," he said.

Gateway courses

Though it's too early to tell if CU's efforts are making a difference for the current freshman class, a mid-year indicator shows some progress: the retention rate between the fall and spring semesters was 95.1 percent, up slightly from 95 percent last year and 94.3 percent in 2013-14.

The campus will look this fall to see how many current freshmen return as sophomores, a better marker for measuring change, officials said.

The campus's six-year graduation rate, a federal standard used to compare colleges and universities, has improved from 66 percent for the class that entered in 2000 to 71 percent for the class that entered in 2009.

Chancellor Phil DiStefano wants to improve that rate to 80 percent by 2020 and nearly every campus decision is connected to reaching that goal. The campus has made changes in advising, orientation, student life and a number of other areas as part of this effort.

Forty-five percent of CU students graduate in four years, according to the most recent data available.

This year, CU academic leaders are revising and improving what are known as "gateway courses," or large, introductory lecture courses that thousands of freshmen take each year.

A student's performance in those types of courses, such as introductory psychology and microeconomics, seems to be correlated with whether or not they return as sophomores, Grant said.

CU is also refining its new student welcome program, which went online for the first time last summer as part of the graduation-rate initiative, and studying the effects of a freshman math-placement tool.

This fall the campus also sought to address a problem that may have unknowingly hindered some students.

A 2014 statistical analysis found that freshmen with certain risk factors — lower high school GPA, higher need for financial aid, being a first-generation college student — were filling out their housing application late, which meant they were placed together in the same dorms, many in Williams Village.

CU officials said they don't know if housing those students together effected their retention and graduation rates, but they thought it might be a possibility, so this fall they began holding spots open in dorms on main campus for late housing applications.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta