Elizabeth Wade, operations manager at Clarity, a staffing agency in Midtown Manhattan, is breathing a sigh of relief.

Clarity was looking at a "substantial" increase in health insurance costs next year as a result of the Affordable Care Act.

Now, a one-year delay in the implementation of a rule that will require midsized businesses to offer health insurance will give Clarity and other city firms some breathing room and time to explore more affordable insurance options.

"It's music to my ears," Wade told the Daily News. "It gives us a slight reprieve from making a hasty decision."

The federal government's move earlier this week to push off until 2016 the employer mandate for businesses employing between 50 and 99 workers was seen as a small victory for small businesses.

"It delays the ultimate burden and gives them hope for legislative repeal," Barry Sloane, CEO of Newtek Business Services, which serves as an insurance broker, told the News.

But some small business groups said the delay, which comes on the heels of an earlier postponement announced this past summer, doesn't go far enough.

Amanda Austin, director of federal public policy for the National Federation of Independent Business, a staunch opponent of Obamacare, called the delay "the latest indicator that this law is not ready for primetime and has systemic flaws that need to be corrected permanently."

The lion's share of small U.S. businesses employ fewer than 50 employers and therefore face no requirement to offer health insurance.

Even so, many small businesses have expressed concern over rising insurance costs.

"Our business owners are very concerned about the cost of providing health insurance whether there is a mandate to do it or not," Sloane said.

But Ian Flamm, president of AAA American Flag Decorating, a small Midtown business that employs five and provides them with health insurance, said he has seen no negative impact from the health care law.

"Every year preceding this one my increases have been 20% to 28% per annum," Flamm said. "This year it's slightly less."

A survey of New York City small businesses with revenues of less than $5 million, conducted by TD Bank, found that 55% do not believe the Affordable Care Act will impact their business.

Nearly one-quarter anticipate a negative impact from the law and most of that group are concerned about rising costs.

"We recommend that they work with their bankers and discuss how they can best manage cash flow and strategically plan for potential costs," said Chris Giamo, regional president for TD Bank's metro New York market.

pfurman@nydailynews.com