A man walked past a building that was burned during clashes in San Cristobal, Venezuela, in late April. The nationwide protests that roiled the country earlier this year have died down in recent weeks. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

Burned ATMs lined a street in San Cristobal. Despite President Nicolás Maduro's record-low popularity, the president seems to have prevailed--for now--with a tough crackdown that cost 42 lives and has withered the opposition. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

San Cristobal residents waited at a bus stop next to a post of National Guard. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

San Cristóbal, boasting five universities, is a hotbed of student activism. Here, a group of antigovernment protesters played the guitar on a barricade across the street of a National Guard tank. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

The faces of Genesis Carmona and Jimmy Vargas, both killed during the unrest, are stenciled on a wall in San Cristobal. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

A protester played soccer next to a National Guard post. While protests have died down in recent weeks, some young protesters in Táchira are willing to carry the torch. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

An opposition camp was lighted up on a Friday evening in late April in San Cristobal. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

A protester rested next to a pile of smashed rocks at an opposition camp. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

Protesters stayed at an opposition camp in San Cristobal. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

A soldier stood guard under the National Guard's tent directly next to one of the opposition camps in San Cristobal. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

A boy shot his slingshot into the trees at one of the protest camps. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

Protesters showed munitions and gas canisters collected during protests. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

A protester showed a homemade arm used to combat National Guard and police during clashes. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

Students in sports uniforms attended a protest in San Cristobal, April 25, 2014. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

A group of National Guardsmen stood guard near one of the protest camps. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

High-school students protested an educational reform measure which they say will reduce core curriculum and institute pro socialist propaganda into text books. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

Students burned books during a protest. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

A woman argued with soldiers at a new camp site in San Cristobal, April 30. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

National Guardsmen passed through a protest on motorcycles. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

Soldiers waited across the street as protesters aimed to set up a new camp in a park in San Cristobal. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …

Protesters settled in at a camp site. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal …