Barack Obama’s average yearly approval rating fell to the second-lowest point in his fifth year in office, according to a report released this morning by Gallup, and the final quarter of 2013 nearly matched the lowest of his presidency.

Consumed by scandal and controversy, the first year of President Obama second-term in office was a quite a struggle, to say the least, with the White House frequently playing defense. In May, for example, it was revealed that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) had improperly targets conservative groups seeking nonprofit status.

The following month, in June, the public learned that the National Security Agency (NSA) was collecting phone records of virtually every Americans for domestic surveillance purposes. In the fall, controversy arose over the disastrous Obamacare rollout and millions of health plan cancellations caused by the law, despite frequent assurances from President Obama that Americans could keep their current coverage.

In his fifth year in office, President Obama averaged an approval rating of 45.8%, according to Gallup, the second-lowest point of his presidency.

Gallup based the results on more than 175,000 interviews conducted between January 20, 2013 through January 19, 2014. His third year in office remains President Obama’s worst, when his approval rating averaged 44.4%.

Looking at the fifth-year numbers compared to past two-term presidents, Obama ranks near the bottom, barely surpassing the 45.7% average approval rating of George W. Bush. Richard Nixon has the lowest fifth-year approval rating, at 41.1%.

Dwight Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan had the best numbers, averaging 62.8% and 60.4%, respectively, in their fifth years in office. Bill Clinton averaged 57.9%.

In the final quarter of 2013, President Obama’s approval rating averaged 41.2%. This is not far off from the average 41% approval rating recorded the third-quarter of 2011, the worst mark of his presidency.

President Obama actually matches Bush on average 20th quarter approval ratings, both with 41.2%. But Gallup notes that President Obama’s numbers fell “to a more extreme degree.”

Though they’re near the bottom of recent presidents, they don’t come close to Nixon, who averaged the 28% approval rating in the final quarter of his fifth year in office, recorded during the midst of the Watergate scandal.

“There is no guarantee that Obama will suffer a similar fate. In the short term, however, all recent elected presidents except Clinton saw at least some decline in their 21st quarter in office, and only Clinton had a sixth-year approval average higher than his fifth-year average,” wrote Jeffrey Jones of Gallup.

“From a historical perspective, then, the prospects for Obama’s approval rating to improve are not great, although improvement would not be unprecedented,” he added.

Though President Obama has time to rebound, the sixth year of a presidency is usually one of the most difficult politically. Known as the “six-year itch,” voters are more likely to reject candidates from a president’s party in a mid-term election, typically translating into losses in Congress.