It took a Vikings franchise-record 12 seconds to determine that Gerald Hodges would not be a liability as a starter for injured strongside linebacker Anthony Barr.

In a play that was read beautifully and executed to perfection athletically, Hodges returned an interception 27 yards for a touchdown and a 7-0 lead just 12 seconds into Sunday’s 30-24 overtime win over the Jets at TCF Bank Stadium.

“Best play of my life,” Hodges said of the touchdown that tied a Percy Harvin kickoff return in 2012 as the fastest score in team history.

With Barr — the team’s leading tackler through 12 games — inactive because of a knee injury, Hodges was tabbed to make his fourth career start. The first three came on the strong side earlier this year. And in a further tip to Hodges’ improved maturity and study habits, he handled Sunday’s strongside nickel defense duties, while Chad Greenway took care of the weak side.

“Last year, I don’t think my head was in it like it should have been,” Hodges said. “Not like it is this year.”

The Jets opened with what appeared to be a low-risk play-action slant pass to Harvin, who was lined up in the left slot. But a formation with two tight ends to the offense’s right side told Hodges to look for the slant pass to the opposite side.

“We see the formations so many times in practice that come game time, we already know what’s coming,” said Hodges, who also had eight tackles and two passes defensed. “You see the formation and you go set yourself up to try and make the play.”

The interception was the first of Hodges’ career and the 12th of the season for quarterback Geno Smith. But in Smith’s defense, Harvin was wide open at first and still looked open right up to the point when Hodges showcased the athleticism that coaches rave about. “Hats off to Gerald,” Smith said. “That’s a play that not many linebackers can make.”

When Smith play-faked to running back Chris Ivory, Harvin was open. Free safety Harrison Smith was 4 yards behind and to Harvin’s left, while Hodges was between the hash marks, 5 yards inside of Harvin.

When Geno Smith let go of the ball, Harvin appeared to be in good position to make the catch. Until, that is, Hodges leapt and snared the ball with his left hand. He then came down, spun to his right and used defensive end Everson Griffen’s block of Smith at the 3-yard line to score his first touchdown since high school.

“I think [Geno Smith] looked me right in the eye as he was throwing,” Hodges said. “I think he thought he could throw it over my shoulder. It was a great play. Right place at the right time.”

Vikings coach Mike Zimmer expected to see a heavy dose of slants to Harvin. “It’s a play that a few teams have thrown on us this year,” Zimmer said. “[Hodges] made a great catch and ran with it.”

Greenway wasn’t surprised that Hodges recognized the formation and was expecting the slant. “His study habits have been good this year,” Greenway said. “And that’s a play we’ve seen a thousand times. But to recognize it is one thing. To react as quickly as he did and to actually make that play from that close is tough. Very tough.”