In this most unconventional of presidential elections, one nugget of conventional political wisdom may still hold true: Victory in Florida could be decisive.

The March 15 Florida primary, with 99 delegates at stake, marks the start of the winner-take-all phase of the Republican battle for the presidential nomination.

Defeat in his home state would humiliate Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and ratchet up the pressure to drop out. The state primary, and one in Ohio on the same day, is also billed as the Republican Party establishment’s last hope to prevent Manhattan billionaire Donald Trump from securing the party’s nomination.

But Florida’s diverse population, which includes large numbers of minorities and transplants from many other parts of the nation, tends to vote in line with the country as a whole. That’s a pattern that favors Trump, said Steve Schale, a Democratic strategist who directed President Barack Obama’s Florida campaign in 2008.

“While Marco has some home-field advantage, history and the trajectory of the overall race is working against him,” Schale said. “If Rubio can’t win in Florida, it’s over.”

The Democratic primary is not winner-take-all when it comes to delegates. Nonetheless, a victory for Hillary Clinton in the Sunshine State would solidify her position as her party’s presumptive nominee ahead of Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders.

“This is the kind of state you have to be competitive in,” Schale said. “If you can’t compete in a big, broad, diverse state, it will be hard to compete in states like Pennsylvania, Ohio, New York. At that point, we have to ask if there is any path for Sanders.”

❖ ❖ ❖

More than 3 million of the state’s 11 million registered voters are expected to cast a ballot in the primary with about half of those expected to take advantage of early voting. Early voting began in some counties Feb. 29 and state-required early voting was underway in every county Saturday.

The Tampa area will be a key battleground. It is the single largest media market in the state and anticipated to provide about 28 percent of all Florida voters, Schale said.

Early voting in Hillsborough County began Feb. 29 with more than 67,000 ballots already received as of Friday morning. In Pinellas County, more than 92,000 ballots have been returned.

Many voters will have headed to the polls in the wake of the Super Tuesday primaries, which resulted in multiple victories for Clinton and Trump.

“Each big win breeds momentum and excitement,” said Ashley Walker, former state campaign director for the 2012 Obama for America campaign. “At this point, it will be really difficult to stop Donald Trump.”

On the Democratic side, Walker said she expects Clinton to repeat her primary victory in 2008, when she outpolled Obama here.

Sanders’ campaign message of campaign finance reform and tackling inequality has played well with young white voters in other states but less successfully with older and minority voters.

By contrast, Clinton’s campaign promises to keep and improve the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, and to remove barriers that prevent minorities, women and the LGBT community from being successful has earned her strong support among them.

In the South Carolina primary, her support among black voters was close to 80 percent, according to exit polls. In Texas, she captured 71 percent of the Hispanic vote, exit polls showed.

Those two voting groups will be crucial again in Florida. Combined they make up about 43 percent of Florida’s registered Democrats, according to Florida Division of Election data.

“I think you’ll see a double-digit win,” Walker said. “Florida has always been friendly to Secretary Clinton.

❖ ❖ ❖

Despite his early primary victories, Trump still has a long way to go to win the 1,237 delegates required to secure the nomination.

Rubio’s campaign will be hoping that recent attacks on Trump from leading Republican figures including Mitt Romney and Sen. John McCain — the party’s last two nominees — will make a dent in Trump’s support.

The Florida senator’s best hope may be to appeal to the higher number of older voters in Florida about Trump’s electability, said Susan MacManus, a University of South Florida political science professor.

Over 50s are expected to comprise a sizable bloc of likely GOP voters in the primary. They are more likely to be concerned about how a Trump nomination could damage the party’s chances in other races on the November ballot, MacManus said.

That includes state House and state Senate races where Republicans enjoy a majority. Most critical of all, it also includes the U.S. Senate seat vacated by Rubio. He also needs to show GOP voters he is more likely than Trump to best Clinton in the general election, she said.

“Republicans are more attuned to electability and also attuned to the impact Trump could have on the down-ballot races, particularly the U.S. Senate race,” MacManus said.

She expects Rubio to emphasize his plan to bolster spending on the military when he campaigns in the Panhandle, home to a number of military installations.

The challenge for Rubio is that all his opponents have roughly the same plan for U.S. defense spending. Also, the swath of Florida from Pensacola to Jacksonville is one of the most conservative parts of the state and has the highest concentration of evangelicals, making it potentially fertile ground for U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas.

Immigration has been a key issue in the GOP primary, with Rubio facing frequent attacks from Cruz about a plan to provide a pathway to citizenship for illegal immigrants that Rubio later backed away from.

Trump’s early campaign comments, meantime, describing Mexicans as rapists and criminals is more likely to be a factor in the general election should he win the nomination than it will be in the primary.

❖ ❖ ❖

Rubio, who is Hispanic, is expected to do well in his home turf of Miami. But only about 478,000 of Florida’s 4.2 million registered Republican voters are Hispanic.

Voters in Hawaii, Idaho, Michigan and Mississippi will go to the polls Tuesday and on Saturday, in the District of Columbia. MacManus expects Rubio’s focus will be on Florida.

“He’s got to work Florida hard in the next couple of weeks and leave no part of the state untouched in terms of outreach,” MacManus said. “He’s got lay off the cuteness in the debates and certainly stress the economy and security.”

Republican strategist April Schiff said she fears voters will be turned off from voting by the insults and attacks being traded among Trump, Rubio and Cruz.

“It’s a disaster; I couldn’t watch the debate last night,” Schiff said Friday. “If they continue down the path they’re on with all that vitriol and arguing and attacking each other, nobody hears their message.”

The most recent poll on the Florida GOP race, from Quinnipiac University, had Trump leading Rubio 44 percent to 28 percent. The poll had Cruz at 12 percent and Ohio Gov. John Kasich at 7 percent. Kasich isn’t expected to be a factor in Florida as he concentrates on his home state.

If the poll is accurate, that deficit will be hard for Rubio to make up, particularly with so many Floridians voting early, experts say.

One significant boost could come if Rubio can secure the endorsement of former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, Schiff said. Bush was once a mentor to Rubio but the two clashed in debates and Bush has not come out in support of any candidate since suspending his campaign Feb. 21.

“Jeb Bush could have a huge impact on this primary should he choose to endorse someone between now and March 15,” Schiff said. “I’m sure they’re working on him as hard as they can right now.”

codonnell@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7871

Twitter: codonnellTBO