This column started with two ideas that I'll admit are a bit naïve.

First, since the federal government is unable to keep itself functioning, maybe it needs some help, possibly in the form of an infusion of ideas from the people that put it there.

Still, I'm not sure politicians are actually listening. One venture capitalist called it "pretty annoying," and that's the understatement of the year. As a U.S. citizen, I also consider it pretty darn embarrassing.

The second idea is that an agile software development approach could be applied to the federal government. An agile approach focuses on building multifunctional teams that create user-focused cases on which to build and develop small, incremental releases. They then iterate to continue building out the software to solve users' pressing needs. It generally moves the process along faster and makes the end result better.

While software is not a contact sport, it borrows some terms from rugby, like "scrum," which refers to the restart of a game after a foul or other stoppage. Developers usually work sequentially with steps of discovery, design, development, and testing. An agile approach folds them in small "scrums" that perform "sprints" to get products and ideas out faster.

All governments need mechanisms to disseminate ideas faster but I was partially missing the point here. I know from my time spent working in local government in New York City that about 90 percent of the good ideas are lost to process and inertia. And New York is arguably the best run executive branch in the country.

At the heart of the disagreement in Washington is Obamacare. It comes down to around 30 Republican members of the House, who represent six percent of the population, says Ferentz LaFargue, a faculty member in the history and social sciences department at Georgetown Day School in Maryland, and it's those people "who are driving or attempting to drive national policy."

We all know about the glitches in the online marketplaces but what if Obamacare worked perfectly on day one? Would its detractors have been more open to the process if it was rolled out in an iterative process grounded in specific use cases that reflect the diversity and needs of the American people? No, I do not think so.

Politics aside, government could benefit from more agility.

"It'd be nice if the agencies were more agile," said Clay Johnson, author of The Information Diet and CEO of Department of Better Technology, "especially when it comes to the ways that they buy things, in particular technology."

"A 'scrum' approach could be useful to the federal government right now. Is this already happening?" I asked him.

"Yeah, it's happening," he answered. "There are even 'scrum-certified' consultants in the government," but many make a common mistake thinking all government works the same. Johnson stresses, "...government is as monolithic as industry, just instead of companies and sectors, you often have agencies and jurisdictions. It's hard to prescribe something to 'government' because oftentimes different parts of government behave entirely differently."

OK, that's great. Scrums could work for some parts of government but definitely not for others. "For instance, I don't want the Supreme Court to 'scrum' on whether or not gays can get married," said Johnson. "I do, however, want Congress to scrum about how to get out of this mess."

Let's hope they get the message.