Hillary Clinton participates in a roundtable discussion with students and educators during an April 14 campaign event at Kirkwood Community College in Monticello, Iowa. Hillary Clinton announced her candidacy for the presidency on April 12 and is expected to be the front-runner for the Democratic Party nomination. (MICHAEL B. THOMAS/Agence France-Presse via Getty)

It is hard to tell whether Hillary Clinton understands the consequences of policies she backs or whether she knows and just gives lip service to those adversely affected. If she ever allowed the press to question her we might find out.

Take her stance on Obamacare. As we’ve all learned, through the maze of regulations and the individual mandate, we’re all required to have a minimum package of benefits and have lost the right to buy catastrophic plans (or be taxed). Insurance companies have been pulling out of the exchanges and suffering losses, thereby raising the prospect of the government (the taxpayers) making them whole. With all that background and with her enthusiastic embrace of Obamacare, we note this report:

Asked about the idea of insurance companies competing across state lines, Clinton said, “I think it’s something we should look at.” “If we’re going to have a free market system, we need a free market where we’ve got people competing on cost and quality, and that may be one thing we need to look at,” she said.

Thunk. For starters Obamacare eliminated a free market by mandating benefits. One result has been to chase insurers from the exchanges as well as throw more Americans into the closest we have to socialized medicine, Medicaid. If she’s pro-free market she never should have supported Obamacare, which is a huge distortion of free markets. But it gets worse. The idea of selling insurance across state lines was championed back in 2007-2008 . . . by Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.). His then-economic adviser Doug Holtz-Eakin tells me, “It is incoherent that candidate Clinton is picking up a McCain proposal from 2008 in hopes of injecting some competition into the hopelessly over-regulated, top-down Obamacare system she help to build.” Does she understand her inconsistency? We don’t know because no voter is going to grill her on her contradictions and leaps of logic.

Then take small business. In Iowa she declared, “Slowly over time it’s become more difficult — more expensive, more red tape, unnecessary regulations that have really put a damper” on business. Thunk again. Between Obamacare, between the slew of Environmental Protection Agency regulations and Dodd-Frank this administration has contributed arguably more to this situation than any in recent memory. Did she oppose any of them? Which does she want to repeal? What’s more, during her trip she bemoaned the lack of mandatory paid sick and maternity leave. Umm, isn’t that more expense we’d be dumping on business?

To be certain, many politicians are not particularly consistent. But in Hillary Clinton’s case one wonders if the lack of media access and the bubble within Hillaryland that she occupies have diminished her ability to think critically about her ideas. She is so used to blathering and saying very little that she may be unaccustomed to the rigors of real debate. It’s one more burden Democrats take on by clearing the field for her stroll to the nomination.