ADVERTISEMENT

Consumers who have started researching health insurance plans for 2016 could be in for a surprise to discover that their current option vanished completely.

Many insurance companies are constantly readjusting to market demands by adding new products and even “taking old plans off the market,” said Nate Purpura, vice president of consumer affairs at eHealth.com, an online health insurance exchange based in Mountain View, Calif.

“A lot of health insurance companies are still trying to find their footing in the reformed health insurance marketplace created by Obamacare,” he said. “As a result, thousands of Americans have been advised that their health insurance company will no longer offer their current plan in 2016.”

Some plans are disappearing altogether, and the options may never return. In Texas, for example, the Blue Cross Blue Shield PPO is being discontinued for at least 380,000 people, said Jack Hooper, CEO of Take Command Health, an online health insurance exchange based in Dallas. Consumers need to check to see what the default option will be, because in this case, people who do not purchase another plan will be renewed automatically into a HMO plan.

“We are big advocates for people not auto-renewing and taking time to shop around,” he said. “The plan they roll you into is not the same.”

Options When Your Plan Disappears

As they eliminate one plan, some insurance companies will offer consumers an alternate option that they can transfer into. While it is worth considering it, it is best to spend some time researching the coverage and comparing it to new ones on the market.

“Don’t imagine that it’s the only option available to you because you have plenty of other choices,” Purpura said.

The new options that are available for 2016 might wind up as a better choice for you, depending on how often you go to the doctor and how much can afford to spend each month. Open enrollment does not end until January 31, 2016, so you have time compare and contrast all the options.

If your current plan expires on December 31, you will need to purchase a plan by December 15 in order for your coverage to start by January 1. Consumers who enroll in a health insurance plan by Jan. 15 will have their coverage begin on Feb. 1, 2016.

For consumers who wait until the last minute to enroll on January 31, 2016 , their plan will not take effect until March 1, 2016. Unless you qualify for a special enrollment period such as moving or getting married, once you miss the deadline, you can not purchase health insurance in 2016.