In his final weeks in office, Congressman Bill Owens has been talking to reporters about his half-decade of politics in Washington, D.C.

The Democrat from Plattsburgh, N.Y., chose not to run for re-election. He leaves at a time when his party faces huge challenges after several big defeats that cost them control of the House and Senate.

During his in-depth conversation with Brian Mann, Owens sounded defiant and defended many of the deeply controversial Democratic decisions and policies.

Remembering the big Democratic wave

I think I voted against various negative acts put up by the Republican House something like 50 times. What a waste of energy and time.

Bill Owens came to office riding a huge Democratic wave. Remember 2009, before the Tea Party? Democrats controlled everything from the White House to Congress. Their approval ratings were sky high andthey had filibuster-proof majorities.

"When I arrived there was certainly a lot of excitement and anticipation of getting things done," Owens recalled. Five years later, that is all gone. As Owens prepares to leave office, Democrats have suffered bruising defeats in 2010, 2012, and again last November.

Owens expressed no regret about his major decisions such as his support of President Obama’s controversial Federal stimulus effort during the Great Recession, or his key vote in favor of the Affordable Care Act. "I have no trouble standing by that vote and I think what you see is that in states like New York where they really took steps to implement it, it's worked pretty well."

Owens said the Affordable Care Act needed to be "tweaked," but he described Republican efforts to repeal "Obamacare" as cynical and unproductive. "I think I voted against various negative acts put up by the Republican House something like 50 times. What a waste of energy and time."

A moderate who now sounds staunchly Democratic

Owens is widely viewed as a moderate. He ran for Congress after being a partner in a law-firm with long-time Republican state Senator Ron Stafford. During our conversation, however, he repeatedly defended Democratic policies and blasted the G.O.P.

Here he is talking about the Republican Party’s opposition to comprehensive immigration reform, which he described as "very problematic."

"Eighteen months the Senate bipartisan bill sat with no action in the [Republican controlled} House. Nor did the House bring any other immigration bill to the floor."

Signaling support for an unpopular Democratic President

Owens occasionally clashed with President Obama, but during our interview, he repeatedly defended the President and suggested the President faced a unique level of opposition from conservatives. "People have said there's a failure of leadership in Washington," Owens acknowledged. "My response to that is Reagan had [House Speaker] Tip [O'Neill], Clinton had [House Speaker Newt] Gingrich. Those were people who for all their rhetoric sat down and got things done. You do not have Republicans prepared to do that currently."

Although he sounded a distinctly partisan tone, Owens expressed some skepticism about the Republican who will hold his seat as of next month. Elise Stefanik won decisively in November and has gone out of her way to repeatedly praise Owens for his service and his bipartisan stance on things like the Keystone XL pipeline.

Asked for his views of Stefanik’s politics, Owens responded this way.

Owens described Stefanik as "very intelligent" and "hard-working."

Although the Democrat will leave office, he won’t exit the political stage entirely. He said he will work part-time for his old law-firm in Plattsburgh and will also work for a law firm in Washington, D.C. He said his focus will be on United States-Canada trade and relations.