Avalanche rookie coach Patrick Roy had much to say in his 35-minute season-opening press conference Wednesday at the Pepsi Center. Among them was moving natural center Ryan O’Reilly to Matt Duchene’s line, playing left wing opposite P.A. Parenteau.

“I think it’s an easy adjustment for him. I think Ryan is very solid in his own zone (and) Dutchy and P.A. Parenteau are maybe not as solid as defensively as Ryan is,” Roy said. “I think it will make a very good line. And I think it’ going to take pressure off of Nathan (MacKinnon).”

Roy said the plan remains the same for the 18-year-old rookie MacKinnon, who will begin as the third-line center with gritty linemates Steve Downie and Jamie McGinn. In the same story Downie talks about his recovery from major knee surgery in January.

O’Reilly and Duchene are excited about the opportunity to play together. O’Reilly played left wing for Team Canada at the 2013 World Championship and said he’s looking forward to be the primary “two-way” player on the line.

Meanwhile, Roy said Gabe Landeskog will continue as captain, after Landeskog previously spoke to the media and thanked Roy for believing in him with the ‘C’ on his chest. Of course, Landeskog was named captain under the previous coaching staff and management, although Joe Sakic had a hand in the deal when Landeskog became the NHL’s youngest captain a year ago. Roy obviously can choose his own captain, but Landy is the man. Sounds like newcomers Cory Sarich and Alex Tanguay — both Stanley Cup champions — might wear the ‘A’s, or O’Reilly, Duchene, Paul Stastny or someone he didn’t mention like Erik Johnson or Cody McLeod.

“The leaders of the team don’t need a C or an A on their jersey. We have great leaders on this team,” Roy said. “We have Sarich. We have Tanguay. We have (goalie J.S.) Giguere. And Landy won’t be alone. And there’s other guys on this team that I’m counting on — I mean Dutchy, O’Reilly, Stastny. I think these guys are ready to take the lead of this team.”

Roy talked extensively about defensemen Ryan Wilson and Erik Johnson, as well as third-year pro Tyson Barrie. Roy said he likes the D-corps and the team is still $10 million under the cap. (He didn’t mention the cap space but the improvement money is there.) Wilson told me he’s 100 percent and champing at the bit after concussion limited him to 69 games in 2011-12 and a nagging ankle injury forced him to miss 36-of-48 games last season. EJ wasn’t available but Roy said he just needs to stop thinking about the past and being that No. 1 overall pick.

Finally, Roy was asked if he predicted his first NHL team would make the playoffs. I thought for sure he’d say yes, given that most people close to the team — me included — think they have a good shot at No. 8 or better.

“Not too many experts put us in the playoffs and I would love to surprise them,” Roy said.

Today’s video interviews from Roy, Duchene, Landeskog, O’Reilly, Stastny and Tanguay can be found at my Tout feed. Adrian Dater and I will be doing video daily and, to be warned, we only have 45 seconds per clip so sometimes the discussion cuts off before it ends. (And yes, the picture on the left of my Tout page is Scott Parker ready to pummel me last season during a Denver Cutthroats charity game. Thank God were were just messin’ around.)