SOUTHFIELD, Mich., Jan. 26, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- As the Jan. 31 deadline approaches to enroll in a health insurance plan on Affordable Care Act exchanges, 40 percent of Americans begin 2016 with no dental insurance.

That's more than three times higher than those who will start the year without health coverage. There are many reasons people decide to go without dental care insurance, including: high costs, price confusion, fear of dentists and lack of accessibility, but just like health care, neglecting oral health can be painful and expensive.

This is where the Dental Solutions blog is designed to help. Located at edentalsolutions.com/blog, it serves as a dental industry leader in educating Americans on oral-health issues and ways to save on dental care.

"From seniors to college students to our neighbors, friends and family, we all know someone putting off going to the dentist due to the expense," said Kim Sharbatz, editor-in-chief of the Dental Solutions Blog. "We hope these tips can help everyone save on their dental care and lead them down the road to improving their oral health in 2016 and beyond."

Four great ways to save money on your dental care:

Discount Dental Plans – These are not insurance plans. They offer discounts from 20 to 50 percent on most dental procedures for a small monthly fee. The only requirement is that you utilize a participating network dentist, similar to most health insurance plans. Among one of the best is the Dental Solutions Discount Plan, which has one of the largest networks in country and some of the best discounts available. One plan includes an entire family unlike its major competitors.

Dental Schools – They often offer free or discounted services to the public. Students are supervised by licensed dentists and are in their final years of schooling. The downside is speed since students have to carefully check their work and might need several visits to complete a procedure. To find a dental school, visit the American Dental Association or for dental hygiene schools visit the American Hygienists' Association.

Dental Clinics – Many clinics base prices on your ability to pay or have sliding fees. Most state government websites have detailed list to locate these clinics.

Charitable Organizations – The Give Back a Smile (GBAS) program and Oral Health America are great resources to help get dental care to those in need. Your local United Way is also an excellent resource.

"These tips for saving on your dental care and improving your oral hygiene are not substitutes for proper daily dental care," Sharbatz said. "Make sure you brush your teeth twice a day, floss once a day and visit a dentist at least every six months. If you lack a traditional dental benefit, consider purchasing a discount dental card, like the Dental Solutions card. It can help you or your family save 20 to 50 percent on your dental care for a small monthly fee. There are no limits on use and everyone is accepted."

About Dental Solutions

Dental Solutions is a discount dental plan that provides discounts of 20 to 50 percent on most dental procedures for you and your household for a small monthly fee. It is a great way for anyone without a traditional dental benefit to save on their dental care including seniors, college students, independent business owners and more. In addition, it hosts the Dental Solutions blog for the general public and its membership. The blog specializes in educating the community about the importance of maintaining proper oral hygiene and oral health. It's a one-stop shop for the latest trends and news on these subjects. Visit edentalsolutions.com for more details.

(1) http://www.nadp.org/Dental_Benefits_Basics/Dental_BB_1.aspx

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160126/326064LOGO

SOURCE Dental Solutions