To debate, or how not to debate – that is the question.

The Republican presidential campaigns are struggling to agree on changes to the structure of future primary debates. At a meeting over the weekend, aides for the campaigns appeared to reach consensus and outlined their list of demands and questions in a letter to TV networks. Now that consensus seems to be crumbling.

“I just want to answer the questions and be done with it,” Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump told ABC’s George Stephanopoulos on “Good Morning America” on Tuesday.

Trump and his campaign manager said they plan to negotiate their preferred terms for future debates directly with the hosting networks, opting out of the collected effort of his fellow candidates.

"We’re being asked very rude questions, many of them directed at me,” Trump added. “I just want to have a debate. I want to answer tough questions.”

Among the demands outlined in the draft letter were abolishing lightening rounds of questioning by moderators. Another request is to keep the debate venue’s temperature a breezy 67 degrees.

Also on Tuesday, presidential candidate and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal offered this suggestion in an e-mail to supporters: “How about this –- if you want to participate in the next Republican debate, you should be required to be smart enough to have a plan to replace Obamacare and restore freedom and sanity to America’s health care system.”

Like Trump, at least three other presidential candidates, including Ohio Gov. John Kasich and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, have said they will not sign the letter to debate sponsors.

In an email obtained by ABC News, Carly Fiorina’s deputy campaign manager, Sarah Flores, informed Ben Ginsberg, a Republican attorney who has taken a lead role in drafting the letter, that Fiorina would not be signing the letter.

"We have consistently and successfully discussed our concerns with the networks and the voters -- and not behind closed doors like the political class seems to like to do," Flores wrote. "We do not care whether it's 67 degrees or our green room isn't as plush as another candidate."

In an appearance on Fox News on Monday, Christie lashed out at demands being asked by his fellow candidates.

“Stop complaining,” Christie said. “Do me a favor, set up a stage, put podiums up there and let's just go. Ok?"

Last week Sen. Lindsey Graham told ABC News he favors two evenly divided debates so that every candidate gets a fair shot.

The next Republican debate will be hosted November 10 by Fox Business/Wall Street Journal in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.