Exclusive

David Leyonhjelm, the NSW senator-elect representing the Liberal Democrats. Photo: James Alcock

The Abbott government faces a new hurdle in the Senate, with Family First and the Liberal Democratic Party forming a ''voting bloc''.

David Leyonhjelm, the New South Wales senator-elect representing the Liberal Democrats, has revealed he will vote in alliance with South Australia's Bob Day of Family First when the new Senate sits from July 1.

They have agreed to vote together on all economic issues, but will decide their own positions on social issues. As a self-described libertarian, Mr Leyonhjelm supports same sex-marriage, for example, whereas Family First is opposed.

Bob Day, federal chairman of the Family First Party. Photo: David Mariuz

The two-member bloc is half the size of the Palmer United-Ricky Muir alliance, but is likely to provide some headaches for the government - particularly if its agenda involves any new taxes.

Advertisement

Mr Day believes the minimum wage should be lowered to get people into work and taxes should be lowered across the board.

On Mr Leyonhjelm's policy agenda is privatisation of schools and hospitals, a lower minimum wage and lower tobacco taxes.

''Unlike the PUP senators, who are only united by Clive's funding, Bob and I share the same values,'' he said. ''That makes us a mini-voting bloc.''

Mr Leyonhjelm said he would defer to Mr Day on any industrial relations issue and Mr Day will take his advice on agriculture.

Prime Minister Tony Abbott is taking the lead hand in negotiating with the new crossbenchers. He met Mr Day on Wednesday and sat down in Sydney with Mr Leyonhjelm on Friday.

Mr Leyonhjelm said the Prime Minister laid out his legislative agenda for July, which focused on the abolition of the carbon and mining taxes, restoration of the Australian Building and Construction Commission and changes to the Fair Work Act.

After the meeting, Mr Leyonhjelm said: ''I quite like the guy, he speaks his mind, a bit like me.''

On Tuesday, Mr Day and Mr Leyonhjelm delivered speeches to the Centre for Independent Studies.

Mr Leyonhjelm said: ''We will push for doing less on nanny state stuff. An end to plain packaging, lower tobacco taxes and fewer smoking rules affecting private property. Stop funding public health advocates who want to control what we eat. Stop funding the environmental organisations that oppose everything about modern society.

''I also intend to press buttons on health and education. There is no justification for the government being a service provider in these. It has a role to determine policy, set standards, monitor quality and inform the public. It does not need to own schools or hospitals, or to employ teachers, doctors or nurses.

''Service providers, whether they are for profit, charitable or community, will do the job better than public servants. So long as there is a safety net for those who are seriously out of luck, the government should get out of it.''

When it comes to smaller government, Mr Leyonhjelm said: ''I do not draw the line anywhere.

''I have every intention of using my vote to try and make a difference. I will use argument, reason, pleading and occasionally blackmail.''

In his speech, Mr Day questioned why when Newstart paid $250 a week and the minimum wage was $650, people couldn't choose to work for less than the minimum, but higher than the dole.

''We praise people who work for zero money - volunteers who work up to 40 hours a week in op-shops and nursing homes, but we don't allow them to work for more than zero until you reach $650. It's absurd,'' he said.