Since losing the ability to offer health care insurance, chambers of commerce in Vermont have seen more financial strain due to losing members who had joined solely for the coverage.



At the same time, chambers have had a renewed focus on strengthening other programs — and trying new ones — which add value for local businesses.



That value is even more important now, given key changes at two local chambers. Recently, the Manchester and the Mountains Chamber of Commerce announced it was closing, only to announce its reopening days later.



Manchester chamber officials and local partners are taking a hard look at the organization’s future, and efforts are underway to get the chamber on firm financial footing. Its membership has declined over the past eight years by more than 50 percent.



One of those former member businesses is the Bromley View Inn in Bondville. The inn’s owners, Kevin and Kami Golembeski, dropped their membership with the Manchester and the Mountains Chamber of Commerce about five and a half years ago. At the time, Kami Golembeski said there was nothing to hold them to the membership after she got a job that offered health care and didn’t need the chamber’s coverage.



They felt their business was an “afterthought” and that the chamber was more focused on members in Manchester.



“We never got referrals from the chamber, we never got invitations to any chamber member events, like it was just expected that we knew they were going to happen,” Golembeski said. Additionally, when they dropped their membership, she added, the chamber did not follow up to ask why.



If they were to rejoin in the future, she said, they’ll need assurance they are valued, and better communication and more networking opportunities through the chamber.



Golembeski said the chamber could play a huge role in helping businesses build lasting relationships with other businesses.



“I just hope that we can help the chamber, because we’d like to have a chamber,” she said.



Berta Maginniss, executive director of the Manchester chamber, declined to be interviewed for this story.



Another chamber transition is happening nearby, but for a much different reason.



The Rutland Region Chamber of Commerce is starting a new era, with longtime CEO Tom Donahue recently stepping down after 21 years to take the top job at BROC — Community Action in Southwestern Vermont in Rutland. Mary Cohen was named interim executive director.



The Rutland chamber’s board is in the middle of an ongoing discussion about the organization’s future. Bill Ackerman, the chamber’s vice president and incoming president, said the organization has many strengths — including events like the annual business show — but a major focus of the current discussion is what else the chamber can do for the business community.



A big part of that is new events — ones that have a major impact for a diverse number of businesses. The job fair, which debuted last fall, is an example of this. Ackerman said the job fair addresses an everyday need for businesses at a time when a variety of companies are struggling to find the employees they need.



“The push for good talent today is enormous,” he said.



David Correll, the Rutland chamber’s current president, said the chamber’s website — which was revamped last year into a mobile device-friendly site — added great value for members and is also a key resource for the wider community. This enhances the chamber’s role as a marketer of businesses, a role chambers have had for many years.



“Our goal was (for the site) to be exactly what it has quickly grown into — the most popular resource for our community,” Correll said. “Additionally, we designed it as a place for our members to improve their online presence and visibility to potential customers.”



Correll added the chamber has spent a lot of time, especially over the last year or two, adding to its partnerships and collaborative efforts with businesses and organizations in the area. He said any chamber needs those connections to accomplish goals and create meaningful programs and services.



Last week, Donahue said the chamber has led successful efforts to bring conventions to the area, including the National Railway Historical Society. He said big conventions are economic engines in and of themselves, bringing a number of new customers to Rutland and surrounding towns.



Donahue said the value of these large events doesn’t stop when the planning is over. On the day of the event, he said, the chamber offers a concierge type of service on site, connecting people with services they need.



“We’re boots on the ground,” he said.



Sue Hoxie, president of the Addison County Chamber of Commerce, said she and the chamber board also recently discussed ways the chamber could offer more value to its members. Hoxie said it was too early to discuss details of possible changes, but the first changes will likely be in the chamber’s programs.



“It’ll probably take us 12 to 24 months to implement some of the things we talked about,” Hoxie said. Those may take the form of “more educational opportunities, more networking opportunities.”



“You may see us do more advocacy for our member businesses,” Hoxie added. That advocacy could be at the local or state level, she said, depending on the issue at hand.



Hoxie said all Vermont’s chambers are considering new services and new ways to add value for their members. Previously, she noted, chambers in Vermont lost 20 to 25 percent of their membership when they had to stop offering health care because of Vermont Health Connect and the Affordable Care Act. Since that happened, chambers have had to take a harder look at their services.



Hoxie said a consistent service of chambers is to be providers of information for visitors, customers and businesses — much like a county clerk would be in other states.



“That’s a value we offer to the community, not just to our member businesses,” she said.



Hoxie said the board is also looking at ways it can attract a younger demographic to its membership. She said that discussion may result in a young professionals’ group.



“We do make it a point to make our board diversified as far as age, gender and industry,” Hoxie said.



Tom Torti, president of the Lake Champlain Regional Chamber of Commerce, said chambers, for decades, have been the place to go for information.



“We really are the place where people come to get information, and then they go and do what it is they need to do,” Torti said. “You either deliver it or broker it.”



Torti said the advocacy piece is key at the Champlain chamber. In fact, that chamber has several staff members who specialize in certain issues, such as tourism or workplace issues, and then they advocate on those issues when needed.



Torti recalled what a local manufacturer once told him: “I pay dues to you to have you do the things that I don’t want to do, I don’t have the time to do, but I know need to be done.”



Advocacy at the State House was one of these things, Torti said.



He also said his members also like the chambers’ services around economic and business development.



“We run programs for both leadership and career development from high school through senior executive,” Torti said. “We’re building the talent pipeline, we’re growing the talent pipeline and we’re helping people grow in their careers.”



Marji Graf, CEO of the Okemo Valley Regional Chamber of Commerce, is the new president of the Vermont Association of Chamber of Commerce Executives, or VACCE.



Graf said the value of chambers was seen particularly acutely after Tropical Storm Irene, when chambers “got on the phone with their members and asked, ‘What do you need?’”



“Working together, we’re really strong,” Graf said.



She said a big part of the value chambers offer is their role as a “connector” between businesses. Over the years, Graf and her colleagues have partnered with businesses to build a strong spirit of collaboration and resource-sharing in the region’s business community.



Graf said a major service the chamber provides is a co-op arrangement that provides advertising in some major publications, such as the Vermont Vacation Guide and Yankee Magazine. This way, the businesses can advertise in these publications for far less money than they would have to pay on their own.



“I tell my members, ‘Look at me as your in-house ad agency. Let me do all the negotiating for you,’” she said. “And I don’t do anything in print that isn’t online as well.”



Going forward, Graf said, more services could be jointly offered through the Vermont Department of Tourism & Marketing and the local chambers, such as efforts to offer financial assistance to cover trade show fees for businesses. Using a co-op type of model, Graf said, the state could potentially offer that assistance to the chambers, and chambers could offer it to members.



gareth.henderson@rutlandherald.com