"Senior terminally ill father signing his last will."

Source: Shutterstock [Update Oct. 5, 2015: Governor Jerry Brown signed the End of Life Option Act into law on Oct. 5, 2015, adding California to the other four states that allow physician-assisted suicide (Montana, Oregon, Vermont, and Washington). California's law is set to take effect 90 days after the state legislature adjourns the special session on healthcare, which likely will not be until Jan. 2016 at the earliest.]



A physician-assisted suicide or death with dignity bill was passed by the California Senate (23-14) on Friday, Sep. 11, 2015. The End of Life Option Act (SB-128) would allow terminally ill adults who have six months or fewer to live the right to have a doctor prescribe medication to end their lives.



Governor Jerry Brown has until Oct. 11, 2015 to sign the bill, but whether he will is unknown. Brown, who attended a Jesuit seminary, is Catholic but has gone against the Catholic Church on issues such as gay marriage. On the other hand, Brown is currently working with the Catholic Church on reducing greenhouse gas emissions. He has not yet made his opinions on physician-assisted suicide known.



The bill was introduced on Jan. 20, 2015 by two Democratic State Senators, Bill Morning of Carmel, CA and Lois Wolk of Davis, CA, and the family of Brittany Maynard, a 29-year-old California resident with terminal brain cancer who moved to Oregon to use the state’s law. It was modelled after Oregon’s Death with Dignity law with two additions: 1. A translator is required for non-English speakers, and 2. Pharmacists are given legal immunity for participating in deaths in addition to doctors.



Initially passed the Senate in June after supporters lobbied the California Medical Association to change their position from opposition to neutrality, the bill was then stalled in the Assembly health committee by Latino Democrats due to Catholic Church opposition. The bill was reintroduced to the health committee during a special session where it passed on Aug. 18, 2015 and passed the Assembly on Sep. 9, 2015 before passing the Senate on Sep. 11, 2015.



California law currently considers helping someone end his or her life felony manslaughter.



An August 2015 survey found that 76% of California residents supported aid-in-dying.



Steve Mione, a San Diego area resident, stated to the Death with Dignity National Center, "I am grateful to the California Senators for passing the End of Life Option Act. When my terminal melanoma moves to Stage 4 and I will have less than 6 months to live, I will want the option to choose death with dignity. I want to be alert, to say goodbye to my loved ones, and to fall asleep and die peacefully. It's my right, knowing my end is imminent, to choose a merciful death. It comforts me that the Senators voted to provide me and my fellow Californians with this option.”



Tim Rosales, spokesman for Californians against Assisted Suicide, stated, "Once suicide becomes an option, it is just another form of treatment and the cheapest option.”



In a joint statement, a coalition of Christian groups including the Organization for Justice & Equality, Chinese Christians Union of San Francisco, and California for Liberty, stated, "One of the current bad trends of the world is to give the insurance companies and hospitals more chances/authorities to profit by encouraging or even telling patients to commit suicide… California Senate bill 128 (SB128) is a pernicious attempt along this line and must be stopped!”



As of Sep. 16, 2015, four states have legal physician-assisted suicide: Montana, Oregon, Vermont, and Washington.