Three big announcements made it to my inbox recently as follows:

*Aetna has agreed to acquire Humana, one of the country’s leading managed health care companies.

“This transaction is expected to give Aetna over 14 million new members and create the company serving the most seniors in the Medicare Advantage program and the second largest U.S. managed care company. Together, we will have even more resources to invest in new, competitively priced offerings and services for our customers.”

*Anthem Inc. struck a deal to buy rival Cigna Corp. for $48.4 billion, wrapping up almost a year of contentious negotiations and potentially creating the largest health insurer in the United States. This deal will likely wrap sometime late 2016 as will the Aetna-Humana deal.

“Centene Corp. and Health Net Inc. announced that both companies have unanimously approved a definitive agreement under which Centene will acquire all of the shares of Health Net. The combination of Centene and Health Net would create a leading diversified multi-national healthcare enterprise with more than 10 million members across the country and estimated 2015 pro forma premium and service revenues of approximately $37 billion. Centene is expected to offer … a more comprehensive and scalable portfolio of innovative solutions focusing on uninsured and under-insured individuals, including participation in Medicare Advantage, TRICARE, and Veterans Affairs programs.”

It’s interesting to note the emphasis on senior- and government-sponsored plans for two of the mergers. It’s a little too early to tell how will it affect us locally. We are free to guess.

Far Northern California represents a relatively small market share of the commercial market for any carrier. When I hear folks complain that we effectively only have two carriers with the Blues — Blue Shield of California and Anthem Blue Cross of California — in our market, I remind them that we should probably be grateful that we even have two.

We simply don’t have a big market for an insurer in comparison to the bigger metropolitan areas. Currently, Health Net’s provider networks are much smaller than the Blues, so they aren’t really all that competitive in our area.

Medicaid is known as Medi-Cal in California. Locally we have benefitted from the addition of the Partnership Health managed care platform being added to our area. While provider access always has been an issue with MediCAL, partnership has been very successful in increasing quality and lowering costs in other areas.

I am not an expert in public health, but one cannot be in my business and not have some exposure to the sector of the health care economy. Participation in the Covered Shasta stakeholders group has been very helpful in expanding that knowledge.

“I absolutely concur with your statement about Partnership Health Plan of California being a tremendous benefit to our North state Medi-Cal, said Melissa Janulewicz, regional services director for Shasta County Health and Human Services.

The Anthem-Cigna buyout doesn’t seem to have the same emphasis on Medicare plans, but they certainly have their eye on the individual subsidized market and the group benefits market. The Aetna-Humana and Anthem-Cigna agreements likely would bring us to only three major insurers. Presumably the regulators will take a hard look at anti-trust issues.

The combined Anthem company could have 53 million members, more than UnitedHealth Group Inc., currently the largest U.S. health insurer. The insurer states that this will help them to negotiate with hospitals and providers. This is certainly a potential positive cost saving opportunity for consumers, if those savings are passed to the insureds. That is a big if. Covered California insurers recently announced 2016 rate increases as low as 1.8 percent in Southern California while Northern California could be in the 7 percent range.

There is concern that the mergers will stifle creativity for plan designs, but frankly the Affordable Care Act already has done quite a bit to reduce “creativity.” That is not always a bad thing. Some of the skinny plan designs had become so “creative” it was scary for brokers, as we weren’t always sure where they hid the holes.

Agents and brokers will be watching this closely to see if the companies will look to eliminate commissions. The increase of fee-based brokers is very possible.

As the saying goes, “Nothing is so constant as change itself.”

At this point, it’s speculation and we in the trenches will just have to wait and see.

Note: All information in this column is provided “to the best of my knowledge” subject to final regulation by the respective agencies. Submit your questions to info@insuranceredding.com to be answered in the paper. Margaret R. Beck is a licensed insurance broker. She can be reached at 225-8583.