The Oklahoma Army National Guard broke ground on a $26.1 million training complex at Camp Gruber on Saturday.

The 128,000-square-foot Operational Readiness Training Complex will add training and barracks space for 650 soldiers through a series of buildings ranging in size from a 4,000-foot storage area to 76,000 square feet of barracks, post commander Col. Curtis Arnold said.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

"I'm thrilled about it," he said. "This adds to our capability and enhances the ability of this installation to provide world-class training for our soldiers for many decades into the future."

The addition will bring the Braggs camp's capacity to 3,000, or about two-thirds of its requirement.

Currently "we can house, feed, take care of about half of what we're supposed to be able to take care of," Arnold said. "This helps us make up some of that requirement."

The complex will consist of housing, dining, parking, storage and classroom space primarily for use by training National Guard units but will also be available to other military units or state agencies when not in use by the Guard.

In addition to the U.S. Navy, Marine Corps and Army Reserve, Camp Gruber is a training site for law enforcement agencies and other first responders in the state.

"That complex would offer to you as a commander a place for all of your soldiers to sleep, a dining facility for them to eat in, a classroom you would use for your training, parking for all of your equipment and storage," he said.

Semi USA Inc. will manage the project, which is expected to be completed in January 2016.

"The vast majority of this work is done by local sub(contractors) so that's jobs and economic prosperity for this side of the state," Arnold said.