You're always ready for the last emergency.

It's a rule of thumb Dan Eamon knows well. And if he didn't, September's flood of the St. Vrain River would have proved it.

"One of the things we really found was that we managed the event we thought we were going to see," said Eamon, Longmont's emergency manager. "We had a good plan for a 100-year flood. But this quickly overwhelmed that."

That meant a lot of lessons learned on the fly and a few surprises, including the unpleasant discovery that the waters had reached farther west than expected. River breaches sent the flow into three neighborhoods near Airport Road that had never been in the flood plain: The Greens, Champion Greens and The Valley.

Now, with the flood six months behind, the city is hurrying to make those lessons stick. And to be ready for what could be the first test: spring runoff.

Lesson 1: Keep the eyes sharp

Early on, one of the biggest challenges for Longmont was information. The rising water knocked out the St. Vrain gauges that measured the river's flow and also tore 10 breaches in the river channel. As a result, even though the emergency operations center was up by 2:30 a.m. on Sept. 12, much of the first day was a scramble to get the big picture.

"We struggled with that issue all that morning: where's the water going?" Eamon said. "We kept getting reports from Lyons, 'It's rising, it's rising, it's rising,' but our river was staying pretty steady."

The answer came at 12:24 p.m, during a city flyover. According to time stamps on the photos that were taken, that's when city officials first saw the flood's flank attack against Airport Road. By 12:42 p.m. the water had started rushing into Twin Peaks Circle; an evacuation order for the neighborhoods went out at 1:02 p.m.

"We got the order up in the neighborhood after a 30-minute delay — which is still meaningful," Eamon said. "Had we pre-planned it, that could have been a car or it could have been some more valuable possessions saved."

Two horses are seen standing in the flood water near Hygiene Road and North 75th, Sept. 12, 2013. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

Now Longmont is working to have more warning. Among other things:

•Cameras with infrared capability will be put up at three sites: the old water plant near U.S. Highway 36 and Colorado Highway 66, a site near 75th Street and Airport Road, and a third on the west end of town near either Hover Street or Airport Road.

• Low-tech "staff gauges" — more or less poles with lines on them — will be put out to give an idea of the river's rise and level.

• Arrangements have been made with Vance Brand Municipal Airport to have quick access to the skies again, when another emergency threatens.

• Starting May 1, at least two spotters will be keeping an eye on the St. Vrain, checking bridges and known breach points. The number will increase when the potential for danger seems to be rising.

"If it's quiet, it's just someone driving over a bridge," Eamon explained. "As things start to happen, that's when we say 'We'll put a person on the bridge for four hours and see what happens.' That's the difference between routine and non-routine."

Four hours is how long it takes St. Vrain water to get from Lyons to Longmont. The flood underlined just how important it is to stay in touch with that town and with Boulder County, Eamon said.

"As they start to evacuate areas like Apple Valley, we're tied into that," he said.

Lesson 2: Spread the word

Communications was generally one of Longmont's triumphs during the flood, with the emergency operations center fielding thousands of calls during the disaster and regularly posting information to the web. But it could still be better, Eamon said.

"We learned how important it was to communicate with our community, constantly and consistently, from the start of the emergency," Eamon said. "It showed us the real need for constant information. That has to be a top priority from moment number one."

That means, among other things, being ready for high Internet traffic. During the emergency, Longmont started a separate website just for flood information, longmontoem.org, and then had to jump to a new .com address two days later when demand kept increasing.

That option to jump sites and servers is still in place, Eamon said.

"The moment we're into any evacuation, we'll post onto any website that we know we can use," he said. "There won't be a delay this time."

The website will also include images from the cameras and reports from the spotters.

In addition, one of the holes in the evacuation net has been patched. The Greens, Champion Greens and The Valley now all have pre-planned evacuation notices, Eamon said, and the city has been looking at different scenarios to see where other surprises might pop up.

"We've done this in a number of ways, said 'If it breaches here or it breaches there, what would we have to evacuate?'" he said. "That's the reason for the river spotters and the cameras. If we see something unusual, like maybe it's going right instead of left, we'll be better prepared to adjust."

Lesson 3: Man the barricades

It would be foolish to be surprised by the same attack twice. If a flood looks like it might leave the channel and head for that western edge of the city again, Longmont is preparing three lines of defense to push the water back in the river:

•Line 1 — Cut Hygiene Road again. That was an improvised defense last time, Eamon said, and it did help rechannel some of the flow.

• Line 2 — Work with landowners along Airport Road to create berms that can intercept the water.

• Line 3 — Put up "Jersey barriers" on part of Airport Road. Those are modular concrete medians that can keep the water from crossing the road and entering homes.

Lesson 4: Know where to go

Last time, Longmont got lucky. The mostly-vacant Twin Peaks Mall, its demolition delayed by court action, was available to use as a recovery center for flood victims to find help. That won't be available next time, but the experience taught the city what to look for in a site, Eamon said.

"Now we know exactly what we need, so we can 'shop' a little better now," he said. "But it was really nice to have that mall there. That was great."

Spring is coming

Beyond the new lessons is an old one: Sweat saves tears. So most city preparations have been focused on getting the St. Vrain ready for spring runoff, the moment when the mountain snowmelt begins to flow into the lower elevations.

Plant debris began to be pulled from the St. Vrain's channel last week. Granular debris — the muck, sand and rock that can clog a river — isn't far behind. But even if the runoff arrives sooner than its regular May start date, the channel may still be ready.

According to a report by engineering firm CH2M Hill, the St. Vrain in Longmont has the capacity to hold a flow of 3,000 cubic feet per second. That's well above the 800 to 1,000 cfs that the city usually sees in spring runoff, and even beyond the flows of the heavier years.

"A couple of years ago, when we had a high flow, it was 1,200 cfs," Eamon said. "And that was with a 190 percent snowpack. ... So with snowmelt alone, the St. Vrain can handle the capacity, up to about three times the normal flow. The concern is if there's a weather event on top of it."

The study isn't over yet. CH2M Hill is also reviewing the river's course to a point three miles west of Longmont — again, to avoid surprises.

Meanwhile, the city has been meeting with neighborhoods that were hit by the flood and expects to do more. As runoff gets closer, Eamon said, there's going to be a need for increased information and reassurance.

"Psychologically, May and June are going to be hard months for people," he said "If we need to do two or three more neighborhood meetings, we will. If there's a need for them to see us in person and ask us questions, we'll do it gladly."

Contact Times-Call staff writer Scott Rochat at 303-684-5220 or srochat@times-call.com