Even those Medicare Advantage subscribers who are happy with their premiums would be wise to check for hidden cost increases and other plan changes during the upcoming open enrollment period, which begins Wednesday and runs for eight weeks.

“There are always changes,” said William McKendree, lead counselor with the Allegheny County Apprise Program, a Medicare-funded program that Family Services of Western Pennsylvania operates in partnership with the Allegheny County Area Agency on Aging.

The program provides free health insurance counseling for Medicare recipients, in person or via its help line: 412-661-1438.

Mr. McKendree said the biggest hidden cost increase this year comes in the form of the plans’ out-of-pocket maximums, which is the cap a subscriber would pay toward non-copay, non-pharmacy expenses. Of the 26 Medicare Advantage plans available in Allegheny County, most have out-of-pocket maximums of $6,700, which is the highest dollar limit allowable under the 2010 Affordable Care Act.

Exceptions include one of the HumanaChoice PPOs (at $3,400), and four UPMC For Life HMO plans, three of which have out-of-pocket maximums of $3,400 and another with a $4,000 cap.

The cap is a safety net for senior citizens who might otherwise be wiped out by co-insurance costs, and “that safety net becomes a critical factor for people who have a lot of service needs,” Mr. McKendree said.

Another change this year is that “the cost of non-generic prescriptions has gone up noticeably,” Mr. McKendree said. “That’s why, for those seniors using several prescribed medications, it’s a good idea to review a plan’s 2015 drug formulary to make sure medications are still covered and affordable, particularly if a physician prescribes brand-name or “non-preferred” medications.

Seniors should also review their finances each year to see if they are income-eligible for either of Pennsylvania’s two pharmacy programs, PACE and PACENET, which sometimes can be a better fit than Medicare’s drug benefit.

Prices and cost-sharing also are rising on big-ticket items such as outpatient surgery, chemotherapy, complex procedures or durable medical equipment, Mr. McKendree said.

Every year Apprise fields calls from people whose plans have been canceled or consolidated into other plans. This year is no exception: Highmark is discontinuing its Medicare Advantage Freedom Blue PPO high-deductible plan, meaning those subscribers will have to select a new Advantage plan, or else they will be automatically enrolled in the traditional Medicare program.

Highmark is folding its Security Blue HMO high-deductible plan into the Security Blue ValueRx HMO plan. Highmark’s changes will affect about 13,000 people in the region, including 4,000 in Allegheny County.

Most Americans choose the traditional, government-operated Medicare plans, known as Parts A and B. Medicare Part A covers hospitalization and hospice care, and Part B covers doctors’ services and outpatient care.

Part C, also known as Medicare Advantage, offers plans from private insurers that cover Part A and Part B costs and some prescription drug coverage plus vision and dental coverage. Medicare Part D is the 8-year-old benefit that covers prescription drugs, an optional plan that has its own monthly premium.

In 2014, 30 percent of the nearly 54 million Medicare subscribers are enrolled in a Medicare Advantage, a share that grows every very year. In Pennsylvania, about 39 percent on Medicare have a Part C plan, and the rest use the original plans.

For the many area seniors who stick with the traditional A and B plans, most won’t have to pay a Part A premium, and for Part B most will pay a monthly premium of $105 a month. Those buying a separate Part D plan will see the average monthly cost rise slightly to $32.

For most, except those who become Medicare-eligible in the coming calendar year, the open-enrollment period, Oct. 15 to Dec. 7, is the main time to make changes to plans. The new plans will take effect Jan. 1.

Apprise plans several Medicare-related informational meetings, including one from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Friday at the Apprise offices, 6401 Penn Ave., East Liberty. People can also call Medicare at 800-633-4227 or visit Medicare.gov for more information.