The success of a society depends - at least in part - on the civility of its members. Mutual respect, openness to different viewpoints...civil conversation is what we try to promote here on our show.

UConn President Susan Herbst, while still a professor at Georgia Tech said this about civility when she appeared on Where We Live: “I can’t think of anything more important in American culture than teaching young people how to get along with each other, how to tolerate each other, and how to express their beliefs in a civil and sophisticated manner.”

Yet, we don’t all agree on what constitutes civil behavior or when uncivil behavior - in the form of protest - might be appropriate.

People took to the streets in Ferguson, Missouri this past August to protest the killing of unarmed teenager Michael Brown, by Ferguson police officer, Darren Wilson.

The killing was the final straw for a community of mostly poor and black residents sensitized from years of racial tension with local police.

It set off a firestorm of protest throughout the country that intensified when a grand jury elected not to indict Wilson. Protesters flooded the streets and university campuses - chanting, blocking traffic, disrupting events, and in some cases...destroying property.

Calls for civility have been loud and strong - from universities, police departments, Missouri Governor Jay Nixon - even, President Obama. The verdict inspired this plea from the President:

"There are Americans who are deeply disappointed - even angry. But, I join Michael’s parents in asking anyone who protests this decision to do so peacefully."

But, civil discourse isn't always smooth and some things are more important than civility. While nobody condones the kind of violent behavior that put lives and property in danger - who gets to say what is civil and not?

Now, those protests have reached a new plateau, where New York City police are protesting their mayor’s seeming support of protests...so, is turning your back on your boss...civil?

Today, we talk about civility.

You can leave your comments below, comment on our website at wnpr.org, or Tweet us @wherewelive.

Today's show was co-produced with Jackie Filson and inspired by this post she wrote for WNPR.org.

GUESTS: