The cost of providing insurance and healthcare are the biggest concerns of rural Georgians, according to a survey conducted for the Healthcare Georgia Foundation. 59.9% of those surveyed said that affordability of insurance was a barrier to accessing healthcare, while 53.1% cited the cost of care as an issue. When asked what was the biggest problem with local healthcare, 68.8 of those surveyed cited the cost.

The cost issue outranks other concerns within the healthcare arena. Only 24.8% cited quality of care and 6.4% cited access as the biggest problem with local healthcare. Survey respondents personally experienced issues with lack of insurance (41.9%), lack of doctors (32.6%) and insurance not being accepted by their healthcare provider (28.2%).

In the report accompanying the survey results, the foundation used the two Georgias analogy to compare healthcare in the rural parts of the Peach State with that available in metro Atlanta:

We in Georgia are dealing with older, sicker and poorer people relying on a severely compromised healthcare system. A disproportionate burden of uninsured patients, the shifting healthcare landscape under the Affordable Care Act, healthcare workforce shortages, and an aging rural population are factors compromising the delivery of rural healthcare. If ignored, our healthcare delivery system is at risk of collapsing on the shoulders of these frail rural communities. Many rural Georgians reside in “medical deserts” where access to affordable, quality healthcare does not exist. The capacity to deliver and sustain the “traditional” model of a healthcare system in a rural community is simply not possible. As long as we continue to rely on such a model of care, there will be winners and losers, including rural Georgians, their families, and their communities.

The survey results appear to bear this out. 27.7% of those surveyed said there was a severe or extreme shortage of doctors in their area, while 59.5% cited a moderate shortage. Attracting more doctors to their community was considered an important healthcare initiative by 80.2% of those surveyed, just ahead of 78.8% citing providing access to emergency care.

Despite predictions that rural healthcare would become an issue during the 2015 Georgia legislative session, it instead was dominated by transportation funding and education reform. In the meantime, at least four rural Georgia hospitals have closed, and an AJC investigation earlier this year pointed towards more problems down the road. During the legislative session beginning next January, the questions of access to healthcare, existing Medicaid funding, and possibly expanding Medicaid as envisioned by the Affordable Care Act could come up.

The Rural Health and Healthcare poll was conducted in February, 2015 by OpinionSavvy of registered Georgia voters. After weighting so that the survey sample measured 2014 voter statistics, the poll of 491 people has a 4.4% margin of error.