Area health care providers are looking for the public's input on an array of community health needs to better determine the most imperative issues effecting health and wellness of St. Joseph County residents.

Wednesday, Beacon Health System invited individuals to fill out a community health questionnaire. The data collected will be used to better focus and concentrate efforts moving forward.

"When you improve health and wellness," said C.E.O of Beacon Health Systems, Mike O'Neil, "you improve productivity, you decrease the cost of health services for the community and you improve economic vitality."

The first assessment was completed in 2012 with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. Under the act, hospital organizations satisfy their annual community benefit obligations.

According to O'Neil, the assessment helped define health challenges and assisted in creating a community-wide "action plan" with partner organizations.

In 2012, Director of Community Outreach at Elkhart General Hospital, Patty Gremaux, said Beacon Health was busy preparing for the introduction of thousands of newly insured patients.

"We recognized early on that that particular group [the newly insured] would not be familiar with a lot of the lingo, a lot of the nomenclature that's used in the health care delivery field, like "network," things like "co-pay," as a result, Gremaux said the focus was on basic education and a health care enrollment center.

After enrollment the focus became on community-based issues, Gremaux explained.

In Elkhart County, the top health concerns are obesity and diabetes, followed by smoking, access to primary health care and access to mental health care.

The concerns are similar in St. Joseph County, with additional concern on the adverse effects of violence.

Margot DeMont, Executive Director of Community Health Enhancement at Memorial Hospital has worked on collecting data on some of the county's "top concerns" and implementing programs to work toward their resolution.

Obesity:

To combat obesity, Beacon Health works with the YMCA and Unity gardens to get kids eating healthy and moving.

"What we're finding is a lot of the time there are two parents working, or one parent working and that's the only adult in the family, and the children are not allowed out of the house when mom is not home. So we have children after school who are captives in the house and they're playing computer games or watching TV eating whatever," DeMont explained.

In partnering with Unity Gardens for a summer camp with 57 children, 97-percent reported sampling 27 fruits they'd never tried, and ended up eating three servings of fruits and vegetables a day.

Similarly, in a program coordinated through the YMCA, adults involved reported increasing their exercise time, reducing cholesterol and improving sleep patterns.

Infant Mortality:

Infant mortality remains a major issue in both Elkhart and St. Joseph counties, as well as the entire state of Indiana.

"St. Joseph county and Elkhart County have a disproportionate share of racially skewed deaths," said DeMont.

Beacon Health is already investing in the electronic medical records to monitor the pregnancies of women who go on to lose their babies.

Violence:

"We know that the number-one corollary with chronic mental and physical health is adverse childhood experiences. We have the data, the CDC has over 30,000 subjects. We have to address this and it will change the very face of healthcare," said DeMont.

Since 2012's assessment, Beacon Health worked with South Bend's anti-violence initiative.

The results of community violence comes straight into hospital Emergency Rooms.

Between May 15, 2013 and January 31, 2014, Beacon Health treated 71 gunshot wounds. During that same time frame the following year, the number dropped to just 44.

2015 Assessment:

"Hospitals and health systems are transitioning from not only treating patients when they're ill or injured, but also preventing health issues in the first place; moving out of the hospital into the community to keep people healthier through education and early intervention," DeMont explained.

Health care providers will continue to collect information and feedback to "data mine" the issues relevant to county residents.