The Koch-backed group AFP fills a critical void nine months out from Election Day. | AP Photos Koch brothers bombard Senate Dem

The Koch brothers have a seemingly bottomless pot of cash this election year — and no one knows it better than Sen. Kay Hagan.

Americans for Prosperity, a group co-founded by the conservative billionaires, has already dropped $8.2 million on TV, radio and digital ads in an effort to defeat the North Carolina Democrat. According to sources tracking media buys, the group has so far spent more in North Carolina than all Democratic outside groups in every Senate race in the country — combined.

Story Continued Below

And while AFP won’t predict the amount it will ultimately spend in North Carolina, if the conservative group keeps the same pace, it’ll spend more than $27 million by Election Day in the Tar Heel State. That’s more than twice what any outside group has spent in the past dozen years in North Carolina congressional races.

The staggering figures make North Carolina ground zero in the unprecedented TV war expected to define the 2014 midterm elections. Powerful outside groups like AFP can now raise and spend unlimited money, empowering big donors to single-handedly reshape a race and even determine which party controls the Senate for the final two years of Barack Obama’s presidency.

( Also on POLITICO: AFP drops $1.4M on Hagan ad buy)

“It concerns me; it ought to concern anybody,” said Sen. Michael Bennet (D-Colo.), chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee in Washington. “It’s just not fair to have two folks in the country potentially determine the outcomes of these Senate races in states where they don’t even live.”

With Republicans eyeing at least six seats to take back the Senate, North Carolina has emerged as one of their best shots, with Hagan vulnerable from the onslaught of televised attacks over her support for Obamacare and with the state showing big swings in public opinion since Obama won the state six years ago.

With Republican candidates and its main party committee still behind many of their Democratic counterparts in the money chase, AFP is filling a critical void nine months out from Election Day.

( Also on POLITICO: Koch World 2014)

The Koch-backed group, a nonprofit that does not have to disclose its donors, has no plans to let up. Through last week, AFP had spent more than $12 million in the country’s six closest Senate races, amounting to two-thirds of total money spent by GOP groups nationally, according to media trackers. The Koch group’s spending exceeds the $7.6 million-plus spent by all Senate Democratic groups combined in the competitive races, including less than $4 million that Democrats have so far spent in North Carolina media markets — some of the country’s most expensive.

Hagan and her campaign now are trying to tie the Kochs’ conservative agenda to one of her potential opponents — state House Speaker Thom Tillis, arguing he championed through the Legislature the group’s controversial far-right agenda on issues ranging from slashing unemployment benefits to cutting teacher tenure.

“The people of North Carolina need to know what their agenda is,” Hagan said in an interview of David and Charles Koch, the owners of the multinational manufacturing firm Koch Industries. “They want to have tax cuts for corporations and the wealthy and, at the same time, put that burden on the middle class and the poor. They want to cut Medicare, Social Security. All of these issues are so, so important to the middle class.”

But in an interview, AFP President Tim Phillips said the group’s agenda rests strictly on one thing: Repealing Obamacare. And already this election season, it has spent $28 million blasting both Democratic Senate and House candidates since last August for their support of the controversial law.

( Also on POLITICO Magazine: I punk'd Scott Walker)

A top priority of the group for years, North Carolina was one of the first states where it set up local chapters, helping build what Phillips says is one of its “deepest state infrastructures,” with more than 130,000 activists that helped defeat a Medicaid expansion in the state Legislature last year and now is singularly focused on defeating Hagan.

“We’ve been engaged in the state for a decade,” Phillips said. “That preceded Sen. Hagan coming into office, and I suspect Americans for Prosperity will be healthy and vibrant in North Carolina long after she is no longer in the U.S. Senate.”