The Freestone County TEA Party Meeting met on Monday night, April18, at the River of Life Church. Henry Horton opened with prayer, followed by the pledges to the U. S. and Texas flags. Our guest, Pastor Stephan Broden from Fair Park Bible Fellowship Church in Dallas, Texas, is a businessman, political commentator, former professor and an activist for pro-life causes. He is a speaker for the Tea Party movement and advocates for a return to what he considers proper Constitutional principles in government and the Judeo-Christian values that he claims undergird the founding of the United States of America.

Pastor Broden gave an awesome presentation titled, “The Doctrine of the Lesser Magistrate”, or “What to do when the Federal government exceeds its Constitutional Limits.” His presentation was filled with quotes from our founding fathers as well as the founders of communism to illustrate the chasm that exists between where we started and where are today.

He began by stating that we are going through a rapid change in our country that we must address. We should not be “PC” (politically correct), but rather “BC” (Biblically correct). If it does not line up with the Bible, it is not correct. Biblical correctness is a true guide for Constitutional Correctness. What was right is now wrong and what was wrong is now right, and we have experienced an incremental implementation of godless philosophy.

Our morality has turned on its heels. We are in an “ism” world: Socialism, Darwinism, Secularism and Communism. Joseph Stalin stated, “If we can undermine these three areas; Patriotism, morality and spiritual life, America will collapse within.” It seems as if we are there. Pastor Broden gave disturbing information on abortion, which has from its inception by Margaret Sanger, targeted the black community. He listed the following unconstitutional decisions by the Supreme Court of the US (SCOTUS) as examples:

1962 banning of prayer in schools; 1973 legalization of abortion; 2003 overturning of sodomy laws; 2014 ratifying obamacare; 2015 overturning US and state DOMA laws, legalizing same sex marriage.

We have allowed the government to break our Texas Constitution. For example, Governor Greg Abbott has said that SCOTUS is established law. However, the Constitution says that the Supreme Court interprets law, not make it. We need to hold Governor Abbott responsible for enforcing our DOMA law in Texas. Nullification is the Constitutional provision for not accepting federal overreach. Current examples of other states actions in defending their 10th Amendment rights are: Tennessee is aiming to nullify the same sex marriage ruling; Colorado has effectively nullified laws against illegal marijuana.

Pastor Broden has attempted to talk to our top elected officials and been stone-walled, so he has started a petition to show that the citizens of Texas want action. The petition can be accessed at ProtectLifeandMarriageTX.org

For additional quotes from Pastor Broden’s presentation access our website, freestonecountyteaparty.org.

Ann Gokey closed the meeting in prayer. Our May 16th meeting will show the movie, “Agenda 2, Masters of Deceit.” This movie is a “must see”. God Bless America! Donations welcomed.