The Boulder Philharmonic Orchestra's theme for its 2014-15 season will be "Legends: The Spirit of Boulder," the group told its subscribers and supporters Saturday in announcing its upcoming schedule.

The Phil's new season will feature five classical subscription concerts and three special events, all at Macky Auditorium on the University of Colorado campus.

Before the public announcement, music director Michael Butterman spoke with the Camera about the programs, saying, "These themes and threads always sort of emerge organically when we start plugging in pieces we want to play and bring in certain guest artists."

As with the current season, the opening concert takes place at 7 p.m. on a Sunday night (rather than the usual 7:30 on a Saturday) to avoid conflict with a CU football game the previous day. The Sept. 14 program is titled "Nature and Legends," creating a bridge from the current "Nature and Music" season.

As with this season's opening concert, it includes a world premiere composition, "Gates of the Arctic" by Stephen Lias. He was a student at Louisiana State University when Butterman was on the music faculty there.

"He contacted me a couple of years ago and told me about a project being funded by the National Park Foundation," Butterman said of the piece, which commemorates the 50th anniversary of the Wilderness Act. The work is specifically about Denali, but Lias has composed other works inspired by national parks.

Venezuelan guest pianist Gabriela Martinez joins the Phil in the Second Piano Concerto by Camille Saint-Saens. Capping the program is the symphonic suite "Scheherazade" by Rimsky-Korsakov, which depicts a series of legends. Butterman chose the work, with its extensive violin solos, to spotlight new concertmaster Charles Weatherbee.

The second concert, on Oct. 11, is titled "Wings and Spirits." According to Butterman, the five pieces on the program share a sense of spirituality. Three works all describe legendary or rare birds: "The White Peacock" by Charles Griffes, "The Swan of Tuonela" by Jean Sibelius and the "Firebird" Suite by Igor Stravinsky.

The centerpiece is the Four Last Songs for voice and orchestra by Richard Strauss.

"I really wanted to include these songs this year to commemorate the 150th anniversary of Strauss' birth," Butterman said. "And we knew that we could get the phenomenal soprano Twyla Robinson to perform them. These astonishing songs look back on life and forward to what lies beyond."

Violinist Philippe Quint will join the Boulder Philharmonic for its Valentine's Day show, (Lisa-Marie Mazzucco / Courtesy photo)

A local connection is provided by the work "Apparition" for timpani and orchestra by Michael Udow, a retired percussion professor and orchestral timpanist who lives in Longmont. The work is a few years old and has been recorded. Brian Jones, principal timpanist of the Dallas Symphony, is the soloist.

The third subscription concert, on Jan. 17, is called "Creative Legends." Acclaimed pianist Conrad Tao, a 2012 Avery Fisher Grant recipient, makes his Boulder debut with Beethoven's Piano Concerto No. 5, the "Emperor." In addition, Tao's own composition, "Pangu," will be played by the orchestra.

"It's great to have him appear as both a pianist and a composer," Butterman said, noting that "Pangu" does not include a piano part and Tao will simply watch as it is performed. Pangu is a creator spirit from Chinese mythology.

Before Tao's piece and appearance, the concert opens with three other pieces about creation myths, beginning with Beethoven's overture to "The Creations of Prometheus," then continuing with "Chaos" from Haydn's oratorio "The Creation" and the jazzy "La création du monde" by 20th century French composer Darius Milhaud.

The fourth concert, on Feb. 14, is built around "Legendary Love." Butterman said Valentine's Day was the only Saturday in February when Macky Auditorium was available, and he noted the pros and cons to having a concert on that day. Tchaikovsky's fantasy overture "Romeo and Juliet" was an obvious choice, as was the "Prelude and Liebestod" from Wagner's "Tristan and Isolde," whose frequent excerpting as an orchestral piece was approved by the composer.

Butterman goes a bit off the path with the "Red Violin Concerto" by John Corigliano, constructed out of ideas from the composer's Oscar-winning score to the 1999 film. The soloist is violinist Philippe Quint, described by Butterman as a "compelling, charismatic performer."

"We hope it will be a classy and romantic evening," Butterman said.

The season finale takes place April 25. Bartók's Concerto for Orchestra, one of the greatest orchestral showpieces ever written, anchors an evening titled "Legendary Virtuosity." Butterman has wanted to program it for years but was looking for the right companion piece. Dvorák's Cello Concerto, another immortal masterpiece, seemed the right fit. Cellist Zuill Bailey is the season's final guest artist.

The program opens with Anatoly Liadov's tone poem "The Enchanted Lake," which Butterman said will finish off the "legendary" theme of the season.

A special pops concert on Nov. 8 also aligns with the theme. Guest artists join the orchestra to perform the music of piano legends Billy Joel and Elton John. The Phil's annual collaboration with the Boulder Ballet on "The Nutcracker" is Nov. 28-30. Another special event yet to be announced is tentatively planned for March 2015.

For more information and to purchase season subscriptions and individual tickets, call 303-449-1343 (ext. 2) or visit boulderphil.org.