When Governor Charlie Baker released his latest budget proposal last week, he was clear about his goal for state spending: “You got to get to the point where your spending is going up at a rate that’s consistent with the growth in your economy.”

Since 2014, Massachusetts hasn’t hit this target. Spending has grown far faster than the state economy. But it’s not because the state has a spending problem, just a health care spending problem.

Advertisement

A decade ago, about 30 percent of the state budget went to health care. Today, that number is over 45 percent.

Meanwhile, spending on most everything else has lagged, constrained on one side by the ever-rising cost of health care, and on the other by a reluctance to raise new revenue.

How fast should state spending grow?

To be sustainable over the long term, state spending shouldn’t increase any faster than the state economy.

Over the years, Massachusetts has mostly held this line, as you can see in this first chart. Up until 2013 or so, the cumulative increase in state spending closely followed the growth in the state economy, with an unsurprising gap during the “great recession.”

Beginning in 2014, however, spending seems to have suddenly taken off.

Why did spending jump in 2014?

Advertisement

It’s all about health care. This was the year Obamacare really came into force, triggering big expansions in the size and cost of state medicaid programs.

In Massachusetts, the impact was especially pronounced, because the state botched its Obamacare sign-up system and moved tens of thousands of people into state insurance programs instead.

You can see the effect by separating health care spending from everything else in the state budget. Health care costs have been growing faster than the state economy for over a decade, but 2014 set them on a whole new trajectory.

Yet, as health care costs took off, spending on everything else remained quite restrained. Over the last 15 years, non-health care spending has increased much more slowly than economic growth.

The picture looks the same even if you account for the fact that the federal government ultimately picks up the tab for much of this health care spending. Net health care costs — after the federal reimbursements — have still risen more than twice as fast as the Massachusetts economy.

Correction: Updated numbers from MassBudget suggest that federal reimbursements do alter the story somewhat. Net health care costs are still a concern, having grown far faster than the economy over the last 15 years. But the post-2014 spending surge virtually disappears. Not because this spending didn’t happen, but because it was paid for with tax dollars from Washington — not state tax revenues.

What does this mean for the future of our state budget?

Massachusetts — along with many other states and the federal government — has been trying for years to “bend the cost curve” and hold down health care spending by minimizing unnecessary medical testing, increasing price transparency, making patients shoulder more of the cost, and a wide variety of other things.

There are signs that this war against health care spending may be working. But if it fails, and health care costs continue to climb, it will siphon off funding that could otherwise go to schools, road repair, housing subsidies, elder services and other core priorities.

Evan Horowitz used to work at the Massachusetts Budget and Policy Center, the group that compiles many of these historical budget numbers.