Jeb Bush said Thursday that while his brother was in the White House, he and his fellow Republicans spent too much of the taxpayers’ money.

Bush defends Patriot Act as necessary, constitutional At odds with one of his top potential competitors for the Republican presidential nomination, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush on Thursday said the USA Patriot Act is constitutional, has not violated civil rights and should be reauthorized. More

Asked during a meeting with Granite State lawmakers and business leaders to say where, other than the Iraq War, there is “big space” between himself and President George W. Bush, the former Florida governor said, “I think in Washington during my brother’s time, Republicans spent too much money.”

“I think he could have used the veto. He didn’t have line-item veto power, but he could have brought budget discipline to Washington, D.C.”

But Bush quickly added: “That seems kind of quaint right now, given that since he left, spending has gone up astronomically. But having constraints on spending across the board during his time would have been a good thing.

“I don’t feel compelled, though, to go out of my way to criticize Republican presidents,” Bush said. “Call me a team player here. It just so happens the last two Republican presidents happened to be my dad and my brother. But you’ll never hear me complaining about Ronald Reagan, either.”

“Every president makes mistakes. The question is, what have you learned from those mistakes? Past doesn’t have to be prologue. You can learn from your predecessors, in business, in life and certainly in politics.”

Regarding the Iraq War, he said: “In hindsight, based on the faulty intelligence and security issues, I wouldn’t have gone in, and mistakes were made, and my brother concurs, along with a lot of other people.”

Bush spoke to members of the New Hampshire House Business Caucus and Concord Chamber of Commerce at The Draft. The pub is owned by state Sen. Andy Sanborn – a supporter of Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul -- and state Rep. Laurie Sanborn, who chairs the business caucus.

Bush later wrapped up his latest two-day New Hampshire swing with a visit to the Tuscan Kitchen in Salem.

Bush's comments on his brother drew criticism from the Democratic National Committee.

“Jeb Bush can’t say he doesn’t like that they spent money, but he liked what they spent it on,” DNC spokeswoman Holly Shulman said. “That’s not how it works. Jeb Bush is desperately trying to prove there’s ‘space’ between him and his brother where none exists.”

Bush spoke about his experience creating a business in Florida and his efforts as governor to substantially slow the growth of state government spending while growing a rainy day fund.

“I vetoed over 2,700 line items in the budget, for Republicans and Democrats alike,” he said, noting that he was known as “Veto Corleone.”

“For five of my eight years, we led the nation in job growth,” he said of his time as governor. “We should not create a perpetual dependence on government.

A key factor in growing the nation’s economy is energy independence, Bush said. He said Washington uses the federal tax code in “picking winners and losers” and is “using the code to determine which energy source should be the appropriate one.”

“I think all of that ought to be phased out, whether it is the oil and gas sector, wind or solar or renewable mandate for ethanol," he said. "Over time in a thoughtful way, we ought to be phasing that out and let free market economics apply.”

He praised fracking as a technology that has driven down the price of natural gas.

“I trust the marketplace to be the source of innovation in our country. Instead of trying to impede that development, we should be encouraging it over the long haul,” Bush said.

In Salem, Bush praised the energy production boom.

“There should be marching bands celebrating this. Instead, we have an administration that feels like this is a real defeat for them.”

Bush in Concord defended the Common Core education program, saying that it is flexible and allows states to decide the amount of testing given to students. He said Common Core standards were higher than the standards in his home state when he became governor.

He said that Florida, under his leadership, set up its own testing program, graded schools and established a voucher program to allow parents of failing schools to send their children elsewhere. He said Florida has tens of thousands of students involved in voucher programs.

“Call it what you want, but advocate higher standards,” Bush told Republican lawmakers, who, generally in New Hampshire, are opposed to Common Core.

Bush was Florida’s governor from 1999 to 2007.

On immigration, Bush said the border should be secured, “and we need to make it a lot harder to come here illegally than to come here legally.” He called for ending “chain immigration.”

But, he said, “For the 11 million people here illegally, we need to have them come out from the shadows. They should pay a fine, receive a provisional work permit, not receive federal government assistance, work, learn English, and over an extended period of time, achieve legal status, but not necessarily citizenship.”

“That, in a practical society, is how you get to where immigration is part of a solution to things, rather than a problem.”

On health care, Bush said that if the U.S. Supreme Court rules the Affordable Care Act federal exchange unconstitutional, Republicans should be ready with an alternative that is “consumer-directed” and has “catastrophic coverage with low premiums, where the government’s role is providing premium support for people and the insurance itself has no mandates and fewer mandated benefits, which currently creates the exorbitant consumer costs.”

“Empowering people to make more of these decisions is key a key element to the change,” he said, calling the ACA “a perpetual root canal.”

In Salem, Bush said: “People want access to affordable health care insurance. And they should have – and they should feel that way. I don’t think that’s a bad motivation at all. But we could deliver that to them without all of the massive controls.”

Bush also called for a review of government agencies’ roles under the 10th Amendment and said authority should be “delegated back” to the states in many cases.

He cited the Environmental Protection Agency’s rules, and also said, “I think Medicaid ought to be state-run.”

Bush also called for a stronger U.S. presence in the world. He said Iran and Cuba are the only two nations with which the United States has better relations now than it did when Barack Obama became president.

“Think about that,” he said.

Unfriendly nations “now see us as weak and vacillating,” he said. “The world needs United States leadership.”

In Salem, Bush said he has enjoyed his visits to New Hampshire.

“I’m having a blast interacting with people,” he said. “They’re respectful, they have a lot of great questions, a lot of great dialogue. It’s a great way to campaign. I think New Hampshire ought to export this style of campaigning to the rest of the country, to be honest with you.”

(WMUR Political Reporter Adam Sexton contributed to this report.)