ENLARGE The Commonwealth Fund chart of HealthCare.gov data on how cost-sharing provisions in the Affordable Care Act lower out-of-pocket costs for those with lower incomes. Photo: The Commonwealth Fund

David Blumenthal is president of the Commonwealth Fund, a private foundation that researches health and social policy issues. He was the national coordinator for health information technology from 2009 to 2011. He is on Twitter: @DavidBlumenthal. Sara R. Collins is vice president of health-care coverage and access at the Commonwealth Fund. She is on Twitter: @SaraCollins_

House v. Burwell is far from resolution, but this case’s path through the federal courts and the threat it could pose to the Affordable Care Act show continued vulnerabilities of the health-care law as well as the stakes of the 2016 election.

A Commonwealth Fund report published Thursday looks at a provision in the health-care law that is at issue in the case. To soften the impact of out-of-pocket costs under Obamacare, the law requires insurers to reduce certain payments for individuals whose incomes are up to 250% of the federal poverty level if they purchase a “silver” plan through one of the insurance marketplaces. The law also says that insurers are to be repaid for the discounts.

The administration says the law is written in a way that provides authority to compensate insurers for revenues they lose over limiting these costs for enrollees. It doesn’t need a specific congressional appropriation to make those payments, it has argued.

Congress disagrees and sued the Obama administration in 2014 over the executive branch spending money that the legislative branch did not allocate.

Out-of-pocket costs affect a growing number of Americans, regardless of where they get insurance. But as the chart above shows, the health-care law’s cost-sharing provisions can dramatically reduce expenses for low-income individuals. The reductions vary depending on people’s incomes and how much health care they use. A 40-year-old man who makes $35,000 a year is ineligible for cost-sharing reductions. If he receives a lot of health care, his out-of-pocket expenses might run to $6,500 a year. The same individual who makes $17,000 is eligible for cost-sharing support and might pay only $650 for that care.

A federal district judge allowed the lawsuit to proceed last fall, rejecting the administration’s argument that the legislative branch lacked standing to sue. This case has the potential to reach the Supreme Court. If a court decides that the administration does not have the authority to pay insurers, as it has been doing, the administration will have to stop making the cost-sharing payments until Congress appropriates the funds. It’s unlikely that a Congress persistently hostile to Obamacare would appropriate the funds. The health-care law entitles enrollees to the cost assistance and entitles participating insurers to compensation, which makes it possible that a variety of lawsuits could emerge if Congress refuses to allocate the funds. And because the law requires insurers to offer the cost reductions whether or not the federal government pays them, many would probably stop participating in the marketplaces rather than eat the expenses. This would reduce the competitiveness of insurance marketplaces, resulting in higher premiums.

Facing much higher deductibles and co-payments, many individuals with low or moderate incomes might ultimately drop their ACA coverage. This could increase the number of uninsured but might also adversely affect the risk pool in the insurance marketplaces, as healthy individuals could be among the first to drop their coverage. That would undermine the stability of the Obamacare exchanges. Opponents of the law might welcome its demise, but there is little upside to increasing the number of uninsured Americans, particularly among the country’s most vulnerable.

ALSO IN THINK TANK:

As the Number of Uninsured Falls, Potential Fallout to Repealing the ACA Grows

Will Poor Health Status in the South Be an Issue in 2016 Primaries?

Bernie Sanders, Hillary Clinton, and Medicare for All

Behind the Challenges to Universal Health Coverage