Topics: aol_on, Barack Obama, David Brooks, Editor's Picks, Media Criticism, The New York Times, Innovation News, News, Politics News

It’s just possible that the chaos of the Republican primaries may shift American perspectives back to top dead center. That is, the nuttiness of the current crop of candidates may finally show that Obama isn’t some crazed Kenyan Muslim socialist but a staid American trying to live by moral standards developed centuries ago here at home.

That, at least, is the initial takeaway from today’s column by David Brooks in The New York Times. Though he tries—for old time’s sake—to include Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton in his crop of loonies, it is the Republicans who are making him nostalgic—already—for Obama. It is they who may be waking him to recognition that, to take a page from the first of the 12 Steps of Alcoholics Anonymous, the right-wing movement he is a part of has become unmanageable.

Though he tries to stay true to his conservative roots by saying of Obama that he has “been disappointed by aspects of his presidency” and hopes “the next presidency is a philosophic departure,” he gives no details about what he means. Perhaps he’s disliked Obama for so long that changing his tune completely is not something he’s quite ready to do. Maybe he needs the 90 meetings in 90 days of a political AA. The process of recovery takes time, after all, and concerted effort.

Here’s the heart of his first, tentative recognition of his disease:

Many of the traits of character and leadership that Obama possesses, and that maybe we have taken too much for granted, have suddenly gone missing or are in short supply.

Trouble is, Brooks is the kid who, after murdering his parents, asks for mercy as an orphan. Still, we should welcome him into recovery. “Hi, my name is David and I’m a political opportunist.”

American politics has been nasty since the days of Alexander Hamilton. We’ve even had a member of the House attack a senator in the Capitol, though that was 160 years ago. Little has changed. We still manage to allow our politicians to be shot (Gabrielle Giffords being the last, just five years ago). Wearing conservative specs, being well coifed and dressed and living in the rarified air of the Washington punditocracy has never removed one from responsibility for the rough and tumble. Those very people who disdain it often prove to be responsible for it.

By abetting an image of a bifurcated political world, Brooks has helped further the vilification of Obama and the Republican descent into the politics of hatred. The us-versus-them, good-guy-versus-bad-guy simplistic vision of the political world that continues to dominate in the United States has long been augmented by the need for people who never step out of character on television—and Brooks has willingly been one of those characters. That he is now trying to change is good. What’s bad is that he seems completely unwilling to accept his own culpability in creation of the contemporary toxic political environment.