By Justin Katz | Watchdog Arena

To some extent, Rhode Island has been immune to the cost increases against which so many Affordable Care Act (ACA) skeptics have rightly warned since the act became law in 2010. The state had already freely opted to inflict on its people most of the harm that Obamacare has brought to other states. The increases are starting to catch up with Rhode Island health insurance consumers, nonetheless, and in ways that aren’t captured by just comparing premiums.

The Ocean State has long led the nation in the number of health insurance mandates, driving up costs. Limits on rate variation for people in different groups were already in place. The expansion of eligibility rules for Medicaid was of less import in Rhode Island because the only change left to make was to offer benefits to able-bodied adults without children.

Even the danger of scaring off insurers wasn’t much of an issue, because Rhode Island’s burdensome regulations had made the state a near monopoly for Blue Cross Blue Shield until UnitedHealth won a state government contract, making it effectively a two-company market.

As the Rhode Island Association of Health Underwriters put it, in 2004, “Over the past few years, a number of private health insurance carriers have left the state. This has severely limited the number of health insurance product choices residents and business owners in Rhode Island have, and it has also caused a dramatic rise in health plan costs, which even exceed the high health insurance rate jumps that people in other states have experienced.”

Although other states have done some catching up with the ACA, Obamacare and Rhode Island’s health benefits exchange, HealthSource RI, have not succeeded in lowering costs. As a silver lining, though, the experience may be teaching Rhode Islanders the financials of health insurance — mainly that premiums aren’t the only way for insurance to cost more.

Among the 2016 health plan offerings through HealthSource that are not new this year, the average premium has increased by around 4.9 percent, but deductibles are up an average of 4.5 percent, and the maximum amount that members will have to pay out of pocket will be up 5.7 percent, overall.

The details are important, though. The second-most-popular plan, covering 4,180 people in 2015, was a silver-level Blue Cross Blue Shield offering with premiums that are actually scheduled to decrease by around 4.5 percent. However, its deductible is up by 50 percent, and maximum out-of-pocket expense is up by 7.5 percent.

To put numbers on the percentages, a 40-year-old individual member will be saving $156 for the year in premium payments, but he’ll have to pay an extra $1,300 before hitting the deductible, at which the insurance actually kicks in. The member will also have to pay an extra $300 before hitting his maximum. Not only that, but he’s going to have 254 fewer primary care providers from whom to choose (17 percent) and 1,744 fewer specialists (29 percent).

HealthSource’s most-popular plan, with 11,661 covered members in 2015, tells a different story. A silver-level offering by Neighborhood Health Plan increased its number of providers significantly, but premiums went up in the range of 6 percent ($180 a year for a 40-year-old), and its deductible went up 10 percent ($250).

Neighborhood is unique, however, in a way that raises another important point. The non-profit company was founded in the 1990s in order to work with the state’s RIte Care and Medicaid programs. The bulk of its revenue therefore comes from government welfare payments. In the first year of HealthSource, Neighborhood provided insurance only to low-income users of the exchange, with income below $28,725, for individuals.

In 2015, its most-popular plan was the only silver plan with premiums below the “benchmark” plan on which federal tax-credit subsidies through the exchange are based. Thus far for 2016 plans, 85 percent of all members will be receiving subsidies, which is in keeping with prior years. In other words, Neighborhood’s exchange-leading option is a heavily subsidized plan offered by a provider that is effectively a government satellite.

For the most part, the increase in premiums will simply be passed on to the American taxpayer. The increase in deductible will fall on the health plan member, but to avoid that burden, the plan would probably have had to cease being the lowest-premium silver plan.

As Americans learn more about the games insurers play with pricing, one can only hope they come to understand the effects of government meddling. Subsidies for premiums push costs elsewhere, while limits and mandates force them all to increase. Rhode Islanders who’ve been following health insurance news in their state for a while know that immunity to cost increases can merely mask the illness and prevent the body politic from fighting it off.

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.