The major brokerages’ shift toward putting clients into fee-based relationships helped soften the effect of recent stock-market turbulence on their wealth-management revenue. But those firms still have a significant amount of their business tied to commission-based activities–and the market’s gyrations beginning in late August showed they remain susceptible to a broad market selloff, writes WSJ.com’s Wealth Adviser. Morgan Stanley and Bank of America Merrill Lynch, two of the biggest U.S. brokerages, said the market’s sinking performance in the third quarter caused many of their clients to trade less, lowering the revenue they collected through commission-based relationships. “When market activity is lower, we tend to see less activity in the transactional side of [the wealth] business,” Bank of America Chief Financial Officer Paul Donofrio told analysts in a conference call last week. Similarly, Morgan Stanley finance chief Jonathan Pruzan told analysts Monday morning that wealth-management transactional revenue was “impacted by subdued levels of retail investor activity driven by ongoing uncertainty and global volatility.” Both firms continue to have more dollars in commission-based accounts than in fee-based accounts.

MANAGING THE MONEY:

Gold now aligned with the Fed’s moves. Traders and analysts say gold’s role as a safe-haven investment in times of turmoil has waned recently. Instead, the precious metal’s price will more likely fluctuate on shifting expectations about when the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates, according to The Wall Street Journal. Gold rose 5.3% this month after a sour September jobs report encouraged investors to bet there will be no rate hike this year. Higher rates, when they do happen, are expected to undermine future demand for gold. “Gold is trading as a proxy for expectations of U.S. interest rates,” said Kevin Norrish, who heads commodities research at Barclays. “People have looked at gold and expected it to act as a safe haven and it hasn’t.”

Pimco stabilizes a year after Bill Gross’s exit. Pacific Investment Management Co. appears to have stemmed its outflows after reporting that its assets under management stood at $1.47 trillion as of September, down slightly from $1.52 trillion as of June 30. It was the smallest percentage drop since co-founder Bill Gross departed a year earlier, writes Bloomberg.

THE BUSINESS:

RCS Capital explores sale of Cetera. RCS Capital Corp. is exploring a sale of its main brokerage business Cetera Financial Group, writes Bloomberg, citing people with knowledge of the matter. RCS is seeking at least $700 million for Cetera, which it acquired last year from a private-equity firm for $1.2 billion, and it has retained Lazard as its adviser. An RCS spokesman confirmed the possible sale, saying the board of directors “is exploring options to raise significant capital to rationalize the RCS capital structure.” RCS ‘s move comes about a year since American Realty Capital Properties Inc.–a firm that has ties to RCS through their shared founder, real estate developer Nicholas Schorsch–disclosed that it had intentionally concealed accounting errors.

Dynasty rounds out executive leadership. Dynasty Financial Partners expanded its leadership team as more firms continue to sign on to use its independent platform and services, according to Financial Planning. Dynasty co-founder Jason Pinkham was named director of relationship management and transition services, making him responsible for helping teams that join Dynasty in New York, Chicago and San Francisco. It has also hired Cantor Fitzgerald Wealth Management co-Chief Executive Stan Gregor to assist with growth on the East Coast.

THE PRACTICE:

An ‘aha’ chart: using nostalgia to teach clients about inflation. Whenever a client is nervous about investing in stocks and only wants to hold cash or bonds, California-based adviser Ara Oghoorian turns to a series of booklets called “Remember When…A Nostalgic Look Back in Time” to teach them about inflation’s effects on their savings. He has a book for each decade from 1950 to 2000, and has the clients flip through the book for a year close to when they were born to see how much cheaper things were when they were young. “The booklet is excellent at showing how pervasive inflation is on purchasing power over time,” Mr. Oghoorian tells Wealth Adviser at WSJ.com. “I tell [them] that if you want to make sure your money lasts during retirement, it has to grow faster than inflation.” (‘An Aha Chart’ is a newly launched occasional feature in which an adviser discusses the use of a chart or other visual presentation to teach clients certain aspects of finance or investing.)

Follow Wealth Adviser at WSJ.com on Twitter: @dowjonesadviser

The Wealth Adviser briefing covers topics of special interest to wealth managers, financial planners and other advisers. It’s delivered to subscribers by email each workday morning. If you haven’t done so already, you can sign up for it here: http://on.wsj.com/WealthAdviserSignup.

Please send tips, suggestions or other comments to Michael Wursthorn at michael.wursthorn@wsj.com or Wealth editor Karen Damato at karen.damato@wsj.com.