Topics: 2016 Elections, Affordable Care Act, congressional republicans, Conservatives, health insurance reform, Healthcare Reform, Obamacare, Republicans, Ron Johnson, Ted Cruz, Politics News

Republicans in the House and Senate insist they have a plans to handle the fallout from a ruling against the Affordable Care Act in King v. Burwell. They’re terrific plans, we’re told, and they’ll do a great job of patching up the damage that the Supreme Court could inflict if it decides that the ACA’s health insurance subsidies are illegal in 34 states. Unfortunately, none of us are allowed to see the plans because they’re super-secret.

Secrecy notwithstanding, the consensus seems to be that the GOP’s most likely path forward will be something along the lines of what Sen. Ron Johnson has proposed: agree to extend the ACA’s subsidies for a limited window in exchange for killing off other parts of Obamacare that actually make the law work. Other Republican proposals that are floating around also endorse temporarily extending the subsidies in some form, indicating that some Republicans understand that there would be a terrible human (and political) cost to this outcome that they’re so enthusiastically cheering for – people losing their insurance, losing access to healthcare, and dying preventable deaths. They recognize the need to act, but if we’ve learned one thing about the GOP and healthcare policy over the years, it’s that they can’t agree on anything beyond “Obamacare is bad.”

The feral dislike of the Affordable Care Act that the Republicans have happily cultivated over the years is coming back to bite them now that they could actually find themselves in a position of having to legislate on healthcare policy. To see how, one need look no further than Sen. Ted Cruz. Speaking to Politico, Cruz categorically ruled out supporting any legislation that revives the Affordable Care Act’s subsidies, even temporarily, should the court knock them down. His rationale is simple: The Republicans will finally have Obamacare on the ropes, and they should use that opportunity to go in for the kill.

“I think the best legislative option is to allow states to opt out,” Cruz said in the Capitol. “I am cautiously optimistic that the Supreme Court will conclude in King vs. Burwell that the Obama IRS disregarded the plain language of the statute and acted lawlessly. And when that occurs, it will be a real opportunity for Congress to lead.” He added: “In a perfect world, we would take that opportunity to repeal Obamacare. At a minimum, we should allow states to opt out.”