Volunteer physicians fill care gap through telemedicine





Photo: Jason Henry, Special To The Chronicle Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Dr. Laurie Green, SF OB-GYN, MAVEN founder and past president of the Harvard Medical School Alumni Association at her practice in San Francisco, Calif., Saturday June 13, 2015. Dr. Laurie Green, SF OB-GYN, MAVEN founder and past president of the Harvard Medical School Alumni Association at her practice in San Francisco, Calif., Saturday June 13, 2015. Photo: Jason Henry, Special To The Chronicle Image 2 of 2 Dr. Laurie Green, SF OB-GYN, MAVEN founder and past president of the Harvard Medical School Alumni Association talks with a patient at her practice in San Francisco, Calif., Saturday June 13, 2015. Dr. Laurie Green, SF OB-GYN, MAVEN founder and past president of the Harvard Medical School Alumni Association talks with a patient at her practice in San Francisco, Calif., Saturday June 13, 2015. Photo: Jason Henry, Special To The Chronicle Volunteer physicians fill care gap through telemedicine 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

Dr. Gary Herzberg doesn’t think of himself as retired, although he gave up his medical practice in Sebastopol seven years ago and recently left a position with a health insurance company. At 68, the longtime family doctor still maintains his license to practice in 13 states and is itching to continue doing what he loves.

“I have my interests, but the point is many of us … still have the skills and expertise and enjoy the practice of medicine,” Herzberg said.

It is Herzberg and medical professionals like him that a San Francisco physician named Laurie Green had in mind when she conceived and co-founded the Maven Project. Her goal was to harness the energy and talent of volunteer physicians, particularly those who are retired, to help solve some of health care’s most vexing issues: the lack of access to both primary and specialty medical care in under-served areas and a growing need for health services, spurred in part by having more people covered under the federal health law.

“We’re hoping we can create a community to try to replace what you lose when you step back from practice or academia,” said Green, a gynecologist.

The Maven Project is an acronym for the aptly named Medical Alumni Volunteer Expert Network. It relies on medical school alumni groups to recruit a national network of experts to lend their expertise, using telemedicine technology, to doctors and their patients in remote areas of the nation that lack that expert knowledge. Essentially, the technology would put these experts into the room.

Green, former president of the Harvard Medical School Alumni Association, came up with the idea after realizing that many of this country’s retired and semiretired physicians — about 250,000 in total — want to stay active without the hassle of running their own practices.

“You don’t necessarily want to go to Guatemala or Africa to volunteer if you’re over 60,” said Green, who serves as Maven’s president and CEO. “Meanwhile, there’s a massive need here in America.”

Growing needs

The medical needs of an aging Baby Boom generation, population growth in general and the federal Affordable Care Act that expanded health coverage to more Americans have combined to increase demand for health services while, at the same time, the number of doctors is dwindling mostly because of retirement. Nurses and other health professionals can help but not replace the expertise of physicians.

The Association of American Medical Colleges predicts doctor shortfalls of up to 31,100 primary care doctors and 63,700 specialists by 2025. Meanwhile, 31 percent of practicing U.S physicians are age 60 or older, according to a study published this year in the Journal of Medical Regulation.

The Maven Project is not the first effort to tap into the underutilized potential of retired physicians. Individual health centers and organizations such as Volunteers in Medicine, a South Carolina nonprofit that has opened more than 100 free clinics in 29 states during the past 18 years, draw on both active and retired health professionals to staff local centers.

Amy Hamlin, Volunteers in Medicine’s executive director, said a national network based on the use of telemedicine could fulfill many unmet health needs. “Leave it to California to come up with the idea — the technology megacenter of the world,” Hamlin said.

Physician recruitment for the Maven Project is well under way and the group plans to start a pilot project at three clinics next month, two in Massachusetts and one in Yuba City (Sutter County). The Massachusetts clinics have received a donated telemedicine software program and Yuba City’s Ampla Health will use its existing system.

“We have the clinics. We have volunteers now. We need to make sure everything with the volunteers goes smoothly … and we’re working out logistics on the technology side,” said Lisa Carron Shmerling, Maven Project executive director.

Hundreds of potential volunteers from Harvard, Stanford, Tufts, UCSF and other medical schools and training programs have expressed interest in Maven’s program.

Plenty of interest

Dr. Ken Bermudez, president of the alumni association at UCSF and a practicing reconstructive and cosmetic plastic surgeon in San Francisco, said he’s had no trouble generating interest among his colleagues. “I haven’t heard a negative response,” he said.

The project helps provide affordable medical malpractice insurance and works with doctors to ensure they meet the proper licensing requirements in their states, Shmerling said. Some states even offer a special license for retired physicians.

Active physicians, not just those who have retired, can volunteer their time and expertise to help colleagues in areas that lack specialists.

At 45, Dr. Rick Loftus, a UCSF Medical School alumnus, wants to offer his experience as an HIV specialist even if he doesn’t have many hours to give.

Loftus, director of the internal medicine residency program at Eisenhower Medical Center in Palm Springs, also works at a free clinic in the Coachella Valley. “It's not just a job for us,” he said. “We take an oath and recognize we have a role in society.”

For Herzberg, who practiced for 33 years in Sonoma County, the project offers him the opportunity to combine his growing interest in telemedicine with his love of working in the safety-net clinics.

“As a volunteer, you have a lot of freedom and the motivation is internal, not external,” he said. “I am anxious to do some work and I’m anxious to do this kind of work.”

Victoria Colliver is

a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. E-mail: vcolliver@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @vcolliver

Maven Project

For more information about the Maven Project: http://mavenproject.org. Physicians interested in volunteering can e-mail forphysicians@mavenproject.org.