SHARE Affordable Care Act

Special Section: Videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare



By of the

Madison — About 19,000 more low-income state residents are gaining state health coverage — more than expected — under a plan put forward by Gov. Scott Walker.

The plan, which passed as part of the state budget last summer in response to President Barack Obama's health care law, avoids using federal money available under that federal law that would have allowed for a greater expansion of the state's BadgerCare Plus Medicaid program.

The Walker administration announced the figures on the plan Monday, saying 81,731 adults below the poverty line signed up for BadgerCare in recent months because of the change and began receiving it April 1. At the same time, 62,776 people above the poverty line were dropped from BadgerCare by March 31 and told to buy coverage under the federal health care law.

That means more people than expected are going on to BadgerCare — as of December only a net 6,000 individuals were expected to join BadgerCare from the two changes.

In doing this approach, the state rejected federal tax dollars available through the federal Affordable Care Act that would have allowed the state to avoid dropping some or most of those 62,776 people while saving state tax dollars. That decision has won high praise from Republicans opposed to the law, also known as "Obamacare," and condemnation from Democrats and advocates for the uninsured.

"Our entitlement reforms make sure Medicaid is a safety net for our state's neediest citizens and protect Wisconsin's taxpayers from the uncertainty surrounding the federal government's implementation of the Affordable Care Act," Walker said in a written statement. "Due to our reforms...Wisconsin is the only state to not take the expansion with no health coverage gap."

What is still unclear is how many of the 62,776 people who were dropped from BadgerCare ended up being able to sign up and pay for health coverage through federal marketplaces for private insurance set up under the ACA. Even with federal subsidies available for those who qualify, the plans remain relatively expensive for low-income families once all expenses, such as premiums and deductibles, are totaled.

John Kraus, a spokesman for Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin, called on the Walker administration to release the numbers on how many adults didn't get replacement coverage for BadgerCare.

"Walker has been provided what they need from (the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services), so they should know today how many of the 62,776 are signed up in the exchange," Kraus said.

Claire Smith, a spokeswoman for the Wisconsin Department of Health Services, disagreed.

"The department received the raw data from CMS last week, and we are working on the data match to clean up the data and de-duplicate it. Once we are confident that we have a clean count, we will release that information," she said.

Under Walker's plan, the new enrollees to BadgerCare will still be paid for by both federal and state taxpayers, which is normal for Medicaid. Walker's approach declined a more extensive Medicaid expansion that would have had federal taxpayers sharing a higher share of the cost.

The Walker administration opted to expand the Medicaid program for people with very low household incomes — $11,670 or less a year for one person — while dropping the coverage for people making just over that threshold.

Overall, the number of BadgerCare enrollees as of April was 772,760, up 14,469, or 1.9% from the previous year. That reflects the fact that a number of factors can drive Medicaid enrollment.

Deficit projected

As of March 31, the Medicaid budget through June 2015 was projected to end up about $20 million in the red, according to the latest figures from the state. Smith said the Walker administration is looking for ways to make that up.

In sum, the number of adults without children who ended up signing up for Medicaid through the program ended up outweighing the number of parents who were kicked off, said Jon Peacock, research director for the Wisconsin Council on Children and Families.

But both Peacock and Mary Burke, Walker's Democratic opponent in his re-election bid for governor, said they were concerned about those who lost BadgerCare coverage.

"Scott Walker's refusal to bring our tax dollars back to Wisconsin was driven by his own personal politics, not what's best for taxpayers. Paying more to cover fewer people defies common sense," Burke said in a statement.

Taking the additional federal money would have saved the state up to $119 million through June 2015, according to the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau.

Lowering the federal spending won't do much for Wisconsin taxpayers, they say, because the savings will be spread out over taxpayers in 50 states.

But Walker and other Republicans say that is not a good long-term strategy for saving state or federal taxpayers money. The federal government can't be trusted for the long term to pay for an expanded Medicaid program, especially given the problems with the rollout of Obamacare, they said.

The federal money still comes from taxpayers, they said.

The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office projects that by 2022 Obamacare will lead to 26 million more people with health insurance, compared with what would have happened if the law had not been passed. This year, 12 million people were projected to gain coverage, rising to 19 million next year.

So far, enrollment in the public marketplaces — where people may be eligible for federal subsidies depending on their incomes — has exceeded initial projections.

Nationally, an estimated 8million people, including 139,815 in Wisconsin, bought private insurance through the state and federal exchanges as of April 19. Of those, 85% nationally and 91% of those in Wisconsin were eligible for subsidies to make the cost more affordable.

Guy Boulton of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.