'It's signed, sealed, and it's delivering – on time': How HHS bragged that Obamacare website would be ready 'on schedule' month after month



Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius bragged in July on her agency's health care blog that 'we're on track with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. It's signed, sealed, and it's delivering – on time.



Eleven weeks later, Sebelius and the rest of the Obamacare rollout team came under fire when its flagship website crashed, flubbed and gaffed its way into the historical annals of failed launches.

HHS published an infographic and a video on July 15, boasting that a series of benchmarks were reached on the way to what was hoped to be a seamless implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

'HHS is on task,' the graphic's title read, 'Working every day to create needed change for Americans.'

It listed nine intermediate goals, introducing each one with the words, 'On schedule.'

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

In a Web video published during the summer, the Dept. of Health and Human Services insisted it was delivering Obamacare, and its insurance exchange website, 'on schedule'

HHS might regret publishing this infographic on July 15, eleven weeks before the Obamacare website flopped its way into history

And the video, also titled 'On Schedule,' featured a photo of the Healthcare.gov home page. Above it read the promise that on October 1, 2013, 'The Health Insurance Marketplace will be OPEN for ENROLLMENT, ON SCHEDULE.'

Congress is now investigating the contractors behind the flawed website, asking questions about why the $394 million pig in a poke could have been delivered with lax oversight and minimal testing before it launched.

In a House Energy and Commerce Committee hearing on Thursday, Chairman Fred Upton, a Michigan Republican, called the website's launch 'nothing short of a disaster.'



Executives representing four of the biggest companies involved with the website told a House panel on Thursday that they delivered everything they were asked to produce, and blamed HHS's Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, for the decision to launch a crash-prone final product.

But Upton complained that representatives from the same companies had earlier 'looked us in the eye and assured us repeatedly that everything was on track, except that it wasn't.'

HHS launched its website 'on schedule' but with so many bugs and glitches that a new 'tech surge' team has been brought in to fix them - and some Democrats are parroting a tea party line in calling for a months-long delay

Goverment contractors including CGI Federal's Cheryl Campbell testified Thursday that it was one of Sebelius' agencies, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, that fell down on the job

The companies, including Canada-based CGI Global, have confirmed that the final website, which involved modules from more than a dozen contractors, wasn't road-tested until less than a week before Oct. 1.

'The system didn't receive adequate end-to-end testing,' according to Andrew Slavitt, an executive vice president with Optum.

Cheryl Campbell, the executive vice president of CGI's American arm, acknowledged that 'no one ever gets enough time for testing.'

But ultimately, she claimed, it was the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services which threw the switch on Oct. 1.



'We were there to support our client,' Campbell told the House panel. 'It is not our position to tell our client whether to go live.'



HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius was asked to testify in Thursday's hearing, but declined, saying she will appear at a later date

Rep. Renee Ellmers, a North Carolina Republican, exclaimed during the hearing that 'the bottom line here is that CMS is responsible for this failure.'



HHS did not respond to a call seeking comment about Sebelius' claims in July.

'There’s no sugarcoating it,' President Obama conceded on Monday. 'The website has been too slow. People have been getting struck during the application process. And I think it's fair to say that nobody is more frustrated than I am.'