Mater Dei Prep students celebrate the saving of the school. (Photo: Courtesy of The Seraph’s Fund)

Kevin Attridge has taught at Mater Dei Prep for 43 years, but he never saw a school day quite like Thursday.

News that the endangered Catholic high school would remain open next year got delivered in the most appropriate manner: The student advisory board informed schoolmates by holding up signs that spelled out "We did it!"

It was a day of elation, but not surprise, as the Diocese of Trenton approved the new governance model proposed by Mater Dei supporters who raised more than $1 million to avoid imminent closure.

"It's been such an incredible rush of emotions from the day it started (in early February) until today, but I think everyone knew we would do this," said Attridge, who teaches religion. "In that awful first day or two everyone rallied and thought, 'This is too big a force to come up short.'"

That proved true, and now the focus turns to operating issues, most pressingly enrollment. Athletic director Dennis Tobin, who is overseeing registration, said there are 50 prospective incoming freshmen "in the pipeline." That number has to increase to balance out a school of 340 students (roughly 85 per class), and Tobin is confident it will on the heels of Thursday's news.

"This is going to catapult us to be in a better place going forward," Tobin said. "When people read the announcement today it drove home that Mater Dei is here to stay. Mater Dei is going to be healthy going forward. Parents can say, 'I can send my son to the school and it's going to be there.'"

The feeling is that the frenzied effort to save the school opened an untapped well of human capital, from students to parents to alumni.

"So many have said they always wanted to do something for the school and nobody ever asked," Attridge said, "so when they saw there was such a great need, the help just kept pouring in."

The key to keeping that well open is the new governance structure. Though it will remain Catholic and affiliated with the diocese, Mater Dei will no longer fall under the auspices of St. Mary Parish in Middletown. It will be overseen by a board of trustees and a president, with a principal running the school on a day-to-day basis. This is the model used by Christian Brothers Academy in Lincroft.

A search for a president is underway. While much of the current staff is expected to remain in place, there will be change at the top with an eye toward fiscal discipline and transparency.

"We will still be a strong, powerful Catholic high school, but we will be a better business model," Attridge said. "You will have a certain accountability now to your trustees and your president. Whereas the diocese is worried about hundreds of schools, this will be a more concentrated view. I think we'll be a much better school, and we're a great school as it is."

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1GLmDNn