DENVER – Over the past few weeks, workers in numerous American cities, including Denver, have been demonstrating for a $15 an hour minimum wage, and the reaction from the right has been predictable: Economic doom will ensue if that happens. “Seattle Set To Destroy Economy With Highest Minimum Wage Increase In The World” read one headline.

Meanwhile, I’ve just returned from a trip to New Zealand and Australia, which have a far higher floor for workers and where that hasn’t happened. Australia has a 16.87 Australian dollars ($14.10 at current rates) an hour minimum wage for adults over the age of 20, four weeks of annual leave for each year of employment, 18 weeks of paid maternity leave at minimum wage, two weeks paid paternity leave and up to 52 weeks of unpaid parental leave for each parent, 10 days of paid personal/sick leave (which carry over if unused) and universal, government-run health care – which started in 1975, nearly forty years ago.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Economy]

Australia has a one of the strongest economies in the developed world. It survived the recent recession unscathed and hasn’t had a real recession in 20 years. And as Australian academics have noted, "Australia and New Zealand, with among the highest minimum wages in the world, have both low levels of unemployment and significantly lower levels of low paid employees."

Bankruptcies due to medical costs, which accounted for 60 percent of U.S. bankruptcies before the Affordable Care Act, are completely unknown there. When I told Australian friends that before Obamacare Americans routinely went without health care or health insurance because they couldn’t afford it, they looked at me as if I’d grown an extra head. People going without health care is unfathomable in Australia as a moral issue, not a financial one.

Yes, some taxes are higher and things cost more in Australia, including groceries, meals and many retail items. But overall wages are higher and because there are no sub-minimum wage workers, there’s no tipping – the price you see is the price you pay. There’s not the constant pressure to add another 20 percent onto every sale or service you receive, or the guilt of knowing the person who just brought you a sandwich makes $2.13 an hour, and you’re supposed to make up the rest. And taking the United States' ridiculous, inflated health care costs out of the family budget, along with the fear of financial ruin from getting sick, changes the whole equation.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Obamacare]