Today, the National Right to Life Committee, the oldest and largest pro-life group in the nation, endorsed Iowa state Senator Joni Ernst in her campaign for U.S. Senate.

“As a state senator, Joni Ernst has been an outspoken leader in the fight to protect innocent human life in Iowa,” said Carol Tobias, National Right to Life president. “Joni Ernst will bring her record of strong pro-life leadership to the U.S. Senate.”

Ernst’s strong pro-life position stands in sharp contrast with pro-abortion Rep. Bruce Braley, who has a 100% pro-abortion voting record in Congress. Ernst opposes using taxpayer dollars to pay for abortion and supports the legislation that prohibits abortion after 20 weeks on the basis that these children are capable of feeling excruciating pain.

Bruce Braley voted against H.R. 7 – the No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Act – which would prohibit taxpayer funding of abortion by codifying the principles of the Hyde Amendment on a permanent, government-wide basis. Braley also voted against the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, which would prohibit abortions after 20 weeks based on the scientific evidence that unborn children are capable of feeling pain.

Braley’s pro-abortion position is so extreme that he is a co-sponsor of H.R. 3471, which can most accurately be described as the “Abortion Until Birth Protection Act.” This is an extreme bill that, if enacted, would invalidate nearly all state limitations on abortion, including Iowa’s two laws that protect individuals and private hospitals from being compelled to provide or participate in abortions.

Bruce Braley voted to enact Obamacare, which provides government funding for health plans that pay for abortion on demand, and will result in rationing of lifesaving medical treatments. Joni Ernst is needed in the U.S. Senate to help reverse the abortion-expanding and rationing effects of that law.

“The most vulnerable members of our human family will be well served by Joni Ernst’s election to the U.S. Senate,” said Tobias.