Photo

WASHINGTON — With Senator Harry Reid’s undiluted endorsement Sunday of the Iran nuclear accord, followed by Senator Debbie Stabenow of Michigan on Monday, supporters of the deal are closing in on the number they need to ensure it goes into force.

But the ranks of undecided Democrats are still full of quirks and wild cards, from a freshman senator from Michigan whose closest aide has a pro-Israeli government bent to lawmakers inclined toward avoiding military conflict but from states where any position in support of President Obama is toxic.

More vexing still, Democratic leaders worry that Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, could allow a resolution of disapproval of the deal to be loaded with politically charged amendments, such as making it contingent on Iran’s recognizing the State of Israel or releasing American prisoners.

Photo

“You could imagine how difficult those amendments could be,” said Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the No. 2 Democrat charged with rounding up votes for the deal. “And you’ve got four presidential candidates all trying to break into Fox’s top 10. The possibilities are endless.”

For all the millions of dollars pumped into the campaigns for and against the deal, the dire warnings on both sides and the threats of political repercussion, this August has not been a caldron akin to the recess of 2009, when Democrats were pummeled in town-hall meetings over the Affordable Care Act. Even the defection of the Senate’s No. 3 Democrat, Chuck Schumer of New York, did not fundamentally change an issue that has largely broken along party lines.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Numerically, the agreement between Iran and six world powers to limit Tehran’s nuclear ambitions is on the cusp of being safe. Republican leaders in the House and Senate have promised votes by mid-September on a resolution to scuttle the deal, which Mr. Obama would then veto.

About 150 House Democrats signed a letter this spring tentatively backing the accord — just over the number needed to sustain a promised veto of a congressional resolution to disapprove the deal. So far, there have been no defections from that group and a handful of new supporters.

Photo

In the Senate, the recent declarations of support by Democrats from Republican-leaning states — like Joe Donnelly of Indiana and Claire McCaskill of Missouri — have substantially reduced the possibility that opponents will be able to muster 67 votes in the Senate to override a veto — if the resolution remains a simple up or down vote on the Iran deal.