Marni Turner, and her 10-year-old poodle, “Dougie,” visit at an outdoor cafe on New York’s Upper West Side in May. Richard Drew/Associated Press

ALBANY – Partisan tussles here have stalled rent-control laws and tax policies as the legislative session draws to a close, but one bill has really gone to the dogs.

A bill permitting people to dine at restaurants with pooches passed through both chambers of the Legislature Tuesday morning with bipartisan support.

Introduced earlier this year, the bill only pertains to outdoor dining areas, and it gives restaurant owners the option to ban the practice.

“I think this is a win for dogs, because they don’t have to sit at home without their owners,” said Assemblywoman Linda Rosenthal, the Manhattan Democrat who introduced the bill earlier this year.

The bill was not without some controversy. Some officials from New York City expressed concerns because the legislation overrides city health codes. And the legislation was amended at one point to respond to concerns it could weaken laws pertaining to service dogs.

But the the bill sailed through the Senate earlier this week, with sponsorship from Sen. Kemp Hannon, a Long Island Republican, and passed in the Assembly on Tuesday, where Ms. Rosenthal sponsored it.

She said she has no plans to push for dogs to eat inside restaurants with their owners: “I think outside is sufficient.”

Gov. Andrew Cuomo, a Democrat, has yet to take a stance on the outdoor dining rights of dogs.

Richard Azzopardi, a spokesman for the governor, said: “We’ll have to review this legislation, however, the Governor has a strong record of increasing rights and protections for all New Yorkers, four-legged or otherwise.”

Other issues in Albany, meanwhile, continued to prove contentious. New York City’s rent regulations expired on Monday, provoking the ire of Democrats and tenant-advocates, after the Legislature’s two chambers failed to reach an agreement on renewing them.

On Tuesday morning, Sen. Marty Golden, a Brooklyn Republican, said the issue was still being discussed, as the clock ticked on the legislative session, which is set to end Wednesday. Asked if lawmakers might leave Albany without renewing the rent laws, Mr. Golden said he doubts it but did not know.

Ms. Rosenthal attributed the bipartisan appeal of her bill to a shared concern for dogs among Albany’s lawmakers. “Animal issues are nonpartisan,” she said. “Because animals have no voice, you have to be their voice.”