Demaryius or Dez. Dez or Demaryius.

The Broncos needed to choose.

The 2010 NFL draft was approaching, and the Broncos wanted to rebuild their receiving core. Dez Bryant was a troubled but ultratalented prospect from Oklahoma State. Demaryius Thomas had a broken foot and when last seen healthy was a fly route runner from the option offense of Georgia Tech.

The Broncos visited first with Bryant at Dove Valley, then Thomas a couple of days before the draft in Atlanta.

It was Brandon Marshall who broke the tie.

Marshall was coming off three consecutive 100-catch seasons but was also a headache. The Broncos had just traded away Marshall because he wanted out and they were tired of him, anyway. But the team could hardly tell its fans Marshall had to go because he was trouble, only to draft the problem child that was Bryant.

And so with their No. 22 overall pick, the Broncos took a chance on the kid with the broken foot. Bryant dropped to No. 24, where he was taken by the Dallas Cowboys.

Demaryius and the Broncos will play Dallas and Dez on Sunday at the opulent, sports palace known as AT&T Stadium.

“Oh, man, I’m blessed to be here,” Thomas said Friday at his locker. “Blessed. Great organization. This is a great place.”

Thomas’ background also raised eyebrows. His mom and his grandma had been imprisoned on drug charges since he was young. But his was a story of overcoming adversity, thanks in large part to the aunt and uncle who raised him.

At Georgia Tech, Thomas basically ran two routes — the “go” and the “hitch.” Maybe, he would mix in the hitch-and-go. He didn’t catch many, but when he did, they went for big yards.

Then-Broncos coach Josh McDaniels and general manager Brian Xanders were with Thomas in his agent Todd France’s conference room. McDaniels would draw up a play on a whiteboard. Explain it. Zebra 11 was one running back, one tailback. Thomas would be in the “Z” receiver position.

Erase it. Draw up another play. Cadet 11 might have Thomas in the slot. Erase it.

After four or five plays, Thomas was sent up to the board. He was told a play McDaniels had diagrammed, and he’d have to draw it up with the correct formation and personnel sets.

He aced it.

“I remember McDaniels telling me that,” Thomas said. “I think it helped me, because everybody was worried I didn’t know many routes coming out of college. That showed that I can catch on to stuff fast.”

Dez is the best receiver on America’s Team. Demaryius is the most lethal weapon for arguably the NFL’s best team.

In the third round of that draft, the Broncos took another receiver with a broken foot, Eric Decker. They went into the draft trying to decide between Dez and Demaryius.

They came out with Demaryius and Deck.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis

THREE UP

1. Browns: Return of WR Josh Gordon coincided with offensive surge. Averaged 8.0 points in two losses, 28.3 in next three wins.

2. Titans: QB Jake Locker was playing steady, but their defense had been carrying them anyhow. Ryan Fitzpatrick is a capable backup.

3. Colts: Have gone 2-0 by margins of 20, 34 points since acquiring RB Trent Richardson. A deal that worked for both sides.

THREE DOWN

1. Falcons: Reminds me of the San Diego Chargers from 2004-10 — lots of star power but not tough enough up front on either side.

2. Texans: Matt Schaub’s pick-six skid has got to end.

3. Eagles: After getting blown out by the Broncos, Philly media detected some quit in Chip Kelly’s men.