The University of Michigan Health System is planning an exhaustive search as it hires its next CEO.

Current Executive Vice President of Medical Affairs and Health System CEO Ora Pescovitz is leaving U-M June 1, and the school announced Friday that it has convened a search committee for her replacement and hired firm Russell Reynolds Associates to assist with the search.

U-M plans to pay Russell Reynolds Associates $300,000, plus expenses.

The Health System CEO is in charge of leading the region's largest healthcare enterprise. UMHS has a $3.3 billion annual operating budget, 22,000 staff members and 11 million square feet of infrastructure.

The university's next president calls the job one of "the best in the whole country for an academic medical leader."

Mark Schlissel, who will replace Mary Sue Coleman as president July 1, helped appoint the committee and plans to be involved in the search and recruiting process. As he comes to Ann Arbor, Schlissel will be tasked with appointing a number of administrative positions at U-M, including a health system leader and a chief financial officer.

"The serendipitous thing is that this is my field. I grew up in academic medicine," said Schlissel, an immunologist who earned his medical and Ph.D degrees at Johns Hopkins University and has worked as a researcher or administrator at Hopkins, the University of California at Berkeley and Brown University, where he is now provost. "My generation is now the generation that's in these leadership jobs around the country."

Michael Johns, a doctor and former medical administrator of Emory University, will serve as interim health system CEO beginning June 2. He was a dean at Hopkins when Schlissel was a medical resident there.

Johns is serving on the search committee, along with 13 other people. Committee members include professors and administrators in the medical, nursing, public health and business schools, as well as the health system's chief information officer, U-M's vice president of government relations, the director of U-M's Life Sciences Institute and the vice chairman of Steelcase, Inc., who is a U-M alum.

Paul Lee, director of the Kellogg Eye Center, is the committee chairman.



U-M's health system is a complex enterprise tightly integrated with the medical school. The system is still navigating health care changes resulting from the Affordable Care Act and in recent years digitized much of its patient records. The health system and medical school conduct millions in research each year — U-M received $509.7 million in National Institutes of Health funding in fiscal 2013 alone. UMHS facilitates 45,000 patient stays a year and 1.94 million outpatient visits.

"You have to keep a medical research complex vigorous in an era when the federal funding has gone flat, and that really calls for outstanding leadership," Schlissel said of the position.

Pescovitz, who served one five-year term with UMHS, appears to be searching for another hospital leadership role. In April she was named a finalist for the next president of the Medical University of South Carolina, but was not selected.

She has led the organization during a time of expansion, including construction of the $754 million C.S. Mott Children's Hospital & Von Voigtlander Women's Hospital, and a time of acquisition, including the absorption of Jackson's century-old Allegiance Health System.

During her tenure, Michigan's health care market has seen expanded competition, and while UMHS has $3 billion in cash reserves, it is working to close a projected $250 million budget gap by 2017.

Pescovitz earned $885,000 in wages and benefits in 2012, according to W-2 documents obtained by The Ann Arbor News. That year, her base salary was $754,000.

According to U-M's website, the search committee is tasked with:





Conducting a national search for candidates, soliciting and considering both external and internal prospects, and building a pool of highly qualified candidates;



Making a concerted effort to meet federal and the institution’s affirmative action goals with respect to this position and to develop as diverse a pool as possible;



Reviewing the candidate pool, conducting preliminary interviews and advising the President of a set of recommended candidates for consideration;



Assisting the president in recruiting and referencing efforts as required.



Kellie Woodhouse covers higher education for the Ann Arbor News. Reach her at kelliewoodhouse@mlive.com and follow her on twitter.