Are you stuck in the Squeezed Middle? Why we're feeling the pinch like never before



Middle-class families are feeling the pinch like never before as they struggle to cling on to normal standards of living while their financial security takes a hit. Rosie Millard looks at what the future holds

‘We are living on goodwill, fresh air and allotments. Graphic designers, artists, photographers, writers, we were all OK – I am still working but I can see the abyss’

Across the country they are still drinking fresh coffee, but they certainly aren’t waking up with joy to smell it. That has been replaced by anxieties about university fees and interest rates. The squeezed middle classes may have coffee and a bit of plonk and books in the house, but they don’t have haircuts, holidays or heating.

But not everyone within the group is feeling the pinch. The middle class has splintered, with ‘uber-middles’ (mostly doctors and bankers who rank in the top five per cent of earners) surging ahead, their incomes rising faster than those of formerly well-paid professionals such as engineers, scientists, accountants and architects. The Financial Times has dubbed the later sub group the ‘cling-ons’ – middle class but only just, with vast numbers struggling to maintain a normal standard of life. Their incomes have fallen in real terms by 8.7 per cent (whereas the poorest ten per cent of families have seen their incomes drop by just 2.4 per cent). With money so tight, what do they choose to spend it on, and how do they feel about the choices they have to make?

Throw a stone up in County Durham and it will strike one of the cling-ons coming down, says Caroline, a gardening writer and mother of two living in Weardale. ‘We are living on goodwill, fresh air and allotments. Graphic designers, artists, photographers, writers, we were all OK – I am still working but I can see the abyss.’

Caroline and I visit some of her friends in Newcastle. We drive in her car, which has no lock – this does not matter because it is only worth about £100. As there is next to no public transport where she lives, it is an essential expense. We meet Suzy, who runs a book festival, and Anna, who works at a local literacy development organisation. They are, as they put it, all ‘skint’.

‘When we go out, we usually have to decide between the cinema and a restaurant,’ says Suzy cheerfully. ‘Never both.’

‘We try not to get too depressed about it,’ says Caroline. ‘The whole point is to buoy each other up.’ So they have each other round for home-cooked meals, or meet to discuss books borrowed from the library. This situation isn’t going to go away fast, this much they know.

‘We are in it for the long haul,’ announces Anna. ‘All those benefits we used to enjoy are not going to be reinstated. Child benefits, university grants, cheaper petrol…’ Everyone laughs. Nobody is saying that they are impoverished, that they can’t afford to put food on the table, but there is nothing to spare.

Last year, the Ipsos Mori Social Research Institute (SRI) put out some questions of its own in a survey called Understanding Families in an Age of Austerity. Researchers worked closely with 11 families across the country, all of whom were in the low- to middle-income bracket. They visited them often with the aim of illustrating the delicate balancing act necessary to sustain household budgets and keep family life on track in austerity. The research uncovered some sobering things. They found out about the four Cs, for a start. These are the things we are finding tough to cope with in the recession: car, childcare, cost of living and credit. The four Cs are particularly difficult as they reduce financial resilience and the ability to deal with the unexpected.

Childcare costs, in particular, cause huge financial pressure. ‘If I didn’t have in-laws to help out, I wouldn’t work,’ says Marion, who has one child with her husband Mark. ‘We need the money but childcare is so expensive that you end up just paying to work.’

‘Even in the case of our well-off families, we were struck by the fragility of people in the recession,’ says SRI researcher Chris Perry. ‘They are only ever two financial shocks away from external borrowing. It’s the big things that happen, such as the arrival of an unexpected tax bill or the breakdown of the car, that can plunge them into debt,’ agrees research director Suzanne Hall. ‘Their day-to-day existence is so precarious that they have no space to think.’

Something they are probably thinking about a lot, however, is their mortgage, which for many is interest only. Lots of middle-class families simply can’t afford to buy a home in places such as London, Cambridge or St Albans, for example, and so are being pushed into cheaper areas, but they still have enormous loans that they are simply not paying off. And many won’t have the capital to pay off their loans at the end of the term and will be relying on cashing in their equity. Everyone will then start selling their houses, which will cause a crash in prices.



The Financial Conduct Authority estimates that nearly four million homeowners could be facing an armageddon similar to the collapse of endowments 20 years ago. Plus, because of these worries, most interest-only deals have disappeared – meaning that when the interest-only sector of the market comes to remortgage, their household budgets will be unable to make the repayments.

What Suzanne Hall and her team also noticed is that families don’t have a financial buffer for disaster. People simply don’t have any savings. This seems to be a constant. ‘If we needed £300 tomorrow,’ says Marion, ‘I think we would have to ask Mark’s parents.’

One-off events such as holidays or the school prom, which are important for families to experience, suddenly become financial nightmares

Or, if that doesn’t work, they simply go to the high street and take out a bank loan. ‘I stick to the essentials, then sometimes I can get through without borrowing,’ says Sarah, a single mother from London who earns around £35,000. But life isn’t only about the essentials. Last year she wanted to take her two sons on a foreign holiday, but by the time it got to the summer she realised she wasn’t going to be able to afford it. However, she felt it was so important for them all to have a ‘normal’ family experience that she took out a high-interest bank loan. ‘I’ve started getting migraines because I’m always thinking, “What am I going to do?”’ she says.

One-off events such as holidays or the school prom, which are important for families to experience, suddenly become financial nightmares. Joanne, who has four children and lives in the Midlands, wanted to make sure her daughter Helena would be able to go to her school-leavers’ party in style, and felt racked with guilt that she couldn’t.

‘There were loads of things she needed that I had to think about, but to go and spend £150 on a dress was impossible. I’d go without anything to do that for her, but it’s just not on. She wanted to get her nails done, and that was £25 – half my shopping budget for the week.’ In the end she paid it, meaning more family debt. After Christmas Joanne had so little money that all her children ate was chips and bread.

Guilt about not being able to do the right thing for your children is a constant headache. Children are seen as a major consumer target, and to allow your child to be without trainers, computers, electronic devices and the like takes a degree of parental strength and resolve many of us find difficult to muster. We excuse spending money on them because we want to show them we love them. Ironically, this means we have to work that much harder in order to afford the treats. Which means we have less time to spend with our children…

Cling-ons are constantly finding themselves playing one thing off against another. Frances is a mother of one daughter, aged eight. Her family income has halved since her husband Peter, a designer, went freelance and she took voluntary redundancy from her job at a high-street bank. Now a manager of a charity shop in Shrewsbury, her priorities are simple. ‘We haven’t had a holiday for two years,’ she tells me. ‘The boiler is broken. Before, we would have just gone out and bought one. Now we have to save up. We used to spend £100 a week on food. Now we spend £60. Peter and I compete to see who can get the lowest weekly bill.’

Frances was furious when the headmaster at her daughter’s school told off the child for wearing a £3 cardigan from Tesco rather than the one officially sanctioned by the school, which costs £16. Uniform isn’t crucial to Frances. Dancing classes for her daughter, however, are different. ‘It’s not fair to stop all the things she likes just because we are not massively well-paid. So she still goes to Brownie camp and on school trips.’



‘I think we are all going to be bumping along the bottom for quite some time. And we have got to keep ourselves well’

‘Six years ago, my daughters did things that middle-class children do,’ says Caroline, whose children are 14 and 17. ‘They both played the piano. One went swimming; one had singing lessons – and we could afford them. They don’t have lessons for anything any more.’



They don’t have new clothes, either. Everyone in the family each has a single pair of jeans. When they are dirty they are washed and go on the radiator to dry, and are put on again. Caroline never watches TV. Seeing all those people prancing around in new clothes, swinging trophy bags is too much. ‘Watching TV would make me too avaricious,’ she says. She sometimes sits in the garden and cries with the pressure of it all.

Benefit changes (including loss of family tax credits and also the arrival of university fees), the steep rise in the cost of living and, of course, unemployment are the things that have affected the famously unshakable confidence of the middle class. The people I spoke to were anxious, worried about the future, unsure how they were going to cope, particularly if the dreaded interest rate goes up. ‘I do worry hugely about that happening,’

says Grace, who lives with her husband Jude and their four children in Winchester. ‘I occasionally have one of those dark, sleepless nights questioning where we are all going. I feel anxious about indefinable things.’

Grace admits that she’s nowhere near the crunch position facing so many others, yet she furnishes her lovely Winchester house with sofas and tables from the city dump and has been known to raid the bins at Waitrose for food.

Her husband, a business consultant who went freelance in the boom years, only to see his work more or less dry up, puts a positive spin on it: ‘I just get on with things. It would be nice to have more money, or extend the kitchen, but the minute you decide you can’t afford these things, you just do without them.’ Plus, there are advantages in ‘resting’. Particularly if you are a father of four. ‘I am 50 now, and in the past

ten years I have had so much time with the kids. If there is an equation that says money or time, I would always take time. I have no regrets.’

Some cling-ons have talked about moving abroad. SRI researchers found that Eastern Europe was looking more attractive to some, as was sending children to university overseas, which may be cheaper in some cases. That children would go on to university or some other sort of higher education was not, however, in any doubt.

Caroline thought she might even have to sell her house to pay for her daughter’s university education – in the end she won a place at Cambridge, which, in fact, worked out cheaper than her original choice in London, so they were able to keep the family home.

Caroline allows herself one treasured luxury. ‘I have a piano lesson once every couple of months. For that hour I have a fantastic time and I forget everything else.’ She thinks the solace granted by classical music offers a vital mental respite from, as she puts it, ‘scrabbling down the back of the sofa for a spare pound to go and buy some butter.

‘I think we are all going to be bumping along the bottom for quite some time. And we have got to keep ourselves well.’