Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Ducey talks KidsCare Yvonne Wingett Sanchez/azcentral.com

State senate president, Andy Biggs speaks at a press conference in support of a bill overhauling the Public Safety Personnel Retirement System in Phoenix at the state Capitol Rose Garden on February 2, 2016. (Photo: John Samora, John Samora/ The Republic) Story Highlights Biggs is blocking a program that would allow tens of thousands of kids to go to the doctor at no cost to the state

His reasons a are illogical

Gov. Ducey needs to assure this program is part of the budget

What Senate President Andy Biggs is doing with KidsCare is just plain wrong, and his explanation for doing it is hopelessly illogical.

He’s blocking restoration of a program that would allow tens of thousands of kids to go to the doctor at no cost to the state.

These are the children of the working poor. Their parents make too much to qualify for Medicaid and too little to buy into Obamacare.

If Biggs won't budge, it will be up to Gov. Doug Ducey to restore this pro-family program.

AHCCCS, which is Arizona’s Medicaid program, projects that 30,000 kids could benefit from KidsCare.

Which is it: No need or too much?

From one side of his mouth, Biggs says that estimate is a figment of reporters’ imaginations. He questions the need.

From the other side of his mouth, he says Arizona shouldn’t restore the program because, as he recently told Ted Simons on KAET-TV's "Arizona Horizon," doing so “would create a constituency of up to 50,000 people” who would object if the program were ever cut.

How to contact Andy Biggs Pressure Senate President Andy Biggs to allow a vote on KidsCare. You can: Send him an email: Fill out this online form. Call his office: (602) 926-4371.

So which is it, Sen. Biggs? There’s no need? Or is there such a great need that satisfying it would create a massive constituency of formerly sick kids? A constituency so strong the state would be forced to pay for the program if the feds decided to stop funding it 100 percent?

Yes. 100 percent. It’s important to remember that restoring KidsCare would be paid for entirely by the federal government at least through 2017, and possibly through 2019. That's years of doctors visits. Years of care that could make a life-changing difference to tens of thousands of Arizona families.

Don't trust the triggers? Let's look at history

The bill – HB 2309 -- that Biggs refuses to hear in the Senate includes an escape clause that says the program ends if the feds fall short of fully funding that promise.

Biggs says he doesn’t trust such "triggers" built into the bill.

But those who say lawmakers would be prevented from lowering the ax on KidsCare ignore history.

Before the recession, Arizona participated in KidsCare, which then required a state match. For every $1 from Arizona, the feds put in $3. It was a good deal.

Freezing the program during the recession made no economic sense. But lawmakers did it anyway.

Arizona saved $12.9 million in fiscal 2011 by eviscerating KidsCare, but our state lost $41 million in federal matching money that year, according to the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured.

We all pay for 'uncompensated' care

That was at a time when people were losing their jobs and houses. Then – as now – parents without health care for their kids wind up in hospital emergency rooms when simple conditions that went untreated turned complex.

Emergency rooms are the most costly option. We all end up paying for “uncompensated” care.

There’s more to Biggs’ illogical defense of blocking a vote: He's taking one for the team. “I take the beating,” he told Simons. He provides cover for KidsCare opponents who are not as willing as he is to publicly stand between kids and doctors.

C'mon. Really?

Biggs is no martyr

Taking a “beating” to spare GOP lawmakers the pain of voting on a bill that lets kids go to the doctor may seem like a profile in courage to the president of the Arizona Senate. It’s not.

In the House, which is not known as a gathering place of squishy liberals, HB 2309 passed 47-12. The bill has a Republican sponsor, Rep. Regina Cobb.

House Speaker David Gowan, who felt the need to assure a safe distance from the terrifying queries and deafening keystrokes of reporters, nevertheless let his members dare to take responsibility for their votes on KidsCare. Are senators more fragile?

Biggs says: “I don’t support KidsCare.” But it’s no reason to prevent others from voting.

Arizona taxpayers and parents whose children’s health hangs in the balance have one more hope: Gov. Ducey, whose devotion to family values is oft-repeated, can assure KidsCare is included in the budget.

Ducey should recognize how illogical it is to let other states lay claim to federal money that could cool the fevered brow of Arizona kids.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1N57RrF