With a Dec. 15 deadline fast approaching, Gov. Terry McAuliffe swung through Roanoke on Monday on a push to encourage people to sign up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

And while visiting a local office of Enroll Virginia, a federally funded organization that has been helping in the efforts, he praised an outreach system that has assisted more than 4,000 Virginians since the enrollment period began three weeks ago.

“We have boots on the ground this year to make sure Virginians find the best insurance options at the best price,” McAuliffe said.

When the system launched a year ago, a malfunctioning federal website was not the only thing that hindered enrollment efforts in Virginia. Under the leadership of a Republican governor opposed to the federal health care law and an attorney general who sued unsuccessfully to have it overturned, the state did not pursue federal grants to help enroll consumers and promote the law’s offerings.

“Well, folks, it’s a new day,” McAuliffe, a Democrat, said of his administration’s approach.

As part of a $9.3 million grant awarded to the state this year, more than 100 full-time positions have been added to the ranks of those helping the poor and the uninsured find coverage.

That means in Roanoke, four new assisters are based in an office where federal navigator Patrick Kelly was working alone last year.

“Patrick, we have your back,” McAuliffe told a crowd of health care enrollment and government officials at Monday’s event. “And that’s why we’re here today.”

The federal grant will also pay for radio and television advertisements, bus signs and other promotions for insurance sold through healthcare.gov.

Under the Affordable Care Act, people who make between the federal poverty guideline — $11,670 for an individual and $23,850 for a family of four — or up to four times that amount are eligible for federal subsidies on private insurance plans sold through a government-run website. The subsidies are awarded on a sliding scale, with the greatest savings going to those with the lowest incomes.

Dec. 15 is the deadline to obtain plans that begin Jan. 1. However, consumers will have until Feb. 15 to purchase insurance that covers the rest of the year.

Last year, about 216,000 people in Virginia obtained insurance through the law. State officials are hoping to enroll another 160,000 this year.

After his remarks, McAuliffe sat in on an enrollment session between Kelly and Kara Joyce, a Roanoke hairstylist who was there to get some help renewing the coverage she obtained a year ago.

“Like a lot of people, I find insurance kind of confusing and intimidating,” Joyce said.

So it was a relief for her to discover, with Kelly’s help, that her new plan would cost just $41 per month. That’s more than what she paid last year, due to increases in both the premium cost and her own income. But it’s still a lot better than a nearly $300 premium for a pre-Affordable Care Act plan that didn’t offer as many benefits.

“It’s a great deal,” Joyce said.