Let’s take a look at some of the deadlines and changes that will affect payroll in the upcoming months.

Affordable Care Act (ACA)—June 30, 2016 is the deadline to electronically file forms 1094s and 1095s for 2015. All applicable large employers (ALE—businesses who employ 50 or more full-time employees or full-time equivalents) received increased flexibility with a one-year extension from the normal filing date of March 31. Remember, this filing is to be performed on a new IRS process through the ACA Information Return system, also known as AIR. Prior registration is mandatory.

Payroll Providers in the State of Oregon—As of January 1, 2017, the employer’s business registry number or business identification number must appear on all employee pay stubs. The Oregon Department of Revenue provides additional information.

Paid Sick Leave Laws & Reminders—Several states and localities now mandate paid sick leave, including Connecticut, Massachusetts, Oregon and California. Localities include San Francisco, Emeryville, Washington DC, Seattle, New York City, Oakland, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh and New Jersey (specifically, Jersey City, Newark, Passaic, East Orange, Paterson, Irvington, Trenton, Montclair, Bloomfield and Elizabeth).

If you are providing payroll in Maryland (effective 10/1/2016) or Vermont (effective 1/1/2017) it is important to investigate how much paid sick leave employees will get and the impact if the employer already has a paid time off policy in place.

Note that this is not a complete list, since several states and localities are adding mandatory sick leave on an ongoing basis. Thomson Reuters Checkpoint is a great resource for updates.

State Minimum Wage News—Most states increase minimum wages annually on January 1. However the following states have changes coming mid- to late 2016: California (San Francisco on 7/1/2016 and Berkeley on 10/1/2016), Maryland on 7/1/2016, Washington, D.C. on 7/1/2016, Minnesota on 8/1/2016 and Oregon on 7/1/2016. Keep an eye out for more!

State Unemployment Insurance (UI) Rates—New Jersey and Tennessee can change their UI base and rates on July 1, 2016.

FUTA Deficit States—As of now, there will only be two states and one territory with FUTA credit reduction for 2016: California, Ohio and the Virgin Islands. Final locations and percentages will be released later this year. Learn more here.

A Special Announcement

On a personal note, I will be installed as the President of the American Payroll Association on May 10, 2016. I look forward to seeing many readers in Nashville at the 34th Annual Congress.

------------------

James Paille CPP is the Director of Operations for Thomson Reuters myPay Solutions. He has been an executive manager in the payroll service industry for more than 30 years, specializing in managing multi-location offices. Jim is President-Elect of the American Payroll Association as well as a member of the National Speakers Bureau and chair of the CPP Certification Review Panel. He holds a Bachelor of Science in Accounting from St. John Fisher College in Rochester, NY.