Economy as a whole would be better with raise to $10.10 an hour.

Peanuts and paycheck (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto )

The minimum wage, $7.25 an hour, hasn’t been adjusted in five years for inflation or rising costs for basic necessities such as housing, food, utilities, transportation and child care. Because of inflation, the current minimum wage forces more people into poverty. A single parent who works full-time at minimum wage earns just $14,500. If she has two children, this income is more than $4,000 below the poverty line.

Despite this appalling fact — indeed, despite the rising numbers of Americans, including business owners, who are for raising the minimum wage, and despite the benefits to not just those in poverty, but to businesses and the overall economy — Congress resists raising the minimum wage to a living wage.

Increasing the minimum wage to $10.10 an hour would raise almost a million people above the poverty line. With that said, it should be noted that the poverty threshold is considered to be inadequate. Nevertheless, that raise from $7.25 to $10.10 an hour would increase a household’s before-tax income by $5,928 annually.

In addition, families earning more than $7.25 but below $10.10 who are barely above the poverty threshold would be lifted up as well. There are 17 million workers who earn less than $10.10 an hour who would directly benefit from the increase to $10.10. Another 11 million workers would indirectly benefit from raising the current minimum wage as their wages would increase relative to the difference that their wages were from the old minimum wage. In other words, wages would increase up the ladder.

Those opposed to raising the minimum wage say that it would result in the loss of jobs because employers would lay off workers to offset the additional labor cost. While this is true, it’s not as dire as it sounds. The Congressional Budget Office indicates that, for every job lost, 49 workers benefit from the wage increase. According to consumer advocate Ralph Nader, a moderate raise in the minimum wage can be offset by slight price increases and lower employee turnover costs.

Raising the minimum wage has multiple benefits. As an increase to minimum wage moves families above the poverty threshold, their need for public assistance decreases. As wages increase, a family’s purchasing power increases for both lower- and middle-income families. As they’re able to spend more, businesses benefit, as demand for goods increases. As demand for goods increases, additional employees will be hired.

Businesses benefit in other ways, as well. An increase in wage will boost worker productivity, increase employee retention and increase employee morale and loyalty, reducing new-employee training costs and improving business efficiency.

Raising the minimum wage to $10.10 would reduce poverty and increase the quality of life of 30 million Americans. The resulting job loss will not be as great as some predict because not all companies will lay off workers to offset the increased wage. Some companies will institute small price increases to absorb the wage increase.

Employees benefit, businesses benefit and the country benefits from the positive effect of increased purchasing power on the economy.

Eighty percent of Americans and a growing number of economists support raising the minimum wage. Contact your representatives and let them know that increasing the minimum wage to $10.10 is not only good for our country but that making sure everyone is paid a living wage is the right thing to do.

— Kim M. Daniel is an Appleton resident. She can be reached at pcletters@postcrescent.com

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1qvf43I