Remote controls have become so numerous in many homes that keeping track of them is a challenge all its own.

There are often separate remotes for the TV, DVD player, cable box and sound system, gaming consoles, light dimmers, air-conditioning units, ceiling fans, etc.

Remotes have a pesky way of slipping between couch cushions, walking to various parts of the house, getting chewed by the dog or just — poof — vanishing. To help restore order, cable companies and professional organizers offer some suggestions.

1. Find a container

Caddies for remotes come in a huge range of prices and styles. There are clear Acrylic organizing cubes (US Acrylic), non-skid rubber with voluptuous curves in impossible-to-miss primary colors (J-Me Cozy Remote Control Tidy), faux-leather organizers in staid brown and black that rotate for convenience (Cosmos) and wooden organizing boxes with NFL team logos. For those loath to park one more thing on an overworked coffee table, some caddies hang saddle-bag style over a chair or sofa armrest (Ikea). “Definitely don’t store it beside the TV,” said Liz Jenkins, a professional organizer in Franklin, Tenn. “As with everything in your house, you should store it closest to where you’ll be using it.” Kevin Hall of Clutter No More, Inc. in San Diego says that keeping track of remotes is a chronic problem. “Our top idea is putting a strip of Velcro on the back of a clipboard, then on the back of each remote, and keep the board by where you usually sit,” he said.

2. Streamline

Can you retire some of these remotes? “When it comes to organizing anything, whether it’s shoes or china or remotes, you need to evaluate how many things you have and how many you really need,” Jenkins said.

3. Go universal

Universal remotes range in price from around $10 to several hundred dollars. “When you have a big pile of remotes, my top advice is to get a universal remote and find a 12-year-old to program it,” said Jenkins.

4. Get smart(phone)

Apps can turn your smartphone into a remote. Popular apps include Dijit, Roomie, Re, iRule, Zsmart, Commandfusion and Openremote.

In addition, TV manufacturers and cable providers have their own apps, some voice-activated, to replace remotes.

4. Buy a replacement

If you’ve lost a remote, ask your cable provider to come to the rescue. Providers are accustomed to such requests; replacements are ubiquitous online and in stores.

5. Back to the future

Television existed years before remotes became commonplace. An old-fashioned TV with a channel button, if you’re lucky enough to find one, requires you to get up and cross the room.

6. Get radical.

If all else fails, there’s always the option of going screen-free. Take a walk, read a book, have coffee with a friend.