The Cañon City High School Tiger Pride Band took the ALS Ice Bucket Challenge on Saturday and challenged the Pueblo County High School band and Ryan Finney, the band's former percussion instructor. The band students also raised $125 to donate to the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (also referred to as 'Lou Gehrig's Disease') Association. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Band earns prestigious award The Cañon City High School Tiger Pride Band marched its way into earning the prestigious Exemplary Band award through the Colorado Band Masters Association this summer. The award is based on points earned toward superior ratings in concert band, jazz band, marching band and solo and ensemble contests. It is given to bands that have a significantly well-rounded program and excel in all of those areas, said Mike Nolan, volunteer and former band director. "I think it's really cool that all the work that these guys have put in has paid off," said Maria Abraas, one of three senior drum majors. Austin Pratt, former drum major and 2014 graduate, said the award is something the band definitely earned. "We've come leaps and bounds and the only reason that they are so successful is because they are not just a class, they are a team and a family," he said. "I am very proud of them and all that they have accomplished."

The Cañon City High School Tiger Pride Band got soaked for a good cause Saturday during its annual practice-a-thon at CCHS.

About 85 band members took the ALS Ice Bucket Challenge and challenged the Pueblo County High School band and Ryan Finney, the band's former percussion instructor. The challenge involves dumping a bucket of ice water on someone's head to promote awareness of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (also referred to as 'Lou Gehrig's Disease') and encourage donations to research.

Advertisement

"I was issued the challenge before, and I really like the cause, so I decided we may as well do something that can raise awareness and get our name out there, and it's kind of fun, too," said Connor Whiting, one of the band's three senior drum majors.

In addition, band students raised $125 for the ALS Association. The association reports that as of Sept. 7, the organization has received $110.1 million in Ice Bucket Challenge donations.

"It is an awesome opportunity," said Maria Abraas, CCHS drum major. "We were talking about it after practice one day and decided to take it seriously. I am glad we did."

Drum major Kristin Katchmar was absent from Saturday's event because of a volleyball tournament.

The all-day practice-a-thon is a fundraiser for the band, and it helps prepare them for this year's show, which is based on music by Elton John. The band is working on "Funeral For a Friend/Love Lies Bleeding," "Your Song" and "Saturday Night's Alright for Fighting."

The band's first invitational of the year is Sept. 20 at Harrison High School, which will prepare them for the regional competition in October.

The community can hear the band and watch part of the show locally at the CCHS first varsity home football game Sept. 19 at Citizens Stadium during half time.