<p>Senate Republican Caucus Chairman Bill Ketron of Murfreesboro talks to the caucus about the majorities Republicans have built in the state Legislature and later about a meeting of the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) attended by several Tennessee lawmakers. Sen. Steve Southerland, left, and Senate Speaker Ron Ramsey listen in at the Dec. 10, 2014, caucus meeting in a penthouse office suite atop Nashville’s Fifth Third Center. (RICHARD LOCKER/NEWS SENTINEL)</p>

By Richard Locker

NASHVILLE — The big law-firm conference room was decorated with several pairs of red balloons forming the number “28,” the new number of Republicans in the 33-member Tennessee Senate. The office penthouse atop Nashville’s Fifth Third Center tower gave the Senate Republican Caucus a fabulous view of the city.

Caucus members assembled there Dec. 10 to celebrate the electoral victories of the previous month and lay the groundwork for the 2015 legislative session convening a month later. Gov. Bill Haslam also spoke, about the state budget he was preparing.

The caucus chairman, Sen. Bill Ketron of Murfreesboro, addressed the crowd about the American Legislative Exchange Council’s annual “policy summit” in Washington, D.C., which he and six Senate colleagues had attended the previous week. He said 22 Tennessee legislators in all attended that ALEC conference, which Ketron said was the most from any state.

ALEC is a conservative policy research organization promoting “limited government, free markets, federalism” and whose membership includes state lawmakers and corporate representatives from across the country. With Republicans now in full control of 30 state legislatures, ALEC now rivals the nonpartisan, centrist National Conference of State Legislatures in influence and attendance at its meetings.

Ketron said former U.S. House Speaker Newt Gingrich spoke to the Washington attendees about the Republican victories of 2014 and how to sustain them. “Newt asked us to come back and challenge each and every one of you: we can’t continue doing business the way we’re doing it. Newt said that we’re still conducting and running government the way we did in the 60s and 70s. We can’t continue building brick and mortar and expanding the size of government. We’ve got to be thinking smart and how do we compress it down.”

Ketron said Tennesseans were front and center at the ALEC conference. “We’re doing things right in Tennessee and they’re looking at us. From bills to anything we’re doing in Tennessee, they want to follow us.”

Indeed, ALEC is ingrained in the Tennessee Legislature, particularly among majority Republicans. Eighteen Tennessee lawmakers spent just over $53,000 in taxpayer money to attend ALEC conferences in 2014 (not counting lawmakers who didn’t bill the state for the travel), according to expense records on the Legislature’s website.

Ketron, who shepherded the wine-in-grocery-stores legislation to passage in 2014, attended all three of ALEC’S annual meetings last year — its spring task force in Kansas City, the annual meeting in Dallas last summer, and the policy summit in Washington Dec. 2-6.

But ALEC is one of several national and regional legislative groups whose meetings Tennessee lawmakers attend. Others include the NCSL, Council of State Governments, Southern Legislative Council and the National Black Caucus of State Legislators.

Unlike other national groups seeking to influence policy from the outside of state legislative chambers through lobbying and political pressure on lawmakers, ALEC is the lawmakers — and thus far more effective. And it’s not unusual that conservative legislators would flock to its conferences and support its goals.

Legislators bring home ideas, model bills and research from legislators in other states, from ALEC staff, scholars and associate members, and advisers from the corporations and foundations that help support ALEC. One of its four Board of Scholars members is economist-consultant Arthur Laffer of Murfreesboro, who championed tax cuts and supply-side economics as an adviser to President Ronald Reagan in the 1980s.

Its “private enterprise advisory council” includes executives from Koch Companies, Exxon Mobil, State Farm, Pfizer, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA), the tobacco giant Altria, AT&T, the National Federation of Independent Business, the alcoholic beverage giant Diageo, United Parcel Service, the for-profit online school company K-12 Inc., and the American Bail Coalition, which represents the bail bond industry.

When the Tennessee Legislature approved a bill in 2011 allowing for-profit online “virtual schools” to receive the state’s share of per-pupil public school funding for every Tennessee student an online school enrolled, its legislative sponsors used a model bill from ALEC.

Virginia-based K-12 Inc. lobbied for the bill. Within months of passage, the company contracted with the small, rural Union County school district to open the Tennessee Virtual Academy to students statewide. After four years of low performance by its students on the state’s standardized tests, the State Department of Education has ordered the academy to close in June, but a lawsuit is pending.

Despite K-12 Inc.’s presence on the ALEC advisory council and a phalanx of lobbyists it hired, the company failed to win legislative approval this month of a measure to keep give the academy another year.

But one of ALEC’s major initiatives has been more successful in Tennessee: opposing implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act at the state level.

ALEC produced the “State Legislators Guide to Repealing Obamacare,” which according to ALEC’s website contains “14 specific recommendations to push back against Obamacare (including “Decline to enforce ObamaCare’s ‘consumer protections’ if such enforcement authority does not already exist in your state”) and 18 ALEC model bills that make health care more secure, affordable and accessible.”

Those include allowing consumers to buy health insurance across state lines — and similar bills have been filed in Tennessee.

State Rep. Curry Todd, R-Collierville, the only Tennessee legislator currently on ALEC’S 30-member board of directors, said despite its opposition to Obamacare, “ALEC was not involved” in the successful effort to defeat Gov. Bill Haslam’s Insure Tennessee plan, an alternative Medicaid expansion plan funded through the Affordable Care Act that would have provided coverage for up to 280,000 uninsured working Tennesseans.

“There were some groups that were involved with ALEC that were active in it but ... as far as ALEC coming down here and lobbying things, they haven’t. They’ve gotten a bad rap from some of the left-wing groups, which is unfortunate.

“Overall, we develop policy up there. Each individual member can take that policy and present it to their Legislature and tailor it to their particular state. I’m not aware of any ALEC legislation per se but some members may have taken some idea” home to present, Todd said.

One of ALEC’S anti-Obamacare model bills requires legislative approval for expansion of Medicaid, as opposed to unilateral action by the governor. Tennessee lawmakers approved a similar bill in 2014, the precursor to this year’s rejection of Haslam’s Insure Tennessee.

Legislators in Tennessee this month approved a school voucher program for special-needs children, allowing students with individualized education plans to take the state share of per-pupil funding to help pay for private schools and private service providers.

Large parts of Senate Bill 27, the Individualized Education Act sponsored by Sen. Dolores Gresham, R-Somerville, and Rep. Debra Moody, R-Murfreesboro, resemble word-for-word the ALEC model “Special Needs Scholarship Program Act.”

Todd said the IEP bill passed after he asked its supporters to narrow eligibility for the vouchers to the most severe disabilities, reducing the amount of money transferred from local public schools to private schools. “The IEP bill is a good bill for kids with disabilities. It gives parents the right (to go elsewhere) if their kids are not getting the kinds of services they need.”

State House Democratic Leader Craig Fitzhugh of Ripley said ALEC, as he recalls, “was the first of the groups that had this sort of model legislation and passed it around to other states.”

Without citing ALEC specifically, Fitzhugh said national groups are having an impact on the Legislature that “they shouldn’t have because Tennesseans can make their own decisions without this outside influence that’s sometimes not exactly correct. I don’t know about (their impact) growing but it’s here and it hasn’t been here before.”