Reese Witherspoon and Lena Dunham have expressed support for a new social media campaign that is urging Oscar reporters to ask female Hollywood A-listers more substantive questions than just about fashion and gossip.

The #AskHerMore campaign, created this month by the Representation Project, claims that reporters often focus more on an actress’ appearance than her accomplishments.

“We’re using the hashtag on Twitter to send suggested questions to reporters, in real-time, whenever they risk devaluing the accomplishments of women in Hollywood, and to spark deeper conversations in front of a national television audience,” the campaign website says.

Reese Witherspoon, who is nominated for her role in “Wild,” voiced her support for the movement on Sunday, even suggesting questions that she would like to be asked on the red carpet.

“This movement #AskHerMore… have you heard of it? It’s meant to inspire reporters to ask creative questions on the red carpet,” she captioned her photo of questions on Instagram. “I love the Oscars AND fashion like many of you - and am excited to share #WhoAmIWearing later tonight. (not yet!!) But I’d also love to answer some of these Qs… And hear your suggestions?! (Share em below!) There are so many amazing, talented nominees this year! Let’s hear their stories! Spread the word.”

Ms. Witherspoon suggested questions such as “What’s the biggest risk you’ve taken that you feel paid off?” and “What accomplishment are you most proud of?”

“Girls” star Lena Dunham also backed the movement, tweeting Sunday: “Ask her about the causes she supports, not her support garments #oscars #AskHerMore.”

The Smart Girls group, co-founded by “Parks and Recreation” star Amy Poehler, also sent out a tweet Sunday supporting the #AskHerMore campaign.

The hashtag comes after news that E!’s controversial “Mani Cam” — a camera dedicated only to showing off manicures and jewelry — would be nixed this year after an outcry from feminists. E! insists that the Mani Cam was axed due to space constraints.