Cover Story

Hospital readmissions for patients with heart disease are common and costly in the United States. Depending on the study population, research suggests that 20% to 40% of patients hospitalized for HF and 5% to 15% of patients hospitalized for ACS will be readmitted to the hospital within 30 days of discharge.

Harlan M. Krumholz, MD, is a leader in

research focused on reducing the risk

for hospital readmissions. Source: Terry Dagradi;

photo printed with permission

Especially for patients with HF, the post-discharge period is one fraught with danger. “Patients hospitalized for HF are at intensely high risk,” Harlan M. Krumholz, MD, professor of medicine and director of the Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation at Yale University, said in an interview. “There is no other group that has a risk of being hospitalized within any 30-day period of one in four.”

This has tremendous implications for patient care and health care costs. The US government has prioritized lowering readmission rates to the extent that CMS now issues financial penalties to hospitals with excessive 30-day readmission rates for patients with HF, acute MI or pneumonia. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 also created new incentives to reduce hospital readmissions; hospitals with high rates can lose up to 3% of their Medicare reimbursement by 2015.

Unfortunately, lowering readmission rates is easier said than done. Efforts in the past decade to lower rates by improving patient adherence to post-discharge medication regimens and other instructions have mostly not paid off. Further complicating matters, in the majority of cases the patient is readmitted for a reason unrelated to the original admission. Another factor may be that efforts to reduce length of stay could have unintended consequences for readmission rates by encouraging discharge of some patients before they are ready.

Richard S.

Schofield

On top of that, many patients have a variety of comorbidities that make recovery more challenging and, especially in the case of HF, have disease states that can be very different from one another, making a single solution for every patient unlikely.

“I don’t think a magic bullet exists,” Richard S. Schofield, MD, FACC, professor of medicine in the division of cardiovascular medicine at the University of Florida, Gainesville, told Cardiology Today.

Causes, prevention of readmissions

The numbers paint a very complex and heterogeneous picture of readmissions in this patient population.

A study of patients with HF at the Mayo Clinic and other hospitals in Olmstead County, Minn., published in 2009 found that 16.5% of patients readmitted within 30 days were readmitted for HF and 21.6% were readmitted for other CV causes. In another study, aside from HF, the most common causes for readmission within 30 days for patients with HF included acute MI, cardiac dysrhythmias, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, coronary atherosclerosis, fluid and electrolyte disorders, hypertension with complications, pneumonia, respiratory failure, and septicemia.

Matthew T. Roe

Likewise, patients with MI who are readmitted within 30 days usually have to return to the hospital for a reason other than recurrent MI, said Matthew T. Roe, MD, MHS, associate professor of medicine with tenure in the division of cardiology at Duke University Medical Center and Duke Clinical Research Institute.

“It is very important in terms of readmission rates to focus on non-CV comorbidities because in the acute MI population many of the readmission reasons are related to non-CV reasons such as infections or other comorbidities that may exist in the patient,” Roe said in an interview.

Gregg C.

Fonarow

The heterogeneity of causes for readmission means there is no consensus on how to prevent these rehospitalizations, as well as no consensus on to what extent rehospitalizations are preventable.

“While there are certainly some preventable rehospitalizations that occur, the extent to which they are preventable is very much in debate,” Gregg C. Fonarow, MD, co-chief of the division of cardiology at UCLA Medical Center, told Cardiology Today. “The percent to which they are related to the condition for which the patient is initially hospitalized is also very much in debate and greatly varies.”