WASHINGTON -- Louisiana Republicans accused the Supreme Court's majority Friday (June 26) of overreaching their judicial authority in declaring a constitutional right for gay couples to marry. Their views contrasted to the views of many Democrats who declared it consistent with America's tradition of freedom and respecting differences in a diverse nation.

"I'm disappointed since Louisianians have clearly expressed a contrary position through our Constitution," said Sen. David Vitter, R-La. Vitter, who is running for governor, said the Supreme Court ruling "certainly reinforces my commitment to fully protect churches and religious liberty in Louisiana."

Rep. John Fleming, R-Minden, said he is "greatly disappointed and disagree with the Supreme Court's decision to redefine marriage today. It's been proven statistically that children are most successful in life when they are raised in a family with both a mom and a dad. While this is not always possible, I remain a strong defender of traditional marriage knowing it provides the best outcome for families and society."

House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., offered a completely different interpretation of the 5-4 Supreme Court ruling, which she said "is about creating a future where loving, committed families are able to live with dignity."

"Finally, every loving American – regardless of their race or where they live, regardless of their gender or gender identity – has the right to marry the person they love," Pelosi said. "This decision is a declaration of our deepest held values and our hope for a better America."

Rep. Cedric Richmond, D-New Orleans, says he doesn't understand why Attorney General Buddy Caldwell is delaying implementing the Supreme Court ruling that same-sex couples have the same right to marry as heterosexual couples.

"The court said it violates the constitutional rights of people not to grant marriage licenses and so why would we want to keep violating the constitutional rights of people," Richmond said. He said that Caldwell's "defiance" could lead to more costly litigation, "which the state can't afford."

In a statement Friday, Caldwell's said his office "has found nothing in today's decision that makes the Court's order effective immediately. Caldwell denounced the ruling as overruling a vote by state residents for a 2004 constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriages.

House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, said that the High Court, in both its ruling affirming the right of same-sex couples to marry and affirming that Affordable Care Act enrollees in Louisiana and 33 states have a right to income-based subsidies to purchase private health insurance, are a "dangerous display of judicial activism." He accused the majority judges, in the 5-4 ruling for same-sex marriage and 6-3 decision affirming the Obama administration's interpretation of the Affordable Care Act, as "creating new law where it does not exist in statute or the Constitution."

Rep. Charles Boustany, R-Lafayette, expressed similar sentiments. "I long said my belief is that marriage is an institution between one man and one woman. Today's decision imposes the will of the court upon the will of the states, creating an ongoing controversy, not a lasting solution. While I disagree with the court's decision, I will work with my conservative colleagues to clarify the law to ensure this institution is protected for future generations."

Democratic New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu tweeted support for the ruling. "Today, U.S. takes another major step toward becoming a more perfect union. Let's continue work ending discrimination in all forms," he wrote.

On Fleming's view that children are better off in a family led by a "mom and a dad," Dr. Renee Binder, president American Psychiatric Association, disagreed.

"The claim that allowing sex-same couples to marry undermines the institution of marriage and harms children is inconsistent with the scientific evidence," Binder said. "In fact, the evidence strongly supports the conclusion that homosexuality is a normal expression of human sexuality and that gay men and lesbians form stable, committed relationships equivalent to heterosexual couples."