Louisiana's state politics spent an unusual amount of time in the national spotlight this year as incumbent Sen. Mary Landrieu fought -- unsuccessfully -- to keep her seat and Gov. Bobby Jindal scrambled -- somewhat more successfully -- to put himself on the countrywide public stage.

Those two figures -- and to a lesser extent U.S. Sen. David Vitter -- drove the political narrative in 2014 and will continue to loom large in some ways throughout the next year.

The following are the most important political trends of 2014 that will carry on into 2015.

The continued decline of the Louisiana (and white Southern) Democrat

Landrieu's reelection defeat in 2014 was perhaps the nail in the coffin for an already beleaguered Louisiana Democratic Party. While the Democrats can still win big in the Louisiana's largest population centers -- New Orleans and Baton Rogue -- the prospect of securing a statewide office seems ever more elusive after Landrieu's loss.

Landrieu, an 18-year incumbent with good name recognition, was generally considered a strong candidate by both sides of the aisle. She was also the last, lone Democrat holding statewide office in Louisiana. Now, both the congressional delegation as well as state government, will be dominated by the Republican Party.

The Louisiana Democrats are hardly alone in being marginalized. There will be no white Democrats from the Deep South in the U.S. Congress at the start of 2015 after Landrieu and a couple of other Democrats were defeated this fall.

Even the Democrats' candidate for governor in 2015, state Rep. John Bel Edwards, recognizes he faces "challenging times" in getting elected in 2015. Edwards -- who is running against three major Republican candidates -- is not thought to have a good shot of winning the race. No major Democrat has entered the Attorney General's campaign so far. The party's strongest potential gubernatorial candidate, New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu, is likely to stay out of the race, after his sister's resounding loss.

A persistent state budget crisis that is only getting worse

Louisiana spent more money than it took in during the financial cycle that ended June 30, and just six months into its current budget cycle, the Jindal administration has already had to make $171 million worth of reductions to state operations.

Next year, the situation is supposed to be worse -- much worse. Jindal and the Louisiana Legislature will have to tackle a projected $1.4 billion budget shortfall during the 2015 lawmaking session. A significant portion of the state spending can't be reduced or moved, so higher education, in particular, is thought to vulnerable to slashes in funding.

The Legislature, which is dominated by Republicans, would be unlikely to support a traditional tax hike to help prop up the state's finances. But several lawmakers have signaled that they might be willing to roll back some financial credits and rebates to help close the financial gap.

However, the issue is a nonstarter with Jindal, who can't afford to have anything resembling a "tax increase" on his record if he decides to run for president in 2016. Legislators will hardly be willing put their necks out for a tough financial vote on the state budget, if they believe the governor will just veto whatever they do.

Still, the state is running out of short-term fixes -- such as selling off state buildings and vehicles for cash -- to help solve its financial problems. Plunging oil prices will also exacerbate Louisiana's fragile state spending plan. It's not clear what will be done to close Louisiana's budget gap, given the governor's focus on his national profile.

The ongoing fight over Common Core

After pushing for the implementation of Common Core, Jindal suddenly reversed himself this past spring, announcing he wanted the state to repeal the academic standards for primary and secondary students.

The governor's change of opinion launched a high-profile standoff between Jindal and Louisiana's Education Superintendent John White, who continues to back the standards. Jindal has drawn national attention for fighting with White -- and President Barack Obama's administration -- over Common Core in court. Just this month, the governor continued to make it difficult for White to purchase a Common Core test, saying the superintendent is using state contracts incorrectly.

Many political observers think that Jindal's reversal on Common Core is directly linked to his national aspirations. Common Core is thought to be politically toxic among conservative voters, so much so that there is speculation former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush -- an otherwise strong presidential candidate -- could face serious opposition just for being a Common Core supporter. Jindal insists he began to oppose Common Core because he started to see it as a federal intrusion, but the timing of his reversal was also politically expedient.

The Common Core debate isn't likely to go away in 2015. An larger, more substantial effort will be underway to repeal the educational benchmarks during the spring legislative session. Common Core opponents have also promised to make the academic standards a lightning rod during the 2015 gubernatorial election. Like Jindal, Vitter has already reversed himself on Common Core. In August, he was for Common Core. By December, he had turned himself against it.

Louisiana doesn't like Obamacare, but Medicaid expansion is alluring

One of the key takeaways from Landrieu's 2014 loss is that Louisiana residents sure aren't fond of President Barack Obama's health care reform package.

Incoming Senator Bill Cassidy skewered Landrieu during the fall campaign for voting in favor of the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare. Polls show an overwhelming number of Louisiana residents disapprove of the law.

Still, it is getting harder for Louisiana to resist at least one aspect of federal health care reform -- Medicaid expansion. By rejecting Medicaid dollars, Louisiana is leaving a significant amount of free federal funding on the table. A recent University of New Orleans poll showed most people are in favor of Medicaid expansion, in spite of having a low opinion of health care reform overall.

Jindal has maintained that accepting Medicaid expansion could cost the state money over the long term because the federal government could pull its funding eventually and leave states to foot the bill for the expanded program.

Still, several other Republican governors have opted into Medicaid expansion recently, making use of alternatives to the traditional program that are based more on free market principles. Jindal has drawn a line in the sand when it comes to Medicaid expansion for Louisiana though, possibly because it could hurt him if he decides to run for president in 2016. The Louisiana Legislature, so far, has also rejected proposals to accept Medicaid money.

Yet three gubernatorial candidates -- including typically conservative Vitter -- have said they would be willing to look at taking the Medicaid money as governor. This could change how some legislators start to approach the Medicaid expansion conversation in 2015. While it's unlikely, especially with Jindal still in office, that Louisiana will accept Medicaid dollars next year, a quiet conversation about taking the money in 2016 might get underway.

An absent Governor

Jindal spent a lot of 2014 outside of Louisiana raising money and campaigning for a possible 2016 presidential bid, causing lawmakers to complain that the governor isn't paying enough attention to Louisiana.

While Jindal said helping Republicans win back the U.S. Senate was a priority for him this fall, he spent very little time campaigning for Cassidy in the race against Landrieu. The Louisiana governor skipped out on Cassidy's Dec. 6 election festivities, opting to speak to a group of Virginia Republicans in the D.C. suburbs that night instead.

Jindal is likely to spend even more of 2015 outside of the state, especially if he launches a presidential bid as expected. It's likely the Louisiana Legislature will have to figure out how to tackle the state budget gap and other matters without much hands-on input from the governor during the spring lawmaking session.

. . . .

Julia O'Donoghue is a state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. She can be reached at jodonoghue@nola.com or on Twitter at @jsodonoghue. Please consider following us on Facebook at NOLA.com and NOLA.com-Baton Rouge.