Nearly 400 patients who can’t afford health insurance could still have the option to go to the CARES Senior Health Clinic if a reprieve materializes.

Recent donations might keep the doors open at the clinic at least through 2015, according to its director, Gisela Dolnoky. The facility is inside the Claude Pepper Senior Center at 6640 Van Buren St., across from the New Port Richey Recreation and Aquatic Center.

About 379 people still depend on free medical help at the clinic, Dalnoky emphasized.

The Affordable Care Act federal mandate has helped many people get health insurance, but not all, said Marc Yacht, a semi-retired phsician and one of the seven volunteer physicians at the clinic. Even with federal subsidies, some people still can’t afford the medical coverage.

Yacht has been helping for about eight years after he retired as Pasco County Health Department chief.

Another long-term volunteer, family medicine physician Dean Ersig, strives to see many people. He has developed a loyal following with his folksy humor and a reassuring smile.

A March article in The Suncoast News described the plight of the clinic. The publicity caused a representative of a private foundation, formed from a bequest, to contact CARES officials. The result could lead to a $21,000 matching grant, Dolnoky said.

She arranged a tour for the foundation official, who remains anonymous at this point. “He likes what we do here,” Dolnoky said. “He thinks it’s a real worthy cause. I gave him a hug” after the large donation was suggested.

Another $2,000 check arrived from the Tampa Bay Community Foundation.

An individual gave $1,000, while many other contributors sent in small amounts.

Timber Greens Homeowner Association pledged $500 now and $500 later this fall.

The clinic puts on a health fair each November as its largest fundraiser. She hopes many vendors fill up the 42 tables at $200 apiece. The Nov. 19 event will take place at First United Methodist Church of Hudson.

Yacht, a former director of the Pasco County Health Department, explained the clinic concentrates on primary care.

“Our problem is that it’s very difficult in some cases to get specialty care,” Yacht noted. “Most free clinics have the same problem” to set up referrals.

ACA provides people with a full range of services through coverage whereas free clinics must offer only limited services.

“Clinics like us hopefully will be obsolete, but not yet,” Yacht said. “I’m afraid they still need us, especially in Florida where the governor still … will not advocate to accept the Medicaid expansion money” from the federal government.”

As many as 1 million Floridians could benefit from Medicaid expansion, Yacht said.

“It’s your story that made this all happen,” Dalnoky said about the March 25 article in The Suncoast News.

A donation drive started in February after the loss of a federal grant for clinic services, officials report.

“Simply stated, we need your support to keep our clinic doors open,” a Feb. 26 letter reads in part, signed by CARES President and CEO Bill Aycrigg and seven volunteer doctors.

The federal grant ended in December for clinic services. CARES still gets the grant money, but is now restricted to applying those funds to health education programs, Aycrigg said.

CARES cut costs by laying off one staff person and reducing the salary of another staff member, Aycrigg said. About $13,000 raised through a health fair was redirected to the clinic budget.

Without a surge of donations, a decision could come this summer whether to close the clinic, Aycrigg said.

Staff and volunteers were very “insistent” to try to keep the facility open, Aycrigg said. Jacklien Erwin, the volunteer medical director, is aided by volunteer physicians, urologist Niles Schoultz, Yacht, Ersig, internist Wayne Taylor, Hassan Lai and Elizabeth Sirna.

The clinic caters to low-income and uninsured adults 55 years old or older. Limited medical care include general physical exams, limited primary treatment, monitoring of chronic illnesses, counseling and referrals. Volunteer doctors and nurses encourage patients to be proactive by participating in health and wellness programs.

“Our staff consists of volunteer doctors and nurses who are compassionate and caring professionals that strive to provide the highest level of service possible to those that are underserved in our community,” the letter continued.

The appeal cited the example of one man who came to the clinic with a piece of cotton in his ear and a dressing over his eyebrow. A volunteer doctor examined the wounds which he feared could signal cancer.

While the senior clinic was not equipped to provide the needed treatment, a clinic nurse lined up an appointment with a local dermatologist for a biopsy. The patient was referred to Moffitt Cancer Center, with the clinic nurse and dermatologist paying for his transportation.

The patient needed his ear removed and then he got plastic surgery. He is now a cancer survivor.

“Any donation you make will positively impact our community,” the appeal letter states. CARES officials said unmet needs of patients include services such as colonoscopies, CT scans, MRI scans and blood tests. Patients also need transportation to and from clinic appointments. Referrals to specialists are welcomed.

Cash donations can be sent to CARES Senior Health Clinic, 6640 Van Buren St., New Port Richey, FL 34653.

The main CARES phone number is (727) 862-9291.

corth@suncoastnews.com

(727) 815-1068