Editor’s Note: We are delighted to introduce a series of excerpts from Healthovate, the newest overview on Innovations in specific disciplines from the IXL-Center, with an interview with the editor, Pam McNamara.

IX: From your “balcony view” of innovation in Healthcare, what is the state of innovation in Healthcare?

Pam: In a phrase, “It’s the best of times in (and…) the worst of times!” With the backdrop of the worst economic recession in 60 years, the challenges to healthcare are unprecedented.

Resources for discovery and research have been declining, adjusted for inflation, resulting in thinner pipelines for new innovation across the full spectrum of healthcare. Over the prior decades, the US innovation and growth engine led the world, in many aspects, through “boom years” of growing public and private investment in R&D in biopharmaceuticals, medical devices, imaging and diagnostics, protocols and procedures, and clinical practices. Government research sponsorships – NSF, NIH, CDC, DARPA, even DoD – drove early stage discoveries in academia, industry and at the medical research centers; development and the “back end” of innovation was carried on largely by industry to address unmet medical needs in the market place.

Today’s situation is vastly different. The US Affordable Care Act aims to assure healthcare for the previously uninsured 50 million (check #) – for whom routine treatments at the Emergency Room was unsustainable. The ACA mandates for improving the quality care to evidence based outcome standards while substantially lowering the cost of care are spurring waves of cost reductions and rethinking, redesign and “new thinking” about clinical pathways, practices, work flows, purchases and virtually all aspects of healthcare.

This means that “improvements” are occurring through more traditional tactics (e.g., restructuring and staff reductions) and also through more innovative “new thinking” about how patients progress along the continuum of care. This means innovation in new services and treatments, new packaging and channels for delivery, shifting the responsibility to more patient-driven care, and new business models. There are exciting new innovations across the continuum of care not only treating a diagnosed disease or condition but in wellness, nutrition, exercise, with access provided through mobile / m-health solutions and more distributed “outlets” closer to where people live. Engaging patients and their family caregivers from pre-birth through end-of life-care is transforming healthcare. New disruptive ideas and innovations are leapfrogging the conventional wisdom. These are being driven and achieved by all types of players – some larger, many smaller that are fast growth and fast moving/acting, companies, social enterprises, community organizations – and in all regions of the world, with some of the most exiting leaps-of-frog occurring in developing market communities.

Setting practical standards of care and performance, measuring results, communicating them transparently and holding stakeholders accountable are demonstrating which innovations deliver on their promises, with real impact and improving outcomes. Whereas medical professionals once focused primarily on safety and health outcome, today, there are driven to achieve high and higher quality outcomes while achieving patient satisfaction, and more cost effective and efficient delivery. Tracking, analyzing, sharing and making meaning out of these metrics are also critical to today’s and tomorrow’s healthcare and to driving innovation.

These are just a few of the reasons, in short, “It’s the best of times in (and…) the worst of times in healthcare, with thousands of exciting new innovations popping up in both traditional and nontraditional places.!”

IX: Why did IXL create Healthovate ? Where do these frameworks come from?

Pam: Healthovate is the third and latest, in IXL’s series of innovation best practices books. Through its 40-plus years of experience with hundreds of leading global companies across industries, fast moving start ups, and research institutions, IXL’s innovation management frameworks, processes, methodologies and tools have been utilized to inspire, enable, and support successes, best practices and lessons by entrepreneurs and stakeholders in these companies. Healthovate’s case studies and lessons spark, provoke ideas and create excitement transforming healthcare across the globe.

IX: How can this be a resource for you and your teams and companies?

For starters, Healthovate’s case studies can ignite fresh and provocative thinking and action by you and your teams. They can inspire new ways along the entire value chain – beyond simply innovative products — new services, new solutions new channels, new partnerships, new business models. They provide users with the ability to envision what success looks like.

We invite and encourage you and your teams to use these case studies with open minds, and bring back to IXL and the Global Innovation Management Institute your experiences and the excellence you achieve in innovation to share with others.

Through open systems, sharing and transparency, we will grow innovation opportunities bigger, better, bolder, faster and with greater impact on patients the medical community and the population at large!

IX: Can you share an example?

Sure! Here is an overview of WebMD:

image credit: nyas.org

Wait! Before you go…

Choose how you want the latest innovation content delivered to you:

Pam is a senior executive experienced in running healthcare technology products and services businesses. She has focused her P&L experience on development and the successful commercial launch of innovative medical technologies and products. Pam is a member of the Center for Innovation, Excellence and Leadership (IXL) senior team, working with IXL’s clients on capability-building, innovation and commercialization of technologies and products. You can follow them at @IXL_Center