Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

OKLAHOMA CITY — Grumbling and grousing, Oklahoma House of Representatives appropriators agreed Tuesday afternoon to the general appropriations bill for the coming fiscal year as well as several ancillary bills that are part of the budget agreement reached earlier in the day.

“This is the most remarkable journey I’ve been through in my life,” said House Appropriations and Budget Chairman Earl Sears, R-Bartlesville.

He and a few others were largely responsible for coming up with the combination of spending cuts and additional revenue needed to balance a budget with $1.3 billion less to appropriate than a year ago.

Democrats and some Republicans grumbled about the details.

Rep. Richard Morrissette, D-Oklahoma City, wanted to know why more consideration wasn’t given to rescinding a 0.25-percent cut in the top personal income-tax rate that went into effect Jan. 1 and to accepting the Affordable Care Act’s expanded Medicaid matching funds.

Rep. Jason Nelson, R-Oklahoma City, said the Legislature was “leaving revenue on the table” and should have coupled alcohol modernization with an increase in wine and beer taxes.

Nelson predicted that cuts to the Department of Human Services will lead to new lawsuits similar to the one that resulted in court-ordered changes to the state’s child welfare system.

Responding to Morrissette, Sears said the Republican leadership did not believe it could muster the three-fourths majorities in the House and Senate to roll back the tax cut.

“We had that discussion at great length,” Sears said.

He said expanded Medicaid was never considered much of an option.

“We’ve never been supportive of it in our caucus,” he said. “What we’re hearing from our constituents is that they don’t want to expand Medicaid.”

The budget agreement includes a $200 million highway bond issue that frees up the same amount of cash for use elsewhere.

Under questioning by Minority Leader Scott Inman, D-Del City, Sears readily admitted that he wanted a $300 million bond issue but was outflanked on the issue by Senate leadership.

Senate Bill 1616 passed 16-10, with Nelson and two other Republicans joining the seven Democrats present in opposition.

Voted down in the committee was House Bill 3215, an attempt by Speaker Jeff Hickman, R-Fairview, to move up the sunset date for a wind generation tax credit from 2021 to 2018. The measure would have had no impact on the budget year that begins July 1 but would have saved an estimated $300 million over 10 years once it went into effect.

Earlier in the day, the full House delivered a resounding defeat to a measure that would have raised the documentary stamp tax for property transfers from 75 cents to a $1 per $500 in value and changed its definition from a “tax” to a “fee.”

Supporters of HB 3217 argued that the assessment is more properly described as a fee because most of the increase would be used to update software used by county assessors. Rep. Dennis Johnson, who presented the bill, said 60 of the state’s 77 county assessors are using old software and as a result are undervaluing real estate.

Opponents asserted that the bill’s primary purpose was to raise operating revenue rather than replace the software and that it violated the state constitution’s ban on revenue bills in the final five days of a session.