Rapid changes are transforming the way health care is paid for and delivered in Connecticut. Nonprofit hospitals have merged and other mergers are likely. National for-profit corporations are looking to Connecticut to acquire nonprofit community hospitals. And both for-profit and nonprofit hospitals appear increasingly intent on acquiring previously independent doctors' practices.

Although predicting where these changes may lead is impossible, two facts are alarmingly clear: The consequences for competition and consumers are potentially significant, and our laws are simply outdated and ill-equipped to address these trends.

Before our health care landscape is irrevocably altered, now is the time to carefully consider new regulatory approaches to foster patient care and access, preserve competition, and protect health care jobs and the communities they support.

One law meriting scrutiny is Connecticut's prohibition on for-profit hospitals employing physicians — the so-called "corporate practice of medicine ban." The chief rationale for this prohibition was that only trained medical professionals, unfettered by financial considerations, should exercise judgment over patient care. This prohibition creates a substantial obstacle to the business model for-profit hospitals intend to pursue.

In 2009, the General Assembly modified the law to permit nonprofit hospitals to form medical foundations that, in turn, could directly employ physicians, apparently believing that non-profit entities lacked financial incentives to interfere with proper medical judgments. In the last legislative session, the legislature passed a further modification to permit certain for-profit hospitals to engage in the corporate practice of medicine in the same fashion nonprofit hospitals do under the 2009 law. Gov. Dannel P. Malloy, appropriately in my view, vetoed that law because it had been passed without sufficient consideration of the potential impacts it may have on health care delivery in Connecticut.

Although it may be too early to judge the impact the 2009 law has had on quality of care, the corporate practice of medicine by for-profit hospitals would, by definition, not include the same safeguards the legislature deemed adequate under the nonprofit model.

Moreover, the 2009 law has resulted in the aggressive acquisition of physician practices by nonprofit hospitals. Although some of these acquisitions may result from the Affordable Care Act, most have been driven by other financial incentives. Hospital-affiliated practices can negotiate higher rates than independent physician practices, charge separate "facility fees," drive out competition in particular markets and provide care in areas where more patients are covered by higher-paying commercial health insurance policies. These trends undoubtedly have resulted in higher health care costs.

If financial incentives are driving nonprofit hospitals to acquire physician practices, those incentives will be even greater in the for-profit model. Indeed, some for-profit hospitals have stated they will not do business in Connecticut unless they are permitted to employ physicians and thus profitably acquire physician practice groups.

These considerations make clear that Connecticut must proceed cautiously when considering whether to repeal the prohibition against the corporate practice of medicine.

Should legislators go forward with such repeal, they should also adopt meaningful safeguards. Connecticut's current laws simply did not contemplate the realities of today's marketplace.

My role under Connecticut's Hospital Conversion Act, for instance, is quite narrow: It is limited to protecting the charitable assets of the nonprofit hospitals acquired by for-profit hospitals, and examining the financial viability of any acquisition. The Office of Health Care Access has some authority to ensure continued quality care and access, but those tools may prove insufficient and outdated.

Other states go further in reviewing hospital mergers and acquisitions: Tennessee requires more stringent conditions to ensure health care access and quality. Massachusetts permits regulators to require for-profit hospitals to fund independent monitors who periodically report on community health care access. And Rhode Island empowers regulators to consider issues of workforce retention and collective bargaining rights.

Connecticut lawmakers should consider these and other measures, such as requiring all hospitals, nonprofits and for-profits alike, to notify the attorney general's office whenever they acquire a physician practice so my lawyers can monitor competition and better enforce Connecticut's antitrust laws.

Time is short. Our current laws simply do not address the rapid transformation of health care delivery. Difficult choices must be made. We must have a coherent vision for the future of health care in Connecticut and enact laws to achieve those goals.

George Jepsen is Connecticut's state attorney general.