5 Questions with Clair Volk of Volkbell

Longmont-based VolkBell was just awarded 2nd place at the 2015 Best Company to Work for in Colorado in the small business category, by Colorado's Society for Human Resource Management. Volkbell helps companies with their benefit programs, insurance plans, human resources, property and casualty services and work site wellness. The family company has been serving Longmont and businesses across the state for almost 30 years, and has grown consistently since it first opened its doors. Volkbell helps companies with their benefit programs, insurance plans, human resources, property and casualty services and work site wellness. The family company has been serving Longmont and businesses across the state for almost 30 years, and has grown consistently since it first opened its doors. We caught up with founder Clair Volk at the Longmont office, which is located at 2040 Terry St. We caught up with founder Clair Volk at the Longmont office, which is located at 2040 Terry St. 1. You have received accolades as a great place to work and a great company. What are your keys to success? Clair Volk of Volkbell. (Lewis Geyer/Staff Photographer ) At VolkBell we often remind our teams of the purpose for which we are in business. The clearer we are about why we come to work and do what we do every day, the easier it is to work through the challenges we may face. Here at VolkBell we have 5 main reasons why we exist: Glorify God: We believe if what we do is pleasing to Him and He is honored we are doing the right thing. Also, the other four reasons are to develop people; help our clients develop their brand promise; impact our community; make a profit. Glorify God: We believe if what we do is pleasing to Him and He is honored we are doing the right thing. Also, the other four reasons are to develop people; help our clients develop their brand promise; impact our community; make a profit. Advertisement We have always had a focus on good character. What does it look like and how does it apply as we serve our clients. Every month we have a special program where we focus on a particular character quality, have discussion about the character trait and then recognize someone within our team that has recently demonstrated that quality. Every quarter we ask everyone in the organization to give us an example of how they have lived these values and explain what they did and how it matters. We want our employees to have the opportunity to continuously be growing professionally and personally. We pay for everyone interested to attend a day-long Leadership conference every year. We provide an on-line video library for employees and their families and support requests through continuing education dollars. We want our employees to have the opportunity to continuously be growing professionally and personally. We pay for everyone interested to attend a day-long Leadership conference every year. We provide an on-line video library for employees and their families and support requests through continuing education dollars. We hire based on a set of character qualities we are looking for in certain job functions such as: diligence, timeliness, patience, and thoroughness. If we find someone on the team cannot live up to our values then we try to help them find a place where they can better live the values that are important to them. We hire based on a set of character qualities we are looking for in certain job functions such as: diligence, timeliness, patience, and thoroughness. If we find someone on the team cannot live up to our values then we try to help them find a place where they can better live the values that are important to them. 2. How many employees do you have today, and how many did you start with? We started in 1987 with three employees - myself, Kathy my wife and one other employee. Today, we have 17 full time professionals helping serve our employee benefit clients as well as five HR professionals providing human resource support. We also have partnerships with two other offices in Fort Collins and an in-house partnership with our benefit compliance attorney. We started in 1987 with three employees - myself, Kathy my wife and one other employee. Today, we have 17 full time professionals helping serve our employee benefit clients as well as five HR professionals providing human resource support. We also have partnerships with two other offices in Fort Collins and an in-house partnership with our benefit compliance attorney. 3. Is it a challenge to retain talent, and to find talent in today's economy? That's something I hear from a lot of companies. We have not necessarily had a challenge retaining talent; the reason being is that it is easier when everyone on the team understands why they are here and that what they are doing makes a difference not only for themselves but for the clients and community we serve. We have not necessarily had a challenge retaining talent; the reason being is that it is easier when everyone on the team understands why they are here and that what they are doing makes a difference not only for themselves but for the clients and community we serve. Also, as I mentioned earlier we try to hire for character. This tends to help attract talent that has more than simply the technical or industry skills. Also, as I mentioned earlier we try to hire for character. This tends to help attract talent that has more than simply the technical or industry skills. 4. Healthcare has changed, it is much more complex today. And now we have the Affordable Care Act as well. Has this made your job more difficult? I would not say it has made our job more difficult but it is different. We realize as a result of Health Care Reform, we need to be more consultative and help our clients work through the maze of compliance that has complicated many of the decisions our clients now need to make. For example, our son Ross who is an attorney now has a practice helping our team and our clients navigate through the new rules that govern how they provide health care benefits to their employees. I would not say it has made our job more difficult but it is different. We realize as a result of Health Care Reform, we need to be more consultative and help our clients work through the maze of compliance that has complicated many of the decisions our clients now need to make. For example, our son Ross who is an attorney now has a practice helping our team and our clients navigate through the new rules that govern how they provide health care benefits to their employees. Where it has become more difficult is in the fact there is more complexity and that often creates more confusion and uncertainty. Where it has become more difficult is in the fact there is more complexity and that often creates more confusion and uncertainty. 5. What is the largest company you have served, how many employees. And what is the smallest you will work with? Our clients range from individuals to small businesses to companies with over 600 employees. Our clients range from individuals to small businesses to companies with over 600 employees. It has been a pleasure to live and work in the Longmont community. We have been able to raise a family, build a business and serve in many capacities along this journey. Our hope is that the next generation following us will have the same passion and commitment to do the same. It has been a pleasure to live and work in the Longmont community. We have been able to raise a family, build a business and serve in many capacities along this journey. Our hope is that the next generation following us will have the same passion and commitment to do the same. Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel