Fourth grade students from St. Anthony Catholic School in Madison, Miss. watch lawmakers debate at the Capitol in Jackson, Miss., Thursday, Feb. 5, 2015. (AP/Rogelio V. Solis)

The Wall Street Journal's William McGurn writes that the greatest gift the Irish brought to this country was the Catholic school system:

Just as they did in the days of the great Irish migrations, Catholic schools in our own time hold out perhaps the best hope for the assimilation and upward advancement of a new wave of immigrants: Latinos. ... These schools lifted millions of Irish, Italians, Poles, Germans and other European immigrants into mainstream society. In these schools, children not only learned the skills that would propel them into the middle class, they were instilled with an appreciation for American virtues, American institutions and American exceptionalism. The rise of a Catholic school system, in short, was an American achievement—the more stunning because it was pulled off by a poor, immigrant people.

It used to be that European immigrants, most of them Catholics, were excluded from U.S. society. Although those groups have since been largely assimilated and enjoy the privileges of other Americans, Catholic schools still primarily teach their offspring. Today, somewhere around four in five students in Catholic schools are white, according to the National Catholic Education Association. By contrast, white students account for less than half of public school enrollment. In short, McGurn is calling on the Catholic schools to rediscover their original mission, one of promoting diversity in the American republic.

Happy St. Patrick's Day!

Welcome to Wonkbook. To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. Follow Wonkblog on Twitter and Facebook.

What's in Wonkbook: 1) House GOP budget 2) Opinions, including Capehart on Mike Brown's death in Ferguson, Mo. 3) Another massive ice sheet is found to be unstable, and more

Chart of the day: Statistical methods allow researchers to estimate the total number of people who migrate across international borders annually, including where they come from and where they're headed. Ana Swanson in The Washington Post.

1. Top story: House Republicans to release budget

The plan draws heavily on an earlier proposal by Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.). "House Republicans on Tuesday will unveil a proposed budget for 2016 that partly privatizes Medicare, turns Medicaid into block grants to the states, repeals the Affordable Care Act and reaches balance in 10 years... The plan envisions a remaking of the federal government. Future recipients of Medicare would be offered voucherlike 'premium support' to pay for private insurance rather than government-provided health care. Spending on Medicaid would be cut substantially over 10 years, with the money turned into block grants to state governments, which in turn would have much more flexibility in deciding how it is allocated." Jonathan Weisman in The New York Times.

This debate will divide Republicans on substance and strategy. "Thanks to their new majorities, Republican budget leaders are under enormous pressure to pass a fiscally conservative resolution that balances the books, perhaps within a decade. But they are also facing a counter push from defense hawks who say increasing military spending is a national security imperative that cannot be ignored. ... If the divide on sequestration weren't enough, Republicans are also debating how to use reconciliation — an obscure budget tool that can be used to usher through major policy changes with a majority vote in the Senate." Rebecca Shabad in The Hill.

Expect President Obama to press his political advantage. "Helping Obama claim the upper hand is a wave of positive indicators that suggest the economy is gaining strength - despite Obama policies that Republicans for years have warned would keep the U.S. stuck in recession. Annual budget deficits have fallen precipitously on Obama's watch... Yet on the issues that Obama has touted as his greatest prospects for working with the new Congress - tax reform, authority to negotiate trade deals, and war powers to fight the Islamic State - Obama's fiercest opposition has come from lawmakers from his own party, a fact that hasn't gone unnoticed by Republicans." Josh Lederman and Jim Kuhnhenn for the Associated Press.

2. Top opinions

CAPEHART: Mike Brown did not have his hands up when he was killed. "[Officer Darren] Wilson knew about the theft of the cigarillos from the convenience store and had a description of the suspects. Brown fought with the officer and tried to take his gun. And the popular hands-up storyline, which isn’t corroborated by ballistic and DNA evidence and multiple witness statements, was perpetuated by Witness 101. In fact, just about everything said to the media by Witness 101, whom we all know as Dorian Johnson, the friend with Brown that day, was not supported by the evidence and other witness statements. ... This does not diminish the importance of the real issues unearthed in Ferguson by Brown’s death. ... But we must never allow ourselves to march under the banner of a false narrative on behalf of someone who would otherwise offend our sense of right and wrong. And when we discover that we have, we must acknowledge it, admit our error and keep on marching." The Washington Post.

GERSON: Inequality has consequences for children. "Unfairness is rooted in various, interrelated trends: family instability, community dysfunction and the collapse of the blue-collar economy. The result is a growing, class-related gap in social capital between rich and poor. But that really does not capture the human reality. ... Children experience these broad social trends mainly as the absence of committed, trustworthy adults in their lives." The Washington Post.

FLAVELLE: Jeb Bush's record on health care is disastrous. "Bush, who served as Florida's governor from 1999 to 2007, faced the same problem as most governors: Medicaid costs were chewing up a growing chunk of Florida's budget. Most states responded by letting private insurers manage the program's health-care benefits. Bush went a step further: In a pilot program that started in 2006 and eventually spread to five counties, he let those insurers decide what benefits to offer in the first place, using those benefit packages to compete for customers. ... The plans taking part in Bush's reform program ranked below the national Medicaid average on 21 of the 32 quality indicators reported by the state. In some cases, those results were dramatically worse than in other states... By the time he left office, Florida's program overall started to buck the national trend of ever-rising costs per person. ... It's possible that without those cuts, the access and quality indicators under Florida's Medicaid reform wouldn't be as poor, or that the program as a whole would compare more favorably against the national average. It's also possible that those reductions were the point." Bloomberg View.

BARRO: The tax cuts proposed by Sens. Mike Lee (R-Utah) and Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) won't pay for themselves. "The Tax Foundation released a report last week arguing the Rubio-Lee plan would generate so much business investment that, within a decade, federal tax receipts would be higher than if taxes hadn’t been cut at all. ... I discussed the Tax Foundation report with 10 public finance economists ranging across the ideological spectrum, all of whom said its estimates of the economic effects of tax cuts were too aggressive. ... The key question is, will the Congressional Budget Office, implementing dynamic scoring under new leadership chosen by Republicans, be more responsible than the Tax Foundation and other conservative think tanks in choosing its assumptions?" The New York Times.

JARED BERNSTEIN: Americans seem incapable of productive dialogue. "Why do views that are known to be wrong or overblown — it’s not that the minimum wage never costs anyone a job, but that the beneficiaries far outweigh the losers — continue to get an equal hearing? ... You can blame the news media for this, and certainly many venues are guilty because they prefer an exciting fight to the boring truth. But many others don’t have the time or the firepower to figure out who’s right. ... Money also buys policies — it buys think tanks that provide the answers it wants to “scientific” questions and casts doubt on the answers it doesn't like." The Washington Post.

Third grade should be the year reading tests end, not the year they begin, argues Robert Pondiscio of the Thomas B. Fordham Institute. "There are two big problems with existing test-driven accountability schemes in reading. First, the high-stakes reading tests our kids take in elementary and middle school really don’t test what we think they do. Even worse, by the time those tests diagnose reading difficulties in third grade, it’s incredibly hard for schools and teachers to help pull kids out of the spiral of reading failure that began years ago – often before kids came to school for the first time." U.S. News and World Report.

3. In case you missed it

Israel's election is Tuesday. "Under Israel’s fractious, multiparty system, the leader of the party that garners the most votes is not guaranteed to become the next prime minister. Instead, victory belongs to the party leader who has the best chance of cobbling together a government coalition with smaller parties in order to control at least 61 seats in the 120-seat Knesset, or Parliament. So while the parties making up Israel’s traditional right bloc and left bloc slug it out, the power may rest with kingmakers like the medium-size centrist parties or small factions representing particular interest groups." Isabel Kershner in The New York Times.

A major ice sheet in East Antarctica is also melting, according to a new study. "'The idea of warm ocean water eroding the ice in West Antarctica, what we're finding is that may well be applicable in East Antarctica as well,' says Martin Siegert, a co-author of the study and who is based at the Grantham Institute at Imperial College London. ... The glacier holds back a much more vast catchment of ice that, were its vulnerable parts to flow into the ocean, could produce a sea level rise of more than 11 feet — which is comparable to the impact from a loss of the West Antarctica ice sheet." Chris Mooney in The Washington Post.

Congress is a huge mess right now. "After several years of troubles with spending bills that were once routinely bipartisan, the Senate has now found a way to disagree on a bill that would protect victims of sex trafficking. And in the process, that dispute has ensnared President Obama’s largely uncontroversial nominee for attorney general, Loretta E. Lynch." Jennifer Steinhauer in The New York Times.

If you get a raise this year, thank a politician. "Faced with a stubborn refusal of wages to rise even as economies recover, some of the most powerful policy-makers in the developed world are now pushing companies to put more money in people’s paychecks. And they’re willing to risk offending the conventional economic wisdom to do it. ... Politicians and policy-makers of all stripes are finally talking about using the influence of government to raise wages instead of letting markets set them. If sustained, that would be a serious swing of the pendulum away from the laissez-faire consensus that has dominated economics since the era of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher." Matt Phillips at Quartz.

No one knows what side Hillary Rodham Clinton is on in her party's big debates. "As she prepares a run for president, Clinton isn’t talking about free-trade agreements opposed by organized labor, tougher Wall Street regulation demanded by her party’s populist wing, or the wisdom of using tax reform to address income inequality. Taking stands on these and other flashpoints risks alienating Democratic constituencies and giving Republicans targets to attack. Avoiding them risks making her look like just another politician." Mike Dorning for Bloomberg.

Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal is turning over tax policy to Grover Norquist, legislators complain. "Jindal, who is exploring a 2016 presidential run, is fighting with his own party over how to fill a $1.6 billion budget hole. ... The administration recently sought out Norquist’s group, Americans for Tax Reform — which has persuaded nearly every elected Republican, including Jindal, to sign a pledge to shun tax hikes — to ensure a new revenue-raising plan isn’t considered a tax hike, according to several Louisiana Republicans. Jindal’s plan guts half-billion dollars in refundable tax credits for businesses and increases levies on cigarettes. ... What some think is good state policy can clash with smart politics — particularly in a GOP presidential primary, where Jindal’s would-be opponents might bulldog him for raising levies." Rachel Bade at Politico.

Financial institutions systematically violate laws protecting the troops from foreclosure. "Over the years, Congress has given service members a number of protections — some dating to the Civil War — from repossessions and foreclosures. Efforts to maintain that special status for service members has run into resistance from the financial industry, including many of the same banks that promote the work they do for veterans. While using mandatory arbitration, some companies repeatedly violate the federal protections, leaving troops and their families vulnerable to predatory lending, the military lawyers and government officials say." Jessica Silver-Greenberg and Michael Corkery in The New York Times.

UPCOMING EVENT: Washington Post Live presents “Changing the Menu,” March 26 at Arena Stage. Steve Case, chairman and chief executive, Revolution & co-founder, America Online; Debra Eschmeyer, executive director, Let’s Move! Dan Kish, head chef, Panera; Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack and many other innovators and experts will look at food and wellness -- what we eat, how we move and how to ensure a healthy, well-fed America. Learn more about the event and register to attend.