NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune asked all 11 of the candidates running for the 6th Congressional District to fill out a standard questionnaire outlining their background and positions on some key issues.

The information below is in the candidates' own words. Some of the profiles may have been edited for space, to fit within a standard word count for all candidates. Any candidates not included did not return the questionnaire by press time.

Name: Lenar Whitney

Party: Republican

Age: 55

Residence (town): Houma

Education (high school, college/university): Vandebilt Catholic, Nicholls University (A.S. Business)

Profession: State representative, as well as outside sales in TV, the petroleum industry and telecommunications. Part owner at AccessCom, running the sales department. Owned and operated a dance studio for 34 years.

Family: Married to Lee Whitney, who owns a sign shop. Two children, Celeste and Ryan. Lost oldest son, Tre, in a boating accident at age 21 in 2004.

What makes you the most qualified candidate in the 6th district?

I am the conservative with a voting record to prove it. Many call me the most conservative member of the Louisiana Legislature. I want to carry that to Washington and join the growing ranks of tea party conservatives in the House fighting to turn back the Obama agenda.

What are the top two issues you want to take on as a congressional representative?

I am a Constitutionalist. I want to focus on protecting the 2nd Amendment. We need less gun regulation in this country, not more.

I am also a great proponent of the 10thAmendment. Competition between the states is critical to our Republic. The Founders were geniuses. They knew that free Americans competing against one another would create results. The 10th Amendment promotes state competition by allowing states to determine their own destiny.

Common Core is an example of the Federal Government overstepping its constitutional bounds. I have fought it at the State Capitol. I will fight it in the US Capitol too.

Given the gridlock in Washington, what would you do to actually get things done?

Thank God there is gridlock in Washington. This "gridlock" is actually just the separation of powers manifesting itself, which is a Constitutional check on executive power. Barack Obama is an incompetent failure. I'm glad his agenda has been slowed.

Would you support Medicaid expansion in Louisiana? Why or why not?

Fighting alongside Americans for Prosperity and the Tea Party, I lead the charge at the State Capitol to defeat Medicaid Expansion this past session.

More than 72 percent of the children in Louisiana already have Medicaid. The purpose of Medicaid Expansion is not to insure more children.

If we were to accept Medicaid Expansion, about 1.9 Million Louisianans would qualify for the program, which is about 40% of the state. Estimates predict that the cost of this to Louisiana could be $2.1 Billion over 10 years.

When the numbers are exposed, I think anyone can see that this is a terrible idea. We can't afford it. Medicaid expansion is the precursor to Single-Payer, which would end the practice of free enterprise medicine. This in turn would cause the demise of the greatest medical industry the world has ever known.

Would you vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act? Why or why not?

We should have already repealed Obamacare. Dozens of bureaucrats threw together a 2,500 page overhaul to our entire healthcare system and jammed it through Congress on Christmas Eve. Why are we shocked it doesn't work?

The reason why healthcare costs are so high in America is because there is too much government intrusion and too much regulation. So what does Obama propose as the solution: more government and more regulation.

Instead of Obamacare, America needs an explosion of free enterprise solutions starting with eliminating "community standards" and the allowance of insurance sales across state lines. Health Savings Accounts should be encouraged, Medicaid fraud must be penalized and tort reform must be addressed.

How do you think the U.S. government should handle its borders, particularly with regard to the unaccompanied children who are now being housed in Louisiana and other states?

President Obama's relaxed immigration policy could mean destruction for America. This has been amplified by the conquests of ISIS. We need to use our troops to defend the border.

If necessary, Congress should appropriate funds to build a fence. The children should be returned to their loving parents in their country of origin.

America is not in a position, currently, to become the benefactor of the world's downtrodden.

Click here for links to candidate profiles for those who completed questionnaires.