Goodson, Jones also factors for the offense

It's been a while since Tyler McCulloch walked away from a game feeling like he made a significant contribution to the Colorado offense.

On Saturday night, though, the senior receiver was encouraged after his effort in the Buffaloes' 38-24 loss to Arizona State.

McCulloch finished with five catches for 72 yards, including a 26-yard catch that set up a second-quarter touchdown.

"I can't even describe the feeling," he said of his night. "I do that all week in practice; it just hasn't translated to the game yet. Actually I had a few more plays I feel like I could have made. Definitely a positive."

Going back to last season, McCulloch had a total of four catches for 20 yards in his previous nine games combined before Saturday.

"I've tried to stay as positive as possible throughout the whole thing and, like I said, it's there at practice all week," he said. "Coach just said, 'Keep waiting and your chance is going to come.' Today it happened."

Obviously, McCulloch wishes his big game would have come in a victory, but on a personal level, he said Saturday was "really encouraging."

He wasn't the only senior to make a big contribution on Saturday. Like McCulloch, fellow seniors D.D. Goodson and Tony Jones were somewhat forgotten as weapons on the Colorado offense coming into the season.

Goodson had five catches for 49 yards - his best game since a five-catch, 44-yard effort vs. CSU in the 2013 opener.

Advertisement

Jones had 33 rushing yards on five attempts, including runs of 11 and 12 yards during a second-quarter drive that set up a CU touchdown.

Gehrke debuts

Backup quarterback Jordan Gehrke made his CU debut on Saturday night, getting his number called for CU's final possession of the night.

"It was exciting," he said. "I just thank God for the opportunity. I went out there and it was good. The coaches do a great job of preparing me."

A redshirt sophomore, Gehrke transferred to CU a year ago from Scottsdale Community College. On Saturday, he completed four of eight passes for 35 yards and ran once for nine yards.

"Even though I'm the backup, I feel like I knew what to do out there," he said. "About the third or fourth play it hit me and I was pretty nervous. I was just really excited to be out there."

It was somewhat surprising to see Gehrke in the game at that point. Although just 2 minutes, 14 seconds remained, the Buffs were within 14 points and starter Sefo Liufau had played a solid game (31 of 46 for 273 yards and three touchdowns).

Despite the good Liufau did, he also threw two interceptions on the night. His second INT ended CU's previous possession and likely killed their comeback chances.

Asked about being pulled from the game, Liufau said, "That's a coach decision and we're just going to leave it at that."

Frazier pulls double duty

Redshirt freshman George Frazier became the first Buff in nine years to play on offense and defense in the same game.

Frazier played a little at fullback, his usual position, as well as at defensive end. He became the first Buff to see action on both sides of the ball since John Guydon on Oct. 15, 2005.

With depth an issue at defensive end, the Buffs moved Frazier to defense this week. He got on the field during ASU's opening drive. On offense, he made his first career catch, for 5 yards, in the third quarter.

At end, Tyler Henington was lost for the season with a knee injury and two others - Garrett Gregory and Markeis Reed - have yet to play this season because of injuries. CU had two other freshmen defensive ends - Derek McCartney and Christian Shaver - suffer concussions against UMass on Sept. 6, but both played on Saturday.

New look

The Buffs unveiled new helmets for Saturday's game. The new design featured black matte paint and a black Ralphie logo. CU has worn shiny black helmets in the past, but this was the first game with the new design.

CU also wore all black uniforms, falling to 21-24-1 when donning all black. They've lost 10 in a row in all black.

Notable

True freshman receiver Shay Fields caught seven passes for 36 yards. He has 21 catches already this season, breaking the school record, set by Scotty McKnight, for most catches in the first three games of a career. McKnight caught 20 passes in his first three games, in 2007. Saturday's kickoff, at 8:11 p.m., was the second-latest start time ever for a game at Folsom Field. The only later kickoff was an 8:15 p.m. start against Florida State on Sept. 15, 2007. CU's main video board, part of a $7 million expense a year ago, went out several times throughout the game. True freshman Donovan Lee made his CU debut. He had a 45-yard run in the third quarter on an end-around. Michael Adkins' second-quarter fumble was the first of his career, after 142 touches (125 runs) without one. ASU is 6-0 all-time against the Buffs. The Buffs reported two injuries after the game: LT Jeromy Irwin (concussion) and RB Tony Jones (chest contusion).

Contact BuffZone.com Writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.