Topics: Asian privilege, Bill O'Reilly, Editor's Picks, Falafel, Ferguson, Fox News, George W. Bush, Joe Walsh, Loofah, Media Criticism, Megyn Kelly, Rush Limbaugh, Vincent Chin, white privilege, Life News, News

Poor Bill O’Reilly. I’m starting to suspect he never leaves his Fox News studio, preferring to remain alone in his echo chamber instead of going out and interacting with actual people, all the better to retain his intellectual purity, untainted by reality. The idea that white people benefit from “white privilege” annoys the hell out of him. How can people be so dumb? He tells us, with emphasis, he “does not, does not believe in white privilege.”

However, one doesn’t have to believe in gravity for it to exist. Even Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly won’t join him in his flat-earth theory.

“It’s got a lot of evidence behind it,” she replied when she was on as a guest this week. She refreshingly let her brain out from the bushel it’s been hiding under, bombarding Papa Bear with statistics and facts on the structural inequalities that create astounding obstacles to success — or even minimal solvency — that African-Americans in places like Ferguson, Missouri, face.

O’Reilly was humiliated at every turn by the well-prepared Kelly. Like the vulture that vomits up its rotting carrion when spooked, O’Reilly had to reach down and pull out the oldest, moldiest racial canard in the book: the Model Minority! “The Asian American community is not a troubled situation,” he protested. Blacks just need to study harder, obviously.

By the next day, Papa Bear wasn’t content with simply recycling an old canard, he had to supersize it, asking, “So do we have Asian American privilege in America?”

He cited Asian American “academics are better than whites,” as are median household incomes. But which whites? Which Asian Americans? As a demographic group, “Asian American” combines high-earning groups such as South Asians with low-earning groups such as Cambodians, and even within those groups, for instance, Bangladeshi-Americans have half the incomes of Asian Indian Americans. Also: Economic development globally means highly educated and higher-earning immigrants.

But instead of wasting time parsing O’Reilly’s cherry-picked statistics, one just needs to ask, if Asian Americans have so much privilege, then why isn’t Congress majority Asian American? Why aren’t most of our CEOs and hedge funders Asian American? Why isn’t the American theocracy headed by Buddha, not Jesus?

Because, well, white privilege.

* * *

I invite Bill O’Reilly, my favorite ahistorian, to examine the case of Vincent Chin, a young man who was murdered in Detroit in 1982 via bludgeoning with a baseball bat by two out-of-work autoworkers who blamed the Japanese for their unemployment. These two white men chose to kill an American man, of Chinese descent, one whose father was a World War II veteran. And who was out enjoying a night on the town on the eve of his wedding.

The men received three years’ probation.

“These weren’t the kind of men you send to jail,” the judge said.

Or, in 2006 in St. Paul, Minnesota, Koua Fong Lee was driving his family home from church and his Toyota Camry accelerated seemingly on its own, speeding up a highway off-ramp and hitting a car stopped at a light, killing three people inside it.

Two years earlier, 125 Toyota drivers had filed complaints about crashes involving Toyotas and “speed control,” and Mr. Lee — in the car with his pregnant wife, 8-year-old daughter, his brother and father — had shouted at the time of the accident that the car was speeding and the brakes weren’t working. But instead of his story becoming part of the alarm over Toyota vehicles, one that could have led to earlier recalls and saved lives, Lee was convicted of criminal vehicular homicide and sent to prison.

He was in his fourth year of an eight-year sentence when the Toyota sudden-acceleration scandal became too large to ignore (millions of recalled vehicles, allegations of a decade-long coverup), and he was freed. One cannot tease out exact amounts that race played a part, but the facts are, two white people who murder an Asian American man received zero jail time, while an Asian American man involved in a car accident went to prison for homicide. I’m trying to imagine what Lee’s scenario would have looked like to a jury if it had been a white family driving home from church, no Asian driver stereotypes. “Tragic accident” comes to mind.

* * *

“Asian American privilege” is basically another cover for white privilege, a false equivalence; it’s the distraction of the pickpocket who waves at you with one hand while quietly emptying your pockets with the other (and then blaming it on a black person). This privilege also works in “soft” ways mostly invisible to the society at large but that on an individual level can create lifelong obstacles for one group while unfairly smoothing the way for another. My friend Evelyn, a distinguished professor at Brown, came to America from Hong Kong as a child, spending much of her time taking care of her siblings while her mother cleaned houses. After three years of high school, she was admitted to Stanford, but as a probationary student because of her low verbal SAT scores, 611. However, she noted, that same year, a white person with even lower language scores despite being a native speaker, was admitted to Yale under “white affirmative action,” i.e., as a third-generation Yalie: George W. Bush, who went on to become president despite some “youthful indiscretions” — including theft and substance abuse — that he could laugh off but that likely would lead to prison (and subsequent difficulty finding employment) for a youth in Ferguson.