ENLARGE SPECIAL SAUCE | Adding yogurt to the curry makes it rich and creamy but not too heavy, with a pleasant tang. Christopher Testani for The Wall Street Journal, Food Styling by Heather Meldrom, Prop Styling by Stephanie Hanes

"I'M VERY CAREFUL about buying fish," said Meeru Dhalwala. "I don't want my karma affected by the fact that we have messed up the oceans." For her first Slow Food Fast contribution, Ms. Dhalwala has selected halibut, which is sustainably caught in the Pacific Northwest, where she has three restaurants. Rubbed with ancho chili and cayenne, the flaky white fish is steamed and topped with a cauliflower curry enriched with yogurt.

The Chef: Meeru Dhalwala ENLARGE Meeru Dhalwala Illustration by Michael Hoeweler for The Wall Street Journal Her Restaurants: Vij's and Rangoli, both in Vancouver, British Columbia, and Shanik in Seattle, Wash. What She's Known For: Raising the bar for Indian cooking in North America with impeccably sourced ingredients and creative takes on classic dishes.

Like many of Ms. Dhalwala's recipes, this one is rooted in the culinary traditions of India, where she was born, but it does not reference any particular region. "I'm not afraid to blur boundaries and break rules," the chef said. "My mother would never have mixed fish and dairy, for example. But I find that a little a bit of yogurt adds a nice tartness."

That's not to say this recipe is imprecise when it comes to technique. "You must massage the oil into the fish so the spices really stick," Ms. Dhalwala advised. "That is very important." When preparing the curry, take the time to fry the spices and build a base of flavor before adding the yogurt and cauliflower. "Spices must be cooked in oil or butter. It wakes them up," Ms. Dhalwala said. "With Indian cooking you can't be afraid of oil, and you can't be afraid of spices." In this case, the result is a dish that more than does justice to all of its ingredients.

—Kitty Greenwald

Chili-Rubbed Halibut With Cauliflower Curry

Total Time: 35 minutes Serves: 4-6

3 tablespoons grapeseed or canola oil, plus ⅓ cup

2 teaspoons salt

2 teaspoons ground cayenne pepper

1½ teaspoons ground ancho chili or red pepper flakes

1½ pounds boneless halibut or sablefish, skin on, cut into 2½ -inch dice

1½ cups finely sliced red onions

1 tablespoon peeled and finely chopped fresh ginger

⅔ cup canned tomato purée

1½ teaspoons ground turmeric

1½ tablespoons ground cumin

3 pieces whole star anise

⅓ cup full-fat plain yogurt, plus extra for garnish (optional)

2 cups water

1 medium head cauliflower, cut into individual florets

Cilantro leaves, for garnish

Chopped scallions, for garnish

Naan bread or cooked basmati rice, for serving

1. In a medium bowl, mix 3 tablespoons oil with 1 teaspoon salt, 1 teaspoon cayenne and ancho chili. Add fish and gently massage spiced oil into fish.

2. Set a medium, lidded pot over medium heat. Add remaining oil and onions and sauté until onions soften and start to caramelize, about 8 minutes. Add ginger and sauté until fragrant, about 30 seconds. Add tomato purée, turmeric, cumin, star anise, remaining cayenne and remaining salt. Sauté until spices are fragrant, 3-4 minutes. Turn off heat.

3. In a small bowl, combine yogurt with 3 tablespoons of the spiced tomato sauce. Stir mixture back into pot with tomato sauce and stir in 2 cups water. Place pot over medium-high heat and bring to a boil. Stir in cauliflower and reduce heat to low. Cover and simmer until florets are tender and easily pierced with a knife, about 7 minutes. Turn off heat and cover to keep warm.

4. Meanwhile, fill another pot with 1½ inches water and fit with a steamer. Set pot over medium-high heat and bring water to a boil. Place fish in steamer, cover and steam until fish flakes easily when gently prodded, about 5 minutes.

5. To serve, ladle curry over fish. Garnish with cilantro and scallions. Top with a dollop of plain yogurt, if desired. Serve with naan bread or basmati rice.