Beech High senior tailback/defensive back Rodrick Napper is the Sumner County Co-Player of the Year. (Photo: Chris Brooks/Gallatin News Examiner)

Rodrick Napper usually found a way to be around the football this past season.

Whether he carried it or brought down the opponent with it, Napper was Beech High’s top playmaker in 2015.

The Buccaneer senior – who was in his second season with the team after transferring from Ripley High School prior to the 2014-15 school year – led Beech in rushing and was the team’s leading tackler as well.

Napper rushed for 1,581 yards on 225 carries, an average of slightly more than seven yards per carry. He rushed for 23 touchdowns in helping lead the Buccaneers to an 8-4 record, though Beech bowed out of the Class 5A playoffs after a second-round loss at Hillsboro.

Napper recorded 69 tackles (54 solo) and four quarterback sacks, and he averaged 23.7 yards per kickoff return on six attempts during the season.

That performance helped Napper – who was last season’s Sumner County Player of the Year – earn Co-Player of the Year honors on this season’s All-County Team.

Napper recently discussed his senior season, his college prospects and other topics. His feedback is as follows …

How did you feel about your senior season?

I feel like it went pretty good. I felt like my teammates helped me a lot. My (offensive) line and my coaches, I can’t leave them out. It starts with them.

How do you manage the student-athlete life?

Obviously, during school hours, it’s strictly school, and then, I go home and do the extra work. I’ve been doing it for a long time, so I’m just good at managing my time like that.

Beech High senior tailback/defensive back Rodrick Napper is the Sumner County Co-Player of the Year. (Photo: Chris Brooks/Gallatin News Examiner)

What position do you hope to play at the next level?

I’m getting some interest at running back and at defensive back, so I’m not sure yet.

What type of recruiting interest are you getting, and are there any offers on the table?

Earlier in the year, I got a call from Duke. I’ve got letters from Vanderbilt and Austin Peay. I’ve gotten a few letters from (Tennessee) and some smaller schools.

What is something that people may not know about you?

There’s a lot of things. I don’t like to just be out like that. I’m a private person.

What did you work on the most to improve during the offseason?

My speed. Last year, I was breaking runs, but I wasn’t hitting the 70, 80-yarders. This year, I made it a point for myself that I wouldn’t get caught from behind.

Where do you feel you still need to improve to get better?

Everything. At the next level, everybody’s a whole lot better. They’re grown men out there.

The players of the year on the All-County Football Team include: (L to R) Gallatin junior Jordan Mason (offensive player of the year), Beech senior Rodrick Napper (co-player of the year), Hendersonville junior Terrell Carter (co-player of the year) and Beech senior Ian Hafner (defensive player of the year). (Photo: Chris Brooks/Gallatin News Examiner)

Who are you closest with on the team?

Probably Jowan Garrett. That’s my boy. When I first got here (after transferring from Ripley prior to the 2014 season), he lived in my neighborhood, and we just linked up.

Who is the best-dressed teammate?

I’d have to say it’s Preston Tribble. Preston has everything fresh, every day.

Who is the biggest jokester on your team?

Chris Peach. He tries to clown around, videoing stuff.

Do you feel like you met or fell short of your goals, and what were those goals this season?

I don’t think so. The bar’s always high. I gave myself big expectations. I don’t feel like I did what I wanted to do.

At what point during the season did you think the team really started to get better?

After week 4 (a 30-16 loss at Hendersonville), we went on a five-game winning streak. The team really clicked. As seniors, we stepped up. We learned how to play with each other, and that helped a lot.

What’s on your wish list for this Christmas?

Probably a car, a (Ford) Mustang, a black one.

Do you have any superstitions or pre-game rituals?

Every Thursday night, I eat the same thing, steak and a baked potato. On Friday, all day throughout school, I’m not talking. I’ve got my music in, and when I get on the field, it’s go time.

Beech High senior tailback/defensive back Rodrick Napper is the Sumner County Co-Player of the Year. (Photo: Chris Brooks/Gallatin News Examiner)

Are you into the different styles of uniforms, and if so, which program or professional team sports your favorite uniform combination?

I love it. At my old school, we had two jerseys, a home jersey and an away jersey. It’s definitely an experience getting to play in these uniforms. But even though Alabama’s old school, that’s probably my favorite.

Who is your favorite college or professional player?

(Seattle Seahawks safety) Kam Chancellor. He plays with a lot of authority, and that’s what I try to play with.

Which opposing high-school player do you respect the most?

There’s been a lot of them. I’d have to say Ponchez (Gallatin junior running back Jordan Mason) and (Hendersonville junior) Terrell Carter. I’ve had to try and tackle both of them. They’re great players. Jordan’s a college running back. He’s big. He’s fast, and he’s strong with (the ball). Terrell can do it all. He can play offense and defense. He’s got good footwork and technique.

Which is your favorite college or professional team?

For college, I’m an Alabama fan. My favorite pro team is the New England Patriots.

Beech head coach Anthony Crabtree’s thoughts on Napper …

He’s a very explosive athlete, and he gave us a lot on both sides of the ball. He ran the ball extremely hard. He’s a really tough, hard-nosed kid. Defensively, we were able to do a lot of things with him and move him around, stunt him, drop him off into coverage. He made a lot of tackles. He’s just a very, very valuable piece to our football team. His knowledge of what we do and our scheme … he was football-smart when he got here, but he did a really good job of picking up our terminology and understanding what things meant and how that fit into our game plan each week.

The Napper file

225 rushing attempts

1,581 rushing yards

7 yards per carry

23 rushing touchdowns

3 receptions for 23 yards

69 total tackles (54 solo)

4 quarterback sacks

1 fumble recovery

23.7 yards per kickoff return

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1YFLj0q