By Dan McGowan

Thanks for reading the Saturday Morning Post while Ted was away. He’s back in action next week and like you, I couldn’t be happier. As always, send your takes, tips and trial balloons to dmcgowan@wpri.com and tnesi@wpri.com. For quick hits all week long, follow @danmcgowan and @tednesi.

1. While the $3.1 million Clay Pell has already loaned his campaign is nearly as much as incumbent Gov. Lincoln Chafee and former Republican Gov. Don Carcieri combined to spend on themselves for elections in 2002, 2006 and 2010, he hasn’t quite cracked the top of the list for campaign loans in Rhode Island. That honor goes to former state Sen. Myrth York, who spent just a shade under $4 million on herself during her unsuccessful bid for governor in 2002. (York did win Democratic primaries in 1994, 1998 and 2002.) Although Pell’s personal fortune is the biggest story of the latest round of campaign finance reports – he’s up with yet another new commercial today – it’s worth noting that Gina Raimondo has now raised more than $5.66 million since launching her 2010 campaign for state treasurer. Put another way, Raimondo’s war chest has collected $18,099 in interest since 2010; that’s more than nine members of the Providence City Council currently have in their campaign accounts. The third contender in this year’s Democratic gubernatorial primary, Providence Mayor Angel Taveras, is no slouch himself when it comes to fundraising. Taveras still finished the second quarter with more than $1.3 million in the bank, but with two better-funded opponents, you have to wonder if he’s kicking himself for pushing so hard to ban outside spending in the race.

2. On the Republican side, businessman Ken Block and Cranston Mayor Allan Fung know they’ll likely be outspent by the Democratic nominee, but all they have to do is call John Robitaille to learn how to run a competitive general election race. At the same point in 2010, the $40,190 in Robitaille’s campaign account was 43 times less than the amount held by Democrat Frank Caprio, who didn’t even have a primary. Robitaille went on to benefit from matching funds and some outside help from the Republican Governors Association, which you have to assume will happen for either Block or Fung again this time around. Block ended the quarter with $584,995 cash on hand, while Fung finished with $364,141.

3. If you ask outgoing Gov. Lincoln Chafee what the most difficult part of running for office as an independent was, he’ll likely point to not having a party chairman around to lob bombs at opponents or defend his actions. Democratic Party Chairman David Caprio’s abrupt resignation this week will likely put one of Gina Raimondo, Angel Taveras or Clay Pell in a similar situation following the Sept. 9 primary. House Speaker Nicholas Mattiello isn’t expected to select a new chairman until after primary – Rep. Grace Diaz is the acting-chairwoman – which means the Democratic nominee could be forced to mix it up with Ken Block or Allan Fung more than they wish. Of course, if Rhode Island does elect its first Democratic governor since Bruce Sundlun, it’s worth noting that Mattiello will no longer the stranglehold over the party that previous speakers have enjoyed. For his part, Chafee told Rhode Island’s Future this week he “will defer these decisions to more veteran members” when it comes to selecting a new chairman.

4. Gina Raimondo and Angel Taveras normally beat each other up over pensions, but this week, they allowed national writers to take care of the job. In the second of her three-part series on the city’s pension reform efforts in Institutional Investor, Imogen Rose-Smith suggests that “until it became politically expedient to do so, the mayor shored remarkably little interest in the city’s pension assets – or the state’s , for that matter.” On the flip side, David Sirota of the International Business Times writes that the “state treasurer’s office openly demands secrecy as a way to protect the financial industry, which in turn has spent big on Raimondo’s political campaigns.”

5. Matt Jerzyk, who is widely viewed as the mastermind behind Angel Taveras’s victory in the 2010 Providence mayor’s race, has signed on as a political and communications consultant for the city’s firefighters union. Jerzyk has a long list of political victories dating back to 2002 and union president Paul Doughty said he believes the partnership “will strengthen our union and advance the cause of fire fighters and all working families.” The fire union has stayed out of the mayor’s race so far, but Jerzyk is supporting City Council President Michael Solomon. Jerzyk will also help coordinate the field operation for the campaign to bring table games to Newport Grand. That campaign is being run by Will Farrell, another former Taveras aide.

6. Dan Meuse, deputy chief of staff to outgoing Lt. Gov. Elizabeth Roberts, has accepted a position at Princeton University to be the deputy director of the State Health Reform Assistance Network. The program is funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to provide technical assistance to states as they implement the coverage portions of Obamacare. Rhode Island is one of 11 states involved with the program. Meuse will remain in Rhode Island for the job, but he’ll also be teaching a class at Princeton on the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

7. Teach for America alum Kate Bubrick and attorney Kevin Gallagher have launched Rhode Island is Ready, a new education advocacy group they say will attempt to bring teachers, parents, community members and students together to discuss strategies for improving schools across the state. Bubrick, who taught middle school in Providence, and Gallagher said the group will try to steer clear of the politics associated with education, but both indicated they hope to unveil a list of issues they wish to tackle following a statewide listening tour that begins in September. (They’re also trying to raise $25,000 in 25 days.) The timing of Rhode Island is Ready is significant. The school reform community has been slowed in recent years after gaining some momentum in 2009 and 2010, and with a new governor and a new mayor of Providence taking office in January, the group hopes to play a role in influencing the state’s education agenda. What that agenda looks like remains to be seen. While activist groups like the Providence Student Union have been remarkably successful by setting the tone around school testing and transportation policies, the challenge for Rhode Island is Ready will be to have enough organization to pump new life into the conversation around education without clashing with key stakeholders.

8. He may not have won the speakership, but state Rep. Michael Marcello, D-Scituate, can still wear the good government championship belt in the Rhode Island legislature. A new scorecard released this week by Common Cause showed Marcello voted in support of government reform bills selected by the group 83% of the time during a two-year period. In the other chamber, Sen. Dawson Hodgson, R-East Greenwich, earned the top spot by voting with Common Cause 64% of the time. He’s running for attorney general. At 37%, the worst score went to retiring Rep. William San Bento, D-Pawtucket. Overall, the General Assembly earned points for eliminating the master lever, but Common Cause executive director John Marion said the group is “disappointed that the assembly did not take up more systematic reform to strengthen ethics and increase participation in our democracy.”

9. Congratulations are in order for Elmwood Little League senior girls softball team, which won the New England regional championship this week in Worcester, Mass. The team dropped its East regional final to Pennsylvania, but what a great season. While we’re at it, the hot-hitting Cumberland American 11-12 year-old boys team kicks off its New England regional tournament today in Bristol, Conn.

10. If you feeling like you’re already being inundated with political commercials, well, you ain’t seen nothin’ yet. While all five of the major candidates for governor have been on air for several months, you can expect to see a steady stream of down ticket ads coming your way in August. Case in point: Treasurer candidate Seth Magaziner went up with two commercials (here and here) this week, both of which included a mention that he has the support of President Clinton. Meanwhile, Democrat Guillaume de Ramel launched the first commercial of the secretary of state’s race, pitching himself as a reformer. On the radio side, treasurer candidate Frank Caprio went up with a 60-second spot touting his record on the job between 2007 and 2010.

11. Here’s a roundup of the latest Campaign 2014 endorsements we’ve received: SEIU Local 401 endorsed Clay Pell for governor … the Alliance of Social Transformation backed Gina Raimondo for governor … Bill Clinton endorsed Seth Magaziner general treasurer … the Hopkinton Democratic Town Committee endorsed Nellie Gorbea for secretary of state … Lt. Gov. Elizabeth Roberts backed Brett Smiley for Providence mayor … mayoral candidate Jorge Elorza won support from the Rhode Island Progressive Democrats.

12. If you missed them the first time around, now’s your chance to check out some of the other items we published this week: Tim White learned that a doctor who performed autopsies for the Rhode Island Medical Examiner’s Office lost his job Delaware because he “misused state resources” … the Providence police union ripped Mayor Taveras … the outspoken owner of The $3 Bar on Atwells Avenue defended his establishment, but it remains closed … the candidates for mayor want to ramp up enforcement on Federal Hill … a PAC established to support Buddy Cianci may have violated campaign finance law … as the mayoral candidates focus on Cianci, former state Sen. Myrth York is getting ready to launch an independent expenditure group.

13. Set your DVRs: This week on Newsmakers – Republican candidates for U.S House of Representatives in Rhode Island’s 1st District, Cormick Lynch and Stan Tran. Watch Sunday at 10 a.m. on Fox Providence. This week on Executive Suite – Liam McClennon, CEO of Greencore USA. Watch Saturday at 10:30 p.m. or Sunday at 6 p.m. on myRITV (or Sunday at 6 a.m. on Fox). See you back here next Saturday morning.

Item 8 has been updated to reflect that Dawson Hodgson, not Ed O’Neill, had the highest Common Cause score in the Senate.

Dan McGowan ( dmcgowan@wpri.com ) covers politics, education and the city of Providence for WPRI.com. Follow him on Twitter: @danmcgowan