We’ve all been waiting with bated breath to hear what the professional word-barfing former Governor of Alaska and VP candidate had to say about the recent brush with reality that her party had. In a recent op-ed Palin, clearly off of any anti-psychotic medicine (but possibly on Adderall) finally weighed in.

In a move that would make Rommel or Hannibal smile appreciatively, Palin deftly circumvented both her handlers and the Lamestream Media to publish this opus. Thesaurus in hand, the Tea Party icon went on a stream-of-consciousness rant that covered pretty much every base of her camp’s convoluted platform, invoking Reagan (talking about children, no less), the looming threat of immigration reform (“the 33 million newly legalized voters will overwhelmingly lean Democrat!”), and of course the apocalyptic terror that is Obamacare.

The Affordable Care Act “in its current corporatist form” is inevitably going to evolve. . . sorry, become Intelligently Designed, into bread-line-God-hating-flag-burning socialism. And for what? We could sink as low as Canada, which Palin ventures to say has “even worse health care coverage,” conceding how terrible the health industry is in its current pre-Obamacare form. Things were good enough already, though, because “presently, no one is turned away from emergency rooms.”

As expected, Palin rails against GOP leadership for failing to completely collapse the global economy over keeping people alive:

But when it came time to stand up and use the Constitutional tools they have – the power of the purse strings – to finally halt the implementation, they balked, waved the white flag, and joined the lapdog media in trashing the good guys who fought for us… …The media wants you to believe that the partial government shutdown “fractured” the Republican machine from grassroots commonsense conservatives who go by the acronym TEA Party (that stands for “Taxed Enough Already”). No, Tea Party patriots rose up because the Republican machine “fractured” itself years ago by marginalizing its conservative base.

This is a perfect example of the total absurdity of the TP victim complex. Having shut down the government for weeks and nearly defaulting on outstanding debts just days ago, the Taxed Enough Already (thanks Sarah) team believes they’ve been “marginalized” by their own party.

Palin did have one good point, though. On Obamacare:

This is unprecedented. This is radical.

Amen.

Image via

Follow @wtfjack