When choosing health insurance, a two-person household is usually much better off with two individual policies, rather than a combined family policy. And yet, MNsure, the state's health insurance exchange, forces every household that files joint taxes into a family policy for its own bookkeeping convenience.

That decision by MNsure cost me an additional $6,000 this year. It is creating unnecessary financial risk for other Minnesotans going forward.

The reason individual policies are better is this: Two policies give each person his or her own separate limit for out-of-pocket expenses. Under a family policy, these individual limits are replaced by a single family limit that is usually twice as large. This means that if either person has a serious health problem, the household will have to pay twice as much out-of-pocket under a family policy.

Yet, surprisingly, the total monthly premium for the insurance itself is often exactly the same for two individual policies as for one family policy. So there is no advantage in choosing a family policy, unless there are three or more people in the household.

This unexpected penalty greatly complicates the decisionmaking process for a moderate-income couple who would receive a small discount from MNsure on their monthly premium. Is it better to get a family policy through MNsure with a subsidized monthly premium or get individual policies directly from the insurance company and thereby have much lower out-of-pocket risk?

I learned all of this the hard way, since I am self-employed and don't have company insurance. A year ago, our insurance policies were discontinued by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), and replacement policies from the same company cost 47 percent more. Needless to say, I was highly motivated to consider alternatives.

Since I am very comfortable shopping online with Amazon and Kayak, I registered with MNsure even though we weren't expecting a subsidy. Like many others, I had lots of problems using the error-prone website. I also had lots of questions about policy differences, but could never get through to a person at MNsure or the insurance companies even after waiting on hold for hours. In the end, I settled for a policy through MNsure that was 31 percent more expensive than what I'd had the previous year. My premiums had gone up less than 10 percent in each of the previous three years.

As fate would have it, I suffered a detached retina and required an expensive surgery. Our policy says: "Out-of-pocket limit $6,350/$12,700 (individual/family)," and I had naively thought that meant there was a limit of $6,350 per person and a limit of $12,700 per family. But the fine print says: "Family out-of-pocket is non-embedded," which they tell me means that there is no individual limit on a family policy. Ironically, this family out-of-pocket limit is much higher than my individual limit from the previous year — and the ACA discontinued that policy because it was too risky.

It seems grossly unfair to me that we are paying 31 percent more for worse coverage because MNsure refuses to issue individual policies. A rep from my insurance company sympathized with my situation and said the company would be willing to retroactively issue individual policies if MNsure made the request. But my appeals to MNsure and Gov. Mark Dayton have fallen on deaf ears.

It remains to be seen in the long term whether the ACA really can bend the cost curve, as promised, and reduce the rate of increase in total health care cost for all Americans. Or did that goal fall by the wayside? All I know for sure, in the short term, is that costs for my family are going up much more rapidly than in previous years. The so-called Affordable Care Act has not been affordable for us.

Tim Hoel, of Eagan, is a software engineer.