It’s hard to go too far with an Obama conspiracy theory on Fox but Dr. Ben Carson managed to do it on The Kelly File last week. He shocked even Megyn Kelly when he told her that “some people” want others on welfare and are deliberately holding the economy down in order to keep them on it. Carson couldn’t say “exactly” who these people are but it was pretty clear he meant the Obama administration.

Carson appeared on The Kelly File on May 22 after he "fired up" The View, as FoxNews.com put it, over his comments about welfare.

“Do you think that people who are on welfare want to be on welfare?” Kelly asked.

Not only did Carson think so, he saw some kind of conspiracy going on:

I think some do. I think some people have that as a way of life. It’s generational. It’s inter-generational. And after the great progress that we made after the struggles of the civil right (sic) movement, I think perhaps the worst thing that happened is a lot of – some well-meaning and some not so well-meaning - folks came along and started patronizing these individuals and saying, “Oh, you can’t really do anything and you know, we’ll take care of you, you’ll be OK.” In some cases, it was to assuage their guilt. In some cases, they genuinely felt that they couldn’t really help themselves. …We’re going from a can-do society to a “what can you do for me?” society. That never leads to the elevation of a society. That always leads to the decline of a society. …I’m happy for people who truly need help to get help. And, like I said before, you know, we have the ability in this nation to get the economy moving. I actually believe that perhaps some of the things that are going on right now - which could be easily remedied - are not being remedied in order to keep the economy depressed. Because there would be no appetite for many of the social programs if people were doing well.

Kelly broke in. She asked, obviously incredulous, “What, are you thinking President Obama and his colleagues are up there saying, ‘How can we keep unemployment high? How can we keep the American society down?’”

Carson continued:

I think there may be some people – I don’t know exactly who they are – but it seems to me like it would be relatively easy to fix some of this stuff. Everybody agrees. The president has said. The Republicans have said. The Democrats have said that our corporate tax rate, which is the highest in the world needs to be lowered. Have they lowered it? No. Have they done anything about our arcane, just ridiculous taxation system? No. Do they talk about it? Yes.

Carson may be a brilliant surgeon but he sure is a dope in a lot of other arenas. Just two days later, he called the VA scandal “a gift from God” to show us the upcoming evils of ObamaCare. You may recall that last fall, he called ObamaCare “the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery. ...(I)t is slavery in a way, because it is making all of us subservient to the government, and it was never about health care. It was about control.”

Watch Carson expound his conspiracy theory below.