WASHINGTON – We know that Sen. Ted Cruz wants to hear President Obama apologize for Obamacare. We know the administration wants Republicans like Cruz to drop their demands for repeal and start working together.

Where’s the common ground? There doesn’t seem to be much.

Shortly before Obama headed to the Capitol to deliver his annual address, Cruz reiterated his scathing critique of the health care law and – a bit reluctantly – acknowledged that he’s not at all interested in tweaking or improving it. He’s after the same thing he’s always been after: repeal.

“Our health insurance system cannot be fixed as long as Obamacare is in place,” he said on a call with Texas reporters. “It is an experiment in social engineering run amok.”

Texas Democrats such as Rep. Joaquin Castro of San Antonio see growing public warmth toward Obamacare, and tonight’s State of the Union as a great opportunity for the president to showcase his policies and burnish his image.

“He’s in the midst of a comeback. You see his poll numbers rebounding,” Castro said in an interview at his office. “The Affordable Care Act is gaining momentum. There are over 3 million people who’ve signed up through the exchanges. Millions more that have enrolled in Medicaid. The pace of signups has accelerated.”

Cruz cited the same 3 million figure. But he said, more than 5 million people have lost health coverage because of Obamacare. Of the 3 million who have signed up for insurance through Medicaid or the online exchanges, he said, estimates show that only 11 percent had been uninsured beforehand – meaning a net gain of about 330,000, a costly result that Cruz called “an abject disaster.”

Castro is more upbeat about the law, and about Obama’s prospects coming out of Tuesday night.

This is a real opportunity for a kind of comeback. Now, like just about every other president, I doubt during his second term he’s going to get to 60 percent approval ratings again as he did when he had just become president. But I do think you’ll see him gain a decent amount of support back,” he said.