By David Karas and Alyssa Mease

Staff Writers

EWING — Over the space of four years, the nursing school enrollment at The College of New Jersey in Ewing has stayed flat at 60 students. Over the same period, the number of students applying for admission has climbed from 440 in 2009 to 750 this year.

The explosion of interest in a nursing education is not limited to students who want to enroll at TCNJ.

It is far reaching and has come amid a recession, when the nursing profession was seen as one of the few growth fields, and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, which through its broader health coverage of Americans is expected to bring a huge demand for more doctors and nurses.

While TCNJ hasn’t ramped up its nursing enrollment to accommodate the surge in interest, other schools are jumping into the breach.

Recently Jersey College School of Nursing, headquartered in Teterboro, expanded its operations in Ewing, where it maintains a school for an undisclosed number of students.



“We have basically quadrupled in size at this campus in the past year,” said Thomas Matese, campus director for the Ewing site. Recent construction has enlarged the campus on Spruce Street to 30,000 square feet.

The Ewing site was founded in 2003, the same year the school itself was established, and is among four other Jersey College campuses that are part of the same school and which include three Florida sites in Fort Lauderdale, Tampa and Jacksonville. Altogether the school enrolls about 1,500, according to The Bergen Record.

Jersey College is joined in its response to nursing demand by Thomas Edison State College, which is currently building a $16.9 million, 27,000-square-foot nursing building on the grounds of the former Glen Cairn Arms apartment complex, across from the Calhoun Street Bridge.

Three years ago, Mercer County Community College jumped into the online market for nursing school courses, expanding its reach to more students. At the time the school had just 275 spots for students in its nursing program and a backlog of 1,500 students on the waiting list.

With five hospitals in the immediate Trenton area, there will be openings for many of the students lucky enough to graduate from one of these programs.

But demand for nursing graduates will likely go further north from here.

New recommendations from the Institute of Medicine, an influential nonprofit group that advises the government and industry on health issues, suggest that 80 percent of all nurses should attain bachelor’s degrees by 2020 in an effort to improve patient care.

This is sending nurses back to school in droves as hospitals try to comply with the recommendations.

Many nurses are registered nurses or RNs, and have two-year degrees, though studies have shown the quality of nursing improves if nurses have more education.

In addition, Americans who are about to gain insurance coverage through the Affordable Care Act will need skilled workers to deliver on the other half of that promise, further stoking demand for nurses.

“The Affordable Care Act will provide them with health-care insurance, right, but will it provide them with health care, with a shortage of nurses and doctors?” asked Marcia Blicharz, interim dean of nursing, health and exercise science at TCNJ.

The Bureau Of Labor Statistics anticipates a shortfall of 1.2 million nurses by 2020, and an increase of about 30 million insured Americans under the new law, Blicharz said.

While TCNJ has not increased the number of nursing student spots in its program over the past four years, it has maintained an emphasis on quality that will stand its graduates in good stead as they look to advance in the medical profession, Blicharz said.

“Obviously I’m prejudiced, but I think we have a really high quality program. I think we prepare students for what’s going on in health care today, and speak to all the new trends in health care and teach them to think critically,” Blicharz said. “They’re much more well-rounded.”

And despite the lack of growth recently, the program has tripled in size since 1996, she said.

Blicharz noted that a national shortage of nursing faculty remains one of the largest challenges with expanding, she said.

Because of the growing nursing and nurse faculty shortage, in 2009 The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the New Jersey Chamber of Commerce launched a five-year, $22 million “New Jersey Nursing Initiative” to help train nurses to become nurse faculty members, increasing what was seen then as a critically low number of nursing professors and educators.

While there hasn’t been enrollment growth at TCNJ lately, the school recently purchased two simulators, mannequins that can have heartbeats and can cough, give birth and die. A grant to purchase three more of the simulators — which cost from $65,000 to $75,000 a piece — was just secured, Blicharz said.

“We do simulation scenarios, which are a good way to learn clinical decision-making without hurting anybody,” Blicharz said.

At Jersey College, students can work in a two-room geriatric care suite, geared toward exposing them to working with older patients.

“They get the lab component here, and then actually go out and do that in actual patients,” Matese said of the care techniques and procedures they learn in the classroom and lab environments at Jersey College. “They do get such a wide range of experiences and exposures.”

Because TCNJ is a four-year institution, students earn a four-year nursing degree and then take the test to become a registered nurse. With the RN, students can go on to complete a master’s or a doctorate in nursing, Blicharz said.

Some nursing programs offer degrees other than the RN. The licensed practical nurse (LPN) program is a one-year degree and the associate’s degree in nursing (ASN) is a two-year program.

“It depends on where you go around the country, but some places won’t hire LPNs at all,” Blicharz said. “The more nurses you have in a hospital with a bachelor’s and higher, the lower the morbidity and mortality rate.”

Jersey College focuses on LPN and RN students, Matese said.

“Jersey College’s nursing programs combine clinical learning with traditional classroom academics to help students acquire the necessary competencies to succeed as professionals in the health care industry,” said Elizabeth Villanueva, dean of nursing at the Ewing campus.

Nurses holding either a bachelor’s or master’s make up about 50 percent of all nurses.

Those with an associate’s or LPN make up 49 percent of the work force and nurses with a doctorate make up less than 1 percent, Blicharz said.

With the increasing demand for spots in TCNJ’s nursing program, Blicharz said the school is considering an expansion.

“I think we’re at least considering it, again. It’s in terms of space and faculty, and we certainly have enough applicants to do that,” Blicharz said. “There’s a huge nursing faculty shortage and nursing shortage.”

Contact Alyssa Mease at amease@njtimes.com or (609) 989-5673.

On mobile or desktop:

• Like Times of Trenton on Facebook

• Follow @TimesofTrenton on Twitter