Here’s your guide to the four main parties’ record and pledges as the campaign begins:

ECONOMY, TAXES AND POCKETBOOK ISSUES

Conservatives:

Introduced a “family tax cut” that allows couples with children under age 18 to split up to $50,000 of income; caps non-refundable benefit at $2,000.

Increased annual contribution limit for tax-free savings accounts (TFSAs) to $10,000 from $5,500.

Increased Universal Child Care Benefit to $160 a month for children under age six, up from $100; added new monthly benefit of $60 for children age six to 17.

Reduced small-business tax rate to nine per cent from current 11 per cent by 2019; have reduced corporate tax rate from about 22 per cent to 15 per cent.

Promise to balance the budget this fiscal year.

Increased eligibility age for receiving Old Age Security benefits to 67 from 65.

Are examining ways for Canadians to voluntarily contribute more to the Canada Pension Plan.

Aug. 3: Increase the apprenticeship job creation tax credit, first introduced in 2006 to create incentives to foster skilled trades, to a maximum of $2,500, up from $2,000, and extend it to include the third and fourth years of eligible training.

Aug. 4: A permanent home-renovation tax credit — an update to the temporary credit introduced in 2009 — costing $1.5 billion a year, but contingent on a stronger economy. Applies to $5,000 worth of renovation costs, down from $10,000 in 2009.

Aug. 12: Raise to $35,000 the amount that first-time homebuyers can withdraw tax free from RRSPs to finance a home purchase. Track the impact of home purchases by foreign, non-residents to ensure this doesn’t skew the market against Canadian buyers.

Aug. 19: Cut “red tape” for businesses stemming from legislation and policy rules in addition to regulations. Better harmonize child car seat regulations with those of the United States to provide more choice and better prices. Simplify the calculation of home-office expense deductions.

Aug. 20: Increase the value of the 15-per-cent non-refundable adoption expense tax credit to $20,000 from $15,000 and make it fully refundable.

Aug. 23: Provide a tax break on membership fees to organizations such as the Kiwanis, Lions and Royal Canadian Legion.

Aug. 27: Add $40 million over five years for an existing federal loans program that offers financial support to new Canadians while they complete the foreign credential recognition process. The money comes on top of $35 million committed to the program in the last budget.

Sept. 1: Establish a not-for-profit agency in Burlington, Ont., to help develop new products and technology for manufacturing, with a budget of $30 million a year for five years. Set up a new trade-promotion office to help attract new business for exporters, paid for by reallocating other government resources.

Sept. 2: Extend the existing 15-per-cent mineral exploration tax credit first implemented in 2006, and create a new 25-per-cent credit for hard-to-reach mines.

Sept. 6: Create an endowment fund for museums that would match the money the institutions raise privately, with a cap of about $15 million a year.

Sept. 7: Increase the maximum annual Canada Disability Savings Grant for low- and middle-class families to $4,000 from $3,500.

Sept. 8: Raise government contribution when low- and middle-income families invest in education savings plans. A family earning up to $44,000 would get $200 for the first $500 put away for a child’s higher education plan each year, while a family earning up to $88,000 would receive $100 on the first $500 each year.

Sept. 10: Invest $20 million in the lobster industry over three years, including a $15-million partnership with the Lobster Council of Canada to market and promote lobster abroad, plus $5 million for research.

Sept. 15: Bring in a $2,000 tax credit for single seniors to help nearly 1.6 million seniors with pension income.

Sept. 20: Create a $100-million manufacturing technology demonstration fund available to large, pre-commercial projects in the advanced manufacturing sector.

Sept. 22: Aim to create 1.3 million net new jobs by 2020.

Sept. 25: Bring in a “tax lock” law barring increases to federal personal and business income taxes, sales taxes and “discretionary payroll taxes” such as CPP and EI.

Sept. 29: Aim to create 700,000 new homeowners by 2020.

The NDP promises to:

Balance the budget in 2016.

Not raise personal income-tax rates.

Cancel government’s income-splitting policy for families; says it helps only wealthiest 15 per cent.

Reverse changes to TFSA contribution limits; says higher amount helps the wealthy and does little for middle-class Canadians.

Increase income-tax rates on Canada’s largest corporations to about the levels that existed before the Conservatives took office.

Cut small-business tax rate to nine per cent from current 11 per cent.

Honour the expanded Universal Child Care Benefit.

Create $15-a-day national child care program, and create or maintain one million affordable child care spaces across Canada.

Cancel Conservative decision to increase OAS eligibility age to 67.

Increase Canada Pension Plan contributions and benefits for Canadians.

Aug. 11: Create a payment-protection program for farmers who don’t get paid if they sell their products to U.S. companies that go bankrupt.

Aug. 17: Invest $30 million over three years in Destination Canada, a Crown corporation responsible for promoting Canada as a tourist destination.

Aug. 20: Create a million child care spaces over eight years, including 110,000 in B.C., where child care costs are highest. The party says the cost to parents would be no more than $15 a day.

Aug. 24: Increase the guaranteed income supplement for the poorest seniors by $400 million; return the age of eligibility for old age security back to 65 from 67.

Aug. 25: A balanced budget in the first year of an NDP mandate.

Aug. 26: A $40-million tax credit for businesses that invest in machinery, equipment and property used in innovative research and development.

Aug. 27: Reverse a planned reduction in the rate of increase in provincial health transfers, due to set in two years from now.

Sept. 3: Convene a first minister’s meeting to discuss expansion of the Canada and Quebec pension plans within six months of taking office.

Sept. 8: Create a $160-million, four-year fund to help small- and medium-sized aerospace companies adopt new technology and increase production.

Sept. 9: Invest an additional $90 million in the federal automotive supplier innovation program over the next five years.

Sept. 10: Provide up to $100 million a year to create more than 40,000 jobs, paid internships and co-op placements for youth over four years.

Sept. 22: Freeze EI premiums for the next four years and spend more on training, while increasing benefits for young people, so-called precarious workers and new parents. Ease eligibility restrictions for EI benefits.

Sept. 25: Boost the forestry sector with $55 million for manufacturing facilities, $40-million for research and development, and $10 million to promote Canadian wood products abroad.

Oct. 3: A New Democrat government would not ratify a Trans Pacific Partnership.

Related

The Liberals promise to:

Cut middle-class income-tax bracket to 20.5 per cent from current 22 per cent; create a new tax bracket of 33 per cent for annual incomes of more than $200,000.

Cancel income-splitting for families; party calls it “a $2-billion tax break to the top 15 per cent of Canadians.”

Introduce a new income-tested, tax-free monthly Canada Child Benefit that would boost payments to all families with children and annual income below $150,000.

Cancel TFSA increase to $10,000, saying it helps well-off Canadians who need it the least.

Retain tax breaks for small businesses but want to ensure this doesn’t primarily benefit the wealthy.

Balance the budget in 2020.

Cancel Conservative plan to increase OAS eligibility age to 67.

Increase Canada Pension Plan contributions and benefits for Canadians.

Aug. 17: Lower the federal income tax rate to 20.5 per cent on incomes between $44,700 and $89,401, paying for it by raising taxes on the wealthiest one per cent. Bring in a new, tax-free child benefit to replace the Conservative universal child benefit.

Aug. 18: Invest $200 million a year to develop clean technologies in forestry, fisheries, mining, energy and farming. Put another $100 million into organizations that promote clean technology firms.

Aug. 19: Change labour laws to ensure that employees in federally regulated industries have the right to ask their bosses for flexible work hours.

Aug. 26: A refundable tax benefit of up to $150 for teachers who spend their own money on school supplies.

Sept. 8: Reduce EI premiums drop to $1.65 per $100 earned from $1.88. That’s less than the $1.49 rate that the Tories committed to in the 2015 budget, but the Liberals say the extra money would be reinvested, with $500 million going to the provinces for skills training. Reduce wait times for a first EI payment to one week from two at a cost of $710 million.

Sept. 9: Change the rules to allow people to dip into their RRSPs more than once to buy a home.

Sept. 11: Spend about $1.5 billion over four years on a youth job strategy to help 125,000 young people find a job.

Sept. 15: Give $500 million to the provinces for skilled trades training, and devote $200 million for federal training programs. Set aside another $50 million to help aboriginal people improve their skills and job prospects.

Sept. 22: Provide $380 million in additional funding for the arts and undo Conservative funding cuts to the CBC.

Sept. 29: Put up $200 million a year for three years to help research facilities, small business incubators and exporters and invest another $100 million a year for an industrial research assistance program.

Oct. 5: Increase Canada Student Grants by 50 per cent to $3,000 a year. Allow students to wait until they’re earning at least $25,000 a year before requiring them to start repaying student loans.

The Greens promise to:

Eliminate personal taxes on incomes below low-income cut-off of $20,000.

Reduce federal small business tax rate to nine per cent by 2019.

Raise corporate taxes over four years from the current level of 15 per cent to 19 per cent.

Work with provinces to increase taxes on tobacco and alcohol.

Aug. 25: Create a national housing strategy. More funding for the co-operative housing sector. Implement a guaranteed livable income to help low-income Canadians and youth buy homes. Ensure a percentage of all newly built units are reserved for affordable housing. Increase access to social housing for First Nations on and off-reserve.

Sept. 2: Introduce a national seniors strategy, which would include a guaranteed livable income, a national dementia strategy and increases to the Canada Health Transfer to account for the age of a province’s population.

Sept. 9: Roll back cuts to Veterans Affairs, Canada Post and the CBC. Tax carbon and return benefits to individuals through “carbon dividend.” PAxe university tuition by 2020. Raise taxes on large corporations to 19 per cent from 15 per cent.

Sept. 10: Close all tax-haven loopholes.

Sept. 16: Cut tuition fees for students and their families without adequate financial means. Forgive all student loans over $10,000. Abolish interest on new student loans and increase available funding for bursaries. Create a national Community and Environment Service Corps, to provide $1 billion a year to municipalities to hire youth. Provide a guaranteed livable income to ensure no person’s income falls below what is necessary for health, life, and dignity.

SECURITY AND TERRORISM:

The Conservatives have:

Committed Canada to a military mission against ISIL, sending CF-18 fighter jets to Iraq and Syria.

Passed Bill C-51, with broad new powers to the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS) to expand surveillance and actively disrupt threats to national security. The bill makes it illegal to promote terrorism; lowers the legal threshold required for police to arrest and detain suspected extremists without charge; and allows more than 100 government entities to exchange Canadians’ confidential information if it is “relevant” to a potential or suspected national security threat.

Committed $292 million over five years to help RCMP, CSIS and the Canada Border Services Agency combat terrorism.

Created a new parliamentary police force by integrating the former, separate House and Senate security staffs into the Parliamentary Protective Service, while also committing $39 million in additional funding for operational security measures in the Parliamentary precinct.

Aug. 9: Expand federal laws that make it a crime for Canadians to head overseas to fight alongside groups officially identified by the federal government as a terrorist organization. Essentially it would declare certain areas no-travel zones for most Canadians, with exceptions for journalists and humanitarian workers.

Aug. 10: Bring 10,000 additional refugees from Syria and Iraq. Spend $9 million over three years to help the Office of Religious Freedom protect places of worship and religious artifacts targeted by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.

Sept. 11: Commit an additional $10 million over five years to the Kanishka Project, which was established in 2011 to fund research into preventing and countering violent extremism.

Sept. 23: Impose travel bans against people who’ve already been sanctioned by the Canadian government and expand the list of reasons for implementing sanctions.

The NDP promises to:

End the bombing campaign and pull out all military personnel from Iraq and Syria; boost humanitarian aid to help refugees affected by ISIL as well as investigate and prosecute war crimes.

Repeal Bill C-51, the anti-terrorism act.

Provide more independent review of Canada’s national security agencies.

Support a counter-radicalization program.

Sept. 10: End Canadian participation in the bombing campaign against ISIL in Iraq and Syria. Bring 10,000 Syrian refugees into the country by the end of the year.

The Liberals promise to:

End the bombing campaign in Iraq and Syria but keep military trainers in Iraq and boost humanitarian aid to help refugees; allow more refugees into the country from Iraq and Syria.

Make amendments to anti-terrorism Bill C-51 by: limiting the sharing of personal data to 17 government departments and agencies with national security responsibilities; eliminating CSIS’s new power to obtain court warrants to break the law in some cases to disrupt suspected terrorists; adding a three-year sunset provisions on some parts of the law and mandatory parliamentary reviews of the extraordinary security measures.

Create an all-party national security oversight committee to oversee the 17 government departments and agencies with national security responsibilities.

The Greens promise to:

Introduce a comprehensive security plan that will provide coordinated direction to the RCMP, CSIS, Canada Border Services Agency, Coast Guard and Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development Canada.

Ensure responses to terrorism are carried out within a framework consistent with international law.

Sept. 9: Repeal Bill C-51, the anti-terror act.

ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT:

The Conservatives have:

Approved the Enbridge Northern Gateway oilsands pipeline that would run from Alberta to the coast of Kitimat, B.C.; support the proposed TransCanada Energy East project, a west-to-east oil pipeline from Alberta to New Brunswick; support proposed TransCanada Keystone XL oilsands pipeline from Alberta to U.S. Gulf Coast.

Committed to reducing Canada’s emissions by 30 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030, largely relying on provincial measures to meet that goal.

Agreed with other G7 nations to move to a low-carbon economy by 2050 and eliminate use of fossil fuels by the end of the century.

Aug. 21: An extended partnership with the Pacific Salmon Foundation and $15 million to restore British Columbia estuaries.

Sept. 4: Allot $5 million annually for programs to sustain habitats that support bird, moose and turkey populations, starting in 2017. Create a family bird-hunting permit and allow the use of crossbows for hunting birds. Earmark $9 million over three years starting in 2016 for a tourism program to attract recreational anglers, hunters and snowmobiles from the U.S. Establish a Canadian Forces reserve unit in the Yukon, the first such unit in the territory since the Yukon Regiment was disbanded in 1968.

The NDP promises to:

Continue opposing the Northern Gateway pipeline; it initially supported concept of west-east pipeline, but says Energy East can’t be approved without more stringent environmental review process; opposes Keystone XL pipeline.

Create a cap-and-trade system with a market price on carbon emissions; revenue from cap-and-trade would be invested in a greener energy sector in regions where dollars are generated.

Work with provinces to create a new fund to help Canadians retrofit their homes and offices to save energy and money.

Redirect $1 billion a year from fossil fuel subsidies to investment in the clean energy sector.

Invest in Sustainable Development Technology Canada – including wind, hydro, solar and geothermal technologies – to create thousands of new jobs for Canadians.

Sept. 27: Launch a national cap and trade plan to combat greenhouse gas emissions. Provinces would be allowed to opt out if their efforts to bring down emissions are as good or better than those of the federal government.

Sept. 30: Put $100 million toward helping 25 northern and remote communities wean themselves off diesel generation.

Oct. 1: Spend $200 million over four years to help retrofit 50,000 homes and 15,000 apartments to make them more energy efficient. Invest $150 million over four years in a green municipal fund to help with sustainable local projects and cleaner transit.

The Liberals promise to:

Continue to oppose proposed Northern Gateway pipeline; support Energy East and Keystone XL pipelines.

Put a price on carbon pollution that allows provinces to design their own carbon pricing policies.

Partner with provinces and territories to establish national emissions-reduction targets.

Invest millions in clean technologies and enhance tax measures to create more green jobs.

Introduce an environmental review process with more “teeth.”

Hold First Ministers’ meeting with premiers within 90 days of the Paris UN climate change conference this December to establish a framework for reducing Canada’s carbon footprint.

Increase the amount of Canada’s protected marine and coastal areas to five per cent by 2017 and 10 per cent by 2020.

Phase out subsidies for the fossil fuel industry.

Along with the U.S. and Mexico, develop a North American clean energy and environmental agreement.

Aug. 18: Invest $200 million a year to develop clean technologies in forestry, fisheries, mining, energy and farming. Put another $100 million into organizations that promote clean technology firms.

Sept. 10: Put a moratorium on tanker traffic along the northern coast of British Columbia. Reinstate $40 million cut from the ocean science and monitoring program at the Department of Fisheries and Oceans. Increase protected marine and coastal areas to five per cent from 1.3 per cent by 2017, and to 10 per cent by 2020.

The Greens promise to:

Introduce carbon pricing through a fee-and-dividend system to reduce fossil fuel use and encourage private sector investment in green tech, clean energy and green jobs.

Accelerate construction of green infrastructure, ensuring a majority of Canada’s energy needs come from renewable sources by 2025.

Work with the provinces to ensure no new coal-fired electrical generation plants are built in Canada.

Aug. 18: Legislate a ban on super tankers on British Columbia’s coast and impose a moratorium on drilling for oil and gas in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. Produce stronger environmental assessment laws to help defend coastal communities from risky pipeline and tanker schemes. Repeal the Conservative omnibus security legislation.

Aug. 25: Retrofit all homes by 2030 to increase energy efficiency.

Sept. 9: Tax carbon and return benefits to individuals through “carbon dividend.” Protect environment from oil tankers and pipelines. Scrap subsidies for the fossil-fuel industry.

Sept. 16: Create a national Community and Environment Service Corps, to provide $1 billion a year to municipalities to hire youth. Provide a guaranteed livable income to ensure no person’s income falls below what is necessary for health, life, and dignity.

INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRANSPORT:

The Conservatives promise:

$5.3 billion a year, on average, for provincial and municipal infrastructure under the New Building Canada Plan.

A New Public Transit Fund committing the federal government to spend $250 million in 2017, $500 million in 2018 and $1 billion a year after 2019.

$150 million for Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program to fund community and cultural infrastructure projects across the country as a way to celebrate Canada’s sesquicentennial in 2017.

Aug. 14: Spend $14 million to pave a stretch of a scenic highway between Fort Smith and Hay River in the Northwest Territories.

Aug. 25: Support for a new marine terminal in Montreal and an expanded cruise ship terminal in Quebec City.

Aug. 26: Spend $200 million to expand the country’s high-speed broadband Internet network across remote and rural areas.

Sept. 28: Provide $700 million for light-rail transit in Surrey, B.C.

The NDP promises to:

Dedicate an additional one cent of the existing 10-cents-per-litre federal gas tax to roads, bridges and other core infrastructure, reaching an additional $1.5-billion annually by the end of an NDP government’s first mandate, on top of almost $2.2 billion in existing annual gas tax transfers to municipalities.

Develop a better transit plan with the provinces and territories and invest $1.3 billion annually over next 20 years for predictable and stable public transit funding for municipalities.

Sept. 20: Re-open the maritime rescue sub-centre in St. John’s, N.L., and re-open the Coast Guard marine communications and traffic services centres in St. John’s and St. Anthony. Have coast guard search and rescue capabilities available at all hours.

The Liberals promise to:

Boost infrastructure funding through “alternative sources of capital” such as having large pension funds invest in major infrastructure projects in urban and rural communities.

Provide infrastructure funding for affordable housing, public transit, transportation, climate change and “smart cities.”

Hold a big city mayors’ meeting in Ottawa annually to discuss pressing infrastructure issues facing cities.

Aug. 27: Increase federal infrastructure investment to almost $125 billion, from the current $65 billion, over the next decade. Provide new, dedicated funding to provinces, territories and municipalities for public transit, social infrastructure and green infrastructure.

Sept. 3: Kill a planned toll system on a rebuilt Champlain Bridge in Montreal.

Sept. 16: Provide $1.5 billion for public transit in Calgary as well as unspecified financing for flood control measures in the city.

Oct. 1: Help fund a Montreal rapid transit expansion, as well as a light-rail project on the Champlain Bridge linking Montreal to the suburban South Shore.

The Greens promise to:

Reinvest in national rail systems, build more train cars, increase train speeds and phase in high-speed rail where feasible.

Increase joint federal-municipal light-rail investments.

Improve Via Rail service nationwide, including working with railway companies to improve rail infrastructure and restore VIA rail service to all major regional cities.

Sept. 9: Spend $6.4 billion on municipal infrastructure. Bring in a national housing strategy.

FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE:

The Conservatives promise to:

Increase Department of National Defence’s budget to three per cent starting in 2017-18, totalling an additional $11.8 billion over 10 years.

Commit an additional $3.5 billion over five years toward maternal, newborn and child health initiative, on top of $2.8-billion commitment at G8 summit in 2010.

Aug. 15: Improve the earnings loss benefit for veterans with service-related disabilities or injuries by letting them earn up to $10,000 in outside work, without losing any government funding.

Aug. 17: Add 6,000 people to the ranks of the Canadian Forces reserves at a cost of $163 million over three years and $63.4 million going forward once the target of 30,000 personnel is reached.

Sept. 26: By 2020, add 665 personnel to Canada’s special operation forces, which consists of 1,900 members.

Sept. 22: Issue official veterans cards as formal proof of service to every member of the military who completes basic training and is honourably released.

The NDP promises to:

Increase Canada’s foreign aid to 0.7 per cent of gross national income, or GNI (Canada currently spends 0.24 per cent of GNI on foreign aid).

Re-open the nine Veterans Affairs regional offices closed by the Conservative government.

Sept. 10: End Canadian participation in the bombing campaign against ISIL in Iraq and Syria. Bring 10,000 Syrian refugees into the country by the end of the year.

Sept. 21: Spend $454 million over four years to provide treatment for veterans suffering from the effects of post-traumatic stress disorder.

The Liberals promise to:

Make Canada a “world leader” at multinational institutions.

Reverse the decline in foreign aid.

Re-open nine Veterans Affairs regional offices closed by the Conservative government.

Create a cabinet committee to oversee and manage Canada’s relationship with the United States.

Host a new trilateral summit with the United States and Mexico.

Aug. 24: $300 million a year to reform veterans’ benefits and delivery of services to vets.

Sept. 20: Scrap the purchase of the F-35 fighter jet and instead buy cheaper planes to replace the aging CF-18s and use the savings to pay for offshore Arctic patrol vessels for the navy being built in Halifax.

Sept. 25: Ease rules to speed up family reunification for immigrants. Scrap the visa requirement for Mexicans travelling to Canada.

The Greens promise to:

Reduce by 30 per cent the $2.7 billion spent every year on DND consultants, contractors and other private sector contracts.

Re-align defence spending to increase emphasis on disaster assistance; shift focus away from NATO “war missions” towards UN peacekeeping contributions.

Ensure development assistance targets the “poorest of the poor.”

Aug. 14: Improve benefits for veterans. Provide any veteran with post-traumatic stress disorder a service dog if they want one.

SOCIAL ISSUES:

The Conservatives promise to:

Beginning in 2017–18, increase annual health funding to provinces to grow in line with nominal GDP, guaranteed to increase three per cent each year (current increases are six per cent annually).

Retool $2-billion-per-year Labour Market Development Agreements with provinces to reorient training towards needs of employers and job seekers.

Provide $65 million over four years, starting in 2016–17, to business and industry associations to allow them to work with post-secondary institutions to better align curricula with needs of employers.

The NDP promises to:

Restore the six-per-cent annual increase to health-care transfers to the provinces.

Restore door-to-door home mail delivery by Canada Post for households that lost it under Conservative government.

Reinstate the mandatory long-form census, which the government replaced with the voluntary National Household Survey.

Aug. 18: Commit $7 million a year to a Joint Emergency Preparedness Program for disasters such as floods and fires and earmark an additional $2 million for emergency training programs.

Sept. 2: Give $28 million for Sport Canada to help poor and disadvantaged youth to play sports.

Sept. 13: Spend $1.8 billion over four years to help provinces bolster health care for seniors by expanding home care for 41,000 seniors, creating 5,000 more nursing beds and improving palliative care services.

Sept. 14: Invest $300 million to build 200 additional health clinics and spend $200 million on recruitment grants for health-care professionals. Devote $40 million to deal with Alzheimer’s and dementia, including money for research, screening, early diagnosis and treatment and help for families seeking care for afflicted relatives.

Sept. 15: Set up a $100-million, four-year mental health innovation fund for children and youth, including $15 million a year for health-care providers and community mental health associations and $10 million a year for research and information-sharing among health-care providers.

Sept. 18: Provide $2.6 billion over four years and work with provinces to establish universal prescription drug coverage. Aim to cut drug costs by 30 per cent through bulk purchases.

Oct. 5: Provide $60 million over four years to Telefilm Canada and the National Film Board. Loosen rules for grants from the Canada Council for the Arts. Allow self-employed artists to average their incomes. Establish a new $10-million digital content fund to support celebrations of Canada’s 150th anniversary in 2017.

The Liberals promise to:

Strengthen the federal government’s role in safeguarding the national health-care system; meet with the premiers on how to improve the system in areas such as wait times, affordability of prescription drugs, and availability of homecare.

Restore door-to-door home mail delivery by Canada Post.

Reinstate the long-form census and make Statistics Canada independent.

Aug. 20: Make employment insurance compassionate care benefits available to anyone caring for a seriously ill family member and make the program more flexible by allowing the six-month benefit to be claimed in blocks of time over a year-long period.

Sept. 22: Provide $380 million in additional funding for the arts and undo Conservative funding cuts to the CBC.

Sept. 30: Spend $3 billion over four years on home care and improve access to and reduce the cost of prescription medications through bulk purchasing. Establish a pan-Canadian Expert Advisory Council on Mental Health.

Oct. 5: Impose new restrictions on marketing unhealthy food and drinks to children.

The Greens promise to:

Ban unpaid internships.

Boost access to apprentice programs in key trades such as electrical, plumbing, carpentry, pipefitting, welding and others.

Develop a Youth Community and Environment Service Corps that will provide federal minimum wage employment for 40,000 youth aged 18-25 every year for four years, at cost of $1.25 billion a year; $4,000 tuition credit awarded to each participant, at the successful completion of each year-long program, that can be applied to further education and training.

Sept. 1: Restore door-to-door mail delivery across the country and have Canada Post make up its budget shortfall by getting into insurance and banking services.

Sept. 2: Introduce a national seniors strategy, which would include a guaranteed livable income, a national dementia strategy and increases to the Canada Health Transfer to account for the age of a province’s population.

Sept. 9: Set up national pharmacare program. Roll back cuts to Veterans Affairs, Canada Post and the CBC.

Oct. 4: Provide $1.5 billion over five years for the CBC, Radio-Canada, the National Film Board, Canada Council for the Arts and Telefilm Canada.

DEMOCRATIC REFORM AND GOVERNANCE:

The Conservatives promise to:

Place a moratorium on new Senate appointments in an effort to pressure the provinces to accept reforms to the upper chamber or abolish it.

Introduce legislation that would require Canadians’ approval in national referendum before first-past-the-post electoral system could be changed.



The NDP promises to:

Replace the current first-past-the-post electoral system with a mixed member proportional system, which combines proportional representation of parties in House of Commons with direct election of MP in each riding.

Abolish the Senate (which requires constitutional talks with the provinces).

Strengthen the mandate and independence of the Parliamentary Budget Officer and make the position an Officer of Parliament.

Aug. 14: Bring in legislation to make the parliamentary budget officer a fully independent officer of Parliament and require government departments and agencies to make financial information available to the PBO.

Sept. 30: Establish an Office of the Parliamentary Science Officer.



The Liberals promise to:

Introduce changes to strengthen the Access to Information system and ensure this applies to the Prime Minister’s Office and ministers’ offices.

Create a quarterly, more detailed parliamentary expense report, and open up the secretive House of Commons Board of Internal Economy.

Create a non-partisan, independent process for advising the prime minister on Senate appointments.

Allow more time for questions and answers during question period, and introduce a prime minister’s question period.

Ban partisan government ads and appoint an Advertising Commissioner to help the Auditor General provide oversight on government advertising.

Revamp the electoral process by eliminating the first-past-the-post voting system; will study measures such as ranked ballots, proportional representation, mandatory voting, and online voting.

Aug. 11: Bring in a merit-based appointment process for the Senate.



The Greens promise to:

Eliminate first-past-the-post system, and consult the public on the style of proportional representation best suited to Canada.

End whipped votes in the House of Commons.

Discourage patronage appointments by establishing an independent agency for appointments to government tribunals, boards and senior positions.

JUSTICE:

The Conservatives promise to:

NOT decriminalize or legalize possession of marijuana.

Consider Canadian police chiefs’ call for ticketing system for people possessing 30 grams of pot or less.

Re-introduce previously tabled legislation to imprison the most brutal criminals for the rest of their natural lives and quickly deport hardcore foreign criminals. Also, to enact an amended version of the government’s previous mandatory-minimum sentencing law for gun crimes, which was struck down as unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of Canada.

Aug. 11: Another $4.5 million a year, on top of the $22 million currently budgeted, for an RCMP team designed to crack down on illegal drug labs and marijuana grow-ops. Allot $500,000 a year over four years on a national toll-free hotline for parents to call to get information about drug use among youth.

Aug. 18: Resurrect the “life means life” legislation that died in the Commons when the election was called. The bill would mean that those who commit the most heinous murders or high treason would spend the rest of their lives behind bars.

Sept. 18: Bring in legislation to ensure that criminals sentenced to life are not eligible for parole. Toughen penalties for drunk drivers. Provide new money for child advocacy centres.

Sept. 27: Establish new RCMP human trafficking teams in Toronto, Vancouver, Calgary and Winnipeg at an annual cost of $8 million for five years. Renew the national plan to combat human trafficking for five years at a cost of $20 million.

Oct. 1: Create a formal list of criminal gangs, similar to what is done with designated terrorist groups. Put $2.5 million more a year into efforts to steer teens away from gang activity. Enact a law imposing two-year, mandatory minimum sentence for financial fraud over $5,000 with multiple victims, unless the offender pays full restitution.



The NDP promises to:

Immediately decriminalize marijuana, where users aren’t criminally prosecuted so nobody goes to jail for smoking a joint; party is open to considering legalization, but is calling for a commission to consult Canadians and instruct Parliament on how to carefully regulate non-medical use.

Introduce legislation demanding Supreme Court of Canada justices be bilingual.

Strengthen laws to keep drunk drivers off of streets.

Aug. 19: Spend $250 million over four years to recruit 2,500 new police officers. Commit $100 million year thereafter to a recruiting program.

Aug. 31: Invest $40 million over four years to restore cuts to shelters for women fleeing violence, creating or renovating 2,100 spaces in first-stage shelters and 350 spaces in transition houses.

The Liberals promise to:

Legalize pot and allow it to be sold – and taxed – in approved outlets. Liberal Leader Justin Trudeau says he expects people would not be allowed to buy the drug until they turn 18 or 19, depending on the province in which they live.

Consider reviewing mandatory minimum sentences.

Require judicial nominees to the Supreme Court of Canada to speak both official languages.

The Greens promise to:

Repeal all the government’s criminal laws creating mandatory minimum sentences.

Review the Young Offenders Act to ensure it is not an inducement to youth crime, but retain its core principle that youth should not be treated as hardened criminals.

Increase penalties for domestic violence and ensure protection for the victims and survivors of domestic violence.

ABORIGINAL ISSUES

The Conservatives promise to:

Review the 94 recommendations released in June by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which the Tory government established as part of the 2007 Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement.

Provide $500 million to building and renovating schools on reserves.

Commit $567 million over five years for Aboriginal people and northerners to help build “stronger communities.”

Budget promises include $215 to provide skills development and training for aboriginal peoples; $200 million to improve First Nations education and outcomes in schools; and $30.3 million to expand a plan that helps communities create their own land management laws to improve economic development on reserve lands.

The NDP promises to:

Call a national inquiry into murdered and missing aboriginal women, and act on other recommendations from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

Reduce poverty, improve educational outcomes and increase opportunities for First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities across Canada.

Create a cabinet committee, chaired by the prime minister, to ensure federal government decisions respect treaty rights and Canada’s international obligations.

Sept. 29: Spend $32 million over four years to ensure more northerners have access to nutritious food.

Sept. 30: Put $100 million toward helping 25 northern and remote communities wean themselves off diesel generation.

The Liberals promise to:

Rebuild the relationship between aboriginal and non-aboriginal Canadians.

Call a national inquiry into murdered and missing aboriginal women.

Implement all 94 recommendations from Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

Create more transparency and accountability with First Nations; pass legislation in consultation with First Nations people on implementing the reforms.

Provide stable, predictable funding for First Nations education to close the “unacceptable gap” in learning outcomes for First Nations students.

Aug. 13: Add $515 million a year to funding for First Nations education, rising through the mandate to a total of $2.6 billion. Add another $500 million over three years for education infrastructure and $50 million more a year for a program that helps aboriginals in post-secondary education.

The Greens promise to:

Adopt recommendations from the TRC report, including a national inquiry into murdered and missing aboriginal women.

Amend laws to recognize Indigenous approval of natural resource projects as equivalent in weight to federal government approval.

Aug. 25: Create a national housing strategy. Ensure a percentage of all newly built units are reserved for affordable housing. Increase access to social housing for First Nations on and off-reserve.