Healthy Indiana Plan Infographic

FORT WAYNE, Ind. (WANE) – For years, hospitals across the state have struggled to keep up with the growing number of patients’ unpaid medical bills. Both major health systems here lost a combined $450M just in 2013. But with the addition of HIP 2.0 and the Affordable Care Act, Parkview’s Chief Financial Officer says those programs should better patient care and alleviate some of those unpaid bills.

In 2013:

Lutheran Health Network had $206M in unpaid patient bills.

Parkview: more than $250M

But, leaders of both health systems say they’re focus is caring for patients.

“They work hard every day. They just don’t make enough money to afford health insurance,” Parkview CFO Mike Browning said.

Parkview CFO Mike Browning says about 1 in 12 patients that walk through Parkview’s doors doesn’t have insurance. Regardless, their care is always at the forefront.

“That’s why the money issues are not discussed on the front end. The one thing that Parkview does that is unique is those who are uninsured we work very hard to get them in some type of program. So, there are many programs out there that people just don’t know about.”

In 2013, Parkview had $250M in uncompensated care. That reflects about 14 percent of their revenue.

With the expansion of HIP 2.0, Browning believes Hoosiers will have better access to healthcare than ever before.

“Typically people without health insurance don’t know they have a chronic condition until it is too bad. With health insurance, they’ll go get their preventative screenings because they see it as an opportunity to get better access to care. So, we look at HIP 2.0 not only bringing dollars into the system, but more importantly bringing access to the system.”

And creating a healthier community and workforce.

“When they get sick they’ll seek care in the appropriate place. It will reduce the costs. Those screenings are very important and their insurance will help pay for that. They’ll more likely have better health and have longer lives.”

Lutheran Health Network released this comment:

Our commitment to care for patients regardless of their ability to pay has remained firm. With few exceptions, patients turn to us in times of genuine need with a desire to meet their own financial obligations to the best of their ability. With the evolution of the Affordable Care Act, and the recent expansion of HIP 2.0, more patients than ever are now in a position to gain access to the type of primary and preventative care that will help them avoid much costlier trips to the hospital. While some reduction in the amount of uncompensated care hospitals provide is probable, shrinking reimbursement from private and government insurance continues to be a significant trend that will need to be addressed. Despite challenges that still remain, the ability for Indiana hospitals to help patients avoid the need for catastrophic care is certainly gaining momentum. “