The oil boom has made its presence known in various ways, such as construction companies adding new housing and retail operations springing up all over the Basin.

Health care offerings sprouted in this area in 2013, especially additions and amenities at Medical Center Hospital.

MCH is in the throes of several construction projects as the year draws to close.

Two new primary care clinics will open in 2014. MCH Center for Primary Care-West University will open at University Boulevard and FM 1936, and MCH Center for Primary Care-JBS Parkway will open on JBS Parkway just north of University Boulevard and across from the University of Texas of the Permian Basin. The West University clinic will open in August and the JBS clinic is expected to open in September.

The Center for Health & Wellness, located at Faudree Road and Highway 191, is adding new features. MCHS purchased the Odessa Heart Institute in December.

In 2013, a simulation center, which is a joint effort between MCH and Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, opened in November at MCH. The simulation center affords medical students opportunities to do training.

“It was a busy year with many accomplishments,” said Bill Webster, chief executive officer of Medical Center Health System. “We continued to push our performance and quality initiatives. It’s also a challenging year in the sense that with the booming economy, it’s a great thing but it also has created challenges for all employers, including the Medical Center. With the very tight labor market, we’ve had significant turnover and, of course, that creates some operational challenges for employers, including us.”

In spite of the turnover, MCH employees performed well overall and it was a good year, Webster said.

New apartments downtown?

MCH is involved in an affordable housing project that would bring an apartment building to Odessa, and discussions have occurred among the developer, hospital district, ECISD and TTUHSC.

In July, the OA reported that the $27 million, 234-unit luxury apartment building would be built in downtown Odessa on Second Street and Golder Avenue. The four-story building would be complete with a pool, gym, meeting areas, game room and 5,300 square-feet of commercial space.

“There’s some technicalities that are still being worked out among the lawyers with that,” Webster said. “The agreement has not been finalized but the hope is to build an affordable housing project here on property that we’d make available.”

He said if the legal issues could be worked out, the hope was that groundbreaking could be held by the summer 2014 and that partial completion could be done by fall 2015.

“It would be a tremendous addition to the campus and to this part of town,” Webster said, noting it was a first-rate project from what officials have seen of the design and renderings of the developer.

Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center Louise and Clay Wood Simulation Center opens at Medical Center Hospital

The new simulation center features various components, such as mannequins, to allow students get trained on real-life situations.

“It’s a state of the art simulation center that we built out to Texas Tech’s specifications,” Webster said about the center, which had a grand opening in November but had been operating for two months. “Then Texas Tech, with generous support of the Wood family and other family and cooperate donors, have equipped that unit. It is a tremendous education and training resource here in the Permian Basin.”

Also at MCH, another Texas Tech project completed this year was the bunkhouse where Texas Tech residents and students have sleep quarters, study and exercise space and commons area.

“Both of those are very nice additions to our education component,” Webster said. “We do take pride in the fact that we are a teaching hospital and value our relationship there.”

MCH also broke ground on a major addition to the Center for Health & Wellness. It is a 43,000-square-foot, two-story expansion along Highway 191 at Odessa’s extreme northeast corner. Officials at MCH anticipate it will be completed by the spring.

“The majority of the ground floor will be leased to — on a long-term lease basis — Veterans Affairs,” Webster said. “They’re going to operate a pretty comprehensive primary care clinic there.”

The second floor will be eventually developed over time as additional clinic space, Webster said.

Accolades come MCH’s way

“I think one of our biggest accomplishments was, after many years of hard work, our trauma program was verified by the American College of Surgeons as a Level II Trauma Center,” Webster said. “So we’re the lead trauma center for the Permian Basin, serving a 17-county area. Our trauma center is operating at a very high level. I think we have an excellent emergency department and an excellent trauma team. We’d emphasize the word team, because trauma is very much a team effort involving lots of departments and lots of medical and surgical specialties.”

He said MCH has conducted numerous performance improvement initiatives and programs related to the 1115 Waiver Program, such as the healthy kids program, health teacher program, a palliative care program and video interpretation units.

“We have the establishment of a congestive heart failure program now with a congestive heart failure navigator,” he said, explaining MCH is in the developmental phase of that program.

The community health initiative has started, which includes a faith and health network.

Webster said MCH maintained accreditation for its cancer program and its laboratory and pathology department was reaccredited by the College of American Pathologists. MCH’s Ann Roden Deaderick Cardiac & Pulmonary Rehabilitation Center also was reaccredited by the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation.

Webster said MCHS has been working on the development of an electronic medical record system for the last few years and made “quite a bit of progress this past year.” Officials try to take advantage of technology that will improve patient care and safety, he said.

Lorita Kelley, an oncology nurse who is the nurse navigator for MCH’s Breast, Lung & Colorectal Cancer program, oversees the lung screening at the hospital and touted many programs the hospital has for cancer awareness and support. She said the hospital tries to promote early detection, screening and treatment to increase survival-ship. That promotion is done through vigils and other events, such as Relay for Life and Pink the Basin. The hospital had a vigil for lung cancer this year in the healing garden and it was one of 100 vigils held in the country.

Affordable Care Act

With President Obama winning reelection in 2012 and his administration having gained a Supreme Court victory on the viability of his signature legislation, the Affordable Care Act, earlier in 2012, businesses came to grips with the rollout and how it would affect their bottom lines.

The website set up to handle the signups for the health care exchanges didn’t work when it was launched this fall, and critics of the president’s healthcare reform law jumped on the disastrous rollout as a point of emphasis in their opposition to the ACA.

“It’s probably not had a tremendous amount of impact on us at this point in that legislation as passed in 2010 and so it’s the kind of thing in which pieces of it have been implemented incrementally,” Webster said about the ACA. “To date, there hasn’t been a lot that’s really impacted us. In the state of Texas we don’t expect as much change as in some other states because Texas is one of the states that declined to participate in Medicaid expansion. All these so-called additional insureds, especially in a state like Texas, were going to come through Medicaid expansion. Well, that isn’t going to happen here. The degree of change here in Texas is not going to be as big as it is in some other states where they’re implementing the whole thing.”

Like many other hospital administrators, Webster thinks the state should have participated in getting more Medicaid funds.

“Texas, if they continue to not participate, is probably leaving $9 billion on the table that basically will be spent by other states,” he said, adding that one in four Texans is uninsured and in this area that number is about 30 percent.

“Hospitals just eat that uncompensated care cost, so by not participating in that they have foregone a lot of federal assistance that would have decreased the number of uninsured and would have been a boost to Texas hospitals by getting some relief from the uncompensated care costs,” Webster said.

Webster said MCHS has a strategic plan.

“We’re doing a lot things that we think make sense,” he said. “One of those is to really expand our outpatient/primary care base. We think that with the growth of Odessa and the surrounding area that there very much is a shortage of primary care availability. We have a clinic strategy, and opening up urgent care centers and walk-in clinics and those type things, we’re trying to create a system of care where access to health care is more convenient, more affordable, more easily accessible rather than just coming through a large, sometimes congested ER.”

MCHS officials want to create access points that are primary care related and thus patients won’t have to go the emergency room route.

“And with the completion of our two clinics next year we’ll have four urgent care centers, plus two walk-in clinics,” he said. “And even with all of that, our ER volume has continued to grow and that’s just because of the increase in amount of trauma and the growth of the population.”

ORMC looking to future

At Odessa Regional Medical Center, the hospital added several services and features in 2013, such as the Electro Physiology Lab that opened in May. It is the first Electro Physiology Lab in West Texas to also offer Cryogenic Ablation. Late this year, the hospital purchased state of the art equipment, for more than $2 million, which will replace the special procedure room and the cath lab. The equipment will be installed in early 2014.

Also this year, ORMC took over the operation of Courtesy Health Screening in Music City Mall.

“This location offers free lab work and pregnancy testing to the general public free of charge,” according to an ORMC release. “The clinic also offers various education opportunities to better equip the community to make health care decisions.”

Another addition at ORMC in 2013 was the Careview System, which minimizes a patient's fall risk and offers movie and communication options for patients in certain hospital rooms, the release stated. This system allows for enhanced monitoring from the nursing station of those patients who have a greater fall risk as well as the comfort of being able to connect to see and talk with family or friends. The system allows the patient to “select and watch family friendly movies in their room similar to other on demand movie services,” the release stated.

“Overall, we maintained focus on our primary product lines of Maternal/Child services, NICU, Cardiology, and Surgical services,” said Stacey Gerig, CEO of ORMC. “We continue to be the clear market leader in deliveries and neonatal services as well as high-risk obstetrics through our Perinatal Centers due to both our excellent outcomes as well as the confidence we have earned from physicians and patients.

“We expanded and complimented our excellent cardiology services through the addition of the Electrophysiology Lab and are now able to provide cryo ablation procedures that, previously, patients were having to travel out of area to obtain. In addition, we have added new physicians that are very well trained who will assist in meeting the community needs for years to come. We have also had a significant focus on wellness, disease prevention and increasing access to care for our community. This will continue to be an ORMC priority in the coming years as well.”