Americans may be thinking this whole government-shutdown fight in Washington is beginning to stink, but to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, that stink smells like money.

“OK, enough of this crap,” reads the subject line and the first sentence of Friday’s fundraising email from DCCC Rapid Response, seeking $3 donations to “spread the truth to the American people” that “Republicans, Boehner, Ted Cruz, the Tea Party” are to blame for the government shutdown.

As WND has reported, Democrats in the House and Senate have abandoned the traditional decorum of both chambers in their personal attacks on Republicans for seeking a one-year delay in the implementation of Obamacare.

Abandoning formalities such as “the distinguished gentlemen” or “the junior senator,” Democrat lawmakers have used their floor speeches to call Republican members “legislative arsonists,” “blackmailers,” “gangsters,” “right-wing extremists,” “anarchists” and “monkey wrenchers,” and to accuse them of trying to “extract a ransom” and conducting “jihad against American citizens.”

Rep. Eric Swalwell, D-Calif., went so far as to describe repealing Obamacare as a “wet dream” for Republicans.

But the DCCC fundraising letter appears to be the first instance of their resorting to toilet language.

In full, the DCCC letter reads:

Subject: enough of this crap

Joe —

Ok, enough of this crap.

Yesterday, a blowhard Republican Congressman from Texas lashed out at a park ranger because the World War II memorial was closed.

Hey. NEWSFLASH: You caused the shutdown. You. Republicans. Boehner. Ted Cruz. The Tea Party.

This crew of right-wingers in Congress shut down the government because of Obamacare, plain and simple. Now, they have the nerve to attack innocent bystanders with political stunts. It’s shameless.

But we can’t just watch this happen. It’s up to us to call out every last Republican we can and make sure the American people know exactly who caused this mess.

RAPID RESPONSE: Chip in $3 or more right now to our Republican Accountability Fund so we can spread the truth to the American people

We’re trying to raise $500,000 to call out as many Tea Party Republicans as we can. With your help, we’re going to run ads in their home districts so voters know exactly what’s going on in Washington.

Help us call out shameful House Republicans. Donate $3 or more right now:

http://dccc.org/Obamacare-Rapid-Response

Thanks for having our back on this,

DCCC Rapid Response

In a sign Democrats are perhaps recognizing their heated rhetoric is contributing to the perception Washington stinks, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid opened the chamber Friday with an apology, admitting he and his colleagues had been too personal and nasty during the floor debates and had violated Senate rules that prohibit the impugning of each other’s motives or conduct.

“I’ll work harder and I hope my senators will work to their best to maintain these habits of civility and decorum,” Reid said. “These rules are a little unusual but they’ve been in place here a couple centuries.”