Tyler Sumpter is one of four girls basketball players who was chosen to participate in the nationwide 2014 American Family Insurance High School Slam Dunk Championship, which airs April 6 on CBS.

Sumpter is senior at Reed High School in Sparks, Nevada, and lives on the Pyramid Lake Reservation in Wadsworth. She wakes up at 4:45 a.m. everyday and commutes about an hour to attend school near Reno.

“You get used to it,” Sumpter told The Sparks Tribune. After all, it had been her routine since seventh grade.

When she moved on to high school, she had four schools to choose from but finally settled on Reed; partly because a familiar face would be there. Her friend Gabby Williams, also a Raiders standout choose to play there and they had been playing together since the fifth grade. Williams committed to play at UConn last fall.

On December 20, Sumpter set a Nevada High School Athletic Association record in 3-point shooting. She pegged 14-of-20, 3-point shots in a 85-45 victory against Hug High School. Sumpter finished the game with 50 points making 35 of the Raider’s 39 points in the second half.

“It’s still crazy to me that I did it,” Sumpter said during a follow up interview with The Tribune. Last season, she averaged a team-high of 24.4 points per game.

Sumpter said, however, that recognition from her young fans is more rewarding than what she does on the court.

“Native Americans, they’re really proud of me because a lot of kids come here from the reservation and they don’t make it in big schools and they don’t get to play basketball. They usually end up back at Pyramid Lake or at a smaller school,” Sumpter said. “So I think it was kind of cool that I got to make it.”

The American family Insurance High School Slam Dunk and 3-point Championship showcases 16 of the nation's top high school basketball players to compete during Final Four weekend. You can cast your vote for the best shooter at HighSchoolSlam.com. Voting ends on March 24.

Check out some of Sumpter’s highlights below.