Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

»

It's that time of year again, when the attention of children everywhere turns to the very important task of narrowing down all of the toys, games, books and other potential gifts that are out there into one manageable list, before sending said list to old Saint Nick.

It's no easy job. How does one condense the hours upon hours of commercials, plus movies and TV shows with merchandise tie-ins, into a list of just a few items? Luckily, lots of children manage, including a whole lot of kids in Longmont.

Of course, a good Christmas letter to Santa doesn't just feature a list of wanted toys. Oh no, the aim here is to get onto the "nice list," and so a nudge in Santa's side by way of a few good deeds done throughout the year goes a long way.

Our local little'uns didn't let us down in that regard, judging by the letters sent toe Santa via Hover Community Senior Independent and Assisted Living.

Rose Keel, 9, wrote that this year the she "did a lemonade stand and gave the money to people who lost their home in the tornado." That sort of altruism and entrepreneurial spirit is sure to impress the big man.

Sidney Walker, 4, was similarly charitable when she "let the ladybugs go free," while Kaila, 8, covered all bases with, "Give nice compliments, share all my stuff, help people in need."

Best of the bunch is Marcello, 7, who said that he's been very good this year because, "I did not pick my nose, I did not hit people, (and) I did not throw the dog." Top marks to Marcello for resisting the urge to heave the pooch especially because, and we're not making this up, he's asking for a puppy for Christmas.

Advertisement

As for the gifts, not everyone is as demanding as Sophie, 17, who asked for a pony and $1 million. Even Ruth, 8, only requested $10,000. As trends go, it would appear that ninjas are very much in, with plenty of requests for Lego Ninjago sets, and "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" merch. Naturally, "Star Wars" gets plenty of mentions, with Lego sets and the Boulder-designed Sphero BB-8 droid favorites. The cartoon "Paw Patrol" also pops up on a lot of lists

We like the way Ella Rose, 9, thinks though, saying that this Christmas she would like "to see you, to see an elf, (and) to see an elf make toys." Dialing up the "awww" factor is Erin Davis, 7, who wants to make her family happy. Of course, she also wants "a lot of presents." Perhaps the most surreal request is from 9-year-old Brigid Deswarte, who wants a leather jacket and a tan.

Much of the gold lies at the bottom of the letters, as many kids chose to sign off in style. "Even though we have not met and people say you are not real, I will always believe in you," said Rose Keel, before adding, "PS - Could I have one of your elf hats to prove that you are real?"

Chloe Hardwicke tried to play on Santa's emotions when she wrote, "Dear Santa, I know that sometimes I have fights with my dad but I know how you feel." Similarly, Max couldn't appear more supportive with, "Dear Santa, How are you doing? I hope you aren't under too much pressure."

We're going to finish with Olivia Dunn, who did her best to forge a friendship with the main man by ending her letter with, "By the way, what is your number?"

You have to admire that confidence.

Brett Callwood: 303-684-5274, callwoodb@timescall.com or twitter.com/city_slang