Home prices across the country rose year over year in 2014, though December growth was fairly flat. Marcio Jose Sanchez/AP

Though existing home sales in January cooled to their lowest level since April, a tightening inventory may have helped spur rising home prices in 2014. And that's not making life any easier for younger, would-be homebuyers.

The national Standard & Poor's/Case-Shiller Home Price Index was relatively flat in December, declining 0.1 percent month over month, while the 10- and 20-City Composites, which record home prices in select cities rather than prices on a national average, each ticked up 0.1 percent.

Still, national home prices climbed 4.6 percent year over year in December, bolstered by gains of 9.3 percent in San Francisco and 8.4 percent in Miami. Home prices in Chicago only rose 1.3 percent year over year, while Cleveland and Washington prices gained 1.5 percent.

[READ: Weather Puts Chills on Housing]

“The western half of the nation plus Miami and Atlanta enjoyed year-over-year increases of 5 percent or more. San Francisco and Miami were the strongest,” David Blitzer, managing director and chairman of the S&P Dow Jones Indices’ Index Committee, said in a news release. “The Midwest and Northeast lagged.”

Metropolitan Area Month-Over-Month Index Change

(%) Year-Over-Year Index Change

(%) Atlanta 0.2 5.1 Boston -0.2 3.8 Chicago -0.9 1.3 Cleveland -0.5 1.5 Dallas 0.0 7.5 Denver 0.5 8.1 Detroit 0.0 2.8 Las Vegas -0.3 6.9 Los Angeles 0.3 5.5 Miami 0.7 8.4 New York 0.0 1.9 San Francisco 0.4 9.3 Washington 0.0 1.5

Source: S&P Dow Jones Indices



Regional housing indicators in the South and, until this week, the West had been generally positive in recent months, while a harsh winter continues to chill home sales in much of the Northeast and Midwest.

Existing home sales in the West showed weakness Monday, dropping 7.1 percent – more than any other region in the country – in the month of January, according to National Association of Realtors’ data released Monday. National home sales dropped 4.9 percent month over month, surprising analysts who had initially expected the figures to decline less than 2 percent.

“This is kind of a big number. But I think you always have to be mindful that there’s a lot of noise in these numbers in the sense that last month, big swathes of the country – notably not the West, but in the East and the Midwest – we had unseasonably terrible weather,” says Marty Leclerc, chief investment officer at Barrack Yard Advisors. “I wouldn’t read too much into any given month, but those numbers certainly are not positive.”

[STUDY: Medical Bills Americans' Biggest Retirement Concern]

Sales in the Northeast dropped 6 percent month over month, while declining 4.6 percent in the South and 2.7 percent in the Midwest. Home sales were, however, up year over year in all four regions in January.

The Census Bureau’s monthly residential construction report released earlier this month showed new housing starts slide 2 percent in January from December, while building permits dipped 0.7 percent. Slowing housing starts and sales can indicate shrinking real estate inventory, and as supply decreases, housing prices can rise.

“The housing market is a little tight – that is, the inventory is relatively low. To the extent that that reflects demand – that is, that houses are being bought – it’s a good sign,” Robert Shapiro, former undersecretary of commerce for economic affairs and current chairman of advisory firm Sonecon, told U.S. News last week. “But at the same time, it puts pressure on housing prices, which can discourage some people.”

[MORE: 1 in 3 Americans Flirting With Financial Disaster]

Lindsey Piegza, chief economist at Sterne Agee, wrote in a research note Thursday that housing prices continue to rebound, though the problem is now whether real estate gains are pricing some consumers out of the limited market.

“Home prices have slowed their rapid rate of ascent but continue to outpace average income growth,” Piegza wrote. “Meaning, despite a slower rate of appreciation, the average American, particularly those in the youngest generations strapped with a significant amount of student debt, continue to struggle to afford a home purchase.”