Saturday will a big day for Broncos’ quarterback Peyton Manning.

Coach Gary Kubiak announced that Manning will undergo a big workout Saturday that he will be apart of to see how he is progressing and what his status will be moving forward.

The veteran QB didn’t practice for the second straight day, while battling the partially torn plantar fascia in his left foot.

Kubiak said that although Manning hasn’t practiced this week he continues to workout inside in the mornings.

Manning hit the practice field twice last week gearing up for a return to action, but suffered what Kubiak termed as a “hiccup” on Friday and they decided to decrease activity.

Kubiak said Wednesday that the plan was for Manning to focus on rehab and Brock Osweiler would be the starter moving forward.

Safety help on the way

The return of T.J. Ward is drawing near.

Denver’s hard-hitting safety practiced for the second straight day Thursday and appears on track to play Monday night for the first time since suffering a high-ankle sprain Nov. 29 against New England.

His return would provide a big lift for a Broncos’ secondary that just gave up season highs in points and passing yards to the Steelers.

Despite missing three games, Ward is still third on the team with 57 tackles.

“He’s made progress. I think he’s had two good days. He did a lot more today than yesterday,” Kubiak said of Ward.

The depth at safety has been tested recently with injuries to Ward, Darian Stewart, Omar Bolden and David Bruton. Bruton was placed on injured reserve Tuesday.

“Well, that’s half of our secondary,” defensive coordinator Wade Phillips said about how the safety injuries affect the defense.

Stewart and Bolden both missed practice for the second straight day. They are each battling hamstring injuries, which are notoriously tricky and can often linger.

Kubiak said he expects Stewart to be a full participant in practice Saturday.

“He’s feeling pretty good. We’re just being smart here,” Kubiak said. “We have an extra day so we’re going to try to use it.”

He wasn’t as optimistic with Bolden. Kubiak said he’s been unable to get a grip on when Bolden will be able to return.

Stewart missed Sunday’s game against Pittsburgh, while Bolden has missed the Broncos’ last two contests.

Guard Evan Mathis is back taking his full load at practice after being limited by an ankle injury over the last few weeks. Kubiak expects Max Garcia, Louis Vasquez and Mathis to play a lot of snaps going forward.

Linebacker Todd Davis missed his second straight practice with an ankle injury.

Cameron Wolfe: cwolfe@denverpost.com or @CameronWolfe