Last month, Gov. Jerry Brown signed into law a bill that includes about $300 million in funding to provide health care services for the developmentally disabled. The state must now decide where exactly to spend this money — and officials should ensure that some of it goes to providing much-needed dental care for developmentally disabled children.

The bill in question, a collection of tax incentives, was originally put together to “avoid the impending loss of $1 billion in federal funding” for a rapidly growing Medi-Cal caseload, according to Assembly Speaker Toni Atkins, D-San Diego. While this action did, indeed, help all Californians by allocating $1.3 billion dollars for health care, the state must now decide where to allocate this money. One crucial yet often overlooked area is the large number of disadvantaged children who still need to obtain access to dental services.

This problem was never supposed to exist in the first place. The creation of Covered California under the Affordable Care Act has provided many of the most financially burdened Californians the opportunity to sign up for dental insurance. The majority sign up for Denti-Cal, which is Medi-Cal for dental treatment. Yet for a variety of reasons, this new coverage option doesn’t always lead to patients receiving the care they need. This is especially true for kids with development disabilities such as autism or cerebral palsy, for example. Why?

The answer is simple: There aren’t enough dentists participating in this program. In order to actually receive health care, there must be a professional willing to provide that health care to these patients. But fewer and fewer dentists are willing to participate in state-run programs such as Denti-Cal. Finding a participating dentist is increasingly problematic.

There are a number of factors contributing to this problem, but perhaps the main reason why so many dentists do not accept these patients is that the Denti-Cal program offers only reimbursement rates that hover around 30 percent of the national average. This despite the far greater overhead, regulatory and tax costs for California’s dentists when compared to most other states. It should not be surprising that dentists, who are primarily small-business owners, have a difficult time trying to develop business models that will allow them to provide care for the least fortunate and still keep the doors open.

In fact, The California Healthcare Foundation’s Center for Health Reporting confirm that only about 25 percent of all dentists accept Denti-Cal patients, and only a small percentage of this 25 percent are pediatric dentists. The same study concludes that 97 percent of dentists cite the main reason for declining to participate as the extremely low reimbursement rates.

Enter the child with a developmental disability. Treating these patients safely and professionally requires far more time, patience, and training than normal. If it’s tough to find dentists to treat the fully cooperative and healthy Denti-Cal child, one can imagine how difficult it is to locate a dentist to treat the special-needs youngster.

Advertisement

The California Dental Association and special needs support organizations such as Autism Speaks have approached legislators on how best to improve the situation. Yet despite years of efforts, the neediest children remain seemingly at the bottom of the heap in terms of receiving dental care.

This is why the new bill is so important. While the main reason may not have been dental care for special needs children, the Legislature and the governor’s actions may mean that children with developmental disabilities may just find themselves with more access to dental care.

The best way to make that happen is for the California Department of State Healthcare Services to distribute a substantial amount of the newly authorized funds to already proven and trusted entities such as California’s system of regional centers. These nonprofit private entities contract with the Department of Developmental Services to provide or coordinate services and support for individuals with developmental disabilities. They have offices throughout California that help families and individuals find and access the many health care services that are available to them, including dental care.

It remains to be seen whether the state will take this path. The governor’s signature means that $300 million will soon be available for the developmentally disabled, and now lawmakers must ensure that dental services should be an important part of this effort. Every child deserves a beautiful smile.

Dr. Joel Strom is a former president of the California State Dental Board. Dr. Kim Klein completed a general practice residency at UCLA with a focus on special needs patients. They practice general dentistry in Los Angeles.