Kaiser Permanente's new 149-bed, seven-story Redwood City hospital is set to open Dec. 16. The nonprofit health organization began construction on the 280,000-square-foot building on Veterans Boulevard and Walnut Street in 2011.

The hospital will replace the current Kaiser Permanente hospital next door, built at about 200,000 square feet in the 1960s.

"Tearing down the current hospital is part of our master plan," said Frank Beirne, senior vice president of Kaiser Permanent and area manager overseeing the Redwood City hospital.

Kaiser Permanente relied heavily on patient feedback to design the new hospital, said Karl Sonkin, a spokesperson for Kaiser Permanente Northern California.

"We have a high-technology test center in San Leandro," said Mr. Sonkin. "It actually stages new ideas and protocols in a setting very similar to a real hospital."

Designed to meet seismic safety standards, the new hospital is equipped with a new labor and delivery unit, six operating rooms, an advanced neuroscience center, and an expanded emergency department.

Most rooms in the new hospital are private with visitor-friendly features such as pullout guest beds, according to Mr. Beirne.

"One of the most significant features is the private rooms," said Mr. Beirne. "It's part of the healing process to have a good support system, and pullout guest beds allow families to be supportive and comfortable."

In addition to having privacy and space, patients will have more control over their care, a high priority for Kaiser Permanente, said Mr. Beirne.

Through an interactive system called "Get Well Network," patients will be able to see their schedules, order room-service style meals, and watch movies and health videos on a flat-screen television. Using a keypad linked to the television, patients will be able to control drapes and lights, and summon help if needed.

"The system allows patients to be the decision-makers and participants in their own care," said Mr. Beirne. "We want to make the hospital patient and family centered. They should be able to see what their day looks like and who their physicians are."

The objective of the new building is not to accommodate more patients -- in fact, the number of beds has been reduced to 149 from 213 -- but rather to help patients become aware and informed of their care, he said.

"The capacity of the facility has been reduced, but the facility is larger," said Mr. Beirne. "And with advances in technology and health care, we've gotten to a position to deliver care in a different, more effective way."

Care that may have required a stay of one week might be reduced to a day, he said. "Advancements in medicine have resulted in fewer patients requiring in-hospital care."

In-hospital patients at the current hospital will be moved to the new building in December, Mr. Beirne said.