Kim Kardashian is a foremost expert in selfies and reality TV. But she might also set a good example for healthcare-payer companies, panelists said at the MidAmerica Healthcare Venture Forum on Tuesday at the Fairmont Chicago.

Asked how such companies might strengthen consumer engagement at a time when people are likely more interested in Kardashian than insurance, Cigna’s Michael Sturmer said there’s opportunity to improve communication beyond 300-page enrollment booklets that don’t tell consumers what they really need to know.

“We have to become storytellers,” Sturmer said. “Don’t run from the Kim Kardashian analogy — I think we actually embrace that. There’s no reason why we can’t be more media savvy in healthcare. Make it fun. Make it engaging.

“Everything doesn’t have to be a game, but everything can be interesting.”

Sturmer, Independence Blue Cross’ Tom Olenzak and Sandbox Industries’ Anna Haghgooie discussed changes in the industry as a result of the Affordable Care Act, among other topics, including insurance companies’ investment trends. Kathleen Tune, a partner at healthcare venture firm Thomas, McNerney & Partners, moderated.

“We’re really being asked to do things we’ve never done before,” said Olenzak, managing director for Independence Blue Cross’ innovation portfolio and the director for corporate development.

“We traditionally used to sell to big companies, and the members kind of came along as part of the package. Now, we’re selling on the exchanges to individual members. We’re having to build brand recognition; we’re having to worry about consumer experience.”

MidAmerica Healthcare Venture Forum Panelists at the the MidAmerica Healthcare Venture Forum discuss changes in the industry as a result of the Affordable Care Act among other topics. Panelists at the the MidAmerica Healthcare Venture Forum discuss changes in the industry as a result of the Affordable Care Act among other topics. See more videos

And, like in any other consumer industry, he said payers have to talk with — not at — customers.

“Our industry is really good at lecturing and telling people what they should do,” he said. “Consumer experience in any other industry is about what the consumer wants.”

A major part of improving that experience will mean helping consumers understand how to navigate the murky healthcare system, said Sturmer, Cigna’s senior director for consumer health engagement.

“How we help them use those benefits to an optimal level?” Sturmer said. “It’s no longer a hundred-dollar decision, a $20 co-pay decision. It’s thousand-dollar decisions, thousands of dollar decisions.”

Olenzak said Independence Blue Cross has begun using a mobile enrollment center, The Independence Express, to hit up parades, schools and block parties in southeastern Pennsylvania. The vehicle is designed to teach consumers about the changes introduced by the Affordable Care Act.

Haghgooie, managing director at Sandbox, which has a partnership with BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners, said health insurers and health systems need to invest in being more helpful for consumers as they’re making daily healthcare-related financial decisions.

“Think about banking online: If your bank didn’t have a great mobile app that let you pay your checks digitally, you might think about switching banks, or you certainly wouldn’t look at them to finance your house,” she said.