News 12 at 6 o'clock /Wednesday, Dec. 3, 2014

AUGUSTA, Ga. (WRDW) -- Tori Holcomb said she is drowning in a mountain of medical bills.

"For her to be two, she has to have glasses. She has to get her tonsils taken out because she's already had strep throat at least three times," Holcomb said.

Out-of-pocket expenses that Holcomb cannot afford when her babies, 1-year-old Kaiden and 2-year-old Riley get sick.

For three months she has tried to get them Medicaid through Georgia's Department of Family and Children's Services, with no luck.

"I called and waited for like three hours and then got hung up on," Holcomb said.

Not just once, but dozens of times. On Tuesday, Holcomb said she was tired of waiting and went to the Augusta DFACS office.

"She said I don't know what, but I can't help you right now," Holcomb said.

A similar story for Lakeisha Allen.

"They take too long to process everything. I've been waiting on food stamps for about three months," Allen said.

She needs help with food stamps to feed her 4-year-old daughter Alex.

But while Allen is footing the bill right now for food, Holcomb may be stuck footing a different kind of bill come tax time. Because she cannot get her children Medicaid, she does not meet health insurance requirements under the Affordable Care Act.

"If we don't have insurance for them, we get fined for it," Holcomb said.

DFACS said it is installing a new phone system this month which they say should solve the problem.

For 2 days, we tried to reach DFACS deputy communications director.

We called her office number but got this message: "The mailbox is currently full. Please call back later, thank you for calling."

We tried her cell phone and got another recorded message that said: "This voice mail is full and cannot except new messages at this time."

We even tried by email. All with no response. Next we emailed a second time and copied the governor's office. Fifteen minutes later we received a response from DFACS.

"Our current (phone) system could not manage our volume of calls. The new system will allow customers to schedule a return call in times of high call volume, and our current platform disconnects callers when there are more than 900 persons holding at one time due to volume limitations."

But Holcomb does not believe the phone system is the only problem.

"The people that work there," Holcomb said.

We wanted to know how much DFACS invested in the current phone system which does not work. The agency said nearly $7.5 million. The contract for the new phone system was $2.5 million. In our original email, we asked if the cost was footed by tax payer dollars, but the communications director has not responded to that.