Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick (D-Ariz.) doesn't have a head in the latest attack ad against her -- just a pair of legs, some high heels, and a lot of "baggage."

The National Republican Congressional Committee released an ad on Monday that features a thin model -- apparently intended to represent Kirkpatrick -- strutting back and forth across the screen in heels with a suitcase on wheels. Her head and shoulders are cut off in the shot throughout the 30-second ad, and the female voice in the background says Kirkpatrick "carries a lot of baggage."

"She's not independent -- she just votes the party line," the voice in ad says. "Ann Kirkpatrick: too much baggage."

The ad's main charges seem to be that Kirkpatrick is a woman and that she supports President Barack Obama. It includes soundbites of Kirkpatrick noting that she likes the Affordable Care Act and is "not going to second guess the President."

The charges are a bit odd, given that a 2013 National Journal analysis named Kirkpatrick as one of the top 10 Democrats in Congress most likely to buck her party.

Emily's List, a progressive political action committee dedicated to electing pro-choice Democratic women, is supporting Kirkpatrick against her challenger, Arizona House Majority Whip Andy Tobin. A spokeswoman for Emily's List said she is not surprised the NRCC made a gendered attack on Kirkpatrick.

“Given that Andy Tobin is one of the very worst of the bunch when it comes to women’s issues, it’s troubling Republicans used a disembodied woman’s legs to attack his opponent," Jess McIntosh told HuffPost. "Maybe addressing women’s issues head on -- which would include a face -- is just too tough for these guys.”

Also on HuffPost: GOP Women In Congress GOP Women In Congress

1 of 23 Sen. Kelly Ayotte (R-N.H.) FILE - In this Jan. 31, 2013, file photo Senate Armed Services Committee member Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., questions President Barack Obama's nominee for Secretary of Defense, Sen. Chuck Hagel, R-Neb., during his Capitol Hill confirmation hearing. (AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite, File) Source: National Federation Of Republican Women Share this slide:

AP

More: Ann Kirkpatrick