One of the most unfortunate and long-lasting consequences of Hurricane Katrina’s aftermath in 2005 was the effect on affordable housing in New Orleans.

Many of the city’s poorest residents had no homes to come back to after the storm and accompanying flood because the rental or owner-occupied properties they lived in were wiped out and not rebuilt. The loss of these residents, many of whom left permanently to live in other states, changed the character of the city.

We hope low-income residents affected by the historic flooding in Colorado this month don’t face the same hardships. As The Associated Press reported last week, there is concern over whether towns in the foothills like Lyons and Jamestown will be affordable for some poor residents whose homes were destroyed or damaged in the floods.

In Lyons, as in a number of other towns, there exists a distinct divide in lifestyles between poorer residents who lived in trailer parks in low-lying areas and more affluent residents who live on hillsides.

The AP reported that the number of renters in Lyons fell by half between 2000 and 2010, while the number paying more than $1,500 a month quadrupled. Meanwhile, census data showed the median price of a home in the town rose by 71 percent to $340,000.

The town’s trailer parks were hit by heavy flooding, and there is talk about whether rebuilding should be allowed in flood-prone areas. That’s understandable, but flood-prone areas are where some of the cheapest land is, so there may be little incentive to rebuild affordable housing elsewhere.

Affordable housing is already so scarce in some communities, lotteries are held to select buyers.

Officials with the state Division of Housing say they are still formulating a plan to assist those displaced by the flooding, but they have identified nearly 1,300 low-income households that have applied for disaster assistance. On an immediate level, that will mean help in getting temporary accommodations.

But long-term, division officials say, they hope to work with local communities on rebuilding or relocating low-income housing.

We hope state and local officials make every effort to ensure the working-class families, retirees and the bohemians who flavor Colorado towns have a good shot at staying in the places they call home.