The subject was about love. The participants were in a movie, the “Matrix Revolutions.” Love being a human emotion was the subcontext.

“No, it is a word,” the character, Rama-Kandra, said to the leading character, Neo. “What matters is the connection the word implies.”

It might be a stretch to say Nuggets players love their new coach, Michael Malone, but through the first week of training camp it’s fair to say they like what they have seen.

“I love Coach’s energy,” forward Darrell Arthur said. “I love his knowledge about the game and how he approaches it.”

Malone’s approach is personal.

His first Denver playbook after he was hired in June was not full of X’s and O’s. It was a manual on building relationships. So his first course of action upon taking over was meeting with as many players as he could get to, rather than doing it in phone conversations. He met with players in Denver. And in September he traveled to Italy to meet with Danilo Gallinari, who was playing with the Italian national team. Denver’s players wanted to know about the new system, their role in it, and how their new boss was going to run things.

Malone wanted to know about them, their lives, their likes and dislikes, their families and what in general makes them tick.

“There’s a saying that we use in the coaching profession: The players don’t care how much you know until they know how much you care,” Malone said. “Maybe it’s a little bit corny, but it’s true.”

Malone opened training camp in Colorado Springs last week to rave reviews from Nuggets players — and he hadn’t conducted his first drill. Veteran forward Kenneth Faried has been most outspoken about how impressed he’s been. And, as previous Nuggets coaches can attest, Faried is not an easy player to quickly get on your side.

Gallinari glowed about Malone taking the time to come see him in Italy.

“I really appreciated the fact that he came to Italy to spend three or four days with me,” Gallinari said. “We had a great time. He was able to see how I was practicing and working with the national team, and we were able to spend a lot of time together. And I think he put on some weight in those three or four days. We were going to lunch or dinner almost every day.”

Malone took over a team that became dysfunctional last season under coach Brian Shaw, who was fired in March. Melvin Hunt, as the interim head coach replacing Shaw, helped calm a tumultuous locker room with his positive outlook. Utah general manager Dennis Lindsey, a good friend of Hunt’s, spoke generally about what he says players look for in a coach.

“What are the most common things an NBA player wants?” Lindsey said. “It sounds pretty simple, but they want a head coach that will tell them the truth as soon as they know it. It may not necessarily be what they want to hear, but it’s what they need to hear. And in a timely fashion. … I think the average NBA player wants to know that a coach will not put them in harm’s way.”

Malone, fired last year as Sacramento’s head coach, said players will play hard if they know the head coach has their best interests in mind.

“If you care about them as players, they are going to run through a wall for you,” Malone said. “If they think you just care about them as an asset or a chip, they’re not willing maybe to go above and beyond. I’ve been lucky in my career as an assistant and as a head coach, to always have good relationships with players because I’m honest, I’m up front, and I do make it a point to get to know them as people first. That’s helped me out throughout my career.”

At no point was that better illustrated than when news got out that the Nuggets were hiring Malone. Sacramento center DeMarcus Cousins, who historically has been a difficult player for coaches to handle, tweeted, “Can’t hold a good man down for long.”

While it’s early in the relationship between coach and players, many Nuggets already agree.

“His whole thing is defense and chemistry,” Arthur said. “His approach to the game is amazing, it’s kind of like (Brooklyn coach) Lionel Hollins — an old-school guy. He knows what he wants, knows what he’s going to get and from what I heard he’s going to keep people in line.

“Everyone likes each other. Everyone wants to be around each other. And that’s a big key.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost