Center to promote interdisciplinary research, Native American student recruitment and retention

University of Colorado senior Rachel Ramberg, of the Ho-Chunk tribe, at center, stands with other graduates with their new blankets during a graduation ceremony for Native American students at the Koenig Alumni Center on the University of Colorado campus in Boulder on May 6. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

For more information about the Center for Native American and Indigenous Studies colorado.edu/nativestudies/

The University of Colorado is launching a new center focused on Native American and indigenous studies and research.

The Center for Native American and Indigenous Studies, approved this spring, is a campus-wide network of scholars who study Native American and indigenous culture, language and history.

The center is also expected to support Native American and indigenous students who attend CU, as well as promote collaborations between CU and native communities and organizations.

"We're part of an effort to indigenize the academy and bring native knowledge into the academy," said the center's newly appointed director Penny Kelsey, an associate professor of English. "We've got 40-some faculty who have active research agendas across disciplines and the center really is a home for that and hopefully a facilitator of bringing everybody together."

With the center, CU joins the University of New Mexico, University of Montana, University of Texas and other institutions with Native American studies programs.

Interest in these research areas has grown nationally in recent years, in part because of two new research journals for scholarship in indigenous studies. The Native American and Indigenous Studies Association has seen its annual meeting attendance grow from 350 people in 2007 to nearly 900 in 2013.

Advertisement

More Native American students are going to college, too. CU has seen its American Indian population grown from 186 total students in the spring of 2000 to 387 in the spring of 2015, according to campus data.

CU recently implemented a graduate certificate in Native American and indigenous studies and will begin offering an undergraduate certificate this fall.

For now the center is located in the Institute of Behavioral Science building, 1440 15th St., on the Boulder campus. Its first-year budget is listed as $196,804, which is expected to drop to $151,904 in the center's second year, according to budget documents.

The center is overseen by CU's Graduate School to promote interdisciplinary collaboration and to invite all faculty members and students to get involved.

"It's important that our center's housed in the Graduate School because most centers are housed in a department or an institute and they have a narrow focus," said Andrew Cowell, a faculty member in linguistics, French and Italian who studies indigenous languages. "The problem when you have a department of native and indigenous studies is people think 'Oh, well, that's the only place we do it,' and then that department is responsible for everything and the rest of us don't worry about it."

It's also likely to help recruit more Native American students to campus, Kelsey said. To that end, CU has also reinstated its native graduation ceremony, native welcome gathering and hosts other relevant events.

"When we're recruiting students, they know that there's a space for native students on campus and that native knowledge and their presence here as students is not just tolerated but really valued," she said.

The center is also focused on retaining those students, which aligns with Chancellor Phil DiStefano's goal of increasing the campus six-year graduation rate to 80 percent by 2020.

Native American students tend to have lower graduation rates than the general student population at CU. To compare, 46 percent of Native American students who entered CU in 2008 graduated in six years, while 70 percent of all students graduated in six years.

"Unfortunately native and indigenous students have a higher dropout rate on average," Cowell said. "Anything we can do to get more of them here but also keep them here I think will be hugely beneficial for the whole campus. We're certainly advocating for their interests in terms of the classes they need, the curricular support they need and the tutoring they might need."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta