CHICAGO, April 12, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Tableau, a global leader in rapid-fire business analytics software, will host a healthcare analytics executive summit at the upcoming 2015 HIMSS National Conference. The summit will take place April 13 at 6:30 p.m. at the Renaissance Blackstone Chicago Hotel and will feature a panel discussion on healthcare analytics challenges and opportunities. Panelists include experts from the Cleveland Clinic, the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, and Baptist Health South Florida.

"Healthcare reform and the affordable care act are placing even greater demand on healthcare organizations to better see and understand their data," said Andy De industry strategy and marketing leader for healthcare and life sciences at Tableau. "Tableau helps them get fast and actionable insights that help physicians, nurses, clinicians, and case managers deliver superior patient care."

More than 26,000 companies and organizations around the world use Tableau, including many of the most respected healthcare institutions in the world. Of the 17 "Best Hospitals" ranked by US News, 14 are using Tableau for healthcare analytics, including Johns Hopkins Hospital, the Cleveland Clinic, and the University of Washington Medical Center.

Thousands of other healthcare providers, research institutions, and hospitals are using Tableau for visual analytics, including:

The Inova Translational Medicine Institute (ITMI) is leading the way in precision medicine by mapping clinical and genomic data from newborn children with healthcare informatics to proactively identify biomarkers for personalized treatment. Visualizing this data in Tableau helps ITMI deliver unprecedented health insights, assuring healthier patient outcomes.

The Frederick Memorial Hospital in Maryland has begun using Tableau to visualize data on hospital resources, patient outcomes, and costs. Their early use of Tableau has led to the development of new cohort strategies for patients. The hospital plans to rollout Tableau to physicians, nurses, and clinicians to help caregivers make data-driven decisions and improve health.

has begun using Tableau to visualize data on hospital resources, patient outcomes, and costs. Their early use of Tableau has led to the development of new cohort strategies for patients. The hospital plans to rollout Tableau to physicians, nurses, and clinicians to help caregivers make data-driven decisions and improve health. STANLEY Healthcare has integrated its MobileView software with Tableau, allowing hospital staff to drill down deeper than ever before into large datasets. For instance, using data from STANLEY Healthcare's Wi-Fi location systems along with Tableau visualizations, staff can track the real-time location and status of patients and critical medical assets throughout the hospital. This helps healthcare providers deliver an optimal patient experience while assuring superior asset utilization.

Tableau recently formed a partnership with Cerner Corp. to integrate its data visualization capabilities with Cerner's enterprise warehouse and analytics offerings. The partnership will help organizations find ways to improve health and care through greater data discovery and exploration capabilities.

In January 2015, KLAS Research placed Tableau among the top business intelligence vendors for healthcare. Respondents in the KLAS survey called Tableau one of the simplest visual analytics products to use and praised the visualization capabilities, speed, quick installation times, and strong value of Tableau Server.

Gartner also positioned Tableau as a "Leader" in its 2015 Business Intelligence and Analytics Platforms Magic Quadrant(1), marking the third year in a row that Tableau has appeared in the Leaders quadrant. The full report is available at no charge from the Tableau website at www.tableau.com/gartner-magic-quadrant-2015.

Visit Tableau in the HIMSS Exhibition Hall at booth #7036, or online at www.tableau.com/learn/events/himss-2015.

About Tableau Software

Tableau Software (NYSE: DATA) helps people see and understand data. Tableau helps anyone quickly analyze, visualize and share information. More than 26,000 customer accounts get rapid results with Tableau in the office and on-the-go. And tens of thousands of people use Tableau Public to share data in their blogs and websites. See how Tableau can help you by downloading the free trial at www.tableau.com/trial.

Tableau and Tableau Software are trademarks of Tableau Software, Inc. All other company and product names may be trademarks of the respective companies with which they are associated.

(1)Gartner, Magic Quadrant for Business Intelligence and Analytics Platforms, Rita L. Sallam, Bill Hostmann, Kurt Schlegel, Joao Tapadinhas, Josh Parenteau, Thomas W. Oestreich, 23 February 2015

Gartner does not endorse any vendor, product or service depicted in its research publications, and does not advise technology users to select only those vendors with the highest ratings or other designation. Gartner research publications consist of the opinions of Gartner's research organization and should not be construed as statements of fact. Gartner disclaims all warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to this research, including any warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130718/SF48964LOGO

SOURCE Tableau Software