Tyler Allen

Boulder police and the family of Berry "Tyler" Allen, the University of Colorado student missing since April 11, announced today that the 20-year-old is safe, but raised more questions with the news that he was on the CU campus the entire time he was missing.

Boulder Sgt. Tom Dowd said Allen told police he remained on campus and was not a victim of criminal activity. Dowd said he couldn't elaborate, but added that police "are still verifying information that we received."

He returned to his off-campus Boulder home, Dowd said.

"What's most important is he returned home and is safe," Dowd said.

In a statement from Allen's family posted on Facebook, they thanked "everyone in Boulder, the fantastic detective's office, the university community, the students, the media in Colorado and Chicago and friends and strangers far and wide who have joined together with us in this effort to find our son."

"We couldn't have faced this crisis without you and we are without words to express to you the depths of our gratitude," they wrote.

His parents also wrote that Allen's roommates told them early this morning that Tyler had returned to his Boulder apartment on his own after seeing one of the missing posters -- and said he had been unaware of the search efforts.

Advertisement

"He is currently in the hospital in Boulder and recuperating well," according to the family statement.

Sunday morning, a family representative wrote on the Find Tyler page on Facebook, which has been used to coordinate search efforts, "TYLER HAS BEEN FOUND!!!!! He is alive."

A second update reported that "he is undergoing a medical exam in Boulder."

According to a report by ABC 7 in Chicago, Allen's uncle, Scott Wennerstrum, said Allen's mother called him early this morning, saying Allen had returned, but looked like he hadn't eaten for days.

Allen had been last seen on April 11 at a CU choir practice and last was heard from when he sent a text to friends on April 16. He was officially reported missing on April 18.

His mother, Sheryl Allen, previously told the Camera that it appeared most of her son's clothes were still in his room, but that he took his guitar and black case with him, along with a laptop, his wallet and his cellphone — which has been turned off.

Allen's family organized a search of the Chautauqua trails on Wednesday, saying he was known to hike there, but found no sign of the missing student.

This weekend, the family had expanded their search efforts, turning their attention to the rest of Colorado, Utah, Nevada, California, Seattle and Austin, Texas.

Police had suggested those involved in the search contact bus and train stations, youth hostels, Salvation Army posts, hospital, mental health centers and homeless shelters.

Allen, a communications major, transferred to CU from Clemson University in January.