Late last summer at the NBA coaches meetings in Chicago, Michael Malone picked the brain of a contemporary about what to look for in handling a young, hotshot point guard.

Jason Kidd, who once was a young, hotshot point guard, told the new Nuggets coach that getting the player to slow down was the most important first step.

And potentially the toughest.

Kidd said if he could go back and give the younger version of himself advice upon coming into the NBA, it would be just that: Slow down.

“All young guys come into the league and want to do things a million miles per hour,” Malone said.

Meanwhile, the point guard in question, Emmanuel Mudiay, was doing things a million miles per hour. At least it seemed that way. At the time there were meetings and workouts and commercial shoots, flight after flight after flight. Mudiay was living at a breakneck pace just a couple of months after being drafted seventh overall by the Nuggets.

Heading into his rookie season Mudiay wanted the big bang, a splashy first season. He knew there would be growing pains. But he would not shy away from any player, he would not back down from any challenge. He hasn’t.

But slower has been better, even if it took him a while to realize it.

As Mudiay looks back on his rookie season — which has 20 games remaining — he’s never been more clear on that.

“You’ve just got to play, relax,” Mudiay said. “That’s what it was.”

Point guards know his plight. Kyle Lowry chuckled as the question was asked.

How difficult is it to learn being a point guard in the NBA?

“It takes a while, it’s a process,” said Lowry, an all-star point guard with the Toronto Raptors. “It takes a while for you to get a feel for the NBA. It took a while for me to figure it out. It’s a hard position to learn quick.”

Why? Because Russell Westbrook is screaming down the lane at you. Because Chris Paul is hounding you, digging to get a steal. Because Stephen Curry is raining 3-pointers from 40 feet. Because Lowry is putting constant pressure on you to keep you out of the lane.

And while Mudiay was trying to adjust to elite competition, he also had to run his team.

“The speed, the contact of the game, making sure you know who to get involved and when to get them involved and how to get yourself involved,” Lowry said. “And still have the assertiveness of being a good point guard. It’s tough.”

Detroit Pistons point guard Reggie Jackson, a Palmer High School graduate, simplified everything down to one goal.

“Win. Just win,” Jackson said. “You have all different ranges of point guards in this league. As long as you win, nobody cares.”

Mudiay hasn’t gotten to the winning part. The Nuggets are 24-38 and will miss the playoffs for the third consecutive season. To get there, Mudiay still must go through the learning process.

“It’s had some ups and downs,” Mudiay said. “But that was to be expected, being a rookie, first year, 19 years old in the West.”

Playing time reduced

There had been stern talks with Malone, requesting Mudiay to reduce his turnovers and eliminate bad shots. Nothing out of the ordinary for young players needing to exorcise bad habits.

But then, after an eight-game losing streak, Mudiay barely played in the fourth quarter of a Dec. 3 game at Toronto, and didn’t get any minutes down the stretch. The Nuggets won. Then, a carbon copy of that in the next game at Philadelphia on Dec. 5. The Nuggets won again. Malone talked about finishing games using players he trusted. Mudiay was on the outside of that group, which ate at him.

Then came a couple of uninspiring performances before an ankle injury shelved him for nearly a month. The true pivot point of Mudiay’s season, Malone said, had arrived. Mudiay watched. He began to understand what was truly meant by slowing down. He studied his own team and players on other teams. Then he and Malone talked again.

More aggressive now

“He was either going to rebound, come back and have a very good rookie season, or he was going to go down further,” Malone said. “We had a couple of very honest, open, heart-to-heart talks. I didn’t try to tell him things that he wanted to hear, I told him things he needed to hear. I told him you have a choice, you can feel sorry for yourself or you can just continue to work harder and commit yourself that much more to the game.”

Mudiay buckled down. He scored in double figures in 10 of the next 11 games and looked more aggressive, more focused. He is averaging 23.5 points, 7.0 assists and 5.0 rebounds in his past two games, looking every bit the elite player the Nuggets believe they drafted.

“That’s what I’ve been most impressed about Emmanuel,” Malone said. “For a 19-year-old kid, to kind of go through the adversity that he was going through, he bounced back in a big way. That gives me so much hope and excitement for the future.”

Given an opportunity to think about it, Mudiay pinpointed the most difficult challenge of his first season in the NBA.

“I think just trying to get people to buy in, being a point guard,” he said. “You’ve got to get people’s respect.”

Mudiay has made progress in that department. Nuggets forward Kenneth Faried said he is seeing Mudiay, who turned 20 on Saturday, grow “into a better point guard, a leader on the floor.” Malone has continually praised Mudiay’s growth in the game over the last month.

Mudiay shrugs that off, saying he still has far to go.

“I’m still growing,” he said. “So that’s the main thing.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost

DALLAS AT DENVER 3 p.m. Sunday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Chandler Parsons:

The forward has cranked up his play of late, and when he gets going, the 6-foot-10 shooter is difficult for anyone to handle. He scored 28 points on 12-of-17 shooting, including three 3-pointers, in his last game, a 104-101 Dallas loss to Sacramento on Thursday. He had 27 points in the Mavs’ 122-116 win over Denver on Feb. 26 in Dallas. He is averaging 13.6 points and 4.4 rebounds and is shooting 49.9 percent from the field and 42.3 percent from the 3-point line. Parsons has a player option at the end of this season, so he could hit the market as a free agent.

NOTEBOOK

Mavericks:

Dallas has won four straight regular-season games against the Nuggets and five of the last six. They beat the Nuggets in overtime Feb. 26 to take a 2-0 lead in the season series. The last two games, starting Sunday, are played in Denver. … The Mavericks come into the game healthy, with no significant injuries to report.

Nuggets:

Denver took Saturday off from a formal practice after its game Friday night against Brooklyn. This is the second 3 p.m. Sunday start for the Nuggets this season. The other was against Boston on Feb. 21. The Nuggets lost that game 121-101. … Guard Gary Harris is averaging 17.2 points, 3.2 rebounds, 1.4 assists and 1.8 steals in his last five games. … Forward Kenneth Faried has 17 double-doubles this season, including in four in the last five games.

Christopher Dempsey, The Denver Post

NOTEBOOK

Nuggets:

The Nuggets took Saturday off from a formal practice after their game on Friday night against Brooklyn. This is the second 3 p.m. Sunday start for the Nuggets this season. The other was against Boston on Feb. 21. The Nuggets lost that game, 121-101. … Gary Harris is averaging 17.2 points, 3.2 rebounds, 1.4 assists and 1.8 steals in his last five games. … Kenneth Faried has 17 double doubles this season, including four in the last five games.

Mavericks:

The Mavericks have won four straight regular season games against the Nuggets, and five of the last six. They beat the Nuggets in overtime on Feb. 26 to take a 2-0 lead in the season series. The last two games, starting on Sunday, are played in Denver. … The Mavericks come into the game healthy with no significant injuries to report.

Christopher Dempsery, The Denver Post