HOLLYWOOD, Fla.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Health Benefits Center, a full-service national health insurance agency and call center based in Hollywood, Fla., and one of the fastest-growing in the nation, has announced a major expansion in Florida and abroad over the coming weeks and months.

Since its founding in May 2012 by CEO Steve Dorfman, HBC has already grown to nearly 200 agents, contractors and support staff at its fast-growing office in Hollywood, Fl., and its customer support center in Panama City, Panama. By the end of the year, HBC plans to more than triple in size and revenue, grow its existing offices, and add enrollment centers in the Boca Raton, Miami, Orlando, and Tampa Bay markets. It also is preparing to expand its Panama service center and open a new support center in the Dominican Republic to accommodate HBC’s rapid growth.

“HBC is on the move, and we are serving health insurance needs for underserved people in all 50 states,” Dorfman said. “We aim to be best–in-class in customer service, forging great relationships with health care consumers in a fast-changing marketplace. Our objective with our customers is to help them cut through the complexities of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, and come up with the best solution for them.”

The expansion will occur in the following stages:

In early April, HBC plans to open a customer support center in Santo Domingo, D.R., with a capacity for 150 service employees.

In mid-April, HBC plans to move into Boca Raton, where it has leased 8,000 square feet on IBM’s former IBM Yamato Road campus, with a capacity of up to 150 insurance agents and staff.

In May, HBC intends to open a Miami office in the Doral-Miami International Airport vicinity, also with a capacity of 150 agents and staff.

Orlando and Tampa are in line for two new HBC offices with a similar capacity this summer, with a similar size.

At the same time, HBC is preparing to consolidate its headquarters from its existing location at 200 South Park Road, west of I-95 in Hollywood, to new, 18,000-square-foot offices at Oakwood Plaza, just north of Sheridan Street east of I-95.

“With the Affordable Care Act and a top-flight management team, we have been fortunate in having the right people in the right place at the right time,” Dorfman said. “We have learned from the experiences of other insurance distributors and developed technologies and training to make us exponentially more efficient. We are investing our revenues back into the business, so that our systems make the health care system understandable and helpful for consumers, particularly those of moderate means or low incomes who are often overlooked. We are a young company, but we are in this for the long haul with a commitment to improve service for people every day.”

Health Benefits Center is on the web at www.hbcinsure.com, with a toll-free number at 1-800-492-1834.