BOSTON - Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker, a Republican, and the state's top legislative leaders, both Democrats, met Monday for the first time since Baker took office last week. They discussed the state budget, revenues and Boston's Olympic bid.

Senate President Stan Rosenberg, an Amherst Democrat who took over as Senate president last week, called the hour-long meeting "100 times better" than meetings that Rosenberg – then chairman of the Senate Committee on Ways and Means – had with former Republican Gov. William Weld.

"I love Governor Weld, but they were much more social events than they were substantive," Rosenberg said. "Mr. Baker is very substantive, and we spent the entire time digging deep in the weeds of policy."

Baker, who served as secretary of Health and Human Services and of Administration and Finance under Weld, quipped, "No one can do social like Bill Weld."

As Baker takes office, the first issues he must deal with are budgetary. He enters office facing a deficit. Former Gov. Deval Patrick, a Democrat, said the budget gap was $329 million, and he unilaterally cut around $200 million. The Massachusetts Taxpayers Foundation has said the gap could be as high as $750 million.

Baker must also file his budget proposal for fiscal year 2016 by March 4.

Baker, Rosenberg and House Speaker Robert DeLeo, a Winthrop Democrat, all ruled out cuts to local aid to fill the budget gap.

Baker has ruled out increasing taxes; DeLeo and Rosenberg have not. But Rosenberg said raising taxes is "the last option," and he does not think the deficit is deep enough to warrant it.

Baker said he anticipates that any plan to address the budget deficit will include administrative actions and a legislative component. Baker already announced a hiring freeze and a review of state contracts.

The hiring freeze does have exceptions: it allows Baker to hire the people needed to transition to a new administration, and it exempts law enforcement and direct care workers such as nurses. Baker said the hiring freeze could affect between approximately 200 and 450 open positions.

Baker said he is still working to ascertain the size of the deficit. "We started with a hiring freeze and contract review because we didn't want to make the problem any worse than it already was," Baker said. "Over the next few days, we'll continue to dig through the data, the information we have, and draw conclusions about that."

Baker said one major factor that he will be looking at is projections regarding Medicaid costs. Medicaid caseloads and costs have risen over the last year because of an expansion in eligibility under the Affordable Care Act and because of around 300,000 people who were moved onto MassHealth last year because a state website was unable to determine what insurance they were eligible for. Baker said there is a "lack of clarity and visibility" into who is getting the temporary MassHealth coverage and what the federal reimbursement rates will be.

Baker had little to say about the U.S. Olympic Committee's choice of Boston as its bid city for the 2024 Olympics. Asked about the use of public money for the Olympics, Baker said infrastructure projects that would get done otherwise will likely be done in time for the Olympics. But he said the process is only beginning and "there's a lot to learn about the nature of the bid."

Earlier Monday, Baker met with Harvard University President Drew Gilpen Faust. Baker said they talked about academic research, online learning and college affordability.