Mason McClaugherty during the Cañon City Tigers' football game against the Mitchell Marauders on Friday at Citizens' Stadium. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Jack Matthews (72), Blake Repshire (75) and Ricky Garcia (4) get to Mitchell quarterback TJ Conklin during the Cañon City Tigers' football game against the Mitchell Marauders on Friday at Citizens' Stadium. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

A 35-point victory is reason to rejoice, right?

Well ...

The Tigers were happy with their 49-14 win against the Marauders late Friday night, but what they did in the process had them uneasy post game. In fact, each coach and player interviewed repeated a consistent sentiment.

"Our main focus this week was discipline and we weren't really there," senior defensive leader Daniel Farkas said. "We did good holding them to 14 points, but there shouldn't have been any points on the board."

It was a lack of discipline — mainly penalties — that had Cañon City (6-2 overall, 3-0 league) less than jubilant about their spanking of Southern League opponent Mitchell (1-7, 0-3).

The Tigers committed 10 penalties including one on the opening kickoff, one to negate a touchdown and another that resulted in a Mitchell first down before they snapped the ball on a third-and-short try.

Head coach Tom O'Rourke punishes the team for penalties during practice by making them do up-downs. The message hadn't been received Friday night.

He said he told his team after the game that, "'I can make you guys do 10,000 up-downs in practice, but until you guys take it to heart that discipline needs to become a priority, all we're doing is up-downs and getting in better shape.' I hope after tonight they see it. Against a good team we can't afford to make those kinds of mistakes."

Advertisement

Practice clearly doesn't equate with blood-pumping game action, though.

O'Rourke was even hard on himself after the game because he was also called for a penalty. After his player was flagged in the third quarter but the official couldn't tell him who exactly committed the foul, O'Rourke expressed his displeasure and drew a 15-yard unsportsmanlike conduct call, the coach said after the game. That penalty resulted in a first down on what would've been a fourth-and-four.

Lucas Bufmack during the Cañon City Tigers' football game against the Mitchell Marauders on Friday at Citizens' Stadium. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

"Everything we do on offense goes back to discipline," said receiver Mason McClaughert,y who had three catches and two touchdowns Friday. "Not doing the job we're supposed to, not being mentally there, going hard every single play. It all goes back to discipline."

The Tigers weren't the only oft-flagged team Friday night. Mitchell had its share as well.

In fact, in a span of five Mitchell offensive plays, they were flagged three times that all waved off 40-yard gains by playmaker Tavarus Melons.

First, Melons converted a fake punt that would've resulted in a 40-yard touchdown run, but holding was called. Then, on the Marauders' next drive, a chop block was called on a Melons catch from quarterback TJ Conklin. And on the very next play, another Conklin-to-Melons play was negated because of an illegal player downfield.

Boom, boom, boom

The score was at a respectable 21-6 with about 5 minutes remaining in the first half when quarterback Luke Nethercot and his band of receivers kicked into gear.

The sophomore QB found McClaugherty for a 10-yard score to go up 28-6.

A quick three-and-out from Mitchell gave the Tigers the ball back and within two plays they'd driven 59 yards — the scoring play was a 47-yard hookup from Nethercot to McClaugherty.

Defensive lineman Jack Matthews forced a Mitchell fumble on the team's first play following the kickoff.

After a strike to Zach Manchester for a quick 15, Nethercot found Dacian Sullivan on a 23-yard bullseye to the endzone.

Just like that, the Tigers had a 42-6 lead going into halftime.

"They're an explosive offense, and you're not going to stop them, you look to slow them down and take your chances and your shots," Mitchell coach Archie Malloy said.

"If we make the right read ... we can score in a real quick amount of time, which is why our kids need to believe that we're never out of a game," O'Rourke said. "Even if things don't go our way initially, we have the offensive firepower to get back in a heartbeat."