Taking blood pressure (Photo: KTVB)

BOISE -- Frustrated families are demanding change when it comes to the huge hole in health insurance coverage in Idaho.



The Senate president pro tem admits Medicaid expansion would save the state money and some doctors say it will save lives, but it seems this is a problem about principle.



Shelley Enderud says she panicked last fall when she learned she didn't make enough to qualify for a subsidy through the state's health insurance exchange.



"When I went to sign up for my Your Health Idaho I was informed by the Department of Health and Welfare that I did not make enough money last year to qualify for a government subsidy, as I had the two previous years," said Enderud.



She said she struggled to recover from several injuries last year, and made just under the $11,400 cutoff.



"My monthly premium went from $210 to $749," said Enderud. "I'm terrified, I'm just terrified. Pleading, I'm pleading for some help.



While she stressed about making ends meet, she got more devastating news.



"They ended up doing a needle biopsy on Dec. 31, which was my 63rd birthday, and five days later they called me back to tell me it was positive, I have breast cancer," said Enderud.



Now, she's not only worried about her illness, but is afraid of bankruptcy.



"The financial fear is more traumatizing to me than the cancer diagnosis," said Enderud.



She's one of 78,000 Idahoans who fall in Idaho's health insurance gap. In 2012, the Supreme Court ruled each state could decide whether to expand Medicaid, and Idaho chose not to.



Because of that decision, those making less than 100 percent of the federal poverty level don't qualify for subsidies, and most don't qualify for Medicaid either.



"I don't think the legislators even have a clue, I'm a working person, I've worked all my life and I fall in this doughnut hole of nothingness," said Enderud.



Which is why Sen. Dan Schmidt has been working for three years to expand Medicaid. He says Idaho has among the worst Medicaid coverage in the country, with very few people eligible. He's a doctor himself, is passionate about caring for others, and served on one of several work groups trying to tackle the issue.



"We made a clear, strong recommendation to the governor that he should advocate for this and he didn't do it," said Sen. Schmidt.



But Sen. Schmidt kept pushing, despite strong opposition from fellow lawmakers.



"I think it will make Idaho more productive, healthier, i think it will help our economy, but i know that there's been resistance for a long time," said Sen. Schmidt.



This session, he drafted two personal bills and finally got a hearing, for the first time. Hundreds showed up to hear the testimony, which was almost all in favor of expansion.



Sen. Schmidt now hopes Senate Bill 1205 will move forward. It's called the Healthy Idaho Plan and includes those making less than 100 percent of poverty line in Medicaid, and also support those making between 100-138 percent of the poverty level to purchase coverage on the state exchange.



One doctor even told legislators that a lack of Medicaid accessibility is the cause for many Idahoans' deaths.



"Our intransigence in failing to pass Medicaid for the last three years has probably resulted in over a thousand deaths in this state and I see those patients on a nearly daily basis," said Dr. Kenneth Krell with Eastern Idaho Regional.



But despite the research, testimony, and emotional stories, the bill is stalled.



"The complete Medicaid expansion as envisioned by the ACA, I just don't think that will happen this year," said Senate President Pro Tem Brent Hill.



Sen. Hill says there are several reasons for the resistance.



"One is just the concern people have of being dependent on the federal government, another one is that we don't want to get to a single-payer system, which is what Medicaid is," said Sen. Hill.



But Hill says he can't argue with the numbers, admitting Medicaid expansion would save the state more than $40 million a year. The money is currently being spent on the indigent and catastrophic funds to cover those uninsured. He says still, many Idahoans simply don't want to rely on federal funding.



"There is a lot of uncertainty and that puts the guard up a little bit, waves a little bit of red flags," said Sen. Hill.



Instead, he's backing an alternative: Gov. Otter's Primary Care Access Plan.



"It's an Idaho solution, it doesn't go as far as and it's going to cost us more than if we went the other way but we have to go with what we can do," said Sen. Hill.



The plan would use 60 pre-existing clinics across the state to offer care for those making less than 100 percent of the federal poverty level, and not eligible for other health insurance. Those receiving care would pay on a sliding scale based on their income. The program is expected to cost Idaho 30 million dollars a year.



But is it enough?



"It does more than we're doing now," said Otter.



Otter believes since Medicaid expansion isn't likely, this is the next best solution.



"If we can at least send them an early signal so that they can catch any major infirmaty when it's in its immature state, that would be a whole lot further ahead than we are now. Is it the total answer? Probably not," said Otter.



But Enderud says the clinics won't be able to address major illnesses, like hers, and simply won't do enough to help those in need.



"It's a slap in the face to people like me as well as people on welfare, it's nothing," said Enderud.



So what's next? Sen. Hill says lawmakers are now waiting to compare both plans side by side.



As for the uncertainty of the affordable care act in the future, Sen. Schmidt says Senate Bill 1205 would stop Medicaid expansion in Idaho if federal funding ever dropped below 90 percent.





Copyright 2016 KTVB