WASHINGTON -- The over 675,000 Louisiana residents enrolled in Medicare Part B will not see an increase in their premiums and deductibles in 2015, according to the Department of Health and Human Services.

Most enrollees will continue to pay monthly premiums of $104.90. Higher income seniors pay higher premiums -- for example, an individual with income of between $85,000 and $107,000, would pay about $146.90 a month.

Deductibles will remain unchanged at $147 a year in 2015.

The premiums cover doctor visits, outpatient care and medical supplies.

People enrolled in the Medicare Part D prescription drug plan will see what officials described as a modest increase to $32 a month.

HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell said that the steady premiums are attributable to slowed growth in Medicare, resulting from the greater access to health care provided by the 2010 Affordable Care Act. The law encourages more coordination of medical services, and more efforts to minimize costly hospital re-admissions.

"The Affordable Care Act is working to improve affordability and access to quality care for seniors and people with disabilities," Burwell said. HHS said that earlier projections anticipated significant premium increases in 2015.

According to HHS, Louisiana seniors who have signed up for Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage have saved over $173 million as a result of the Affordable Care Act's phased closing of the so-called "donut hole," the coverage gap after prescription spending exceeds a set amount every year.

"Since the ACA was implemented, Medicare Part B premiums have remained stable, a clear indication that the healthcare law has resulted in substantial savings for seniors," said Rep. Cedric Richmond, D-New Orleans. "Affordable healthcare is an essential part of personal financial stability. For many seniors on fixed incomes, going back to the prohibitive costs of rising premiums, limited access to preventative care, and the increasing price of prescription drugs would cause significant economic strain. I will continue to defend the Affordable Care Act from the habitual attempts to repeal and maintain the healthcare our seniors have come to rely on."

Some other analysts also credit reduced spending on health care due to the recent economic problems many Americans faced in the aftermath of the 2008 recession.

For those about to turn 65, Kaiser Health News has some great tips on how to sign up for Medicare.