Catholic Memorial players hoist the championship trophy as they celebrate their victory over Mount Horeb on Saturday at Uihlein Soccer Park. The victory gave Catholic Memorial its seventh state title, tying it with Whitefish Bay for the most by a girls soccer program. Credit: Michael McLoone

By ,

Even for a soccer team drenched in glory, Saturday was historic.

The Waukesha Catholic Memorial girls soccer team etched its name into the WIAA record book Saturday, beating Mount Horeb, 2-0, and winning the WIAA Division 3 state championship match at Uihlein Soccer Park.

It was third straight state title for Memorial, which won the Division 2 championship in 2012 and 2013. It also was the seventh overall title for the Crusaders, tying them with Whitefish Bay for the most ever won by a girls team. Memorial also won three private school championships.

"It's nice to be in the books," Memorial coach John Burke said. "To put together a season like this with the injuries we have had and the young team we have, it's just a terrific job by these girls."

The Crusaders (25-2-1) wasted little time in gaining an advantage against the Vikings. In the ninth minute, senior Cristina From poked in a high, soaring corner kick from Mo Burke to give Memorial a 1-0 lead.

"I told Mo to put it up like it was the backyard," said Burke, Mo's father. "We have spent countless hours practicing. She had done that thousands of times."

"Coach told me that winning it as a senior and as a captain makes it even sweeter," said From, a Western Illinois recruit. "The run we are on is truly remarkable. We knew this would be a battle. Teams want to come out and beat us. We had to be at our best to win today."

From played Saturday despite missing part of Thursday's semifinal victory over Appleton Xavier after twisting her ankle. She told Burke early in the morning she was ready to go.

"She had not ever missed a game, and she certainly wasn't going to miss this one," Burke said. "She had a major impact on the match."

From played deep at defender, keeping the ball away from the Crusaders goal — the Vikings managed only two shots — and starting the offense.

Memorial extended its advantage to 2-0 in the 53rd minute as Nicole Piette send a through ball to Jo Rolli, who had escaped the Vikings back line. Rolli easily beat Vikings keeper Maria Yanna with a strike to the right side of the net.

The Crusaders won despite not getting a goal from sophomore forward Emily Cervantes, who scored four against Xavier on Thursday and has 66 goals this season. Mount Horeb (12-7-1) surrounded Cervantes with six defenders at times, allowing other Crusaders to get involved in the offense.

"We told Emily to occupy their defense," Burke said. "With so many people around her, they kind of eviscerated their midfield. When that happened, I knew we would just need a couple goals."

Memorial loses only three players and will return everyone else to make a run at a state-record four titles in a row.

"We're young and we make a lot of mistakes," Burke said. "Our three seniors really led this team to where we ended up. They really did quite a job."