Decisions made today may determine whether a revolution in the High Plains Library District comes to the bargaining table or the courtroom.

Stung by an ongoing dispute about how High Plains is run, representatives from most of the Weld County communities that founded the district are pushing to fire and replace its entire board of trustees, a move library district officials consider blatantly illegal.

Attorneys for High Plains have set a deadline of noon today to seek mediation on the issue. If the towns turn them down, the next step could be a lawsuit.

"Recent actions taken by some of you ... (have) left us no choice but to seek court intervention," read a letter from Jennifer Peters of the Otis & Peters law firm in Greeley, which called the offer "one last opportunity" to avoid a court fight. "We believe ... that an amicable resolution is preferable to litigation and better serves the interest of those most affected by this ongoing disagreement: library patrons throughout the entire district."

Officials in Ault and Fort Lupton voted on Wednesday to remove the board. Weld County's board of commissioners isdue to consider a similar resolution today, followed later this week by Eaton, Hudson and the Fort Lupton school district. Of the seven original founders, only Greeley has declined to take part in the move.

These days, the district encompasses about two dozen communities and a dozen libraries. High Plains directly operates three "branch libraries" in Greeley and one each in Kersey, Firestone and Erie; self-governing "member libraries" are located in Ault, Eaton, Platteville, Fort Lupton, Hudson and Johnstown.

That split is at the heart of the current fight. High Plains officials maintain that patrons should be able to expect the same service anywhere in the district; the rebelling communities say that High Plains is trying to take over the member libraries.

20140411_FORT_LUPTON_LIBRARY_456.jpg Madelyn Overly, 3, helps her mother Tacha Overly return items at the Fort Lupton Public & School Library Friday morning, April 11, 2014. (Lewis Geyer/Times-Call)

"It was join with us, do exactly as we say, or leave," said Janice Fisher-Giles, director of the Fort Lupton Public and School Library.

Streamlined or status quo?

When the district started in 1985, the founders brought their own libraries to the table to pool resources, allowing the members to provide more services together than they could separately. Today, member libraries keep two-thirds of the revenue collected in their service area and send the rest to High Plains; district libraries give High Plains the entire amount.

According to High Plains' figures, about 89 percent of the district is now served by the branch libraries.

Member libraries, though, still play by their own rules. For example, Ault lets patrons use the Internet for a longer period of time but also limits how many times a book's checkout can be renewed; in Fort Lupton, the library opens at 7:30 a.m. to accommodate students and commuters, and no overdue fines are charged.

"We'd rather have the book back than money out of your wallet," said Fisher-Giles.

The differences came to a head about two years ago when High Plains began to replace its Integrated Library System or ILS, the computer system at the heart of library operations. Kelli Johnson, a spokeswoman for the library district, said that seemed a good time to iron things out and create a more streamlined system.

"What we tried to do was clarify many years of discrepancies in rules and regulations between the district and member libraries," she said. "What we're asking for is a compromise and agreement to operate our library system in a more consistent form. ... (The current system) is complex and requires more resources than is necessary."

But to many of the founders, the changes sounded more ominous.

Under the proposed arrangements, member libraries can keep their autonomy and share of the property tax, but would have to buy and catalog their own books, handle their own technology and interlibrary loan services, and do their own outreach, rather than relying on district services such as the bookmobile. Libraries that merge their policies instead would get support in all those areas.

Ault Mayor Butch White called that overreach. There's no reason, he said, that a computer system couldn't accommodate the way things are now, without having to press everyone to the same standard.

"We're just trying to get things the way they were intended, back in 1985," he said.

Time to renew or check out

However, more communities are in the district now than in 1985.

The current board divides the district into six areas, with one member for each area, plus one at-large seat.

The re-organization would divvy up the seven seats among the seven founding members of the High Plains District — Ault, Hudson, Eaton, Greeley, Fort Lupton, the Fort Lupton school district and Weld County— leave three current "areas," including the Erie-Frederick-Firestone region in Area 1, without anyone from their region on the board.

"At present, we have significant questions about future equitable representation within the High Plains Library District's Carbon Valley area and whether this initiative is legally permissible," said newly elected Firestone Mayor Paul Sorensen.

The legal question arises because the current High Plains leadership says the founding communities can't change the district's board on their own initiative, while Weld County attorney Bruce Barker has said the founders never surrendered that power.

Both sides said they want to keep this out of court. But if negotiations fall through, that's where it's going. If the replacement push succeeds, the current High Plains board plans to go to court to block it; if it fails, the founders may head to court as well.

"I think problem-solving is preferable to litigating," said High Plains director Karen Rademacher, who faces removal if the founders succeed.

Johnson said that unifying policies didn't have to mean doing everything the district's way. The communities could have their own say in what that picture looked like, she said.

"Yes, it means compromise," Johnson said. "Yes, it means having to make changes. But no one said only the member libraries would have to make changes."

For Fisher-Giles, it's a philosophical question between efficiency and consensus. Right now, she said, the district has been more interested in dictating a solution than in cooperating to reach one.

"It's more difficult to be collaborative," she said. "But it's a more effective way to govern."

Contact Times-Call staff writer Scott Rochat at 303-684-5220 or srochat@times-call.com