Karen Ignagni was a K-Street mega-lobbyist, leading the health insurance industry through the Obamacare wars.

Then she left to run a New York health plan with a downgraded credit rating.

She says she wanted a challenge, and the chance to practice what she had long preached by leveraging the market clout of an insurer and its relationships with doctors and hospitals to help build a high-quality, cost-efficient health care system. But despite her years in Washington, where she was immersed in the consequences of hospital consolidation, she was shocked by what she found in her new job as CEO of EmblemHealth, a nonprofit regional insurer that is currently losing hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

EmblemHealth had just received word that a large health system was taking over one of the community hospitals it contracted with — and that it would raise prices a stunning 60 percent.

Ignagni said it was a “clarion call” — a reminder that the issues she had thought about and lobbied on for 22 years in Washington would confront her as she leads an old New York insurer trying to find its footing in the changing, competitive health care field.

“I know from a national policy perspective that folks have concerns about consolidation in this market,” Ignagni said in an interview in Manhattan. “And now being confronted with the evidence of what this means was quite shocking to me.”

She’d heard about price increases of 20 percent, 30 percent. But the prospect of a 60 percent hike, she said, should “cause people to pause and ask, ‘What are we doing?’”

Ignagni, a 61-year-old Rhode Island native, had traveled far from her early days as a Democratic congressional aide and a labor official to become a powerful lobbyist at America’s Health Insurance Plans, or AHIP. She helped craft parts of the Affordable Care Act (while resisting others), fought new taxes and warned regulators about soaring drug prices and hospital consolidation.

"She’s tenacious and knows how to get things done in D.C., and as a result really created government markets for health plans,” Dan Mendelson, CEO of the Washington consulting firm Avalere Health.

AHIP’s role on Capitol Hill changed, and the health insurance industry went from primarily operating in a defensive crouch, aggressively knocking down threatening policy proposals, to the current universe in which private insurers are an integral part of every significant government program: Medicare, Medicaid, and now Obamacare.

“Now the health insurance industry is the principal partner for CMS in moving health policy," Mendelson said.

And she led the industry, in a sometimes rocky alliance with the White House, during the tough early years of Obamacare implementation — including the HealthCare.gov catastrophe and the chaos and recriminations over canceled plans.

Then she announced she was leaving in May, trading in her office in the shadow of the U.S. Capitol for a perch right outside the Lincoln Tunnel, where she has to figure out things like what to do about a hospital acquisition that’s jacking up bills.

EmblemHealth has longstanding relationships with large unions including SEIU, the United Federation of Teachers and the Teamsters. Long before Ignagni began gliding through Washington’s power corridors, she spent a decade at the AFL-CIO.

“Knowing the record of service and commitment that this plan has, and the partnership with the labor community, it was an opportunity for me to really work on this promise of delivering affordable health care and do it in a place that has this wonderful tradition,” she said.

Ignagni talks excitedly about Emblem’s commitment to fixing health care starting at the neighborhood level.

“We have neighborhood centers located in Harlem, Chinatown and so on where we’re actually doing care coordination and triage for individuals to help them sort through this complicated delivery system,” Ignagni said.

“Everything the policy community writes about, we’re actually doing it,” she said. “We are affiliated with 36 centers across the boroughs where we have physician groups that are providing services. So we are almost a mini-Kaiser of the eastern seaboard. And then finally this plan has been a market leader in pay-for value. So, you put all that together, and when their board approached it took me a nano-second to be very interested.”

Emblem would not disclose her salary, but her predecessor made $4 million, about twice what AHIP’s 990 reported she was making there in 2013.

Former associates in Washington aren’t surprised that she’d plunge into the messy business of running a health plan under the new ACA landscape she helped shape.

Bob Kocher, who was a top White House adviser during the development of the Affordable Care Act and is now a partner at the venture capital firm Venrock, says she played an integral role in some of the tough technical aspects of the ACA, like designing risk reduction tools that would draw enough insurers to make the new ACA markets viable, or pushing to make sure the individual mandate had enough teeth that it would actually push people to get covered.

“I can see why she’d be excited to go lead a plan through this decade-long transition that she helped to establish,” said Kocher.

AHIP has been going through its own challenging times with Obamacare, which is changing the insurance industry. Its biggest member, UnitedHealth, left the group shortly after Ignagni’s departure, although AHIP quickly rebounded by announcing former Medicare and Medicaid chief Marilyn Tavenner would succeed Ignagni.

While AHIP faces uncertainty, Emblem is outright struggling.

The insurer provides health coverage to 3.2 million people through its two subsidiaries, Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York and Group Health, accounting for roughly 15 percent of the New York market, according to the United Hospital Fund.

The combined entity lost $494 million in 2014 on roughly $7 billion of revenue. The losses cut across all lines of business, including comprehensive (hospital and medical), Medicare and Medicaid.

In June, Fitch lowered the credit rating of Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York, the primary arm of EmblemHealth from BBB- to BB+, citing poor financial results and losses in capital and surplus.

Ignagni is beginning her work by looking within, she said, seeing if the right people are in the right positions as she begins the work of trying to take the company from red to black.

She sees strengths to build on. About two thirds of the insurer’s contracts are already value-based, and there is room for growth, Ignagni said.

Ignagni believes that by pushing this model, and leveraging the company’s existing relationship with physicians, she can help turn the company around. If it can structure its contracts right — including both upside and downside risk (which is health plan lingo for gains and losses) — Emblem may be able to neutralize some of the consolidation in the health provider market that has insurers worried, and form its own mergers.

Pharmaceutical prices, however, are harder to reckon with. The costs of breakthrough Hepatitis drugs, new cancer treatments and cholesterol medications are squeezing insurers, Ignagni said.

And as with hospital consolidation, Ignagni believes the industry is reaching a tipping point that will require action either on the part of consumers or regulators.

“All of us as citizens want to have drugs that cure disease and help us live more high quality lives but the rhetoric is all about innovation and now it’s time to draw a bright line between what is truly the cost of R &D versus the cost of marketing, sales, and profit taking,” she said. “In the case of the hep-C drugs, we know a significant amount was profit taking at a time when the entire delivery system should be focused on how do we answer the question of what can all of us do as actors within the delivery system to provide affordable coverage and care. You can’t have one industry that’s not on that page.”

Ignagni is also familiarizing herself with the peculiarities of New York regulations, and the specific challenges New York insurers face. The city is home to several large, world-renowned health systems bent on consolidation, which insurers complain increases costs. Insurance companies across the state also say regulators do not understand the pressures they face and that the prior review process has become politicized.

“We have been concerned about the regulatory environment here in New York and certainly we have made our concerns known about the state Department of Financial Services regarding the rate setting process, and our concerns to the Department of Health about network adequacy standards and the ability of plans to operate in a structured and multifaceted regulatory structure in New York,” said Leslie Moran, spokeswoman for the New York Health Plan Association. “I’m certain that is something Karen understood going in, but now, jumping in with both feet, will have a new appreciation for just how complex our regulatory structure is. Given her background with AHIP and AFL-CIO, I think she will be an asset in the industry’s effort to push back on that regulatory constriction, and it will complement some of the other players. … Having Karen at a very large New York plan, making the same arguments United or Aetna makes, we hope that will be beneficial in the ongoing effort to obtain some regulatory relief.”

Ignagni, perhaps better than anyone else, that she's got to be able to see the big picture.

“Your obligation as a CEO is not just to keep your head down and work internally to address issues but to make sure you are entering the political and policy dialogue here in this community to provide data to provide assistance and be a good partner with consumers purchasers and regulators,” she said. “That’s the world I know. That’s the way I intend to approach this job as CEO but I will be very focused on making sure we are a reliable and thoughtful partner with the city and state and purchasers and consumers. That’s what people should expect.”