Brookings, SD

Fall and winter are fast approaching and your vegetables might not be ripe enough to pick yet. Here are some steps to help protect your plants from frost or freezing.

If you choose to cover your plants, it’s best to use cloth, like an old sheet or blanket. The blanket is used as insulation and will keep plants a few degrees warmer. Plastic loses heat rapidly. If you do cover, cover early in the evening to capture the remaining heat of the day.

The most sensitive vegetables and plants require extra attention.

Basil: Doesn’t tolerate temperatures below 37 degrees and anything below 45 degrees, the plant begins to show leaf bronzing and edge drying. In order to protect the plant, cut it down and remove the leaves. Instead of drying, Basil can be stored in an airtight container in the freezer.

Tomatoes, Peppers and Eggplant: These are tropical plants and don’t like the cold. They will need to be covered with thick blankets. A light frost will only damage the outer leaves. The light damage won’t kill the plant or stop them from ripening.

Squash: If you have summer squash, it will die back or be damaged with a light to moderate freeze. For winter squash and pumpkins, they will be damaged depending on maturity if it freezes. You can test the maturity by pressing your thumbnail to the rind. If it’s soft and punctures easily, it’s not mature and will have little flavor. These will not survive freezing. An almost mature rind will just have a dent. A mature rind will show almost no dent at all.

Melons and Cucumbers: These are similar to Squash, where if it freezes, the plant will die back with a mild freeze. Harvest all that appear ripe and cover others that are close to being ripe.

Onions: Mature onions that are above the ground will freeze and not keep well. Those that freeze will soften and rot leading to rot in the other onions in the same container.

Beans: Pick all beans before it freezes.

Potatoes: Need to harvest now. Potatoes cannot take a light freeze.

There are plants that can tolerate the frost or freezing.

Lettuce: Loose leaf can be fine all the way down to 20 degrees. It will be frozen solid in the morning but fine by midday. They should be harvested before it gets down to 19 degrees.

Broccoli, Kale, Cabbage and Cauliflower: All will survive when it gets very cold. With Kale you can over winter if it doesn’t get too far below zero. It can also be harvested during the winter.

Spinach: If planted in the fall, cover with 6 inches of straw and allow to overwinter. Those larger leaves can be harvested throughout the winter. The early spring leaves will be tender and sweet.

Carrots and Beets: Both plants can take the cold. Cover with a foot of straw to overwinter. This prevents the ground from freezing too much.

For more tips, visit iGrow.com.