TALLAHASSEE — Behind the noise of Florida's nastiest gubernatorial contest in recent memory, Republican Rick Scott and Democrat Charlie Crist disagree on a range of issues near and dear to voters' hearts.

Here's a breakdown on where they stand:

Economy

Scott and Crist have argued over who's to blame for the Great Recession and the credit for Florida's slow-but-steady recovery. But beyond that, they have both proposed jobs plans.

Crist says he wants to create jobs by increasing education funding; reducing tuition costs for science, engineering, technology and math degrees; and targeting economic incentives for Florida-grown companies.

He also says he'll have a "laser focus on the Space Coast," which has lost jobs since the space shuttle was mothballed. Crist also has pledged to kick-start the high-speed-rail project between Orlando and Tampa that Scott scrapped in 2011.

Scott has pledged a $1 billion tax-cutting plan but says he'll unveil the details after the election.

The cuts would appear to heavily tilt toward reducing business and communications services taxes yet again.

He also backs the All Aboard Florida commuter-train project connecting Orlando to Miami. Crist has been less committal on that project, with Democrats calling it a boondoggle steered in part by Scott's chief of staff.

Environment

Both candidates have called themselves friends of the environment.

Scott has released a detailed environmental plan that includes pressing on with Everglades restoration; developing an Indian River Lagoon plan; spending more to clean up wastewater in the Keys; and increasing fines for oil and gas companies.

He has also pledged a 10-year, $1 billion effort to protect Florida's waters, including $50 million a year on springs.

Crist says he will "fully restore" Florida Forever spending on land conservation within his first two years. The program once spent $300 million annually to protect green spaces but was slashed during the recession.

Crist also says he'll be tougher on Everglades polluters — such as Big Sugar, which has contributed heavily to Scott's campaign — and press Washington and state lawmakers to keep up restoration efforts.

Education

Classrooms dominated the dialogue in the early months of the contest.

Both Crist and Scott want to raise classroom funding. Crist says he plans to "restore" the $1.3 billion that Scott cut in his first year in office. Scott says he's already done so and has pledged to increase classroom funding to a "historic" level in his second term.

But they differ over traditional partisan issues such as "school choice."

Scott has pledged to continue supporting the expansion of school vouchers to thousands students in poorly performing schools and to stick with a plan for evaluating those schools.

Crist has promised to fight voucher expansion and has been less committal on student testing. He has set a goal to improve Florida's ranking in reading, math, science and technology by 2020.

Abortion

Scott has approved a series of abortion restrictions during his term. He signed bills to mandate that a woman receive an ultrasound before an abortion; to add new requirements to the state's Parental Notice of Abortion Act; and directed more state dollars from the sale of Choose Life license plates to anti-abortion advertising.

Crist has voted on both sides of the abortion-restriction issue over his political career. During this campaign, Crist has pledged to oppose any anti-abortion bills.

In the 1990s as a legislator, he voted against a bill requiring a waiting period for an abortion. But Crist also voted to override a veto by then-Gov. Lawton Chiles of an abortion ultrasound bill, and he has supported legislation requiring a waiting period for minors seeking abortions since then.

Medical marijuana

Crist supports Amendment 2, the ballot measure to legalize medical marijuana. It is being pushed by his current boss, Orlando trial lawyer John Morgan.

Scott opposes the amendment but did sign into law a bill this year legalizing a noneuphoric version of medical marijuana known as "Charlotte's Web" that has potential to help children with epilepsy.

Health care

Both candidates have espoused support for a federally funded $50 billion expansion of Medicaid as part of the federal health-care overhaul pushed by President Barack Obama. But the similarities stop there.

Scott cut his teeth in politics fighting Obamacare as a private citizen. His administration rejected the opportunity to create a Florida-based health-care exchange, punting that duty to Washington.

Crist has pledged to redesign the health-care portal for helping people connect to insurers.

Minimum wage

Crist says he supports Obama's proposal to raise the minimum wage to $10.10.

Scott spent most of the last year avoiding the question but ultimately conceded he opposed raising the minimum wage.

Same-sex marriage

Scott has consistently opposed legalizing same-sex marriage, although the debate has been playing out in the courts.

Crist, who once backed Florida's constitutional ban, has since reversed course and now supports legalizing same-sex marriage.

adeslatte@tribune.com or 850-222-5564