IRS Commissioner John Koskinen testifies before the Senate Finance Committee June 2, 2015. Win McNamee/Getty Images

The controversy over the Internal Revenue Service’s treatment of tea-party groups is fading in Washington. But for some House Republicans, it is still heating up.

House Oversight and Government Reform Chairman Jason Chaffetz (R., Utah) filed an impeachment resolution on Tuesday against IRS Commissioner John Koskinen, the turnaround expert who was brought in to clean up the tax agency in 2013. Mr. Chaffetz was joined by 18 fellow Republicans.

The charges focus on the destruction of magnetic tapes that contained e-mails from Lois Lerner, the former agency executive whose office gave extra scrutiny to the groups.

“John Andrew Koskinen engaged in a pattern of deception that demonstrates his unfitness to serve as Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service,” the resolution says, focusing on Mr. Koskinen’s statements last year about the agency’s efforts to retrieve documents for congressional investigations. “Commissioner Koskinen made a series of false and misleading statements to Congress in contravention of his oath to tell the truth.”

“The IRS vigorously disputes the allegations in the resolution. We have fully cooperated with all of the investigations,” the agency said in a written statement.

The move came just hours after Mr. Koskinen testified in the Senate in a hearing that was at times testy but lacking in the kinds of confrontation that have persisted in the House for more than two years.

Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch (R., Utah) told Mr. Koskinen that he had a “high opinion” of him, adding that the statement would get him “in trouble” with the House. The impeachment resolution came four days after the Department of Justice said that no one, including Lerner, would be prosecuted.

The odds are against Mr. Chaffetz’s impeachment bid. Even if the House went ahead and impeached Mr. Koskinen, it would take 67 votes in the Senate – and thus at least 13 Democrats – to remove him from office.

The House hasn’t impeached anyone except judges and President Bill Clinton since 1876.