A bill in the Ohio Legislature that, according to its sponsors, is intended to create fairness in commercial lending contracts also could affect a bank’s abilities to lend and to recoup losses after a deal sours.



That’s what Ohio lenders fear, anyway.



House Bill 291 is designed to alter state law allowing “confession of judgment provisions” clauses — otherwise known as cognovits — that currently are embedded in every commercial loan made in Ohio.



The conspicuously placed clauses warn borrowers in bold, all-caps language that if they sign the loan, the lender can seize assets through a court judgment “without your prior knowledge” should the borrowing party fail to make timely payments.



Those clauses only apply to commercial loans and are inserted automatically.



It’s illegal to insert cognovits into consumer loan contracts today.



HB 291 wouldn’t eliminate cognovits entirely. Rather, it would add a stipulation requiring that a hearing be held within 30 days of the borrower being notified of the lender’s intent to file a declaratory judgment.



“In the commercial banking area, this would be a big change on the way lenders make judgment on loans,” said Steven Shandor, chair of Akron law firm Day Ketterer’s banking law practice group.



The change almost certainly would drive up legal fees for lenders in addition to drawing out the timeline for a bank to recoup losses, Shandor said. In a scenario involving commercial real estate, for example, it would draw out the timeline of a foreclosure.



While lenders rarely act on cognovits, which generally are considered a last-ditch effort to recover losses, banks argue this proposed change puts them at a disadvantage.



But Rep. Ron Young (R-Leroy Twp.), who is the bill’s primary sponsor along with Rep. Jonathan Dever (R-Cincinnati), argues the change helps protect borrowers by ensuring cognovits are only filed “for legitimate reasons.”



Specifically, the proposed reforms would require a lender to notify a borrower 30 days in advance that they plan to confess judgment, and allow the debtor the opportunity to request a hearing to respond.





Lenders voice opposition

It also would ban the use of a cognovit note when a lender alleges non-monetary default, such as a failure to file a report on time—something that’s been upheld by several Ohio Appellate Courts.Those changes combined create a fairer system that would encourage economic growth and jobs, according to a testimony by Young.Young said he was motivated to sponsor the bill after being approached by business people in Lake County who “wanted this done.” Dever, an attorney, has tried cases where businesspeople lost homes and businesses as a result of cognovits even in situations where they allegedly made payments on time, every time.“The agreement itself is simply un-American,” Young said. “In a sense, we’re taking away people’s constitutional rights and due process, specifically. It’s something that shouldn’t be practiced in Ohio.”

Ohio’s bank associations are generally against the proposal.



“We think from all angles, it’s a bad idea,” said James Thurston, a spokesman for the Ohio Bankers League trade organization.



Cognovits, as they stand now, shift risk away from lenders, which in turn benefits borrowers in their loan agreements. And while Ohio is among a minority of states that permit them, opponents maintain it’s an important and beneficial tool.



“It is accurate to say we are in a minority of states that do this,” Thurston said. “But that means we get an advantage. The borrowers can potentially get better terms in Ohio than they would in other states.”



Credit unions are paying attention, though they seem to take a more neutral stance.



“We are in the business of protecting credit unions, and our member credit unions who are involved in business lending had concerns over the proposed notification process,” said Patrick Harris, vice president of government affairs at the Ohio Credit Union League, in a statement.



“We continue to have discussions with the bill sponsors, with the hope of getting to a place that protects credit unions while allowing them to continue to offer affordable small business lending.”





Shifting risk

Middlefield Banc Corp. president and CEO Thomas Caldwell, an Ohio delegate for The Independent Community Bankers of America and a member of the legislative committee for the Community Bankers Association of Ohio, said it is, in fact, rare for a bank to use cognovits.“But part of the concern is you’re giving the customer 30 days prior to the judgment being placed, and all of a sudden, the assets we have a secured interest in disappear,” he said. “This has happened before.”Caldwell said his bank has witnessed borrowers literally hide money or equipment the bank has a claim on ahead of the assets being seized.“In the past, where we attempt to collect on a debt, equipment has disappeared and we have to track it down if the borrower is not being cooperative,” he said. “We find it’s gone. Sometimes it’s already been sold. In some cases it’s being hid.”

While “most borrowers” are honest, Caldwell said, that extended period gives the borrower increased opportunity to act surreptitiously. That results in more risk for the bank, which in turn could result in higher interest rates and fees for commercial customers.



“I think you’ll find, if they removed this clause, it could make it more difficult for some borrowers to obtain credit, and more than likely it will make it more costly for borrowers to obtain credit,” Caldwell said.



However, Young isn’t sold by the claims that the proposed changes to cognovits would interfere with a bank’s ability to loan money, or that it would drive up legal costs, He said that hasn’t been the case in other states where similar changes to cognovits have occurred.



“That argument is based more in fears and concerns banks might have than any reliable data that can be confirmed statistically,” Young said.



One tweak to the bill, Young said, would permit lenders to declare judgments immediately, as they do now, with the significant caveat that a hearing must still happen within 30 days, and if a borrower can prove they made all their payments on time, the bank would be held responsible. If the bank, indeed, made an error and seized a borrower’s assets — which could include an individual’s business, banks accounts and even their home and car — the bank would be responsible for court costs, attorney fees and “extensive” damages.



The bill was introduced last July and is currently in committee. Young said he expects to see it moved out of committee in mid-April or sooner.