Leo Baker strikes a rock star pose Aug. 12 after getting a new electric guitar on his ninth birthday from Blue Star Connection, a nonprofit that provides musical instruments to children for musical therapy. Leo's mom, Sarah Portillo, far left, his sister, Lily Portillo, 12, center left, and his little brother, Marcelo Portillo, 5, right, watch. Makenzie Culver of Loveland, 15, the ambassador for Blue Star Connection, center right, gave Leo a few tips about playing his guitar and sang a birthday song for him. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Next show Paradox will perform Sunday, Sept. 20, at Surfside 7, 238 Linden St. in Fort Collins, for a gear drive to collect instruments for Blue Star Connection.

When Loveland teen musician Makenzie Culver handed Leo Baker a guitar and amplifier on his ninth birthday on Aug. 12, he thanked his sister.

"I'm lucky to have you for a sister, because otherwise I wouldn't be rocking out," the Loveland boy said to 12-year-old Lily Portillo.

Makenzie, 15, previously had given Lily, a child with special needs, a drum and their brother, Marcelo Portillo, 5, another drum.

"Leo loves his guitar and plays it every day," said Sarah Portillo, the mother of the three siblings. "Lily loves her drum. Who knows; we might end up with a family band."

Makenzie delivered her first set of instruments as the first Colorado Blue Star Kid. She promotes Blue Star Connection, a nonprofit founded in Grand County in 2004 that provides donated instruments to children with medical and other challenges to use for musical therapy.

For her deliveries, Makenzie made up the term "instrument drop" for the guitars, amps, drums and other instruments she takes to children, teens and young adults across the state. Most of her drops are surprises, and she typically gives a quick lesson on the instrument.

"The ambassador needs to be a kid that understands the value of music when you're going through a tough time," said Makenzie, lead singer for teen band Paradox who writes songs and plays the guitar.

Advertisement

Makenzie's story

At age 5, Makenzie was diagnosed with Chiari malformation type I, a neurological disorder in which part of the brain, the cerebellum, descends out of the skull into the spinal area, compressing parts of the brain and spinal cord.

Makenzie experienced extreme headaches, nausea and difficulties focusing and had to undergo surgery to correct the problem and for syringomyelia, a secondary condition she developed that can cause permanent nerve damage and paralysis.

Makenzie, who had to deal with returning symptoms and wasn't medically released until age 12, found relief in music when a family friend played the guitar for her.

"Music was the only thing that brought her peace," said her mother, Christy Culver. "I could visibly see her face soften because she felt comforted by music."

Makenzie said, "It helped me calm down. I felt normal."

In the hospital room is where her love for music began, Makenzie said. She learned years later that one of the symptoms of Chiari is difficulty singing because of an inability to modulate tone or pitch in the vocal cords, she said.

"It's crazy to think about," Makenzie said about singing as a child and now in a band. "Everything I'm doing is involved with singing."

Makenzie, who has been playing with Paradox for more than two years, publicly told her story for the first time when the band opened for another band at Dickens Opera House in Longmont in October 2014. She had wanted to learn whom to thank for booking the band and found out the presenter was Blue Star Connection, which raises money through concerts and donations.

"We realized that was really her story," Culver said. "She realized it was so powerful to have music therapy during her recovery."

Seeing the passion

John Catt, founder of Blue Star Connection, was at the concert. Seeing Makenkie's passion for music, he invited her to become the Colorado ambassador, the second one ever for the nonprofit. The other ambassador, now an adult, was from Texas.

"She's the perfect choice," Catt said. "When she told her story that night, the first time in public, she realized there's a reason for her to share it. ... That gives kids who are going through a hard time more than a little bit of hope. It's a shining example of 'You can get through this.'"

Makenzie has the ability to interact with children and shows she cares about them, Catt said.

"Her heart is very, very big," Catt said. "She's the most enchanting girl. She's just so cool."

Catt describes Makenzie as a crowd-pleasing, entertaining type of performer.

"I think she's going to change the world," Catt said. "She just wants to. That's usually what it takes, with some skill and a big heart."

Makenzie applied for a production development deal with a production company in Los Angeles and wrote a song, yet to be titled, inspired by the Blue Star Kids, which will be released soon on iTunes. She's also being considered for a three-song extended play, a step toward getting a record deal.

"It's encouraging kids to fight," Makenzie said. "It's basically an anthem to how these kids fight wars here. Medical stuff invades on your life."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.