Bryant opened Heartland Outdoors in August 2009, hoping to turn his love of the great outdoors into a profitable business. That never happened.

Barry Bryant is the owner at Heartland Outdoors and says he's disappointed that he has to close his doors.

After nearly four and a half years in business, an Edmond gun range and store has closed up shop.

Barry Bryant is the owner at Heartland Outdoors and says he's disappointed that he has to close his doors.

"We took a risk five years ago," Bryant said. "It didn't work."

Bryant opened Heartland Outdoors in August 2009, hoping to turn his love of the great outdoors into a profitable business. That never happened.

"In the history of Heartland Outdoors, we've yet to make any profit," said Bryant.

It's a disappointing reality that has forced him to close for good and he did on Dec. 31. Bryant says the low markup on merchandise and competition with other retail stores and more on the way sealed his company's fate.

Visit the Heartland Outdoors website

"People have been good to us. We tried. We took a risk. We didn't make it," Bryant said. "But it's not the people's fault."

Which is why he and store manager Steve Wingo said they will make good with all their customers.

"Our customers have been great," said Wingo. "It's no fault of theirs. They've supported us and we want to make sure we go out in the right way."

Which means all gift cards and special orders will be honored and all range memberships will be prorated and reimbursed. And for those customers with outstanding layaways, Bryant has a special surprise.

"When they come in, we're going to waive what they owe on that layaway and let them take it with them," Bryant said.

Bryant said customers have until Jan. 15 to redeem their gift cards or pick up any layaways. But you have to make an appointment by calling Heartland Outdoors at (405) 340-7530 between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. Monday through Friday.

Everything inside the store will go to auction on January 24 and 25 at Dakil Auctioneers located at 200 NW 114th St. in Oklahoma City.

Learn more about Dakil Auctioneers