This 7,355-square-foot brand new family home has vast and secluded landscaped gardens, and on the top floor it has a large games area. Owner and developer Lisa Lynn Bowdery completed this property, which is built on about half an acre, earlier this year. "My husband is a perfectionist and, together, we spent a long time reviewing the design to ensure that the house was exactly as we wanted," says Ms. Bowdery. Knight Frank …

Before Sunning Place was built, there was a 1950s-style property on the plot, says Ms. Bowdery. "When we bought the land to develop, I actually discovered a diary dating back to the time that the property was built. It was absolutely fascinating to read about what life was like in those days," she says. Knight Frank …

"We paid particular attention to ensuring that the reception space, kitchen/dining area and bedroom accommodation were designed in a way that would achieve the ultimate in modern family living," explains Ms. Bowdery. There are five reception rooms in all. There is also a studio flat above the separately built two-car garage. Knight Frank …

Attention to detail has been important in the construction of this house. The soft furnishings of the house, for example, were supplied by So Chic Interior Design, a company with a royal warrant. "I spend a lot of time in Spain and find that the lighting fixtures made in this country are of a really superior quality," says Ms. Bowdery. She shipped in the lighting from Spain to make sure that all aspects of the house were of "the highest standard." Knight Frank …

The bespoke kitchen has Gaggenau appliances and an integrated wine cooler and a Quooker hot tap. There is also an additional pantry, and a large utility room more than 10-feet-square. Knight Frank …

The house has six bedrooms, five of which have en-suite bathrooms. There are fitted wardrobes in most of the bedrooms. The house has state-of-the-art smart technology throughout, including a multiroom entertainment system, with tablet and remote controls. The house is secured with CCTV and a video door-entry system. Knight Frank …