Tackling today’s PolitiFact Oregon Roundup feels a bit like trudging unfazed back to the movie studio the day after the Oscars.

Why? Because PolitiFact awarded its 2013 “Lie of the Year,” that’s why. It went to President Obama for his now-notorious claim, “If you like your health care plan, you can keep it.”

Heady stuff indeed to have to follow an act like that. But as long as there are politicians, public figures and tireless bloggers out there making all manner of statements and claims, we will happily accept the challenge of examining them.

And, given the fireworks of yesterday’s award, what better place to start than with a Facebook meme saying that Vladimir Putin accused Obama of being “an idiot?”

The meme – (we don’t like that term, by the way, but it’s generally used to describe an idea, style or action which spreads, often as mimicry, from person to person via the Internet) -- passed along to PolitiFact included Putin’s picture and the quotation, “Any fourth grade history student knows socialism has failed in every country, at every time in history. President Obama and his Democrats are either idiots or deliberately trying to destroy their own economy.”

The story, written by Lilly Maier, asked, “Did Putin really call his colleague Obama an idiot? You may wonder why you hadn’t heard about the large-scale diplomatic crisis. We did, too. So we took a look.”

A little digging indicated that the quote had appeared in various places on the Internet over the past several years. PolitiFact finally traced it back to a site called Scooter’s Report, a blog that mixes satirical articles with offensive, manipulated images of Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama.

Further, the site appears to have been updated only once in the past three years. Those responsible for circulating the alleged Putin quote apparently look at a disclaimer on Scooter’s Report that says: “Like I have to tell you. This is fictitious satire and any resemblance to persons, places, or events is coincidental.”

The scam could have been revealed with just a little sleuthing. Maier rated the claim Pants on Fire.

Next up was this claim from U.S. Rep. Barbara Lee, D-Calif., who claimed that 60 percent of people on food assistance are working. “They are,” she said during an appearance on CNN’s Crossfire, “part of the working poor.”

Since Lee specifically mentioned food assistance during her appearance, PolitiFact took a closer look at what percentage of people receiving food stamps (also known as SNAP, for Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) are working.

What Lee should have made clear, the piece concluded, was that she meant to single out 60 percent of the pool of recipients expected to work. Her figure was a little high, but anywhere from 42 to 58 percent is a reasonable summary when talking about the percentage of people on food assistance who are working. Her claim was rated Mostly True.

Finally, PolitiFact took up a claim by conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh, who vowed that Obamacare “is going to increase the divorce rate.”

Limbaugh was apparently referring to a story about a New York couple considering a divorce so they could qualify for subsidies individually to offset the cost of health care under the new law.

The piece, written by Katie Sanders, found that so-called “marriage penalties” do exist, but that they aren’t limited to the new health-care law. It also can come into play for programs such as food stamps, temporary cash assistance and others.

Other experts weighed in, saying that it would be “pure conjecture” to say the health care law will cause an increase in the divorce rate; at least, any more than it would in those other instances.

“But there is no research that suggests this will substantially affect the country’s divorce rate, which is a little hard to measure in the first place,” the story concluded. “Experts said the effect may be marginal, as no one has done the research to nail down reasonable expectations. We rate this False.”

OK, the Oscar-equivalent “Lie of the Year” is duly awarded and we’re raring to get back in action. “Roll ‘em.”

-- Dana Tims