Betty Shelafo, a medical assistant who has spent decades providing care to Amarillo patients, is not excited about the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, but said she is trying to keep an open mind.

“I am not impressed with it,” she said. “It’s very similar to military (care) and I had my first child in a military hospital. That was not a pleasant experience.”

Shelafo was one of hundreds to attend an Amarillo Area Foundation symposium aimed at answering questions about the law many have dubbed Obamacare. Health care providers, administrators, business owners, and other citizens showed up to have their questions answered, foundation Vice President Charlotte Rhodes said.

“We wanted to make sure that we did something that was a neutral setting and we wanted to present the facts,” she said.

Republican State Representatives John T. Smithee and Four Price, and Republican State Sen. Kel Seliger, began the discussion Thursday morning in Amarillo Civic Center Grand Plaza. Seliger spoke of rising health care costs in Texas, and said the time is near when lawmakers would have to have a “substantive discussion” on how those costs will be covered.

“There is no indication there will be a slowdown or cessation of that growth,” Seliger said.

“We are headed, I think, for something of a budgetary crisis,” Seliger said.

Price said state lawmakers achieved a great deal in improving health care during the 83rd Legislative Session. Among those accomplishments were increasing funds for mental health programs, allotting new resources to detect Medicare fraud and other measures.

State lawmakers struggled to address the Affordable Care Act due to the politicized nature of the law and because they received few answers from the federal government over how the law would work, Price said.

“There was so much concern, so many unanswered questions,” he said.

Texas Hospital Association Senior Vice President of Government Relations John Williams echoed Seliger’s statement that health care expenses are unsustainable at their current rate.

One major expense he pointed out was the $5.5 billion hospitals have reported in uncompensated care, often resulting from patients who don’t have access to primary care or mental health and substance abuse treatment.

“You have to invest in services to help people get more appropriate medical care,” he said.

Repealing the Affordable Care Act, Williams said, is not an option unless lawmakers can work with insurers and health care providers to find a viable alternative. Maintaining the status quo is untenable, he said.

“So the dilemma is, how do you make insurance available to folks, make it more affordable ... do you do it through a mandate? Do you do tax incentives? Do you de-link it from employment? Do you create risk pools for folks who are uninsurable?” Williams said. “I think these are the debates we’re going to have going forward.”

Texas Medical Association Vice President of Medical Economics Lee Spangler talked about how the U.S. is demanding “more for less” from health providers.

Spangler said uncertainty over health care regulations has kept

practice-owning physicians from hiring new doctors and prevented new physicians from starting their own practices.

“Physicians basically get frozen” in the face of stringent regulations, he said, and costs to provide care to Medicare patients makes making a living hard for physicians who accept those plans.

Another problem with the Affordable Care Act lies in how physicians are supposed to provide care for the millions of additional Americans who will begin receiving insurance coverage, Spangler said.

In light of the act, physicians, insurers and hospitals are forming “affordable care organizations,” defined by the Department of Health and Human Services as a group of health care providers who coordinate patient care to improve overall quality of care.

Spangler warned that regulation on which groups can call themselves ACOs are lax, and that patients and providers should do their research on any ACO they are asked to join.

Dr. William Biggs, CEO of local ACO Amarillo Legacy Medical, said his organization of 110 health providers has seen numbers of hospital admission rates, re-admission rates, and rates of diabetes, pneumonia and heart failure drop among patients under the Legacy Medical umbrella.

The organization allows providers among five different practices to share patient information and compare performance standards among physicians.

“We are promoting the right care at the right time in the right place,” Biggs said.

Shelafo said she would like to see the government be more transparent and make information on the Affordable Care Act available to people in terms that they can understand.

“I think the federal government needs to be more open ... with what all of these rules are,” Shelafo said.

“There’s a lot of people that have a lot of questions.”