Webb led Cougars to state title

Mountain View senior Nicole Goddard, back left, Thompson Valley senior Emily Newton, middle left, Loveland senior Kim Weissmann, middle, Roosevelt senior Breanne Hankins, middle right, and junior Farel Garcia, right, Resurrection Christian juniors Madison Webb, front left, and Preston Lienemann, front right, make up the 2013 Reporter-Herald all-area volleyball team. Webb is the athlete of the year. (Cris Tiller)

Caleb Howard got a tip that he was about to get a talented young setter moving from middle school to high school.

He thought he would run her with the junior varsity team and just gauge how good this freshman would be. Middle school is of course a completely different level of competition than high school. The result was surprising and exciting. Why not try her another level up?

"So I ran her with the varsity and thought 'Oh my goodness, she's varsity level as a freshman.' She was a very good setter her freshman year, but she's really emerged in the last few," Howard said.

In two years time, Madison Webb went from a talented youngster to the leader of an undefeated, 2A state championship team. The Cougars weren't just good they were downright dominant.

The junior dished out a staggering 1,016 assists over the course of a season, an average of 10.8 per set. She was fourth on the team in digs with 206 and added 41 aces.

Resurrection Christian finished the season a perfect 29-0 and didn't drop a single set until its 14th match of the season. It would be one of just seven sets the Cougars would lose the entire year. And in the middle of it all stood Webb.

For her guidance and exceptional play, she has been selected as the RH volleyball player of the year, heading the All-Area team. She is joined on the team by Rez teammate Preston Lienemann, Roosevelt's Breanne Hankins and Farel Garcia, Thompson Valley's Emily Newton, Kim Weissmann of Loveland and Nicole Goddard of Mountain View.

Advertisement

"State was an experience I will never forget. The nerves and you look around the (Denver) Coliseum and all the people are yelling and screaming. There's nothing like that," she said. "You step out and the lights are right on you. But as soon as you step out there you know this is it, this is what you've been working for all season. When the whistle blew on that final point it was like a dream come true for each and every one of us."

And that right there is what makes Webb such an exceptional player. The moment was never too big and her drive to win always kept the goal dead center. When Howard looks at the Webb before him now, he sees someone who is mature beyond her years, an excellent teammate and above all else, a winner.

Her passion to be the best in unique for a kid her age, Howard said, and like any good leader she's at her best when the team needs it most.

"She's a very skilled setter, obviously, but a tremendous leader as well. She's very, very competitive, but keeps a pretty cool head," Howard said. "So while she wants to win, and her teammates know she wants to win, she also doesn't panic. She performs well under pressure."

A setter in volleyball is much like a quarterback in football. They nearly always touch the ball and are responsible for getting teammates in positions to succeed. A bad serve can lead to a poor hit, which can hurt you on the defensive end. There's little room for error.

Dropping seven sets in an entire season speaks volumes to the skill of Rez as a whole, but also to its centerpiece.

"There's definitely a lot of pressure thinking about where the set should go to get the best kill or things like that. I just think of myself as a leader out there, not wanting all the glory or attention, but just the backbone of the team," Webb said. "To make sure everyone knows what they're doing, making sure everyone knows what set they'll have and do my job and hold up that end."

Webb talked about loving volleyball because of the team element. She liked how it took everybody doing their part to make thing run and naturally she loves winning almost more than anything. But she also likes improving, constantly figuring out new ways to get better than the day before.

She'll repeat tasks over and over until she's mastered them, asks for advice and takes criticism for what it is. Her senior year will be tougher than the last. Rez returns all but two seniors and will be heavy favorites to repeat. The Cougars will get everyone's best shot.

Good, because Webb loves a challenge and wouldn't have it any other way.

Lienemann -- The 5-foot-9 outside hitter led a strong Rez squad with 341 kills (3.6 per set) and hit an outstanding .247 as a junior. Lienemann also had 44 aces and 381 digs, the second-best mark for the Cougars.

Weissmann -- The Loveland senior paced the offense for the Indians with 258 kills on the season, an average of four per set. She hit .347 and committed only 77 errors in 521 attempts. Weissmann will continue her career at Northern Colorado next fall.

Hankins -- Hankins was a force on the outside for a strong Roosevelt team, leading the RoughRiders with 231 kills (3.2 per set). She was third in digs with 360 and helped RHS to a 19-8 record, 12-2 in 4A Tri-Valley conference play.

Garcia -- Roosevelt's offense ran smoothly thanks to Garcia, who dished out 701 assists (10.6 per set). The junior excelled in controlling the tempo, getting four different outside hitters at least 100 kills on the season.

Goddard -- Goddard led Mountain View in kills with 273 (3.3 per set) and was second for the Mountain Lions in digs tallying 318 during the season.

Newton -- In her senior season, Newton capped off her high school career by leading Thompson Valley in kills with 256 and solo blocks (23, 49 total). Newton also contributed with 168 digs.

Cris Tiller can be reached at 669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or on Twitter @cristiller and @RHpreps.