Clemson's Deshaun Watson (4) celebrates his touchdown against North Carolina during the first half of the ACC Championship Game in Charlotte on Dec. 5. (AP Photo/Bob Leverone)

The Clemson football program has already won the publicity national championship for 2015. The undefeated Tigers were No. 1 wire-to-wire over the six weeks of the College Football Playoff rankings, hosted the ESPN “GameDay” crew and made three Sports Illustrated covers and the Heisman Trophy show.

If Dabo Swinney isn’t winning a Coach of the Year award, he is hosting a stadium-sized pizza party.

“People say athletics is the front porch of a university and Clemson’s front porch looks pretty good right now,” said Dr. Raymond Sauer, president of the North American Association of Sports Economists and an Economics professor at Clemson. “That kind of positive publicity is pretty hard to purchase. It’s hard to quantify that but it gives the university a national presence, not just a regional presence.”

But while the 13-0 run to a College Football Playoff date with No. 4 Oklahoma in the Dec. 31 Orange Bowl no doubt gives the football program a boost, it doesn’t guarantee the athletic department upcoming annual profits. And, contrary to popular belief, the university as a whole might feel little if any positive financial impact.

The short-term key for Clemson? Leverage.

Long-term key? Keep winning.

Football success comes with only a few guarantees.

Among them:

‘Self-contained’ profit, and loss.

Deshaun Watson, quarterback and Heisman finalist, has been worth more than $2 million to Clemson this season, said Dr. Robert Brown, a professor of Economics at the University of California at San Marcos who has studied college athlete values for two decades. He bases his theory on a star player’s impact on things like ticket sales, TV revenue and game concessions.

“As a Heisman Trophy candidate and with Clemson having the year that they’re having, (Watson’s) value is probably well beyond $2 million,” Brown said.

Of course, that’s just the tip of the Clemson cash haul. Just for making a semifinal playoff game, the Tigers earn $6 million for the ACC and stand to make much more money under the bowl revenue distribution plan. Clemson home attendance (81,751 average) ranked No. 14 nationally and was almost equal to 2014 (81,752).

Clemson, USC red ink

Most athletic departments plow their football profits back into the program or other sports upgrades. That’s not such a bad thing — new facilities, new planes for recruiting, various upgrades.

“It’s not a bonanza for the university as a whole, per se,” Sauer said. “The money side of things is mostly self-contained to the athletic department. That’s a truism that goes back a long way in college athletics.”

But as a recent Washington Post story shows, it rarely means black ink for athletic departments or schools even as revenues soar, mostly thanks to TV money. The 25 Power Five conference athletic departments that ran deficits in 2014 included Clemson ($3 million) and South Carolina ($2.8 million).

The impact beyond athletics is minimal or murky.

In theory, more athletic success equals more exposure for a school, which leads to more applicants, which usually means better applicants, and smarter students can lead to valuable prestige for academic departments.

“That’s certainly the story. It’s possible,” Brown said. “There has been some research on that but there hasn’t been a consensus to show the direct connection there. Does it translate into things like research grants? Probably not.”

Still, there are positives.

“Whether it’s a Final Four run in basketball or an undefeated football season, you get a bigger applicant pool,” Sauer said. “That allows you to either be more selective, or if you’re trying to grow your student numbers a little bit, you can do that without having a drop-off in quality. That part of the equation is well-studied.”

‘Have to keep working’

Striking when the ranking is hot is critical, but doesn’t guarantee more winning.

“The best way to leverage success is to develop donors, hit them when excitement is high and passions are keen,” said Dr. Thomas H. Regan, a professor in the University of South Carolina’s Department of Sport and Entertainment Management. “Both philanthropic and transactional development have to be worked to gain maximum financial benefit.”

Clemson is on the right track with that lifeblood tandem, donations and recruiting. Swinney helped break ground last month for a long-planned $55 million football complex — aka Dabo World — that includes a mini version of The Hill. As if Clemson recruiting for the Class of 2016 wasn’t going well enough, Swinney this month got commitments from two of the top quarterbacks in the Class of 2017, Hunter Johnson of Brownsburg, Ind., and Chase Brice of Loganville, Ga.

As everyone in sports knows, maintaining excellence isn’t easy. South Carolina skidded to a 3-8 football record this year, two seasons after a third straight 11-2 finish.

“You have to keep working,” Sauer said. “If you can sustain an excellent program, that will feed back in a number of ways. No question, their apparel and licensing revenues will increase. For the long term, they will probably be able to get better deals on those contracts if they can continue to be in the limelight.”

Clemson is two games away from a different kind of limelight.

“A championship will bring a national exposure to Clemson much greater than the first (1981) national championship,” Regan said.

Which will likely lead to more perks inside the football complex and a new athletic department jet, though not necessarily any new fountains, greenhouse grants or reduced tuition.

Follow Gene Sapakoff on Twitter @sapakoff