By Samuel Friedman | Watchdog Opinion

We are well passed the fifth year anniversary of the day President Obama signed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which was supposed to give every American affordable and accessible health care, especially to those people who had pre-existing conditions and were either forced to pay extremely high premiums for insurance or were denied coverage. However the ACA only works, assuming your goal is not a government-payer health care system, if those of us who don’t have health insurance buy into the system to help ensure less healthy individuals can keep their premiums down.

I turned 26 in January and the insurance I had from my parents expired. As I do not receive health insurance benefits from my employer, I headed over to the Delaware Marketplace like thousands of other Delawareans who don’t have health insurance. In addition to the four “metal plans” available to everyone, I am eligible for a catastrophic plan since I am under 30.

The price for the cheapest available catastrophic plan on the Delaware health insurance exchange website was roughly $190 per month with a $6,600 deductible and same Max-out-of-Pocket (MOOP) expense before I would qualify for the plan’s coverage offered by Aetna. So I, with no major health issues which would harm my ability to function without medical insurance or medicine, would have to pay about $8,880 out of my pocket before I’d see any of the benefits of my plan.

Needless to say, for me to burn almost $9,000 from my bank account would not make this plan “affordable” or easy on my savings, and even then I would not be completely able to avoid expenses as the catastrophic plan doesn’t cover 100 percent after I reach my MOOP. The bronze plans started as low as $234 per month for a single, 26-year-old man, and the other metal levels were even higher for all available plans.

The next step was to find out if I qualified for taxpayer subsidies. Since I’m within 400 percent of the federal poverty level (the $46,000 threshold set for individual subsidy eligibility) for a single childless man, I assumed, like I was told by the Democratic Party and mainstream media, that subsidies would be available for me to help offset the high cost of the insurance plans.

For the record, I generally don’t like the idea of taking taxpayer funds for my own use without giving anything in return, but the plans are unaffordable otherwise. Even supporters of the law acknowledge the need for healthy, single, childless men like me to pay much higher premiums to subsidize other people’s insurance policies.

When I checked my eligibility on the exchange site, I was told I was ineligible for subsides for two reasons. First, catastrophic plans are ineligible for any subsidies. Second, my income exceeds 200 percent of the federal poverty limit for my social status, which meant I was not a priority for subsidies because they went to people purchasing the higher metal plans in the marketplace who were ineligible for a catastrophic plan. Three efforts to reach someone from the Delaware exchange via e-mail and phone were unsuccessful, and I never got callbacks or had my questions answered.

A News Journal report published last week shows that only 23 percent of young Delawareans signed up for Obamacare, the second lowest number of enrollees in the country. This isn’t hard to understand; Delaware really only has two insurance companies: Highmark Blue Cross Blue Shield, which controls close to 92 percent of the private insurance market, and Aetna, which has the remaining eight percent of the market. More than half of all Delawareans receive some type of government-paid healthcare.

Having only two companies in the private insurance market creates a duopoly and limits competition, especially when one company has pretty much the entire private market and there’s little incentive to control prices. Then there’s the issue of the fine, which is always lower than the cheapest available plan; ACA was written this way. And what’s the rush? If I get sick, I can show up in the emergency room, and by law they can’t turn me away. They’ll just enroll me in Obamacare on the spot. And if I incur a lot of medical debt? Declare personal bankruptcy and restructure my payments to protect my credit.

That’s not the way I want to live, but it’s the way Obamacare is set up.

At least I can afford to pay the fine.