Solicitor General Donald Verrilli Associated Press

If blockbuster Supreme Court battles ended the way sports championships do, U.S. Solicitor General Donald Verrilli would be soaked in champagne and showered with Gatorade. And Jones Day partner Michael Carvin, the lawyer for the losing plaintiffs, would glumly file back into a hushed locker room.

Thursday’s Obamacare ruling marked the second time in three years that a centerpiece of the health law came under heavy legal assault and survived. In both cases, Mr. Verrilli was the lawyer standing before the high court in its defense.

And once again, Mr. Verrilli prevailed, when Chief Justice Roberts united with the court’s liberal wing in refusing to dismantle the health law.

“Congratulations to SG Don Verrilli,” tweeted former Attorney General Eric Holder.

Writing for Slate, former acting Solicitor General Walter Dellinger says he’s “rarely seen an opinion of the court that more closely followed the government’s arguments.”

Ron Pollack, head of the Families USA health law advocacy group, said he saw the solicitor general in the courtroom today but that Mr. Verrilli had told him he thought the health decision would come Friday. When it became clear that Chief Justice Roberts was reading an opinion upholding the tax credits, Mr. Pollack said he wanted to jump up and down and hug Mr. Verrilli, but was bound by the court’s rules for decorum and silence.

For Mr. Carvin, the ruling marked the second time he argued against the health law but failed to persuade at least five justices. In 2012 he represented the challengers to the law who fell one vote short when Chief Justice Roberts voted to uphold Affordable Care Act’s individual mandate as a tax.

“I’m obviously disappointed,” Mr. Carvin told Law Blog on Thursday after the court announced its decision. “I think the big loser today was the rule of law.”

Just before arguments in the case in March, the star conservative litigator likened himself to the hero of “To Kill a Mockingbird.” Fighting for the rule of law is “what Atticus Finch was doing,” he told The Wall Street Journal.

“This is probably the easiest case I’ve ever done,” Mr. Carvin said at the time. “I believe to my bones that if this involved some mortgage deduction or any kind of tax question outside the politically charged context of this case, no judge would disagree.”

Mr. Carvin attributed his last defeat to legal precedents that granted broad deference to Congress and to the challenge of trying to prove how the framers would have approached the legality of Obamacare’s overhaul of the modern health-care marketplace.

Don’t give Mr. Verrilli too much credit, says South Texas College of Law professor Josh Blackman, who wrote a book about the 2012 constitutional challenge to Obamacare. The court rejected the government’s position that “established by the state” was, in Mr. Verrilli’s words, a “term of art” deliberately chosen by Congress.

Mr. Blackman also noted that the majority dismissed the argument advanced by the solicitor general that the court should defer to the Internal Revenue Service, which wrote the regulation authorizing subsidies for insurance purchased on federally run exchanges.

“On the whole the government won, but not based on the [solicitor general's] arguments,” the professor said.

– Louise Radnofsky contributed to this post.