Calling for a renewed democracy, Tom Howarth, a Democrat from Front Royal, confirmed Tuesday he’s seeking the party’s nomination to run for the 6th District U.S. House of Representatives seat.

“We have a big gap [in politics] now,” Howarth, 67, said in an interview. “We don’t talk to each other anymore.”

“Things have gotten very bitter, and it’s not good for democracy. I want to see that end.”

Howarth — who spent his career in government, politics and nonprofit work before retiring in 2014 — is filing to run for the seat currently held by Rep. Bob Goodlatte, R-Roanoke County.

Goodlatte, a 12-term incumbent and chair of the powerful House Judiciary Committee, is seeking re-election and facing a primary challenge from Harry Griego of Roanoke County.

Griego, a pilot, ran for the House of Delegates last year with the endorsement of the Roanoke Tea Party. He came close to upsetting an incumbent in a primary contest for the 17th District statehouse seat.

In this year’s elections, Howarth is the only Democrat so far to announce for the congressional seat. The party is gathering May 21 at a district convention in Lexington to pick its nominee. Candidates have until Friday to file for consideration.

The 6th District covers part or all of 19 localities spanning from Roanoke north through the Shenandoah Valley.

On Tuesday, Howarth said he was spurred to run for office by his growing concerns about the partisan divide in D.C.

“We have this bitter partisanship that is getting nothing done,” he said. “How many times have Republicans in the House voted to repeal the Affordable Care Act? It’s an empty gesture. They know the votes in the Senate aren’t there. But they keep doing it, apparently, just to fire up their base.”

Howarth said he hopes to help serve as an “architect for a renewed democracy” built on respect and a focus on fixing problems.

“There was a time when Republicans and Democrats worked together,” he said. “We’ve got to get back to that.”

If elected, Howarth said he’d be an advocate for strengthening the Voting Rights Act, raising the minimum wage and adopting a “comprehensive and compassionate” immigration policy.

Prior to retiring, Howarth spent more than nine years working in the D.C. area as director of The Father McKenna Center, a Catholic nonprofit that runs a homeless shelter, food pantry and other programs.

His resume also includes past stints working for the Department of Commerce during the Carter administration, serving as a legislative aide for U.S. Sen. Frank Lautenberg, D-N.J., in the 1980s and working as a lobbyist for Mothers Against Drunk Driving.

Howarth is married with two adult children and three grandchildren. In January, he became chairman of the local Warren County Democratic Committee.

This is his first run for public office. He said he’s in the process of setting up his campaign and plans to hold a formal kickoff shortly before the May 21 nominating convention.