Step by step. Story by story. Memory by memory.

"It's interesting and it's chilling," Mark Tate, a volunteer said. "He lives in the building and stood on the landing outside his door to hand out water and fruit to climbers.

"The real heroes are the guys that climbed the stairs and the guys that climbed the stairs on 9/11," he said. "This country doesn't need to forget that day. Never."

The stair climb brought more than 400 participants plus volunteers from community groups, emergency services, fire rescue and military units from more than 12 states.

They climbed 22 stories five times to mimic the 110 stories of the World Trade Center.

"I am. A Little bit. A little nervous," Gage Cowart with the Bay County fire department said, strapping gear on before his climb.

Fourteen years ago, men and women climbed up and down the stairs of a crumbling World Trade Center.

"Lieutenant Mike Quilty and Lieutenant Glenn Perry," one firefighter said, reading the names written on a water hose strapped to his back. "They worked together for 20 years. And Lieutenant Glenn Perry's son dates Lieutenant Quilty's daughter now."

Fourteen years later they're still climbing.

"I mean it was a beautiful thing to see because it shows that no matter where you're from, you know, that moment touched everybody about the same," Parnell Boyd with the Oxford, MS fire department said. "This job that we do it carries us far and brings us together in a lot of different ways."

"You get to meet a lot of different people from a lot of different departments," Natalie McQueen with the Bay County fire department said. "You don't get that opportunity often.

Air tanks, masks and flags, by the dozen, were strung, strapped and stuck on climbers by the dozen.

"Proximity gear," one firefighter said, dressed in a silver, reflective suit. "It's for airport fires."

"You can only imagine what they went through especially 110 straight with no rests," another with the Pensacola fire department said.

"We just feel like you know it wouldn't be that much of a climb without wearing the same gear they wore," Cowart said. "And facing the same amount of stairs and the same amount of hardships they did so it's good to compare to see what they went through."

Others carried cargo far more precious.

"He's getting tired. Somehow," one firefighter said with his young son in his arms.

Climbers trudged upward with not just determination but investment.

Kyle Klekamp and his friends took turns carrying up a 110 pound dummy.

"Well you know, on 9-11 those guys walked all the way up those flights of steps we figured they had a lot more weight than we did," Klekamp said. "And so we grabbed the heaviest thing really we could find.

The climb is also a fundraising event for the National Fallen Firefighters Association. Organizers say participants they are already planning to make next year's event bigger and better.

And so they climbed - some for fitness, others for charity. But all to remember those who climbed all the way to heaven.