CU awards 5,927 total degrees on soggy Saturday

This year, "Pomp and Circumstance" was accompanied by the rhythmic and unrelenting "drip, drip, drip" of rain that fell all morning during the University of Colorado's commencement ceremony.

Instead of the traditional sea of black caps and gowns filling the chairs at Folsom Stadium, a veritable rainbow of pink, red, blue, striped, plaid and polka-dotted umbrellas covered the field.

Anxious parents and grandparents ducked under stairwells and eaves, poking their hooded heads out from under to look for other family members and friends. A pair of maintenance workers used leaf blowers to push inches of water off graduates' chairs before the procession.

Though Saturday was wet — really wet — and cold, graduates and their families made the most of a bad situation by stocking up on hot coffee inside Balch Fieldhouse and frolicking joyfully on the campus's soggy sidewalks and grass.

The rain did not let up for the ceremonial early-morning drink at The Sink, nor did it stop when students lined up on Norlin Quad before heading to the stadium.

It kept pouring when longtime publishing executive Cathleen Black delivered her commencement address, which she pared down to less than five minutes.

"You'll be glad to know that I have three versions of my speech today," said Black, decked out in a poncho covered with the CU logo. "One about 15 minutes, one about 10 and the Noah's Ark version."

Advertisement

Black described how her now-graduating daughter, Alison Harvey, fell in love with Boulder and CU's campus.

"That was before the admissions speaker said there are 300 days of sunshine in Colorado," Black said, pausing. "I think you must have used them all up."

Black offered brief pieces of advice to graduates — be kind and compassionate, over-deliver at your first job and follow your passion "no matter what your parents want you to do," she said.

Emma Friedland, left, and Tara Kengott try to stay dry by wearing bags to no avail during the University of Colorado spring commencement ceremony at Folsom Field on Saturday . (David R. Jennings )

All told, CU conferred 4,545 bachelor's degrees, 908 master's degrees, 149 law degrees and 325 doctoral degrees.

'It's freezing'

Before the ceremony, Aijiana Zanders took cover near Norlin Library, looking out across the sopping quad in her graduation regalia.

She said she was "thrilled" to be finishing her undergraduate studies at CU in speech, language and hearing sciences, but added that the rain was putting a damper on the festive mood.

"I was going to wear a dress and heels and everything, but now I'm wearing jeans and boots," Zanders said. "And I'm still wet."

Outside the Sink an hour before the start of the ceremony, Ramisa Faruque held a pair of strappy turquoise heels in her hands while waiting to get inside for a Bloody Mary.

On her feet instead were rubber flip flops — not exactly what she had envisioned for her graduation-day outfit.

"I'm freezing," said Faruque, who earned a degree in computer science.

Like Faruque, many students and their guests coped with the moisture and cool temperatures by imbibing mimosas and other breakfast beverages before heading to campus.

A long line of umbrellas snaked up the sidewalk along Pennsylvania Avenue, even as heavy rains fell.

"I hear there's breakfast burritos and I wanna get hammered before the ceremony," said Roman Sammartino, who received a degree in math. "It's miserable out."

For father Jim Von Dreel, whose daughter Julia received a degree in studio arts on Saturday, a bit of bad weather wasn't enough to dampen his pride.

"We've been working too hard," he said. "A little bit of rain isn't gonna slow us down."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta