?

LOUISVILLE, Ky. (WDRB) -- They are two issues that directly affect every Kentuckian.WDRB gets answers from the four Republicans running for governor about education and healthcare.All four say the status quo is not working. They want to revamp education and remove Obamacare.Kentucky students spend just over 6 hours a day in school. The four Republican candidates for governor say that time can be better used for learning.They all support school choice, including public charter schools.“We cannot continue to sit by and watch as failure after failure occurs with increasing numbers of our school systems. We need school choice,” said Louisville businessman Matt Bevin.“I believe that school choice will help improve our existing public schools because competition's a good thing,” commented Agriculture Secretary James Comer.“I believe in specialized forms of education for children that aren't making it,” said Hal Heiner, businessman and former member of Louisville's Metro Council.Former Supreme Court Justice Will T Scott is also promoting educating and treating drug addicts in prison.“We're housing addicts now in an expensive medium security system, when I can do a minimum security system with lower cost, with high schools, I can put colleges in there, real skills training,” he said.When it comes to healthcare, all say they'll disconnect Kynect, the state insurance exchange created by Gov. Steve Beshear as part of Affordable Care Act.They would move enrollees to the federal exchange.“It's redundant. We can't afford it when the subsidies come off,” said Bevin.But what about the nearly 400,000 Kentuckians who now receive Medicaid through the ACA? Beginning in 2017, Kentucky must begin to pay a share of the cost.“My budget advisors tell me we're looking at $500 million. We'll find it. We will find it,” said Scott.Bevin, Comer and Heiner focus on getting people off Medicaid and into private insurance.“That's what we need to do is give people the tools to move to a higher level job,” he said.“That's not going to happen until we improve the business climate in the state to create more jobs,” said Comer.But how will get they anything done with a divided General Assembly?Heiner's solution is to rally public support.“Amazing things happen when the citizens get involved and they start calling their senators and representatives. That's how you get big, long lasting improvements.”Comer points to his experience in Frankfort.“I have a history of bringing people together and passing legislation in a bipartisan manner.”Bevin says he'll work to replace House Democrats.“I have high confidence that if I'm elected governor, that by the time we get to year two, after the 2016 election, we will have turned the House.”And Scott says he'll call a special meeting with House and Senate leadership.“I'm going to say ‘come on we're going fishing,' and we're going to talk, and we're going to agree on what we can do to solve these problems in Kentucky.The primary is May 19 and, right now, the race is too close to call.The winner will face likely Democratic nominee, Attorney General Jack Conway.View the raw interviews with the candidates:Related: