He speaks with a mouth full of food. He can’t go longer than 10 seconds without checking his iPhone. He wears a smaller jeans size than me. The list of relationship deal breakers that I’ve heard could go on for miles. But that’s not unusual.

A series of six studies published together in the Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin found that people put more emphasis on negative traits than positive ones while evaluating a potential mate. In other words, a deal-breaking trait hurts a potential mate’s chances more than the average deal-making characteristic helps.

Related: How Your Smartphone Is Sabotaging Your Relationship

The studies also found that while both sexes are selective about long-term partners, women are likely to be a bit pickier, probably because they have more riding on their selection, including the nine months of pregnancy. As the researchers posit, women “are biologically obligated to expend a higher minimum investment in offspring.”

Both sexes had more deal breakers as they aged, possibly because they had more experience from previous relationships, or because the stakes were higher as men and women looked to start having children. Individuals that considered themselves a good catch were also found to have more deal breakers.

Related: Why ‘In a Relationship’ on Facebook Means More Than You Think

The researchers’ questionnaire asked 5,541 single Americans about 17 different traits that might cause someone to reject a potential long-term mate. Below are the 13 qualities that were most commonly cited as deal breakers:

Disheveled or unclean appearance

Men: 63 percent

Women: 71 percent

Lazy

Men: 60 percent

Women: 72 percent

Too needy

Men: 57 percent

Women: 69 percent

No sense of humor

Men: 50 percent

Women: 58 percent

Lives more than 3 hours away

Men: 51 percent

Women: 47 percent

Bad sex

Men: 44 percent

Women: 50 percent

Lacks self-confidence

Men: 33 percent

Women: 47 percent

Too much TV/videogames

Men: 25 percent

Women: 41 percent

Low sex drive

Men: 39 percent

Women: 27 percent

Stubborn

Men: 32 percent

Women: 34 percent

Talks too much

Men: 26 percent

Women: 20 percent

Too quiet

Men: 11 percent

Women: 17 percent

Blunt

Men: 11 percent

Women: 17 percent