There comes a point when rehabilitating a repeat drunk driver should become secondary to keeping such menaces off the road.

Reasonable people may disagree on when that change in priorities should occur. Is it the third driving while intoxicated conviction? Fifth?

How about 16 convictions?

The case of Denny Lovern, convicted at least 16 times on alcohol-related driving offenses over 31 years, has highlighted Colorado’s unacceptably weak drunk driving laws.

Last month, a grand jury indicted Lovern after the Saab he was driving plowed into a vehicle driven by a woman in Englewood. After briefly checking the damage to the woman’s car, he drove off.

Later, according to the indictment, he told police: “I’ve had a lot to drink. I should not have been driving.”

It wasn’t the first time.

The indictment said Lovern was first charged with DUI in 1983, a charge that was reduced to driving while ability impaired. He also was ordered by the court to undergo alcohol education, something that was to be repeated many times over the years.

One of the maddening things about DUI law in Colorado is that no matter how many DUIs a person racks up, it’s still a misdemeanor, punishable by up to a year in jail.

The way Lovern got to felony charges this time is that Arapahoe District Attorney George Brauchler is arguing that Lovern was so reckless in driving drunk that he committed attempted manslaughter and attempted assault, both felonies. This is an aggressive approach by the prosecutor, to say the least, and it shouldn’t be necessary.

If Colorado had a law that made drunk driving a felony at some point — whether it’s the third in five years or the fourth in a lifetime — then those people who obviously don’t care about the lives they are putting in peril could be put in prison upon conviction.

Don’t believe for a minute that these folks haven’t had access to treatment. In fact they have.

Sure, we can debate what treatment is most effective or how to make it more affordable, but there is no reason that treatment and punishment should be mutually exclusive.

So if lawmakers are concerned about the efficacy of treatment, by all means, they can address it. But let’s not turn away from the reality that there is a hard core of drunk drivers who just don’t care about who gets hurt.

“This guy is not a stand-alone in terms of DUIs,” Brauchler told us. “You’d be shocked at how many people are out there with multiple DUIs.”

State lawmakers last year failed to pass a felony DUI bill despite it having bipartisan support. The concerns centered on cost of incarceration and a preferred focus on treatment.

This year’s effort, which is reportedly coming, deserves a better fate. Colorado must have a felony DUI law, as most states do, so dangerous drunks can spend time in prison getting sober.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.