Updated on Tuesday:

A city spokeswoman said the water main break was caused by corrosion in the line.

About 400,000 gallons spilled from the pipeline before it could be patched.

Updated at 12:14 p.m.: First Baptist Church leaders said Saturday afternoon that the church property, specifically the Criswell Center, sustained minor damages from the flood.

Ben Lovvorn, minister of operations who saw the flooding first hand, said there was a foot of water in the basement — not five feet as previously reported by flood recovery crews.

He added that Sunday services will happen as planned.

The main break “may have looked bad on the exterior, on the road,” he said. “But it’s not really going to affect our ministry … The average church member won’t even know that it happened.”

First Dallas Baptist underwent a $130 million renovation in 2013. None of the new or renovated spaces were affected by Saturday’s water main break, Lovvorn said.

Crews continued to tend to the gaping hole on the 600 block of Ervay Street Saturday afternoon. The area was still closed off to traffic.

Original post at 8:50 a.m.: An overnight water man break caused water to gush out of the ground and pour into the First Baptist Dallas building in downtown, causing water levels to rise five feet in the church’s basement, utilities officials said.

The break, located in the 600 block of Ervay Street, was reported around midnight Saturday. Crews cut off water flow to the pipe by 1 a.m., said Joel Tillery, a senior program manager for Dallas Water Utilities.

By then, water levels had risen about five feet in the basement.

“The water was coming up, going over the sidewalk and into the doors,” Tillery said.

He said he did not know how much water flowed out of the damaged 12-inch water main. The cause of the break was also unknown as of 8 a.m. Saturday.

More than a dozen workers helped clean up the area.

Building recovery crews were at the scene for more than seven hours, pumping water out of the building. Utilities crews focused their efforts on the 10-by-12 feet hole in the street, digging into the roadway to get to the damaged pipe.

Ervay Street, between San Jacinto and Patterson streets, was closed to traffic. Tillery said officials planned to temporarily repair and re-open the street by the afternoon.

“We’ll clean as much mud and debris as we can,” he said.

Church officials could not immediately be reached.

More soon.