Packers quarterback Scott Tolzien scrambles away from Titans defenders Akeem Ayers (56) and Karl Klug on Saturday in Nashville, Tenn. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Nashville, Tenn. — Davante Adams hadn't experienced rain this vicious since his senior year of high school. To his right, Myles White said he played in two hurricanes during college, and Saturday night's monsoon-like conditions were worse than both.

Then again, Green Bay isn't exactly going to be paradise.

"You're not going to get sunny skies every time you play," Adams said.

So this experiment on punt returns may not last long.

The rookie receiver Adams isn't even listed on the Packers' depth chart as a punt returner. Yet in Green Bay's 20-16 loss to the Tennessee Titans at LP Field, he lined up deep for the first two punts...and muffed both.

The back-to-back bloopers were the latest sign that coach Mike McCarthy may be better off just sticking with Micah Hyde as his punt returner.

Rain was a factor — ball security was a problem for both Green Bay and Tennessee. The city was blitzed by a treacherous downpour about 45 minutes before kickoff, and the rain stayed steady all first half. Even Hyde dropped (and recovered) a punt himself. Still, Adams struggled.

As Adams said, the Packers "aren't naive to the fact that it's the hardest rain in the world," but he knows he has to catch the ball.

Deep in his own end, Adams let the second punt bobble off his body, the Titans recovered, and Shonn Greene punched in a 13-yard touchdown run the next play.

Adams was known for sure hands in college — he did catch 233 passes in two seasons — but returning live punts is somewhat new. At Fresno State, Adams only returned two punts for 13 yards and took some reps in practice when needed.

Adams hasn't been returning punts much at Ray Nitschke Field, saying he's been catching some after practice. Special teams coach Shawn Slocum told Adams a couple days before the game that he'd be taking the first returns.

More than anything, his woes Saturday reflect the value fifth-rounder Jared Abbrederis could have had to Green Bay. Prior to tearing his ACL in practice, Abbrederis was the most realistic challenger to Hyde. At Wisconsin, he averaged 15.8 yards per punt return as sophomore.

So with Hyde viewed as an "every-down" type of player on defense, McCarthy has been auditioning players in the return game. White had his own trials and tribulations, muffing three punts one day.

"I've never really had any issues catching them," Adams said. "It's just the fact that we had some challenging, obviously, weather....Any of the wideouts, we believe if you catch it in space, you can really do some things. It's fun to me. It's just tough when you have water splashing."

The rain does affect vision, Adams added. And on the one punt he lost, he lost it when the ball slipped through his slick gloves and bounced off his chest. Green Bay has rainproof gloves available, but Adams thought the rain was going to let up.

"There's no excuses," Adams said. "My job is to catch it."

While he provided little on kicks, Hyde was effective on punts in 2013, ranking fifth in the NFL at 12.3 yards per return. Meanwhile, 5-foot-7 DuJuan Harris showed promise on kick return, taking the first one back 40 yards.

Harper's wild ride:Chris Harper's last preseason game was a nightmare. The Seattle Seahawks' fourth-round pick had a potential 40-yard touchdown bounce off his chest...and the team gave up on him.

Resetting his career in Green Bay, possibly no player on the roster has been more up and down.

The 6-foot-1, 228-pound Harper flexes his muscles as a potential threat over the middle one moment, then has a head-scratching drop the next. At the Family Night practice a week ago, Harper had a drop eerily reminiscent to that one with Seattle.

On Saturday, he worked his way back into the competition at wide receiver. Largely overshadowed by White and Kevin Dorsey in practice, Harper had two receptions for 55 yards at Tennessee.

To start the second half, he hung onto a 17-yarder, taking a hard hit in the process. And soon after, he leaked free for 38 yards.

Of course, Good Harper/Bad Harper continued as the game progressed. Motioning left, Harper dropped a fourth-and-2 quick out from Tolzien.

Clinton-Dix contact:A week ago, safeties coach Darren Perry said he was eager to see his first-round pick in pads. During practice — before those quick whistles — the Alabama safety hinted that he could lower the boom on ball carriers.

Saturday night was a mixed bag.

On one second and 8 in the second quarter, Clinton-Dix closed on Titans utility back Dexter McCluster and the (soaking wet) 5-foot-8, 170-pounder ran the rookie over for 10 yards. The very next play, however, Clinton-Dix had a textbook wrap-up of Bishop Sankey for a 1-yard gain.

This is an element the Packers were hoping they had in Clinton-Dix. Among past starters, M.D. Jennings was often too light and Jerron McMillian too reckless vs. the run.

Rodgers sits, Tolzien shines:In the steady downpour, the Packers decided to play it safe with their most valuable player. Quarterback Aaron Rodgers sat in the exhibition opener, along with running back Eddie Lacy and starting wideout Jordy Nelson.

Inside linebacker Joe Thomas and running back Rajion Neal both left the game with knee injuries, as running back Michael Hill (concussion) returned.

The injured group of Tanner Miller (ankle), Letroy Guion (hamstring), Morgan Burnett (oblique), Colt Lyerla (knee), Don Barclay (knee), Jerel Worthy (lower back) and Abbrederis (knee) all did not travel.

In past seasons, Rodgers has gotten snaps in the exhibition opener. In his last six seasons as the starter, Rodgers has gotten one series (2013), three (2012), two (2011), four (2010), two (2009) and four (2008).

With Rodgers out, the Packers got an extensive look at Tolzien and Matt Flynn. And although Flynn worked against starters, Tolzien was more impressive. In his first game fresh off his first full Packers off-season, he completed 8 of 12 passes for 124 yards and a 100.7 passer rating.

The rain didn't affect him.

"There's a balance between being extra-conscious and also not being timid," Tolzien said. "You really have to focus on it, but you can't overfocus on it."