Where adjectives fail, smartphones succeed. After his latest monster performance, C.J. Anderson’s text messages nearly matched his rushing total.

He received 165 texts on his phone Sunday night. He finished with 168 yards on the ground.

He is the NFL’s new darling, a previously unknown player who suddenly is providing rocket fuel to fantasy league teams everywhere.

“I would tell all the fantasy players, I love what I am doing and having fun. But don’t get mad when certain situations come up and I decide not to get into the end zone and not make that long run because I am trying to win games,” Anderson said. “That’s all that matters. Winning games.”

Anderson has 662 yards from scrimmage over the past four games, more than any NFL player during that span. On Sunday, he became the first running back with 165-yard-plus back-to-back efforts since 2012.

“He has leverage, makes people miss,” Broncos coach John Fox said.

Anderson remains “humble and hungry,” greeting the press no differently than he did when he was buried as a third-stringer.

“I just feel like I belong. The way we prepare as a running back group and approach each week, any of us can have the type day I had,” Anderson said. “I don’t feel like it was a hot hand. My coaches just trusted me, 18 (Peyton Manning) puts us in the right position and the O-line is doing a (heck) of a job.”

***

Thomas continues to improve. Tight end Julius Thomas watched from the sideline for the second consecutive week, his left ankle preventing him from playing. Thomas made progress last week and thought he might return Sunday. With another week of treatment, he remains optimistic about playing against the Buffalo Bills.

“It’s going to be something I have to work through and get after it in the training room. Last week I had a couple of good days and I was really optimistic I would play. But it wasn’t feeling the way I needed it to,” Thomas said Monday. “I am not discouraged. I need to just keep going. I am encouraged.”

***

Party on Barth … with help? Connor Barth made a stirring debut, tying the franchise record with five field goals. He struggled with kickoffs in what Fox labeled “tricky conditions.” It raised the question of whether Fox would consider adding a kickoff specialist. Brandon McManus, cut last week because of field goal issues, ranked second in the league in touchback percentage at 75 percent (48 of 64).

“I have done it before. Had John Kasay in Carolina and we did it,” Fox said. “You can consider it. And you can also consider nothing.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck