Editor’s note: This article is by Derek Carson, of the Bennington Banner, in which it was first published June 26, 2015.

BENNINGTON — After months of negotiations, the boards of the Southwest Vermont Supervisory Union took the final step toward a new two-year teacher contract on Wednesday, when they ratified the contract in a roundtable meeting.

A quorum of board members from the SVSU, Mount Anthony Union, Shaftsbury, Bennington, Pownal, Woodford, and Career Development Center boards were on hand for the contract signing. Tim Holbrook, chairman of the MAU board, who also chaired the negotiation committee, led the meeting. Each board, following open meeting procedures, had to individually open their meeting, after which, one by one, they ratified the collective bargaining.

Health insurance, which was one of the most hotly debated topics during the negotiations, will remain largely the same as in the previous contract, except that the portion of the premium paid by the teachers will increase from 18 percent this year to 19 percent in fiscal year 2016, which begins this July 1, and 20 percent in FY17.

The health insurance compromise was able to be reached when both sides backed down from their initial demands. The board, looking to save money for their respective districts, had proposed switching from Vermont Education Health Initiative plans to plans offered by the Vermont Health Connect. The teachers, happy with their current plans, demanded that no change be made. Both sides were unwilling to move from these positions,and eventually, in early May, a neutral mediator had to be called in.

Both sides had initially hoped to negotiate a three-year contract, but the news that VEHI would be eliminating its current plans in favor of new Affordable Care Act compliant plans in July 2017. Rather than putting a negotiation reopener for health insurance into the contract, both sides elected to go with a two-year agreement.

According to Section 33.2 of the new contract, if the VEHI plans are eliminated as planned, and the two sides have not reached agreement on a new contract by March of 2017, it will fall to the Teacher’s Association to give the boards written notice of what health insurance plans and providers will be offered to employees in FY18. The boards would then, “establish a health reimbursement arrangement for each employee enrolling in a plan and shall reimburse such employees for eligible medical costs up to an amount that equals the amount paid by the Boards for a single, two-person or family VEHI Dual Option Plan in FY 2017.” At such time that the two sides agree on the next collective bargaining agreement, it would have to include a transition from this system in FY18 to whatever new system is agreed upon in subsequent years.

Another major change that Holbrook mentioned had to do with teachers being laid off. In the past, a teacher who was laid off by the district would be entitled to be recalled in the event of a vacancy for up to three years from when they left. That has now been decreased to two years.

Once all the boards had voted on the agreement, superintendent Jim Culkeen addressed the audience, which included many teachers, “All boards have ratified the contract. Congratulations.”