Late one afternoon this summer, Dr. Laura J. Esserman, a breast cancer surgeon at the University of California, San Francisco, sat in a darkened room scrutinizing a breast MRI. With a clutch of other clinicians at her side, she quickly homed in on a spot smaller than a pencil eraser.

She heard the words “6-millimeter mass.” Her response was swift:

“No.”

Meaning no biopsy.

Most doctors, including the radiologist seated next to her, would have said yes. But Esserman, who has dedicated much of her professional life to trying to get the medical establishment to think differently about breast cancer, foresaw only unnecessary anxiety for the patient, who had had several biopsies in the past — all benign.

Esserman, 58, is one of the most vocal proponents of the idea that breast cancer screening brings with it overdiagnosis and overtreatment. Her philosophy is controversial, to say the least. For decades, the specter of women dying for lack of intervention has made aggressive treatment a given.

But last month, her approach was given a boost by a long-term study published in the journal JAMA Oncology. The analysis of 20 years of patient data made the case for a less aggressive approach to treating a condition known as ductal carcinoma in situ, or DCIS, for which the current practice is nearly always surgery, and often radiation. The results suggest that the form of treatment may make no difference in outcomes.

Esserman, who directs the Carol Franc Buck Breast Care Center, is one of only a few surgeons in the United States willing to put women with DCIS on active surveillance instead of performing biopsies, lumpectomies or mastectomies She and other critics of vigorous intervention point to the potential side effects and risks of sometimes disfiguring treatments for premalignant conditions that are unlikely to develop into life-threatening cancers.

She has also challenged the conventional wisdom surrounding screening, arguing that while mortality from breast cancer has decreased over the past three decades, the approach to screening needs to change. She points out that the most lethal breast cancers appear between screens, while mammograms are finding more slow-growing cancers with a very low chance of metastasis. In addition, screening has revealed a reservoir of DCIS, also known as Stage 0, which now accounts for 20 percent to 25 percent of all breast cancer diagnoses.

So convinced is Esserman that most patients will not benefit from early detection of such lesions that she has recommended to the National Cancer Institute that for many DCIS lesions, the ominous word “carcinoma” be dropped from the medical term for them and that they be renamed “indolent lesions of epithelial origin,” or IDLEs.

Much of this unsettles cancer specialists, who believe that aggressive treatment is prudent given that DCIS can be a precursor to invasive cancer in some patients.

“What do you do if you hear a gunshot — duck or not?” asked Dr. Larry Norton, medical director of the Memorial Sloan Kettering Evelyn H. Lauder Breast Center, who nonetheless said he admired Esserman’s professionalism and rigor.

In an era of 15-minute doctor visits, Esserman is known to spend hours with a patient (a practice that can be maddening to those in the waiting room) even if it means staying at the office until 10 p.m. She sends late-night text messages to patients and calls whenever she can.

For nearly two decades, Esserman has sung to her patients as they go under anesthesia. With enough notice, she takes requests.

“Ask for an aria and I might need a week, but most songs take about 15 minutes to learn,” she said.

Esserman received national attention five years ago with an innovative, adaptively randomized drug trial called I-SPY 2, aimed at reducing the cost and time required to test new medications for breast cancer. The trial matches drugs with patient subtypes, allowing drugs from different companies to be assessed simultaneously, and much earlier in the disease process, while quickly phasing out those that do not appear to be working.

Trials for drugs to treat other cancers, as well as Alzheimer’s disease and Ebola, have adopted the design, said Donald Berry, a statistician at M.D. Anderson in Houston who designed I-SPY 2 with Esserman.

But Esserman’s approach to DCIS has been much slower to gain acceptance in the medical community.

“Laura is one of the people who’s actively engaged in research in this area and will help us push the field forward to determine whether or not there is a group of people for whom surveillance will be appropriate,” said Dr. Elisa Port, chief of breast surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York and author of “The New Generation Breast Cancer Book.” “But no one has these tools now to know whether or not it’s safe, and the biggest factor is we know that when we do surgery on DCIS, about 10 percent of the time, commingled with the DCIS is invasive cancer.”

She added: “When we talk about watching and waiting with DCIS, the question is, ‘How do we know it’s just DCIS?’ The answer is that we don’t.”

Peggy MacDonald, 51, is currently under Esserman’s care, on a watch-and-wait course. She was diagnosed with DCIS in April 2013. “I didn’t even know what it was,” she recalled. “But there was cancer in the word and it was scary.”

The first surgeons MacDonald saw in Portland, Oregon, where she lives, immediately discussed surgery as a given. Then MacDonald heard about Esserman and flew to San Francisco for another opinion. Before the appointment, Esserman requested a few additional tests, including a high-resolution MRI and blood tests to check hormone levels.

“She walked into the room and sat down and said, ‘I don’t think there’s anything urgent going on here. We have time,’” MacDonald said.

Esserman put MacDonald on a course of ovarian suppression drugs and a hormonal agent. Last December, nearly two years after the diagnosis, Esserman told MacDonald that an MRI showed no evidence of DCIS.

“I didn’t rush her into surgery,” Esserman said. “And I think that’s the essence of it. People don’t want to think that a mastectomy is the first choice.”