BLOOMINGTON, Ind. — James Franklin likes to throw around adjectives such as “awesome,” “fantastic” and “excellent.”

The past seven weeks, despite four consecutive losses and two off weeks, the coach wouldn’t publicly let on that he was anything but positive. Saturday, though, Franklin was relieved.

Sitting at the front of the media room, the Penn State coach smiled and exhaled after the Nittany Lions snapped their four-game losing streak. In that moment, Franklin was all those words tied into one and wrapped up with a grin. Penn State’s 13-7 victory against Indiana puts the Lions (5-4, 2-4 Big Ten) within one win of bowl eligibility, and it didn’t matter that the win was perfectly imperfect. When the Memorial Stadium scoreboard struck zero, Franklin’s team outlasted the Hoosiers (3-6, 0-5) and Penn State celebrated its first win since Sept. 20 against Massachusetts.

“This is the prettiest win I’ve had in my 20 years of coaching and I’m looking forward to getting back on that bus and heading home and enjoying this win for a couple hours,” Franklin said. “Beautiful. Would you prefer beautiful? Wonderful? … It’s a W.”

The defense did more than its share yet again, keeping Indiana’s star running back Tevin Coleman in check. The Lions limited Coleman to 71 rushing yards on 20 carries, snapping Coleman’s streak of 10 consecutive games with 100-plus rushing yards. The defense didn’t let the Indiana offense score, pitching a shutout with the Hoosiers’ lone touchdown coming off a Christian Hackenberg interception that was returned 47 yards for a score.

Needing a big play late in the fourth quarter to avoid another close defeat, linebacker Nyeem Wartman picked off Indiana’s third-string quarterback, Zander Diamont. The Penn State offense couldn’t put together a touchdown drive, instead setting up Sam Ficken for the successful 28-yard field goal with 55 seconds left. Ficken also hit a 27-yard field goal in the third quarter.

“People on the team kept telling me I had a lane for the end zone. I wish I would’ve read it,” said Wartman, who had his first collegiate interception and was looking for his first career pick-6. “Everybody keeps saying, ‘Wait until you watch the film, you’re going to see you had a lane.’ ”

Throughout the ups and downs of the game, the Lions did just enough to work through their small margin of error and find a way to win. Days after vowing to unveil a few new offensive wrinkles, the Lions responded in the second quarter after Hackenberg’s pick-6 put them behind, 7-0.

Penn State went with a conventional up-the-gut run to try to give Hackenberg some room to operate, but running back Bill Belton said he wanted to unleash the burdens of his own struggles and those of the offense in the previous four games.

The senior burst through the middle and got just enough of a block from his tight end to see a whole lot of room in front of him. Belton chugged on, outrunning three defenders who were on his heels as he crossed midfield, cut to his left and kept his balance after getting tripped up around the 10. Belton pulled off the 92-yard touchdown, the longest rushing score in Penn State history.

“He’s sort of been itching to have an opportunity like that and he took advantage of it,” Hackenberg said. “I saw it open up, I saw him hit it and I knew he had a shot.”

Like Franklin and the rest of the team, Belton celebrated after his score, saying he wanted to respond after “not playing well” the past two weeks when he combined for 22 yards on 17 carries.

Belton finished with a season-high 137 rushing yards, the first rusher to eclipse 100 yards for Penn State this season.

“My biggest thing was I wasn’t trying to get caught from behind,” Belton said. “Once you see the touchdown in front of you, it’s kind of like, ‘All right, I’ve got to get there.’ ”

A season after throwing 10 interceptions as a freshman, Hackenberg added two more and was held without a touchdown for the fourth time this season. He was sacked five times, the result of holding the ball too long, receivers not getting separation and a patchwork offensive line.

The line, which played without injured left tackle Donovan Smith for the second consecutive game, did receive a boost as senior left guard Miles Dieffenbach played a few series off the bench, his first action of the season.

The Lions will continue easing Dieffenbach back into the lineup, possibly doubling his workload next week against Temple, Franklin said. Smith didn’t make the trip to Bloomington.

Today, the Lions will hit the practice field and prepare for their game against Temple Saturday. Until then, Franklin and the Lions will enjoy this one, knowing all too well how difficult it is to get back above .500.

“Right now, where we’re at as a program, we’re just going to find ways to get Ws,” Franklin said. “The most important thing where we’re at right now is to get a W, get back on that plane and keep building.”

Audrey Snyder: asnyder@post-gazette.com and Twitter @audsnyder4.