Several panels of experts tackled everything from cars that will order your morning coffee to houses that will greet you as you walk in the door — offering congratulations for that extra bit of exercise you squeezed in at lunch.

Such is the nature of the Internet of Things, the subject of a full day’s worth of panels presented Thursday by the Illinois Technology Association. About 250 people attended the event, which marked the group’s second annual event on the topic.

Takeaways included:

• Industry continues to be the biggest driver when it comes to things communicating with other things, mainly because big manufacturing companies have a lot of machines and can quickly reap savings from increased efficiency and productivity.

• Connected cars remain a hotbed of innovation, though one Ford executive suggested driverless cars may be farther off than some eager tech buffs suggest.

• Healthtech innovation continues to be driven by health-care policy changes that aim to achieve better care at lower cost, and it is quickly taking us to a point where our health will be monitored constantly.

• The urban landscape continues to get smarter, thanks to, among other things, GPS tracking of snowplows and cars sharing real-time traffic data.

• Standards are a growing concern, as different companies — and different countries — adopt different technologies. This means there’s money to be made in translating one machine’s language to another machine’s language.

More details follow.

Cars

Mike Tinskey, Ford’s director of global vehicle electrification and infrastructure, said driverless cars are in the pipeline, but he dampened the enthusiasm of fellow tech geeks who think they’ll be here soon. He said driver-assist technologies, like smart cruise control that eases the throttle when approaching a slower vehicle, will continue to develop. But he said self-driving cars “are a long way off.”

Kate-MeLynda Migon, sales director for Gemalto M2M, said connectivity in cars will keep developing as they network with other household devices and learn more about you. Once a car knows you stop for coffee every day, it will anticipate that.

“Eventually the car will pre-order that latte and pay for it,” she said. “You’ll just pick it up.”

Furthermore, Migon said, “when you drove past the grocery on the way home, you’re car will tell you what you’re missing from the fridge.”

Also, Tinskey said, Ford electric vehicles “coach” drivers in real time, typically improving fuel economy by 11 percent in the first three months of ownership.

Health and wearables

Much talk in this sector is about wearable devices and sensors, but the real value is in building the software that will run and understand those sensors.

“The ability to get real-time, continuous physical measurement from patients who want to stay healthy, or health care providers who want to keep people out of the hospital, is quickly evolving,” said Gary Conkright, CEO and Founder of physIQ. “The by-product of that will be a tsunami of data.”

Drew Palin, chief medical innovation officer of Preventice, said the “sensors will become commodities over time,” like computer chips now, and analytics will be the competitive advantage.

“For every patient we monitor for a month, we collect one gigabyte of data,” Palin said. “There is no way doctors can look at all that. You’re going to need sophisticated analysis to distill this data into what is meaningful.”

Panelists said health-care policy changes are creating pressure to improve care while showing cost savings. They said health-care providers are increasingly paid for results rather than for every procedure they perform. Although some in Congress are pushing to repeal the Affordable Care Act, Conkright said he expects recent trends to continue.

“That train has left the station,” he said. “If there is one thing we can all agree on, it’s that we were on an unsustainable path with regards to rising health care costs. Regardless of what happens (with the new Congress), I don’t see that changing.”

Palin drew chuckles when he said he sees a day when wearables are connected not just to smart phones but to other smart devices in the home.

“When you walk in, your TV will come on and say: ‘Good job, Drew. You got some exercise today. I’m going to open the freezer so you can have a fudge bar.’”

Security and privacy

Brandon Jung, Google’s Americas head of Cloud Platform Partners for Business, said users simply click privacy agreements without reading them so it’s up to companies to do the right thing. At Google, he said, that means being as transparent as possible.

“There’s a reputation risk if we do privacy poorly,” he said. “If we screw it up at all, we’re done.”

Michel Maeso, Ayla Networks’ vice president for global sales and service, said standards for privacy are emerging and that they change depending on the age of the person you are talking to. He said younger people are much more comfortable sharing data that is valuable to retailers.

“We’re learning where those edges are, where it’s not cool,” he said. “We’re going to go through this grand experiment as more devices come online.”

Brenna Berman, the City of Chicago’s chief information officer, said the city wrestles with the question often. The city shares administrative data on its Data Portal, and Berman said officials are often urged to monetize that information by selling it to businesses.

“Who owns that data?” she asked. “We feel the people own that data.”

Homes

Houses are getting smarter, but adoption comes slowly as people are reluctant to make changes. Most customers won’t switch to, say, a smart thermostat simply to save a few dollars, said Mohammad Shahidehpour, director of the Galvin Center for Electricity Innovation at the Illinois Institute of Technology.

“Surveys show that you have to present a better picture than just saving money,” he said. “People want to know that, when they are using a smart appliance, they are saving the environment.”

Ivan Sheldon, director of Here (formerly Navteq), said the key to consumer adoption is ease of use.