Fifty years of cutting hair in Boulder, Tony McHugh knows to keep it simple.

Do the books by hand, keep the prices reasonable, and provide not only personal service but good service.

"That's really what it is," said McHugh, the proprietor of Table Mesa Barbers at 637 S. Broadway in the Table Mesa Shopping Center. "Know you clients, learn what they like and what they don't like.

"Mainly, it's just listening."

The straightforward approach appears to have worked. The barber chairs have been kept warm through decades that brought changing hairstyles, new competitors and higher costs of living.

McHugh's barbering roots in Boulder stretch back more than 50 years to a job at a barber shop in Crossroads Mall, the city's indoor mall at the time.

He and a partner eventually would buy that business, and McHugh expanded the operations with a shop on the east side of the Table Mesa Shopping Center in 1975. Table Mesa Barbers later relocated to the center's west side.

"I have some customers that go back 40 years," he said.

Boulder resident John Smathers, 77, first got his hair cut by McHugh in 1972 and has been a return customer ever since.

"It's just the experience," Smathers said. "He's very consistent; always gives me a good cut. It's a very comfortable place to go."

Plus, it's hard not to notice how much the congenial, easy-going McHugh really enjoys what he does, Smathers said.

"Some of the older barbers have a stool that rolls around; he stands all day long," Smathers said. " ... he's so congenial, easy-going."

McHugh will turn 80 this year, but he has no plans of hanging up the shears.

Both he and his wife, Nancy, say the love of the job is too strong.

"I just enjoy the social aspect of it, too," he said.

The generations of families that have walked through his doors have become close friends. Even quick, couple-of-minute trims present opportunities for catching up and visiting.

On a recent weekday, with a soundtrack of flittering classical violins accompanied by snips the of calculated clips, McHugh engaged in friendly banter with a longtime client about life and family.

A few laughs later, the jovial McHugh smiled and prepared to send the customer on his way.

"There," he said. "We got you all ready to face the world."

Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia