LITTLE ROCK — Arkansas’ congressional delegation was divided on the $1.1 trillion omnibus spending bill that cleared the House and Senate on Friday.

The Consolidated Appropriations Act avoids a government shutdown and keeps federal agencies funded until October. It incorporates legislation from the 12 appropriations committees.

The measure passed 316-113 in the House and 65-33 in the Senate and was signed into law by President Barack Obama.

Sens. John Boozman, R-Ark., and Tom Cotton, R-Ark., and Reps. Bruce Westerman, R-Hot Springs, and Rick Crawford, R-Jonesboro, voted against the bill. Reps. Steve Womack, R-Rogers, and French Hill, R-Little Rock, voted for it.

Boozman said in a statement Friday the bill contains some provisions he supports, including the repeal of country-of-origin label requirements for food sellers, funding for the Delta Regional Authority and a delay of certain taxes that would help fund continued implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

“Unfortunately, the irresponsible spending outweighs the good in the bill,” he said. “The Senate Committee on Appropriations passed all 12 appropriations bills for the first time since 2009. Senate passage of these bills and the return to regular order and open and transparent debate is the path to fiscal responsibility that we must follow to show taxpayers we are serious about reining in federal spending.”

Cotton said, “A rotten process yields a rotten result, and this 2,000-page, trillion-dollar bill is rotten to its core, resulting from secret, backroom negotiations and getting dumped in the dead of the night on Americans with barely two days before the vote.”

As an example of the “rotten result,” Cotton said the bill “will quadruple the number of foreign guest-worker visas at a time when millions of Americans are still looking for full-time work and working-class wages remain stagnant.”

Westerman said, “The omnibus — above all else — increases deficit spending. As an individual committed to fiscal responsibility, I could not vote for a bill that would increase deficit spending by billions of dollars.”

Crawford said the omnibus bill “breaks through our budget caps with $50 billion in new spending, new spending that adds to our national debt at a time when the federal reserve is raising interest rates on that debt. The bill did include several policies which would help move America forward, but those policies did not outweigh the cost of increasing our national debt, which is already more than $19 trillion.”

Womack said he would have liked to see language in the bill to block some of the president’s policies that he opposes, such as a new rule broadening the authority of the Environmental Protection Agency to regulate pollutant levels in bodies of water and the president’s plan to allow Syrian refugees into the country.

“However, failing to provide for our men and women in uniform is simply not an option, and this bill does so while strengthening our nation’s security by tightening requirements under our visa waiver program and increasing funding for our troops as they prepare to face more radical and more complex enemies,” he said.

Hill said he voted for the bill because “the good significantly outweighs the bad.”

“In passing today’s bill, we continue the fight against the president’s failed health care law while protecting important pro-life policies, supporting our military, improving our nation’s economy, reigning in the IRS, and cutting funding to the EPA,” he said.

The bill prohibits the IRS from adopting any new rule regulating nonprofit “social welfare” groups and keeps the EPA’s funding flat.

Also included in the bill is a funding increase for the Delta Regional Authority, which promotes economic development in the Mississippi Delta.

“The Delta Regional Authority is excited to see that the budget bill has been passed by Congress and signed by President Obama,” said Chris Masingill, federal co-chairman of the DRA. “This budget represents a vote of confidence from congressional leaders both from the Delta region as well as across the country who recognize the hard work the DRA has done and continues to do to strengthen opportunities for Delta communities and their local economies.”

The Arkansas Farm Bureau issued a statement thanking Womack and Hill for voting the bill, saying it contains tax relief and funding for programs that will benefit farmers. The Farm Bureau also supported ending country-of-origin labeling.

“While this bill may not be perfect, it was necessary to protect the livelihoods of farmers and ranchers across this great country,” Farm Bureau President Randy Veach said.