Two others arrested during the raid, 21-year-old Dejuan Pickney and 19-year-old Erin Taylor-Powell, were charged with misdemeanor crimes. Pickney was given a $2,000 bond and Taylor-Powell a $1,000 bond.

According to Guthrie Police, 19-year-old Richard Brothers, 31-year-old Heather Brown, 33-year-old Matthew Hadley-Hales and 29-year-old Rao Laster were charged with felonies. Each of their bonds was set at $7,500.

Six people were arrested after a series of drug raids at four homes in Guthrie last week. Even worse, nine children were also discovered living in the homes.

Last Thursday, Guthrie Police, along with the Logan County Sheriff's office, served four search warrants simultaneously to four homes located within two blocks of each other on the west side of Guthrie.

An undisclosed amount of drugs and paraphernalia were seized from the homes where it was soon learned that children also resided. The Department of Human Services (DHS) was called in to assist and they took three of the children into protective custody. The six other children were released to family members.

According to Guthrie Police, 19-year-old Richard Brothers, 31-year-old Heather Brown, 33-year-old Matthew Hadley-Hales and 29-year-old Rao Laster were charged with felonies. Each of their bonds was set at $7,500.

Two others arrested during the raid, 21-year-old Dejuan Pickney and 19-year-old Erin Taylor-Powell, were charged with misdemeanor crimes. Pickney was given a $2,000 bond and Taylor-Powell a $1,000 bond.

According to the Guthrie News Press, Brothers is facing four charges, including possession of marijuana and intent to distribute. Brown was charged with possession of a controlled drug in the presence of a minor under 12 years of age and drug paraphernalia. Hadley-Hales was charged with intent to distribute and maintaining a house where drugs are kept. Laster was charged with possession of drug paraphernalia and possession of a controlled drug in the presence of a minor under 12 years of age.

Pickney faces possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia charges while Taylor-Powell faces one count of possession of marijuana.

?