Buy Photo Tennessean columnist Keel Hunt (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights The area has thrived thanks to a lot of effort, creative rezoning and willing property owners.

Over on the east side from whence I came, last weekend began for me in sadness — visitation with the family of a high school friend — but ended with glimpses of new life across my old neighborhoods.

“Great to see you again,” we said to each other, “but better if weren’t under these circumstances.” The things you say to each other when death touches your generation. Too many funerals lately. Too many moons.On Saturday morning, at Phillips-Robinson Funeral Home, I saw many friends from my Stratford High School days. Naturally it was a bittersweet reunion.

Before heading back across the river, I decided to take the long way home. I drove through the parts of town I remember best from my youth: Rosebank and Inglewood, then Eastland and Edgefield, to Lockeland Springs and Martin’s Corner and to what people now call “Five Points.”

Back in the day, some of these were tough parts of town. As a young police beat reporter for this newspaper, I remember some of these mostly as crime scenes.

On Sunday afternoon I caught up with Bill Martin Sr., who turns 95 next month. He remembers late nights in the 1980s when Metro police would alert him to break-ins at his store at Eleventh and Fatherland.

Last weekend as I walked along these same street corners, the scenes I saw were no longer pictures of decay and demise but of freshness and renewal. The air smelled of cherry blossoms and tulip trees, of redemption and new hope.

Many young adults were about, heading in and out of a new generation of shops and restaurants. Other 20- and 30-somethings were holding babies or doing chores on the front porches of colorful Victorians and charming bungalows along Woodland and Fatherland, Russell and Boscobel. One young couple stopped at a for-sale sign in front of a bungalow with a picket fence. On the next block, a young man was repairing a chair.

My grandmother lived at the corner of Sixteenth and Holly. Last weekend, I noticed across the intersection that our family church, Lockeland Baptist, is getting a fresh coat of paint. The historic Holly Street fire hall has a gleaming new fire engine.

In the revived commercial district at Eleventh and Fatherland, I spoke with many young owners and managers of new retail — a bead store, coffee shop, bookstore, dress boutique and the cool antique vendor who also provide props to ABC’s “Nashville.”

East Nashvillians, including former Mayor Bill Purcell, will tell you the progress here “didn’t just happen.” It took willing property owners, supportive zoning overlays and determined entrepreneurs like Meg and Bret MacFadyen, natives of North Carolina and Pennsylvania. They established The Idea Hatchery across Woodland from the post office, birthing eclectic new shops, and the Art & Invention Gallery, and the annual Tomato Art Festival, which has become huge.

“I have never lived in a community,” Bret told me, “where people were so interested in each other’s success.”

Around the corner, on a spot that once could have been called “Needle Park,” a hip restaurant now flourishes. In June, Margot McCormack will celebrate 15 years of her Margot Cafe & Bar. She described her pioneering, early years when the sidewalks were empty and you had to wear gloves when clearing brush lest you grab a used syringe.

In my lifetime, the biggest difference on the east side has been the arrival of a new generation of Nashvillians. They have reactivated these old neighborhoods with their numbers and new life. It also has taken the tenacity and perseverance of their elders.

Over the past century, in the hundred years since the day of the Great East Nashville Fire (March 22, 1916), Bill Martin Sr. is one who has seen the bad times and now the good. Steadfast, he will tell you about the good fight.

“I love East Nashville,” the grocer said as I sat with him on Sunday afternoon, a gleam in his striking blue eyes. “It used to be terrible here. Now it’s wonderful.”

Keel Hunt is a Tennessean columnist and the author of “Coup: The Day the Democrats Ousted Their Governor.” Reach him at Keel@TSGNashville.com. Tweet to him at @KeelHunt.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1pnRhJs