As a White House special adviser on health policy, Ezekiel Emanuel had a ringside seat for the sometimes tortured process that produced the Affordable Care Act. He explains why it was so difficult to pull the law together. Photo: Bloomberg News

As a White House special adviser on health policy, I was party to many of the internal debates that shaped the Affordable Care Act. Looking back, I believe that three key issues were emblematic of the sometimes tortured interplay of policy and politics in crafting Obamacare—and of the inherent difficulty of fashioning complex legislation in today's Washington.

To control costs and improve quality in health care, the White House economic team believed that we had to change the way physicians are paid. About 85% of payments to physicians are fees for individual services—which gives doctors incentives to order more tests and interventions. Fee-for-service puts volume above value; it rewards treating sickness rather than promoting health.

"Bundled payments" are widely recognized as a promising new approach to paying doctors. If fee-for-service payment is like ordering a la carte, bundled payment is like a prix fixe menu: It puts all the costs for an episode of care together for one price. A bundle payment for, say, a hip replacement would include X-rays beforehand, the surgeon's fee, the artificial hip itself and rehabilitation therapy afterward. Since the doctors are paid one fee for the entire episode of care, regardless of how many tests and scans and drugs they order, they no longer have an incentive to provide unnecessary care for a few extra bucks. When implemented in hospital settings, bundled payments have been shown to encourage providers to improve efficiency and eliminate unnecessary procedures without stinting on care.

We presented the idea of phasing in bundled payments, especially for chronic conditions, to the rest of the White House reform team, where we found some strong support. But then we hit a brick wall. Many of our colleagues who worked for Medicare feared that creating the bundles would be too hard and warned that Medicare didn't have the computer infrastructure to handle it.

The arguments went back and forth, but the Medicare bureaucracy wouldn't budge. Ultimately, the ACA authorized 10 demonstration projects that could be expanded if they worked—a good start, but a far cry from the more ambitious bundling plan many of us had hoped to see.

Another clash, over what health wonks call the "tax exclusion," vividly demonstrated that good policy can overcome politics.

In 1954, the Internal Revenue Service created a tax exclusion for health insurance premiums, which is why health benefits offered through an employer aren't subject to income or payroll taxes. This makes an additional dollar of health insurance (which isn't taxed) more valuable than an additional dollar of wages (which is).

Economists—liberal and conservative alike—overwhelmingly denounce the tax exclusion. It drives costs higher while keeping wages down, it is regressive, and it is a major drag on the federal budget—lowering revenue by a whopping $250 billion a year.

During the 2008 presidential campaign, Senator John McCain proposed eliminating the exclusion and replacing it with a $5,000 tax credit to help families buy health insurance. The Obama campaign ran more than $100 million worth of ads pounding McCain, accusing the GOP nominee of "taxing health benefits for the first time ever."

ENLARGE Alex Nabaum

Once Obama was in office, his advisers split on the issue. The economists wanted to limit the exclusion, but the political team didn't want to touch it. David Axelrod, the president's political guru, even showed us a montage of Obama's campaign commercials to remind the economic team of his stated position. The president himself repeatedly insisted on the principle of fidelity: Campaign promises weren't to be contravened without a very good policy rationale.

One Friday in July 2009, the president made a surprise appearance at a meeting of key health-care advisers. When the discussion moved from pleasantries to substance, I argued for limiting the tax exclusion. Obama already understood that this would raise revenue to fund the expanded coverage, but that wasn't reason enough to change his position. So I tried a different argument. If reform was to succeed, it had to control rising health-care costs, which threatened to overwhelm the economy. Limiting the tax exclusion, I argued, was the most powerful lever the president had to control costs on the private side.

Ultimately, Obama authorized a new tax-exclusion policy despite the heartburn he knew it would cause his political base—particularly labor unions. We proposed a tax on high-cost "Cadillac plans," which will begin in 2018. Reversing a campaign position took a lot of guts, but this was good policy, and the president showed leadership in endorsing it.

A final issue—the fate of medical malpractice reform—also illustrates the complexities of political deal-making. Malpractice is regulated at the state level, so it is not easy to institute change through federal legislation. Nevertheless, we had good reasons to think that the ACA would contain some kind of malpractice reform. The powerful American Medical Association wanted it. Most importantly, so did the president. In 2006, he coauthored (with Hillary Clinton ) a New England Journal of Medicine article advocating it. So a group of advisers were instructed to explore options.

Late one summer afternoon, I met my brother Rahm—then the White House chief of staff—in his West Wing office. We chatted, and then he asked in his usual staccato, "What else is going on, Zeke?"

"I'm also working on the medical malpractice proposal I told you about," I began.

He immediately cut me off: "Shut the f— up! We are not doing malpractice. Period. Every time the AMA comes in here, they don't talk about malpractice." Their first, second and third priority, he said, was the formula used by Medicare to determine doctors' pay. "We don't need to do malpractice for the doctors, and I am not alienating the president's base for nothing," he barked. "Stop it."

Rahm's reaction told me everything that I needed to know about the politics of the issue. Democrats would accept malpractice reform under two circumstances: if they needed it to keep the AMA's support for the bill, or if they needed it to attract Republican support. Neither was true. In backroom negotiations, the AMA was solely focused on securing higher physician payments—not on malpractice. And not a single Republican in Congress would even negotiate.

The president had already aggravated liberals by forgoing a "public option." He'd offended unions by limiting the tax exclusion. He wasn't going to antagonize trial lawyers, another core Democratic constituency, for no gain.

Ultimately, the ACA funded states to test their own malpractice reforms while extending federal malpractice protection to non-physician providers in federal clinics. Even in the absence of major reform, Obama has done more on medical malpractice than any president in recent history.

Despite multiple near-death experiences, the law the president signed in 2010 was historic—and I'm proud to have done my small part. It isn't perfect; no legislation in a democracy will ever be. But it was heartening to learn that sometimes, sound policy can trump politics when politicians show leadership.

--Dr. Emanuel is chair of the department of medical ethics and health policy at the University of Pennsylvania. This piece is adapted from his new book, "Reinventing American Health Care," published by PublicAffairs.