TOP STORIES

A pretty damning statement about healthcare’s relationship with disaster: “Preparedness doesn’t put heads in beds, and if it doesn’t put heads in beds, it doesn’t bring in revenue, so it’s not going to get the C.E.O.’s attention.” Learn why this may – or may never – change. At the end of this essay ask yourself: Who is the real culprit for this culture? – The New York Times

We have President’s Day off at MedCity News so blogging will be light today.

LIFE SCIENCES

Opdivo: Not worth a 25 percent bump in Bristol-Myers Squibb stock. – Reuters

China will support a role for traditional medicines and consolidate its “fragmented” drug market – this includes strengthening safety controls and traceability of domestic drugs. – Reuters

PAYERS-PROVIDERS

Here’s a deeper dive into Massachusetts General Hospital’s plans to open a concierge medicine practice. – The New York Times

One-third of people in England with mental health problems receive no help at all. – BBC

Would you cite GE Healthcare, Kaiser Permanente and Novartis as brands reaching consumers by emphasizing shared values? – Health Care Communication News

Researchers have created a map of the world’s chemical landscape: 10,000 chemicals with safety data that can predict the toxicity of many of the 90,000 or more other substances in consumer products. – ScienceDaily

A look at healthcare in “Freddie Gray’s Baltimore.” – NPR

TECHNOLOGY

I think this statement is 100 percent true:

Silicon Valley’s failures are often linked to illiteracy about how clinicians and patients interact, and how individuals think about their health: lack of communication, cooperation or respect for the clinical community, underestimating the depth of regulatory hurdles, over-estimating healthy individuals’ willingness – or need – to actively use IT in maintaining their health, and impatience in understanding how IT needs to function within the patient-clinician relationship.

I also think it’s not the only reason. – TechCrunch

POLITICS

GOP leader: “We have failed” to deliver ObamaCare alternative. – The Hill

Remember when Congress offset the cost of Obamacare by cutting payments to Medicare Advantage plans? Well, enrollment in private insurance plans through Medicare has shot up by more than 50 percent. – The New York Times

A LITTLE BIT EXTRA

A case for coding in the general curriculum: “We don’t teach biology or chemistry to kids because they’re going to become surgeons or chemists. We teach them about photosynthesis and that water is H2O, or how lightbulbs work, just to understand the world around us. You don’t use any of it, but you do on a day-to-day basis use public-key encryption, and the average American has absolutely no idea what that is.”

– Re/Code

Photo: Flickr user tv’s Spatch