There is no denying that the federal government suffers from a tremendous amount of waste, bureaucratic bloat and excessive regulation. A new analysis focuses on both a result and symptom of this ailing system that helps put it into perspective.

According to the American Action Forum, Americans complete more than 23,000 forms for 68 federal agencies each year. Just filling out all these forms consumes 11.4 billion hours, which works out to about 35 hours per person — almost a full work week.

The biggest offender, by a large margin, was the Health and Human Services Department, with 5,005 forms, including 943 forms related to the Affordable Care Act. That was 34 percent more than the next agency, the Agriculture Department, with more than 3,700 forms. This includes 334 forms for vegetables and specialty crops, which is more than the total number of crops actually sold in the country (222), AAF noted. There are even forms for “nominations to the Vidalia Onion Committee, nominations to the Hazelnut Marketing Board, a report for ‘High Moisture Content Prunes’ and an application to ship Florida tomatoes for relief or charity.” The Commerce Department came in third with more than 2,000 forms.

Perhaps surprisingly, the Treasury Department, home to the Internal Revenue Service, came in only fourth with 1,599 forms — 1,053 related to the tax code. These forms imposed far and away the greatest time burden, however, accounting for 77 percent of the total, “thanks in large part to the incomprehensible individual and corporate tax system in the U.S.,” AAF added.

As if the sheer number of forms were not inconvenient enough, more than 1,400 Agriculture forms, more than 1,000 Treasury forms and nearly 450 HHS forms cannot be submitted online, AAF found. “In the year 2016, it’s discouraging that such a large percentage (28 percent [for these three agencies]) of supposedly vital private information must be mailed back to the federal government,” it maintained.

While some forms are necessary to apply for certain programs, verify eligibility and make sure people are who they say they are, the amount of paperwork imposed on the public has clearly gotten out of hand — as has the amount of government regulation in general.

“The number of federal forms, 23,000, should give pause to regulators seeking to add more to the pile or to members of Congress wanting to cede additional power to the executive branch,” AAF concluded.

To address this burden, AAF recommends adopting a “paperwork budget,” which would set restrictive limits on the hours of paperwork each agency imposes on citizens every year. This might be helpful, assuming the government implements it in a way that removes more bureaucracy than it adds, which is far from a sure thing. An even better solution would be to simply reduce the size and scope of government.

The thought of filling out endless forms to provide personal information, file income taxes and apply for countless government programs would have been inconceivable to our nation’s founders. It should shock the conscience still today.