Local and State News & Features Supreme Court to hear Diocese of Pittsburgh case March 23

Friday, February 12, 2016 - Updated: 9:19 AM

WASHINGTON (CNS) — The U.S. Supreme Court will hear oral arguments March 23 in seven pending appeals in lawsuits brought by the Diocese of Pittsburgh and several other faith-based entities against the Obama administration’s contraceptive mandate.

Among the plaintiffs are the Pittsburgh and Erie dioceses, Little Sisters of the Poor, the Archdiocese of Washington, Priests for Life, Southern Nazarene University and Texas Baptist University.

The cases are being referred to collectively as Zubik v. Burwell. Bishop David Zubik heads the Diocese of Pittsburgh and Sylvia Mathews Burwell is the secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services.

“This is an extraordinary time for the Diocese of Pittsburgh and all other religious institutions that have prayed and worked for three years for the preservation of religious freedom,” Bishop Zubik said. “We are grateful that the justices will hear our case. And we continue to pray that the religious freedom of all people, which we treasure as our constitutional right, reinforced by Congress in the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, will be upheld by the Supreme Court.”

Under the federal Affordable Care Act, most employers, including religious ones, are required to cover employees’ artificial birth control, sterilization and abortifacients, even if employers are morally opposed to such coverage.

In all of the cases to be argued before the high court in March, appellate courts in various jurisdictions sided with the Obama administration. The rulings said the religious entities’ freedom of religion was not burdened by having to comply with the mandate as they have argued, because the federal government has in place an accommodation, or “work around,” for a third party to provide the contested coverage.

These employers must notify HHS in writing of their religious objections. Then HHS or the Department of Labor in turn tells insurers and third-party administrators that they must cover the services at no charge to employees. However, this accommodation does not provide a viable solution to those Catholic institutions or organizations that are self-insured, such as the Diocese of Pittsburgh.

The religious groups also object to that third-party notification, saying they still would be complicit in supporting practices they oppose.

While their appeals worked their way to the high court, the government has not been able to force the groups to comply with the mandate or face daily fines for noncompliance.

Only those religious employers that meet narrow criteria set by the Obama administration are exempt from the mandate. Houses of worship are exempt, for example, but most religious employers such as social-service agencies are not.