GREELEY — Francis Chenoweth remembers when there were no glossy strips of shops and restaurants dotting Greeley’s west side. Green fields blanketed the area. There were no drive-thrus, no gyms and no massive grocery stores.

“Thirty-fifth (Avenue) was the end of the world, just about,” she said.

This was after World War II, one of the most prosperous periods in our history, and yet Greeley was still a farm community. One of Chenoweth’s friends at the Greeley Senior Activity Center remembers working for extra money on the farms that dominated the landscape.

Now retired, Chenoweth and her friends congregate at the senior center downtown. It’s an amenity only a bigger Greeley can offer, but she misses that little farm town.

These people didn’t see it coming. Northern Colorado’s little farm town is growing into a sprawling metropolis.

Since the 1970s, the population has doubled. Big-name stores and restaurants trickled in. Downtown festivals, bustling hotels and craft breweries replaced feedlots. City limits clawed their way west.

Even though they appreciate the amenities their new, bigger city has to offer, when longtime residents reflect on the past few decades, they long for a home to which they can’t return — the one that was taken over by the crowds of people, where it’s harder to get around and harder to know your neighbor. Greeley is now a city of 100,000 people.

“I miss that small town,” Gene Torres said.

Torres has been in Greeley for 70 years. He’s reminded of the population growth every day, even in his smallest tasks, such as a trip to the grocery store.

“If I wanted to go to the store to buy a loaf of bread 50 years ago, I was in and out,” he said. “Now, there’s more wait. It’s just busier.”

In addition to increased population, the biggest telltale sign of Greeley’s urbanization is, perhaps, its population past 35th Avenue.

As Chenoweth said, in her day, there was nothing past 35th Avenue. Now it splits Greeley; about 40 percent of the population lives west of 35th Avenue, assistant city manager Becky Safarik said. Now a city like Greeley is almost a bunch of small towns, not just one. The city is a jigsaw puzzle of numerous little communities, she said, built around where someone’s kids go to school.

But all the differences can be a boon to residents. Now they get to choose their community.

“You have so many choices in this town,” she said. “You can really find the part of town that fits your lifestyle.”

There’s the Sunrise Park area, an old part of town that immigrants settled early in the town’s history.

Greeley’s downtown features loft-style apartments over shops, restaurants mixed with college students up the street and a working class just to the east.

Six historic areas near the university offer more of a neighborhood feel.

The west side presents a more traditional suburban lifestyle.

Greeley may have lost some of the intimacy, but residents are now more accepting of each other.

Gene Torres’ wife, Alice, spent the early part of her life in New Mexico. When she got here, Greeley had a problem she didn’t see back home.

“There was a lot of discrimination,” she said. “We couldn’t rent (a home) because when they saw our last name, they’d say, ‘Oh, it’s been rented.’ Then it would be in the paper for the next week.”

But Gene Torres adds: “Greeley has come a ways.”

Perhaps that’s just a reflection of the times, but it also may be because of the diverse population a larger city encourages.

“We have a bigger immigrant population,” Safarik said. “We’ve seen the biggest growth in that sector.”

And then there are the benefits that are impossible to see.

“I’m glad we don’t have the cow smell anymore,” longtime resident Alvina Bailey said.