By Loree Lewis

(TRNS) – On Monday, President Obama awarded 18 people with the highest honor possible for an American civilian, the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

“This event celebrates people who have made America stronger, and wiser, and more humane, and more beautiful,” Obama said.

Amongst the recipients are Ethel Kennedy, founder of the Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights, which is “dedicated to realizing her late husband’s dream of a more just and peaceful world”; singer-songwriter Stevie Wonder; journalist Tom Brokaw and Rep. John Dingell, a Michigan Democrat and who, “fought for landmark pieces of legislation over the past six decades, from civil rights legislation in the 1960s, to legislation protecting our environment in the 1970s, to his persistent, determined fight for health care throughout his career, from Medicare to the Affordable Care Act.” Dingell is the the longest-serving member of Congress and set to retire at the end of the year.

Others recognized at the White House ceremony were composer Stephen Sondheim, actress Meryl Streep and author Isabel Allende.

The list also includes Native American activist Suzan Harjo, actress Marlo Thomas, economist Robert Solow, golfer Charles Sifford, former Rep. Abner Mikva of Illinois and Mildred Dresselhaus, a pioneering female physicist.

Posthumous medals went to six individuals, among them civil rights workers James Chaney, Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner, who were slain in 1964 as they participated in a historic voter registration drive in Mississippi.

Other posthumous awards went go to choreographer Alvin Ailey, who at the age of 27 opened a dance studio in New York City that, “judged not based on race, but talent alone,” and Reps. Patsy Mink of Hawaii, who became the first woman of color elected to Congress and is best known for co-authoring and championing Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, and Edward Roybal of California, founder of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus.

The Presidential Medal of Freedom is reserved for individuals who have made “meritorious contributions” to U.S. security, world peace or cultural endeavors. President John F. Kennedy established the Medal of Freedom, which has now been awarded to more than 500 people.