Lynn Coleman, former investigative division chief with South Bend police and mayoral assistant in the administration of Mayor Steve Luecke, is eyeing a race for Congress.

Coleman discussed logistics of a challenge to U.S. Rep. Jackie Walorski, the Republican incumbent in Indiana’s 2nd Congressional District, in a conference call Thursday with Democrats at the state and national levels.

He isn’t ready to formally announce but is expected to run and to be the favorite for the Democratic nomination in the primary election next May.

Democratic sources say that Coleman’s candidacy is looked upon favorably by such influential Democrats as U.S. Sen. Joe Donnelly, South Bend Mayor Pete Buttigieg and St. Joseph County Democratic Chairman Jason Critchlow. It’s too early for them to make formal endorsements, but all of them have been anxious to find a formidable challenger to Walorski, and they think Coleman could be that candidate.

They know that without a serious candidate, the nomination could go by default to someone like Bob Kern, the very strange candidate from Indianapolis who files everywhere, including in the 2nd District last time.

Coleman, 61, an African-American with credentials in police work and in South Bend government, could help in building the Democratic plurality in St. Joseph County, largest county in the district. His biggest challenge would be to seek to hold down Walorski’s strength in the other nine counties that are all or partly in the district.

With a Republican-controlled state legislature doing the redistricting after the 2010 census, the 2nd was made much more Republican, with Democratic portions of LaPorte County taken out, Republican portions of Elkhart County added and strong Republican areas to the south included.

Although Walorski won a first term narrowly in 2012, she won re-election by a landslide in 2014, coming close in St. Joseph County and winning in all the other counties, in most by a margin of 2 to 1 or better. Her Democratic opponent last time, Joe Bock, received virtually no campaign funding or other help from Democrats at the national level. They wrote off the race and concentrated resources elsewhere.

If Coleman is to have any significant chance, he will need funding help at the national and state levels for the TV ads that are vital in a sprawling congressional district.

So, his conference call, involving the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC) and Indiana Democratic Chairman John Zody, was important in letting him know what he needs to do with his own fundraising and campaigning in order to get eventual targeting for DCCC funding and help from other national and state Democratic sources of campaign money.

Coleman also has traveled to Washington to confer with DCCC strategists. They want him to run. They tried earlier to recruit state Rep. David Niezgodski of South Bend for the congressional race. He declined and will run instead for re-election to the Indiana House.

Walorski, according to her latest campaign finance report, had over $700,000 in cash on hand on Sept. 30. Coleman starts with zilch.

Mike Schmuhl, vice president of 270 Strategies, Chicago-based consulting firm, insists that a Coleman race would not be a lost cause. Schmuhl was campaign manager for Donnelly, when Donnelly defeated Walorski for Congress in 2010, and then was campaign manager and chief of staff for Buttigieg.

In a competitive race, Schmuhl says, Walorski has a “clear ceiling,” with support not likely to extend beyond her conservative base and into the key independent and moderate middle ground.

Coleman joined the South Bend police force in 1977, advancing through the ranks to investigative division chief. While still remaining on the force, he took on duties as administrative assistant to Mayor Luecke for youth issues in 1997. He retired from police and became a full-time assistant to the mayor in 2000.