On Monday's NBC Nightly News, anchor Brian Williams continued to blame Republicans for the government shutdown, asserting that the budget impasse "traces its history back to a determined core of GOP House members who are vehemently against ObamaCare and were willing to shut down the government because of it." [Listen to the audio or watch the video after the jump]



However, he took it a step further by hinting at a way to get rid of such troublesome members of Congress holding up President Obama's agenda: "These members happen to be from very conservative districts where they won by big margins, and their jobs are secure more or less. And in both parties there are congressional districts that are set up by the states to keep the parties in power. But some believe if the system stays this way, our politics will kind of stay this way."

In the report that followed, correspondent Kevin Tibbles began by briefly outlining the history of both parties gerrymandering safe congressional districts to maintain power. However, the story quickly targeted the GOP specifically: "When Republicans won the majority of state houses in 2010, it ensured they'd be redrawing the maps in those states. And lo and behold, it paid off in 2012. Nationwide, Democrats running for Congress got 1.1 million more votes, but Republicans sent 33 more members to the House."



A sound bite was included of Jeff Reichert, director of the 2010 documentary Gerrymandering who once described his political leanings as being "somewhere left of Karl Marx": "If we continue to have a system which allows ridiculous folks to be elected, then we're gonna have a situation where government actually just literally does not function."



In case there was any doubt which politicians Reichert regarded as "ridiculous," footage rolled on screen of a weekend Tea Party protest, with Tibbles observing: "And on day 14 of the government shutdown, some may argue that's exactly what's happened."

Here is a full transcript of the October 14 report: