USA :: Freedom and Liberty :: Print this Article

AS AMERICANS ARE BEING DRAGGED AGAINST THEIR WILL TOWARDS A SOCIALIST GOVERNMENT, IS THERE A SECOND AMERICAN REVOLUTION ON THE HORIZON?

10-05-2013 1:34 pm - John W. Wallace - NY OathKeeper

The words "No Taxation without Representation" began as a slogan in the period 1763-1776 just before the first American Revolution. The slogan summarized the primary grievance of the American colonists in the Thirteen Colonies who believed the lack of representation in the British Parliament was an illegal denial of their rights as English citizens. The colonists believed that the laws excessively taxing them for services they did not receive were illegal.



It has become apparent to most Americans that the current President of the United States, many elected Senators and Representatives in both houses of our Congress, and the federal Judiciary, just like the King of England, the British Parliament and the British Judiciary of the 1760's and 1770's, no longer represent or protect the rights and best interests of the American people.



Our president, via his many executive orders, routinely exceeds his constitutional authority by creating laws out of thin air, or that grant exceptions to laws passed by congress for the benefit of special interest groups that support him, all at the expense of American citizens’ constitutional rights, their freedoms and Liberty.



Our congress routinely passes legislation, oftentimes that the members do not even read, like the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), written by socialists and lobbyists for the benefit of a wide variety of special interest groups, all at the expense of American citizens’ constitutional rights, their freedoms and Liberty.



Our Judicial branch of government has become so corrupt at both the federal and state levels that obvious unconstitutional laws like the Affordable Care Act are ruled constitutional because of a single judge’s personal, political or social beliefs, all at the expense of American citizens’ constitutional rights, their Freedoms and Liberty.



Through the use of billions of dollars of special interest bribes, also called campaign contributions, it can now be said that America truly has the best government that money can buy.



American taxpayers are seeing their taxes go up at every level of government, oftentimes for services and programs that they do not need, benefit from, approve of, or want. Our local and school taxes are rising at rates far exceeding any increases in their incomes and the quality of our public education standards continue to slide towards third world levels.



The President and his socialist allies in the U.S. congress are pushing unsustainable budgets (or continuing resolutions) that are putting us deeper in debt by the Trillions of dollars and the Federal Reserve continues to unconstitutionally print Trillions of dollars in fiat money (backed by nothing) as fast as the printing presses can print it.



The American taxpayers are getting angry about the increasing burden of taxation placed upon them to support unnecessary and/or unconstitutional government functions and activities, and they have every right to be angry. They live up to their responsibilities and work hard (often holding two jobs) to pay their bills with less take-home money. They cannot understand why the federal government keeps adding new programs and is continually spending more money than it takes in, putting us deeper in debt.



Americans are getting angry because the federal government is forcing them to pay for an unending stream of ongoing failed social engineering experiments in housing, education, welfare and now health care.



Americans are getting angry because the federal government is forcing them to pay for the continuous funding of anti-American community and race-based, socialist organizations like LaRaza, illegal alien support organizations, the Southern Poverty Law Center, the Congressional Black Caucus and the NAACP.



Americans are getting angry because the federal government is forcing them to pay for a wide variety of social and criminal justice services for the approximately 15 million +/- illegal aliens, while at the same time, refusing to protect the nation’s borders from this invasion.



Americans are getting angry because the federal government is forcing them to pay for subsidies to crony capitalists who receive Billions of dollars in grant and loan guarantees for industries that businesses that cannot make it on their own in the free market, because they are friends or financial supporters of the president of the United States.



Many American citizens, particularly those who pay taxes, are frustrated by a government that no longer represents them, but rather represents the interests of an oligarchy of political, globalist and financial elites, as well as special interest groups, who exert unconstitutional and illegal control over our government and economy for their personal gain.



The members of this ruling oligarchy are not loyal Americans who have the best interests of the county in mind, but rather they are the enemy within who benefit financially or politically by:



a) Keeping our country in a constant state of war without ever passing a ‘Declaration of War’ as required by the U.S. Constitution.



b) Dumbing down our children in a government run education system that uses nation-wide, socialist, “Common Core Standards” that are more concerned with the indoctrination of young minds into their socialist beliefs than education;



c) Devaluating our currency by flooding the world’s markets with Trillions of American ‘fiat’ dollars;



d) Separating us into categories by race and ethnic origin in the census and through unconstitutional Affirmative action and race-based programs;



e) Drugging 6 million of children with mind altering drugs to cure a disorder that doesn’t exist;



f) Deliberately flooding our country with illegal aliens, and failing to secure our borders;



g) Chipping away at the people’s constitutional rights as outlined in the Bill of Rights;



h) Chipping away at our nation's sovereignty through international agreements and membership in the United Nations.



I believe that most Americans are fast approaching a point of frustration and anger with their own government and particularly with our current president and congress, similar to what the American colonists reached in 1776. Americans want to take their country and government back from the corrupt political, socialist and financial elites who control it. The massive and growing attendance by average American citizens at Constitutional, Freedom and Second Amendment Rallies across the country is a clear indication that the American people have had enough of the progressive, step-by-step introduction of socialism and communism into America and they are prepared and ready to finally take their country back by any means necessary.



Our president, some members of congress and some state government leaders are currently so afraid that an armed American citizenry is waking up to what these socialist-leaning leaders are really doing that they are now trying to use any crisis or other excuse to disarm American citizens. Unfortunately for them, the American people are not falling for it and most are very well aware that an armed person is a citizen, but an unarmed person will always be a subject or slave in their own country.



The American colonists of the 18th century gradually came to the conclusion that their tyrannical government was out of control and infringing on their God given rights as free people and so are the American people of the 21st century gradually coming to the conclusion that their current tyrannical American government is also out of control and infringing on their God given rights as a free people. Just as our country’s founders did, a growing number of freedom-loving American citizens realize that we must also be prepared to resist and fight a long and arduous battle against a very well-financed and ruthless enemy, the difference being that our main enemy is within our own country.



There are very strong indications that average Americans are waking up and that a Second American Revolution for Freedom and Liberty is on the horizon in this great country.



In order for it to be successful, however, Americans of all races, religions and ethnic backgrounds will have to put aside many of the minor differences that have separated us in the past, mainly orchestrated by the government to keep us under control, and unite as one strong political force. We must become united by our major common goals of preserving our Liberty and protecting our individual Freedoms, by protecting and defending the United States Constitution from the enemy within.



We must become active in politics in our local towns, villages, counties, cities and school boards. We must attend the meetings to find out what is really going on in our local communities and be prepared to actively resist all attempts at giving these governments more control over us. We must support only those candidates who truly believe in the principles outlined in the U.S. Constitution, who are honest, ethical, of good moral character, who take no special interest money and who support smaller, less intrusive federal, state and local governments.



Together, freedom loving American citizens must begin the journey that will leave future generations of Americans a legacy of individual freedom and liberty, a first class education system, a clean environment, a strong and sovereign America with an honest, limited government that will offer unlimited opportunities for their future. If we stand together and are willing to fight for our freedoms and liberties, we can give it to them.



Only then, will America’s Second Revolution succeed.