Bobolas family hoarders in the thick of it as big clean-up begins at Bondi

Bobolas, police look on during clean-up 0:28 Play video The Bobolas family look on as a group of contracted rubbish removers attack the piles of rubbish in the family front yard.

Neighbour claims Bobolas family sleeps in a tunnel

Contractors unearth toy pirate sword, road sign, playhouse tent

Mary and Liana Bobolas out combing the streets at 3am

Boss says workers nervous about taking on Bobolas ‘junk’

NEIGHBOURS of Bondi hoarders the Bobolas family rejoiced yesterday as council workers moved in to clear away the family’s rubbish.

Terry Cudmore, 71, who lives opposite the Boonara Ave, Bondi, eyesore, said: “Every time they clean up it disturbs the rats that they have in their backyard.

“The rats are as big as possums and they get up into my roof and they are down in the wall cavities,” he said.

Waverley Council workers wearing masks, gloves and steel-capped boots moved in to clear the hoarded rubbish after Mary Bobolas and her two daughters lost a last-ditch appeal at the Land and Environment Court.

Michael Williams’ unit overlooks the litter strewed back garden.

“The backyard is overgrown. There’s garbage and there is a garage and the back of it is falling apart with all the things they’ve stacked up,” he said.

“I won’t be happy if it starts building up again.”

But sisters Elena and Liana Bobolas were already busy storing their most treasured junk in a hired Budget van strategically parked around the corner.

Elena said: “You can describe it as someone coming into your yard and throwing away everything and saying everything is waste.’’

Here's what they found A give way sign/round about sign

Basketball

Toy pirate sword

Swimming pool noodle floaties

Lawn mower

Tiles

Pot plants

Books

Luggage

Bricks

Milk crates

Stroller

Buckets

Kids playhouse tent

Mr Cudmore believes Mary, Elena and Liana Bobolas sleep outside because they cannot fit inside the house as it is also filled with items they have collected.

“They actually burrow under,” he said. “When it rains they have big umbrellas over the rubbish, that’s where they sleep, they can’t get in the house.

“It would be like a small-sized bathroom and they just put down tarpaulin and plastic bags, that’s what keeps them dry.”

Colm Drumgoole, another local, is amazed by how well the Bobolas family know the legal system. He said the way they use, “the law to the effect that they’ve done is amazing”.

“It’s all rubbish,” Paul Younan, 30, co-owner of The Rubbish Taxi said after filling another skip.

He went into detail about what was being pulled from the rubble this morning while waiting for his trucks to return.

A “Give Way Round About” sign was the most peculiar object they discovered.

“I’ve had some hoarder jobs but this is a bit dirtier,” Mr Younan said.

“(There is) power cords, tiles, stuff off the streets and trolleys.

“The backyard is overgrown you can’t see what’s underneath the grass.”

They expect to remove about 50 square units of rubbish today.

Mr Younan said his workers were apprehensive about taking on the Bobolas family home’s junk.

“They were a bit nervous leading up to the job today, I was pampering them,” he said.

“Our plan is to do our job and if there are any issues the Council will take over.”

The rubbish is all being taken to a dumping site in Alexandria.

Police instructed her to stay away from the workers and machinery, “for safety issues”.

Daughter Liana Bobolas stayed inside the home, sitting on the porch during the clean-up.

Elena Bobolas was asked if it was possible to live inside a home filled with this much rubbish and her response was, “We are living in this home”.

Waverley Council have hired a security guard from ECS International Security who is also at the Boonara Ave home this morning in the lead-up to the cleaning process — the 14th ratepayer-funded clean-up of the property.

Some members of the family stood vigil at their home overnight and even added to the junk in their yard.

Mary Bobolas and daughter Liana were seen walking up and down their street about 3am, with Mary seen carrying a plastic bag back to the house.

A clean-up was arranged for March 17 but an appeal at the Land and Environment Court cancelled that before a new date was set.

Legal action and clean-ups have cost Waverley Council ratepayers more than $350,000 and there is expected to be enough rubbish at the house this time to fill an Olympic-sized pool.