In the spirit of World Cup competition, we're holding our own tournament in search of the Better Stock Today. We're pitting 32 companies against each other, and you, the reader, will determine the winner.

Today it's the Semi-Final stage, and Gilead takes on Kinder Morgan Partners in our search for the better stock.

Motley Fool health care analyst David Williamson makes the case for Gilead Sciences (NASDAQ:GILD) to win this match up. He believes Gilead's Sovaldi will continue to beat analyst estimates and that its runaway success will continue. Estimated to do $1.4 billion in first quarter sales, the instant blockbuster clocked in at $2.3 billion. Gilead already has an even better combo treatment in the works and despite its high price tag, Gilead's future rivals don't appear willing to undercut its cost. With an estimated 150 million hepatitis-c cases worldwide, curing the disease will prove beneficial to humanity and Gilead shareholders. Joel South, energy analyst at The Motley Fool, thinks Kinder Morgan Partners (NYSE:KMP) is the better investment because the firm is the premier midstream MLP in the world. Kinder Morgan Partners offer a substantial 7.1% distribution yield, but more importantly, the large pipeline operator continues to grow its payments by strict capital discipline and structuring its contracts so 93% of all revenue is absent commodity risk. With $641 billion expected to be spent in the North American midstream market in the next 20 years, Kinder Morgan Partners could outperform the broad market year in and year out.

Leaked: This coming blockbuster will make every biotech jealous

The best biotech investors consistently reap gigantic profits by recognizing true potential earlier and more accurately than anyone else. Let me cut right to the chase. There is a product in development that will revolutionize not how we treat a common chronic illness, but potentially the entire health industry. Analysts are already licking their chops at the sales potential. In order to outsmart Wall Street and realize multi-bagger returns you will need The Motley Fool's new free report on the dream-team responsible for this game-changing blockbuster. CLICK HERE NOW.

Vote here to determine the winner of this match and sound off in the comments box below. Check back to Fool.com to see who advances in the final.