Boxes littered the offices and cubicles of the third floor of the Playhouse Square headquarters of the Greater Cleveland Partnership and the Council of Smaller Enterprises last week as staff prepared for a new floor plan that will bring together COSE and GCP units that have operated separately for several decades.



The first wave of moves was scheduled to begin Friday, Feb. 19. Over the next several weeks, nearly everyone’s office location will change as the two joined-at-the-hip business advocacy and business service groups continue to search for a winning strategy in the face of a steep, decade-long membership and revenue decline at COSE.



The organization’s leadership will discuss the changes, which have been underway for several months, at the COSE annual meeting Feb. 24 at the Near West Theatre in the Gordon Square arts district.



Members will hear how COSE is being folded more closely into GCP. They will hear about a strategy that envisions the consolidated organization focusing more on advocating public policy positions at the local, state and federal levels — a GCP strong suit — than on selling the products and support services to members — particularly a once-highly profitable health insurance operation — that COSE relied on.



“We’re putting together the organization to move a different way than we had in the past,” Steve Millard, COSE’s president and CEO, said last week.



In a joint interview last Wednesday, Feb. 17, Millard and GCP president Joe Roman explained the changes.



“I think we have a chance to be the model in the country for representing” different kinds of businesses, said Roman, who currently serves as chairman of the Association of Chamber of Commerce Executives, an Alexandria, Va., trade association for 1,700 chambers of commerce.



“So when GCP sets an agenda item, it comes from incredible input from small business leaders, middle market leaders and CEOs of Fortune 1000 companies,” Roman said. “Nobody else is really doing that.”

A COSE cash cow

Not everyone who has watched COSE struggle over the last decade is confident the small business group’s top management, which has been in place for more than a decade, is up to the task.



“I would like to see the organization start to grow again,” said Eric Tolbert, a financial adviser who served as COSE’s chairman from 2010 to 2012. “But any organization that does really well, or any organization that does really bad, at the end of the day it’s about the (performance) of top management. You can spin it however you want, but at the end of the day if (an organization) is successful or not that’s what the issue is, isn’t it?”





One voice

Although GCP was the more widely known and influential brand of the partnership, former staffers described the 44-year-old small business group as “a cash cow” and “the tail that wagged the dog.”It was a cash cow because its health insurance program generated income that ended up on GCP’s income statement, and a dog-wagging tail because most of the 16,000-plus members GCP could brag about — about 84% in 2005 — were COSE’s small businesses.Former staff members declined to speak on the record because of nondisclosure agreements.The tailspin began after Medical Mutual of Ohio, which was one of several insurers who supported COSE’s role as an intermediary selling health insurance products, in 2006 demanded an exclusive contract to provide health insurance to COSE members. It also took a large part of the administration of the plan in house. The loss of operating a low-cost, members-only health insurance plan triggered a loss of half of the organization’s membership. Millard said membership now stands at about 8,500.Income from that brokerage role and the dues of 16,000 COSE members were GCP’s main revenue streams in 2005.GCP that year reported revenue of $13.3 million, with $9.1 million coming from memberships and much of the rest from COSE’s health insurance business. That year, according to an internal briefing memo obtained by Crain’s, GCP was earning $3.3 million in net income from the insurance program. That revenue would evaporate in 2013.In 2014, according to the latest tax filing available, the organization reported $9.6 million in revenue, with $6.7 million coming from memberships. Revenue from events and other programs and a $20 million parting contribution from Medical Mutual have cushioned — at least temporarily — the financial loss.Jared Chaney, Medical Mutual’s chief communications officer, said the $20 million was an unsolicited contribution to GCP that recognized the value of the 40-year relationship that had existed between the two organizations and was offered to help COSE reinvent itself and help GCP spur economic growth in Northeast Ohio.“We both succeeded over a long period of time, and it was our way of helping them get a new start,” Chaney said.That appears to be what GCP and COSE are doing. GCP has been a successful advocate for issues such as protecting the budget of the NASA Glenn Research Center during the Congressional budgeting process and advocating for the improvement of Cleveland’s schools. In the past, the two membership groups had different legislative and regulatory goals — COSE would fight for health care reforms, while GCP’s lobbyists were more interested in shaping tax and regulatory policies.

Roman now believes that the need for two agendas has declined, partly because the Affordable Care Act is taking business groups out of the health insurance business and because the organization has found an advocacy strategy that satisfies both factions. He said that as the two groups of members worked together over the last decade — GCP was created in 2004 — they have found that “99.9% of the time we’re either in the same place, or, let’s say we have a disagreement on a bill, we say, ‘Let’s s see if we can change the bill to be good for both of us.’ ”



That happened last year, Roman said, when they lobbied jointly for changes in Ohio Gov. John Kasich’s budget proposal.



Roman said the organization also will increase its focus on attracting new members from the middle market, which it is defining as companies with $50 million to $200 million in sales.



Companies could belong to COSE if they had 150 or fewer employees, though Millard said 80% of COSE members had fewer than 20 employees. GCP members, called investor-members, were companies with sales in the high end of the middle market range and above, who joined the organization for its advocacy for issues like lower taxes and changes in regulatory agencies.



But companies defined as middle market are growing rapidly and some in that category, based on the traditional definitions, were sought after by the membership sales teams of both GCP and COSE. So merging units like membership and marketing makes sense, Roman and Millard believe.



All of this may feel like a demotion for COSE members.



Under the new plan, the COSE board of directors will continue, but as an advisory body, said incoming COSE volunteer chairman Michael Stanek, CEO of Hunt Imaging. It no longer will have formal, fiduciary responsibilities for the operation of the organization. Fiduciary boards, like the GCP board, typically approve budgets and changes in policy and review executive compensation.



COSE members, though, will have seats on the GCP board and on its important financial committee.



“I think everything is heading in the right direction,” Stanek said.



Others, former employees and board members, are not so sure. They especially blame Millard and, since the salaries of nonprofit executives are made public on tax filings, they wonder why his salary continues to rise as revenue declines and the jobs of their friends are eliminated. The GCP staff has declined in the past several years from over 100 to 80, according to a GCP calculation.



Over the last decade, Millard’s salary climbed from $290,087 in 2004 to $366,676 in 2014, a 26.4% increase.