PAUL SAKUMA / ASSOCIATED PRESS

MATT MALONEY: “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it,” is not a phrase that applies if you want your company to have long-term growth. But although many leaders know that making big, bold moves to evolve and grow their business is the right move, actually doing so is much more challenging. This is particularly true for young public companies, who often succumb to outside pressure, cautious investors and their own fear in an attempt to play it safe. This is not the way to grow: the moment you go on cruise control is the same moment you start losing ground.

I remind myself of this frequently and often remember that some of today’s most visionary companies did not achieve success by playing it safe. Pushing your company to think about the long game and making significant changes, even when those changes feel scary or don’t make sense to company outsiders, is one of your most important jobs as a leader. Both the future of your company and industry depend on innovation—so thinking five steps ahead is not an option, it’s a requirement.

This can be particularly challenging for leaders of first-to-market companies, like GrubHub. When you’re the first, or biggest, it can feel like there’s a lot of room left on the runway to coast. But knowing that there are more pitfalls than benefits to coasting is the first step in winning the innovation battle; company leaders must pledge to remember that the demands of customers are constantly evolving, and that failing to meet their ever-changing needs will eventually lead to company failure.

One example of a company that made a move which now seems obvious, but seemed a bit crazy at the time, is Netflix, with their move into online video streaming. Legend has it that not long after Netflix went public in 2002, their CEO, Reed Hastings, started pushing hard for the company to offer its customers online streaming of movies and TV shows.

In today’s world, where binge-watching is a term regularly used around the proverbial water cooler, this seems obvious. But in 2007 there were significant barriers to success on both the consumer and content side and this was far from an obvious win. Consumers weren’t yet used to watching long-form content online, and content providers hadn’t yet embraced online video streaming as either a revenue source or a way to build viewer loyalty; Netflix largely built this world. But the company had insight and vision, and stuck with it–and saw huge subscriber growth in the two years after online streaming was introduced. The rest is, as they say, history; Netflix now has more than 65 million members, regularly posts strong earnings, and continues to take educated risks with new things like original content.

Another example of a company taking risks is Tesla. Elon Musk said they were going to spend “staggering” amounts of money on capital expenditures. They’re doing so to deliver on his plan to produce 500,000 all-electric cars a year by 2020. And while the success of this plan remains to be seen, the company has a long-term vision for the future and is taking risks–by making investments in things like a battery Gigafactory and new car models–which they expect will pay off handsomely in the next decade.

Those are two examples of what I consider smart risks—which are, as the name would imply, educated gambles. They will often take time to develop before they pay out, and some may even fail, but trusting your gut and being patient can pay huge dividends in the long term.

So if you want to be the visionary of your industry, and of the collective eye of your investors—in the long term, anyway—remember that this requires the willingness to take smart risks. Never stop searching for new ways for your company to grow, and when you’re feeling outside pressure to be too cautious, repeat to yourself: rewards do not come without risks.

Matt Maloney is the co-founder and CEO of Chicago-based GrubHub.

Read the latest Small Business Report.