Junior standout led Lyons to fourth 2A title in five years

After adding three first-place medals to his collection at state, Paul Roberts earned his second straight Times-Call boys track and field Athlete of the Year honor. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

LYONS — After the Lyons boys track and field team's dominant three-year reign atop the Class 2A Colorado prep pinnacle ended 2014, the Lions' 2015 season became all about clawing their way back up the mountain.

Even with every man on the team digging deep for each extra team point he could gather, the Lyons boys new they'd need junior distance runner Paul Roberts to do what he does and bear the heaviest load possible.

Indeed, Roberts did what he does, and Lyons won its fourth 2A team title in five years. For the second year in a row, Roberts is the Times-Call boys track and field Athlete of the Year.

"This season we just wanted to get the team title so we all had a chip on our shoulders and we wanted to take care of business," Roberts said. "We were all trying to get as many points as we could and we were happy to get it done. At Lyons, you have to run for everybody on the team and everyone is counting on your to do your best."

At this year's state meet, Roberts won the 1,600 title in 4 minutes, 21.78 seconds, the 3,200 title in 9:38.84, and led the Lyons 3,200-meter relay team to a time of 8:21.47 for a third gold medal. He also placed fourth in the 800 with a time of 1:59.86.

Roberts' best, however, was the 9:13.55 he ran in the 3,200 at the Stutler Bowl Twilight Invitational on April 24. Not only did that crush the previous Lyons High School record of 9:27.54, it was the sixth-fastest time ever run by a high school runner on Colorado soil.

The Lyons junior did all this despite missing the early portion of his track and field season while training for the IAAF World Cross Country Championships in China, where he placed 59th in the world. By the way, Roberts has won three straight 2A cross country titles and will attempt to become the first male runner to win four cross country titles in Colorado history.

"I was training for the China race until the meet in Boulder and I was able to focus on track once I got back," Roberts said. "I didn't quite get the PR in the mile that I wanted but even with the weather this spring, everything went pretty well."

But in the end all of Roberts' efforts came back to winning the team title.

The Lyons track team always stops at the Glacier Homemade Ice Cream in North Boulder on the way back from the state championships. After winning the 2015 team title by 11.5 points over Cedaredge, Lyons senior Zach Christiansen remarked that the ice cream tasted much better this year than last. The Lions can chalk a large portion of their enjoyment to Roberts and the 28.5 team points he accounted for.

"It was obviously a big challenge for Paul having to leave his teammates to go to China," Lyons head coach Mark Roberts said. "But all things considered, Paul had a great season and we had a lot of guys step up which made it a much richer experience."

Follow Brad on Twitter: twitter.com/BradCochi