emids Technologies raises Rs 82 crore from two US-based PE firms

The Bangalore and Tennessee based firm said it will use the money to fund acquisitions. Both, Baird Capital and Council Capital , which have a strong focus in investing in healthcare IT and healthcare services ventures, have joined the emids board.

NEW DELHI: Healthcare services venture emids Technologies has raised about Rs 82 crore in funding from two US-based private equity firms, Baird Capital and Council Capital.

"We will use the proceeds to go on the inorganic growth route. We have been growing at 40% annually, but want to grow faster," said Saurabh Sinha, cofounder and chief executive of emids Technologies.

Sinha also said that the company management had identified a couple of targets, and expected to make an announcement on the same over the next 12 months.

emids, which competes with a number of India's marquee information technology services companies such as Wipro Technologies, Cognizant Technology Solutions and Tata Consultancy Services (TCS), provides healthcare IT solutions including, accountable care and revenue cycles, to clients in the US.

"emids is part of the next wave of Nashville healthcare entrepreneurship - in health IT and other services - that will remake healthcare," said Grant Jackson, general partner, Council Capital.

US healthcare is undergoing massive reform, driven by the President Barack Obama-led Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, popularly known as Obamacare.

emids and its larger peers, such as TCS and Cognizant, are hoping to benefit from Obamacare, as US healthcare providers and service vendors prepare to upgrade their software to meet the Act's stringent compliances.

According to industry experts, Indian IT services companies could see an inflow of about $18 billion (Rs 11,214.9 crore) to $20 billion (Rs 12,461 crore) from business generated by the Act.

"There are massive opportunities, and we are looking to take advantage of the same, by acquiring companies that add capabilities in areas, in which we currently lack expertise," Sinha said.

Private equity players have continued to pour in money in the broader healthcare space, with Kohlberg Kravis Roberts investing $89 million (Rs 554.5 crore) in PCR Investments, and IDFC Alternatives investing $20.2 million (Rs 125.9 crore) in Bangalore-based healthcare services provider Medi Assist Healthcare.

"Healthcare IT services businesses are getting a lot of traction among the funds. It is also beneficial if the bulk of the business comes from overseas, which one can add to the benefits of offshoring," said Sanjeev Krishan, leader - private equity and transaction services at PricewaterhouseCoopers.