You would think that having a senior official of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America caught on tape discussing how the organization routinely harvests the parts of aborted babies in order to sell them for research purposes would have led the national news as soon as it was out.

It didn't. In a flagrant violation of the truism "If it bleeds, it leads," most of the major media publications waited until the organization had time to craft a response before letting the story out.

In the days before the Internet that might have been enough to kill it. Thanks to some enterprising bloggers and online reporters however, the story got out anyway and was much discussed before journalism's thought leaders had their chance to spin it.



[READ: Rep. Renee Ellmers Derails GOP 20 Week Abortion Ban]

To The New York Times it was "Video Accuses Planned Parenthood of Crime." To the Boston Herald it was "GOP Balks at Planned Parenthood." To CNN it was "GOP Candidates Condemn Purported Planned Parenthood Video." And to The Hill it was "Republicans Seize on Planned Parenthood Video." To these and other leading outlets of the American media, the story was about the politics, the reaction, the vague possibility it might be true rather than the damning allegations that had been made.

Planned Parenthood, of course, obviously embarrassed at getting caught in a rare moment of candor, issued a statement Monday in which it denied the allegation. The tape, the group said, was "heavily edited" and "falsely portrays" the group's involvement in and commitment to scientific research. Which brings to mind another old saw: Who are you going to believe, me or your lyin' eyes?

The videotape, released by the Center for Medical Progress, seems pretty explicit. In it Dr. Deborah Nucatola, the senior director of medical services for Planned Parenthood, can be heard explaining things such as, "We've been very good at getting heart, lung, liver, because we know that, so I'm not gonna crush that part, I'm gonna basically crush below, I'm gonna crush above, and I'm gonna see if I can get it all intact."

As head of the organization's medical services department, Nucatola reportedly oversees the medical practice at all Planned Parenthood locations, trains new abortion doctors and performs abortions herself in Los Angeles on unborn babies up to 24 weeks old in gestational terms.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]