One sign that Perry may run: He has quietly been sending invites to a series of dinners. Perry bids for 2016 relevancy

Rick Perry doesn’t want to be forgotten.

The Texas governor, whose 2012 presidential bid famously flamed out after a series of verbal blunders, is making moves to try to keep his name on the radar for a potential national comeback.

Story Continued Below

His strategy: Curry favor with influential party stalwarts, demonstrate to voters in key Democratic strongholds that he has the answers for how to jump-start the economy and even show a little political leg with a pit stop in Iowa this November.

All this activity comes as Perry is weighing whether he should take another shot at the White House.

( PHOTOS: Rick Perry’s career)

It isn’t a simple calculation. Not only would Perry have to win back the support of those who abandoned his disastrously unsuccessful 2012 run, but he would also have to contend with a new crop of party favorites, like Sens. Rand Paulof Kentucky, Marco Rubio of Florida and a fellow Texan, Sen. Ted Cruz, who are gaining a national following.

Republican strategists say a Perry presidential bid would be uphill but not insurmountable.

“I think expectations would be low on his debate performances, and if he was able to get himself into a position where he was studied and ready to go, that would surprise a lot of people and enhance his chances,” said Matt Schlapp of Cove Strategies, who served as political director to former President George W. Bush. “I think he would also benefit from the fact that there is no obvious front-runner in 2016, that he’s not a creature of Washington, and obviously, he benefits from the fact that he’s from one of the most important fundraising states that you need to conquer to get the nomination.”

Veteran Republican Party operative Fred Malek agreed.

( WATCH: Perry, O'Malley face off on Obamacare)

“Certainly, he could recover from the debate gaffe as we’ve seen Bill Clinton recover from the lengthy speech that he gave as a keynoter of the national convention to become the nominee,” Malek said, referring to the former president’s 1988 speech that was so long that he had to go on “The Tonight Show” to try to stanch the bleeding.

Malek cautioned, however, that inviting people to Austin and traveling around the country doesn’t mean Perry will seek the presidency.

“It doesn’t necessarily mean he is running for anything other than he is thinking through where his future lies,” Malek said.

( WATCH: Rick Perry leaving gov's office, doesn't rule out 2016)

Still, Perry certainly appears to be laying the groundwork to make a potential run possible.

Texas Republican state Chairman Steve Munisteri said it shouldn’t surprise anyone if Perry gets in the race.

“I don’t think he’s been shy about that he has another interest in running for president; he’s been upfront with people about that,” Munisteri said.”Most people have to run two or three times before they get the nomination.”

( See POLITICO's full elections coverage)

One of the strongest signs that Perry is looking beyond Texas for his post-governor life is the invites he has quietly been sending to influential businessmen, veteran political operatives and big-money fundraisers to Austin for a series of dinners.

Longtime Perry confidant Jim Lee, a major donor and bundler for the governor, has been emailing potential attendees, according to a copy of an email obtained by POLITICO.