The emblem for New York's health exchange (Photo: Albany Bureau)

ALBANY — A new report questioned the long-term viability of New York's health exchange as the deadline to enroll is Sunday.

New Yorkers have through Sunday to enroll in the "NY State of Health," the state's health exchange established through the federal Affordable Care Act. More than 2.7 million people have enrolled in the exchange, including 1.9 million in Medicaid and 827,000 in private coverage, the state Health Department said.

“Today more than 2.7 million New Yorkers now have access to quality, affordable health care, a testament to our progress in helping those without insurance find coverage that works for them,” said Donna Frescatore, the program's executive director, in a statement.

Despite its success in enrolling uninsured New Yorkers, there are concerns about the solvency of the program, Standard and Poor's, the credit agency, said in a report Tuesday. The agency said 12 insurers in the exchange sustained losses of about $160 million for 2014.

Additionally, one of the state's largest insurers, Health Republic, was shut down last fall because of mounting losses, and insurers and providers are seeking a state fund of at least $200 million to help offset costs associated with Health Republic's demise.

"If insurers continue to lose money, it's only a matter of time before many drain their capital cushions and are forced to either significantly raise prices or drop out of the New York exchange," the S&P report said.

S&P said that while larger insurance companies can sustain the losses "for some time," small insurers may be imperiled — which could lead consumers to have fewer plans to choose from in the exchange, as well as higher costs.

The problem with the program is one that states across the nation are facing, but in New York, one of 13 states with a state-run exchange, the situation may be more acute, the report suggested.

Providers and insurers pointed to the report as another sign of looming problems with the fiscal health of the state's exchange.

“Plans cannot be expected to continue losing money year after year and remain viable," said Paul Macielak, president of the state Health Plan Association, which represents insurers, in a statement.

The state Health Department and the Department of Financial Services have hailed the exchange, saying it has successfully enrolled New Yorkers in health insurance — even if the majority have been on the government-funded Medicaid program for the poor and disabled. The Department of Financial Services has limited increases in insurance rates in recent years, which has been praised by consumers but derided by insurers.

The S&P report said the uninsured rate in New York declined to about 7 percent last year, down from 11 percent in 2013.

"We’re reminding New Yorkers there’s still time to get affordable health insurance through the marketplace," Frescatore said.

People who do not enroll in a health plan by Sunday will be unable to access a plan for the rest of the year — unless they have a qualifying “life event,” such as marriage, losing employer coverage or, under a new law this year, become pregnant.

But enrollment in Medicaid, Child Health Plus and the Essential Plan, which is new this year for lower income New Yorkers, is open all year.

To enroll in a health plan, visit nystateofhealth.ny.gov/ or call (855) 355-5777.

The call center is open Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., and from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday.

Read or Share this story: http://press.sn/1SOhpIP