A group of data analysts who helped President Barack Obama win two terms in the White House are now partnering with a coalition of health-care providers in Camden, N.J., to study how people’s consumption habits change under the new health law.

BlueLabs, a company formed last year by members of the Obama data team, is partnering with the Camden Coalition of Healthcare Providers to compile information tracking the treatment patterns of people who enroll in Medicaid or the new insurance marketplaces under the Affordable Care Act.

For example, the team will gather data on how frequently the newly insured go emergency rooms or outpatient health centers and compare that with their previous behavior. The goal is to help health-care providers and policymakers in other parts of the country understand what is driving health-care costs and better serve patients’ needs.

The work is being funded by a $450,000 grant awarded to the Camden Coalition by the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation.

The project will give the BlueLabs team a chance to employ some of the same methods they honed studying voters’ behavior during back-to-back presidential campaigns. Mr. Obama’s re-election effort is widely considered the most sophisticated campaign in modern politics thanks in large measure to a data team that collected large amounts of information about which voters were perusable, what messages moved them and the best method for delivering those messages.

“On the 2012 Obama campaign, our analytics team consolidated critical data from across the organization into a single database and used that resource to run one of the most successful and efficient campaigns in U.S. history,” said Erek Dyskant, a co-founder of BlueLabs. “Now, we’re using the same techniques to make community health programs more effective.”

The collaboration will build on work the Camden Coalition has been doing in New Jersey for years. The Coalition, which is comprised of doctors, nurses and other health-care administrators, started gathering patient data years ago from the three major health-care systems in Camden. The coalition eventually compiled that information in a central database that helped local health-care providers improve outcomes and bring costs down.

The group discovered, for example, that in one year just 13% of the patients in Camden accounted for 80% of the health-care costs there, according to its website. Often these were people who were going to emergency rooms for common ailments, like a head cold or sore throat, or others who waited until their illness advanced because they did not seek preventative care.

The Camden Coalition and BlueLabs will now apply those methods to see how people change their health-care consumption patterns under the Affordable Care Act. The goal is to help hospitals, outpatient centers and community health organizations spend money efficiently and address patients’ needs.

BlueLabs and the Camden Coalition will anonymously aggregate medical claims and other patient information and break it down by geography and demographic groups. The new tool has been dubbed the Camden Health Explorer. The Camden Coalition will then work with health-care providers and policymakers in other communities to help them interpret the information in an effort to trim costs and improve treatment.

“By creating an open source of anonymous data, the Explorer will inform broader, important discussion about the health of entire communities,” said Aaron Truchil, manager of research for the Camden Coalition. “This tool will leverage the data generated during patient care to improve the efficiency of community-level health programs, enabling organizations to make smarter decisions, ranging from deciding where to locate a new clinic or what language should be used to run a diabetes class.”

Follow @wsjwashington on Twitter.