Anglers competing in the Otter Street Fishing Club Walleye Tournament enter into Millers Bay to drop off their final catches to be entered and weighed at Menominee Park. (Photo: File ) Story Highlights I am extremely disappointed in your failure to cover a huge event that occurs every year in our city. The Otter Street Fishing Club's annual Walleye Fishing Tournament.

First off-Congratulations for the Northwestern's No. 1 rank, in the entire United States, in the category of "adult contact every week." (June 15). However in light of this accomplishment and the commendable job you do in promoting Oshkosh - The Event City. I am extremely disappointed in your failure to cover a huge event that occurs every year in our city. The Otter Street Fishing Club's annual Walleye Fishing Tournament.

This year's event on, June 14 and 15, was not mentioned or covered by the Northwestern on Friday, Saturday, Sunday or Monday, not even in the little "Daily Events" column. Who won? Who knows!

You folks should have ambled down to Menominee Park Sunday afternoon during the weigh-in of the fisherperson's catch and see who won?

Then amble over a taken a look at all the fancy 30+ thousand dollar boats, (5) thousand dollar trailers, 40+ thousand dollar trucks and the additional thousands of dollars of equipment in the boats, as to have an appreciation for the financial aspect of these people who have come to town to fish in our Oshkosh town on our great Lake Winnebago.

Keep in mind there were nearly 300 hundred 2 person teams entered in the tournament. Probably, at least, two-thirds were from out of town.

These folks are here on Thursday and Friday for pre-fishing practice and of course, Saturday and Sunday. This is a lot of motel money, food money and more that our local establishments profit form significantly!

Then amble over to where the weigh in is taking place and observe the camaraderie of the folks. The wives, their children, girlfriends, boyfriends and other friends.

Check out the "catch board" to see who caught what. Have a beer, a pop, a brat, or burger and say "hi" to friends and neighbors.

This Otter Street Fishing Club event should be included in the Oshkosh-The Event City's line up. It deserves the recognition and appreciation of the city and in particular the Oshkosh Northwestern.

Jim Patterson

Oshkosh

Wisconsinoutdoorfun.com: More fishing news from around the state

Read or Share this story: http://oshko.sh/1s0d899