Mayor Steven Adler spoke about the past, present and future of Austin to the Healthcare Texas Innovation and Growth Capital Forum on Wednesd

Mayor Steven Adler spoke about the past, present and future of Austin to the Healthcare Texas Innovation and Growth Capital Forum on Wednesday. His message spanned decades as he talked about how the Dell Medical School embodies everything the city has been building to over the past 40 years. With our universities, innovation economy and iterative mindset, Austin's the place where bold ideas come to life, he said.

The opening of the Dell Medical School comes at a time of incredible growth and prosperity, but not all of Austin has reaped the benefits. As the city has surged, property values and the cost of living are outpacing income growth, and often those who are most in need the are the ones who have the hardest time accessing healthcare. It can be expensive to get and stay healthy.



culture and ethic reach to all parts of our community.

“Health outcomes are [currently] determined by ZIP code,” said Adler. “Our challenge is having that [innovative] culture and ethic reach to all parts of our community.”

Partially funded by a voter-approved property tax increase, the Dell Medical School will soon be open to serve Austin -- all of it.

“This community made that investment because it expects a systemic return," said Adler.

And with the passage of the Affordable Care Act and innovation coursing through the 512, the opening of the Dell Medical School comes at a time when Austin can lead the country in establishing new, innovative healthcare practices and procedures.

The school has brought in Mellie Price, a serial entrepreneur and angel investor, as part of a push to drive innovation and help startups gain traction with the long-established healthcare market.

"My goal is to create a very nimble and responsive environment so that when an entrepreneur has an opportunity that they can bring to bare that might improve outcomes, we can respond quickly and not go through a long process," Price told Austin Inno in March.

And while the Dell Medical School will speed the growth and promise of innovative technologies, Austin has already shown success in its burgeoning healthcare and healthtech ecosystem. Healthcare companies like Mirna Therapeutics, Xeris Pharmaceuticals, OneDrop and Cloud9 are all growing, even without a major healthcare system in place. With the implementation and buildout of Dell Medical School's innovation center, there’s real opportunity for the city to focus all this creative, entrepreneurial energy and channel it towards a new, innovative healthcare ecosystem.

This approach to healthcare -- quick adoption and implementation of new ideas -- puts Dell Medical School in a unique position to lead sweeping healthcare industry changes.

Not only will the medical school support the development of new ways to provide healthcare, goals include increasing the speed to commercialization for new technologies, serving low-income patients and bridging networks within the city to help spark further innovation.

“This is something that just fits with our city,” Adler said. “This is a city where ideas become real.”