By Nik Blosser and Tom Kelly

As Oregon business leaders, we were excited to hear that a transportation package was a priority for all Oregon legislative leaders at the Oregon Business Summit in January. It was a chance for targeted investments in safer roads and transit to move both people and freight. It was also a chance for bipartisan cooperation — something all Oregonians support.

Instead, misled by flawed evidence from the oil industry, a minority in Salem decided to tie the transportation plan we all want and need to repealing Oregon's well-crafted clean fuels program. Developed over the past six years and already implemented cost-effectively elsewhere, the clean fuels program represents the kind of policy Oregonians have consistently embraced: one that delivers an increase in Oregon jobs while at the same time giving us cleaner air and significantly cutting pollution — in this case cutting air pollution of greenhouse gases and cancer-causing chemicals like benzene and arsenic. That's why the Oregon Business Association endorsed the program and worked alongside environmentalists and health advocates to pass it, both this session and previously.

We are businesspeople, but we also recognize that some profitable business models endanger both other businesses and the common good and need to change or be changed. Unfortunately, oil companies make a lot of money by polluting our air. And this pollution inordinately impacts the poor and the sick — those least able to adapt to increased pollution and a changing climate. Many Oregon businesses, particularly those that depend on historical weather patterns such as farmers and the outdoor recreation industry, are increasingly being harmed by this unfettered pollution and climate change. Bloom on wine grapes in the Willamette Valley happened a full month earlier this year than normal. This trend cannot be sustained by the Oregon wine industry — one of the state's biggest business success stories.

We agree with Pope Francis, who wrote in his recent encyclical letter on climate change that we should demand "a greater sense of responsibility for the common good from those who wield greater power." It's a tremendous shame that oil companies have not invested their ingenuity and profits into figuring out how to make money without polluting Oregon and the rest of the world. But they haven't. Instead, in 2014 alone they outrageously spent over $2 million on lobbying expenses in Oregon — a relatively small state where no oil company is based — to spread misinformation about the clean fuels program.

In truth, the clean fuels program requires oil companies to change their business model by tracking and reporting on their emissions and, over time, increasing their use of cleaner fuels. As we have seen in other places with a similar program, this policy ultimately gives consumers more choices, and the impact on gasoline prices is so negligible as to be completely lost in gas price fluctuations driven by larger market forces. The idea that the clean fuels program increases gasoline prices significantly is a misleading one promoted by an industry desperate to keep using our air as a dumping ground for their pollution. But even this issue of potential increased costs is addressed, for the legislation in fact has an off-ramp if the increase in the cost of fuel due to the program gets too high.

The governor got it right — a transportation package and the clean fuels program must be decoupled. Clean air should not be pitted against safe, reliable transportation. Like many businesspeople in Oregon, we support both. But we do not support one over the other, and most Oregonians don't either. We believe we can have a good economy, a good transportation system and a clean environment. Our roads should not be taken hostage by oil companies and their lobbyists.

•

Nik Blosser is CEO of Celilo Group Media and chairman of Sokol Blosser Winery. Tom Kelly is CEO of Neil Kelly Company.