It was Thanksgiving night and I was at my computer thinking about the question news commentators and everyone asked, a question we seemingly rarely hear any other day: “What are you thankful for?”

The usual responses from people on the street or celebrities in the studio are family, friends, health, a job, etc. I’ve never heard anyone respond with “my bank account” or “my vintage cars” or the amount of money one makes.

Intuitively, we recognize that the things that count most are priceless, irreplaceable and other-directed, most often. As such, we choose to be with family and friends on holidays like Thanksgiving and Christmas and not by ourselves with our possessions. We seem to know what really matters in life when we take time to reflect.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Women in the Military]

And that’s where faith comes in. In the Gospels, Jesus stated that we are most fulfilled and thankful when we serve, and not be served. Those were the words He used when he defined his mission on Earth — to serve and give His life as a ransom for many. He also stated that there is no greater expression of love than when someone lays down his life for a friend.

This was again illustrated to me recently when I attended the rather unique birthday party of one of my friends, Emmy-winning TV host and WABC Radio afternoon host Rita Cosby. It was unique, but not quite intimate. There were about 1,000 other people there, as the event was also cause for Rita to honor the Wounded Warrior Project. Among the crowd were a number of her celebrity friends and men and women in uniform.



[READ: Empty Cheers for the Troops]

Frankly, I’m around celebrities more often than members of the military. That’s the nature of my profession. But I really believe that being around men and women who embody those noble virtues Jesus spoke of enables us to see how much faith truly matters when it comes to Thanksgiving and the realization of not only what to be thankful for, but who to be thankful for, as well.

I had a chance to talk with a number of the men and women that evening who have sacrificed much for freedom. I believe that deep down, we appreciate those that lay their lives on the line as a matter of daily devotion to their job because we understand the truth of what they do. It’s not about them. It’s about a greater good that underscores a greater truth of the universe.

And that greater truth is that service is what real power is about, and why we respect the service of our military personnel so much. We understand deep down inside the real power of laying down one’s life for another and by being servants to the weak, the powerless and the forsaken. Our wounded warriors are wounded because they have followed this calling to stand for those who cannot defend themselves. They have paid a price. They carry both physical and emotional wounds. They not only deserve our praise, they deserve our respect and admiration.



[READ: 'A Day of Thanksgiving and Praise']