Boulder County CareConnect disaster recovery coordinator Regis Lindsay meets with Lyons resident Betsie Monteith to talk about disaster preparedness. The nonprofit is giving out 900 emergency kits this year and next to seniors and people with disabilities following last year's flood. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

Editor's note: The Times-Call's series Take Two revisits people and things about which we have written previously. Take Two stories run on Mondays.

Inspired by last year's devastating flood, a Boulder County nonprofit is handing out 900 emergency preparedness kits to homebound seniors and adults with disabilities.

For more info Visit: careconnectbc.org

Boulder County CareConnect, which provides free services for about 2,500 adults across the county, has handed out 348 of the kits and talked to clients about the importance of being prepared.

The kits include water bottles, food, toiletries, grocery store gift cards, flashlights, hand sanitizer, gloves, masks and other items.

Staff plan to hand out another 102 grab and go disaster kits by the end of the year and another 450 next year, said disaster recovery coordinator Regis Lindsay.

The kits are part of a three step plan -- have a plan, be informed and have a kit -- that staff are talking to clients about when they hand out the bags, Lindsay said.

"We don't want to just give them the kits," Lindsay said. "We want to talk to them about their plan."

The kits are not meant to be a client's only disaster preparation, Lindsay said, but a starting point to get people planning and personalizing their own kits.

Advertisement

Lyons resident Betsie Monteith has already been adding to her kit.

The Boulder County CareConnect kit is one of two bags that Monteith has filled with necessities in case she has to evacuate her home again.

Kitty litter, a nightgown and some personal toiletries have been added to her kits. She also purchased a cat carrier after she was forced to put her cat in a cardboard box with holes when she evacuated her home last September.

Having a plan and disaster kit has helped Monteith and her cat, Spooky, move on from the trauma of the flood that displaced the pair for a few months, she said.

The flood also displaced the nonprofit from their Boulder office in the Frasier Meadows Retirement Community. But since moving to their new location at 2540 Frontier Ave. in Boulder, Eli Richman, Boulder County CareConnect communications coordinator, said the nonprofit has completely recovered.

"We're no longer facing boundaries from the flood," Richman said. "The kits are a sign that we're moving forward and learning from it."

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.