Sen. Steve Dickerson, R-Nashville (Photo: Jed DeKalb)

A bill allowing pharmacists to prescribe oral contraceptives is heading to the Senate floor, putting Tennessee in line to be the third state to approve such a measure.

SB1677, sponsored by Sen. Steve Dickerson, cleared the Senate health and welfare committee on a 7-1 vote after members of the panel heard testimony from Dr. Leonard Brabson, the state chairman of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.

The bill would allow pharmacists to enter into collaborative agreements with physicians, if they so choose, to prescribe birth control to women 18 and older.

Dickerson pitched the bill as one way the state could help prevent unintended pregnancies, thus saving the woman, her family and, potentially, taxpayers costs associated with unplanned pregnancies. Sen. Jeff Yarbro, D-Nashville, proposed a similar bill this session.

Only California and Oregon have similar laws in place.

Birth control will still be covered by insurance, as mandated by the Affordable Care Act, because it will be classified as "behind the counter” rather than over the counter, a designation that would remove it from insurance coverage. It’s up to federal officials to classify medication as over the counter.

Sen. Joey Hensley, R-Hohenwald, cast the lone vote against the bill after a series of questions to the expert witness and Dickerson, R-Nashville. Hensley's concerns centered on the logistics of pharmacist-patient conversations, whether an annual physical exam is needed and whether women would lie about not being smokers to the pharmacists.

“There are so many issues with it, I would rather us wait and see what happens in some other state,” said Hensley, adding that birth control is already readily available through the health department.

Birth control pills (Photo: Getty Images / Wavebreak Media)

Dickerson, a physician, is “very optimistic” the bill will get the votes it needs on the Senate floor and expects Rep. Patsy Hazlewood, R-Signal Mountain, will be able to carry the companion bill, HB1823, through the House. The bill will start in the House health subcommittee process.

“I’ve got support of a lot of the leadership,” Dickerson said. “There’s something in there for conservatives to love. There’s something in there for liberals to love.”

A spokeswoman said Gov. Bill Haslam is deferred to the will of the legislature on this bill as amended. If passed and signed by Haslam, the law would take effect this summer.

But women won’t be immediately able to get a prescription from a pharmacist. Dickerson expects that it would take months for pharmacists to get educated about the process and begin entering into the agreements with physicians.

“By government standards, that’s pretty quick,” Dickerson said.

Under the bill, pharmacists or a corporate sponsor would be able to charge a fee for the consultation. The fee was originally proposed to be $20, but the amended bill allows the individual pharmacist or corporate employer to set the price.

Pharmacists would be able to prescribe medication for up to a year — or one prescription with 11 refills.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 and on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1oQlQ9G