My name is John. I am a 36-year-old medical doctor, I am nearly unemployable, and last year I moved back in with my parents. I am writing this post to give the reader a concrete example of how severely the war on drugs hurts real people, and to show how even the recovery community, despite good intentions, can cause harm when used improperly.

During my residency training after medical school, I had a major depressive episode, a problem with which I have struggled since college. Around the same time, I was prescribed a course of opiate painkillers by my physician for a legitimate medical problem. Having little time to take care of myself during that stressful period, I made the terrible decision to self-medicate with opiates, to the point that it became a problem. I voluntarily sought help via my state's impaired physician program and was sent to rehab for three months.

In response, my residency program fired me via a letter while I was still in rehab. To add insult to injury, my name was red-flagged with the residency matching program, unbeknownst to me at the time. Now free of drugs, I began the process of applying to programs to complete my training, without which I was unable to practice medicine on my own. I tried for five years, spending countless hours and thousands of dollars on hundreds of applications, to all types of programs and locations throughout the country. I went on several promising interviews, but none panned out. With that black mark on my record, it was impossible to return to medicine. In the interim my medical license was suspended due to a technicality, a supposed violation of my monitoring agreement. My personal physician, psychiatrist, and substance abuse counselor all testified on my behalf at my board hearing, but to no avail, as the matter had clearly been pre-decided. At that point I was so dejected that I barely bothered to fight it, as it was clear I would never be able to practice medicine again anyway.

Having gained experience as an adjunct professor teaching anatomy and physiology courses to pre-healthcare students, I ventured to switch careers, aspiring to become a professor in biomedical research. I was thrilled when I was accepted to a Ph.D program in neuroscience, thinking at last that my painful ordeal was over. After being accepted, the circumstances surrounding the suspension of my medical license surfaced in a routine background check. I explained the whole situation to the Dean of the graduate school, and to his credit he green-lighted my admission despite my past.

A few months after starting what would be a long course of study, my nightmare returned with a vengeance. The Dean called me into his office and gave me the terrible news: my name had come to the attention to the university's legal department, who told him that I would be unable to continue as a student there. It seems that after my license was suspended, my name was placed in a database by the U.S. Department of Health, the intention of which is to prevent any such disgraced practitioner from attempting to bill Medicare or Medicaid fraudulently. The unintended consequence of this was that I could also not accept any money from the NIH, which funds most biomedical research. This meant I could not work in any lab that receives federal funding, as virtually all the labs in academia do. Without being able to work in a lab, it would be impossible for me to complete a Ph.D.

There are no words to describe the grief and depression into which I sank following this blow, so I will not even try. Recognizing that I had quit my job and moved to start the program there, my university kept me on as a student the rest of the academic year (Note that nearly all biomedical Ph.D programs are subsidized with tuition waivers and living stipends). I finished out the academic year with a 4.0 GPA. Seeing that I would soon be unemployed yet again, I saw no choice but to move back in with my parents, with whom I had also lived during the painful years between being kicked out of medicine and starting my new "career".

After leaving the university, my health insurance was cancelled with no notice whatsoever. I am immensely thankful that due to the ACA (derisively, yet inappropriately, called "Obamacare"), I was able to secure an affordable plan with the income-based credit. I shudder to think what might have happened if I had experienced a health problem during that two-month lapse in coverage. I owe an obscene amount of money in student loans for medical school, spent on a degree for which I no longer have any use. Having no lab experience, I am not qualified to be a full professor at any college that also does research. I have applied for 151 teaching positions over the past year and a half and been rejected by 128 and counting. Of course, it doesn't help that if you Google my name, on the first page of hits you will find a link to the state medical board that suspended my license, along with all the sordid details of every terrible mistake I allegedly made during my active drug abuse. Some of them are true, some are hyperbole, and some are outright fabrications necessary to ensure that the board voted against me. All are easily-accessible public records; I am not permitted to rebut them, and they will never go away.

Since leaving rehab, I have spoken with several mental health providers about my experience. They have unanimously agreed that I am not truly an addict. I abused prescription opiates during a miserable depressive episode, and after my depression was adequately treated I had no further problems with opiates. I even had to take them for a few days last year following an injury, and afterwards I did not have the slightest inclination to continue using them. I enjoy alcoholic beverages in moderation and have never felt the need to drink excessively.

I do not blame anyone for my punishment, nor do I want anyone's pity. The mistakes I made were entirely my own, and I alone must take responsibility for them. I do, however, ask for a bit of understanding, as I was very sick, mentally, at the time, and as anyone who knew me before can tell, if it could happen to me, it could happen to anyone. But I have never been given the opportunity to get back up again. Despite being drug-free for over seven years and going to extraordinary lengths to put my life back together, it was all for nothing.

________________________

Need help with substance abuse or mental health issues? In the U.S., call 800-662-HELP (4357) for the SAMHSA National Helpline.