A floundering free-meal program proposed for school children may get a second chance after the Maury County School Board agreed Thursday to reconsider a vote on the issue at next month’s meeting.

The plan to implement the program in 10 of the 21 county schools this fall initially failed to gain enough support during a meeting earlier this month in which only seven of the 11 board members attended. Ten board members — with Steve Kindler absent — attended Thursday night’s meeting.

Board member Victor Goodman made the motion to approve the federally-funded Community Eligibility Program, but agreed to table the issue until next month pending the outcome of the County Commission’s vote on the proposed budget for 2014-2015.

Board Chairman Jim Morrison and schools director Eddie Hickman pointed out that the timing of the vote is complicated since the schools’ food service budget already has been approved by the board and the county commission. However, that budget is not final until a vote on Aug. 5.

Hickman said approving the CEP now “may or may not muddy the waters” since that would require reworking the food service budget, re-voting and then submitting that approved budget again to the county. The change would then have to go through the adoption process again with the county commissioner, therefore delaying adoption of the entire county budget, he said.

Brian Parkhurst, the school’s nutrition manager, said the school has until Aug. 31 to join the program. He has recommended the district implement the program in 10 schools with the highest percentage of low-income students — Baker Elementary, Brown Elementary, Cox Middle, Highland Park Elementary, Howell Elementary, McDowell Elementary, Mt. Pleasant elementary, middle and high schools and Riverside Elementary.

Those schools have a combined attendance of 4,319 students with 2,748 or nearly 64 percent identified as low-income and qualifies those schools to provide free breakfast and lunch to all students, he said.

Under the program, a particular school must have at least 40 percent of identified low-income students in order to qualify. At that threshold, 64 percent of the students would receive free meals and 36 percent would pay a reduced cost. The school district would then be reimbursed for the costs of those meals, Parkhurst explained.

As the percentage of low-income students increases, the more free meals will be provided under the program. For example, at a 65 percent rate, all meals would be provided for free, he said.

During a July 10 meeting, school board members voted 4-3 in favor of enrollment, but the measure failed because it lacked a majority of the entire board. Some of those who opposed the program said they did not feel comfortable implementing a program that didn’t benefit all the schools.

Parkhurst had previously reported that giving free meals to all students district-wide would require the district to pay $1.17 million in its own funds — funding that would deplete the fund balance by half the first year.

Board member Jerry Lassiter said since the previous meeting he has had about a dozen constituents ask him questions about the program. After questioning Parkhurst at Thursday’s meeting, Lassister said he believes he can answer the questions proposed to him.

He concluded that implementing the CEP may not require a “big jump” in hiring more personnel; that students receiving free or reduced-cost meals will continue to be served either way; that it will not cost the district more just for those 10 schools; and those schools already have up-to-date equipment.

Lassiter said the biggest question posed to him was “What’s the problem we’re trying to fix.”

“This gives us a chance to take care of more kids,” Parkhurst said. “That’s really the main reason.”

Board member Tommy Dudley said he still has concerns about the district not offering the program in all schools.

“It bothers me to tell certain people from certain schools to say, ‘Guess what? You’re just out of luck’,” he said.

Jim Pennings, another board member, said the meal program is important to families who barely have enough income to feed their children or to those families who are too proud to allow their children to participate. He said there are other academic and sports programs that are not the same throughout the district, so offering the meal program in 10 schools shouldn’t be an issue.

“We have a chance to help three-quarters of our students,” he said. “I think in all good conscience we need to implement this program.”

Goodman said eating right is important to helping a child learn.

“Children can’t learn when they are hungry. You can’t work when you are hungry,” he said. “We really need to take advantage of this opportunity.”