Q: I’ve avoided taking fish-oil pills because I didn’t like the taste in my mouth hours later. Now I’ve been reading that fish-oil pills don’t actually live up to their promise of preventing heart disease. Can I skip them?

A: The answer, as for many nutrition topics, has evolved as research has revealed fresh findings.

“Nothing in nutrition is set in stone. We just don’t yet know the details of everything various nutrients do, let alone exactly how much people need and how to account for individual differences,” says Catherine Price, author of “Vitamania: Our Obsessive Quest for Nutritional Perfection.”

Keep in mind that research in this area is aimed squarely at reducing cardiovascular disease, particularly heart disease and strokes.

Fish, red meat, peanut butter, avocados and other foods contain different types of fats, including saturated fat and the two main categories of unsaturated fats, polyunsaturated and monounsaturated. Even the highly esteemed olive oil contains a small amount of saturated fat.

We all need to eat some fat. Fats provide vitamins A, D, E, and K and, among other functions, help maintain healthy skin.

But the message to cut as many calories from fat as you can is from a bygone era. Today the focus is on quality.

In a nutshell, this translates to: Don’t eat too few (less than 20 percent) or too many (no more than 35 percent) calories from fat, and make the fats you eat more healthful ones.

“Research shows that preferentially replacing polyunsaturated fats for saturated fats provides the greatest impact on reducing cardiovascular disease,” says Penny Kris-Etherton, Penn State University nutrition professor and spokeswoman for the American Heart Association. Monounsaturated fats come in second place and healthful sources of carbohydrates come in third.

Omega-6 and omega-3 fats are the two main types of polyunsaturated fats. Liquid vegetable oils, such as corn, soybean and sunflower oils, contain mainly omega-6 fats. Omega-3 fats are found in plant-based foods such as canola and soybean oil, flax oil and seeds, and walnuts or walnut oil, and, as you know, fish.

Early studies showed remarkable benefits of fish-oil supplements in preventing repeat heart attacks and strokes and sudden death from heart disease. But more recent research has not duplicated these dramatic benefits, though it has shown some.

Consuming sufficient amounts of omega- 3s from fatty fish remains an important goal for heart health, along with attention to eating more plant-based omega-3s.

“People don’t eat sufficient amounts of either,” Kris-Etherton says.

Suzanne Steinbaum, director of the Women and Heart Disease Center at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York and co-founder of the Global Nutrition & Health Alliance, recommends fatty fish such as salmon, mackerel, herring, trout, sardines and tuna.

Why the focus on eating fish rather than swallowing fish-oil supplements?

“Fish provides a good source of protein along with vitamin D, B vitamins, potassium and other nutrients,” Kris-Etherton says.

The answer to your question about whether you can skip fish-oil supplements depends greatly on your willingness to eat a sufficient amount of fish each week — about eight ounces — along with your health status.

Kris-Etherton recommends one gram per day of a fish-oil supplement for healthy individuals who don’t eat fatty fish. Steinbaum recommends one gram per day for people at risk of or with heart disease, and more for those with elevated triglyceride levels.

And, as always, it’s a good idea to discuss your individual health status and disease risks with your health-care provider before starting a supplement.

– Hope Warshaw, The Washington Post