The World Trade Center PATH station, designed by Santiago Calatrava, on April 24. Eliot Brown / The Wall Street Journal

The renowned architect Santiago Calatrava is frustrated with the public reception thus far of the World Trade Center transportation hub he designed in Lower Manhattan, as an article in Wednesday’s Wall Street Journal explores. The press and many observers, he believes, have been far too critical of him for cost overruns he says were not his fault, while he wishes there was more focus on the beauty of the project.

In addition to taking a toll on Mr. Calatrava’s workload, the woes of the project have had another effect: straining the relationship between a top architect and his client, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which has sparred with another famous architect at the site.

Mr. Calatrava and the Port Authority have been at odds in recent months, amid a series of interviews he has given to various outlets after years of relative silence about the project. Recently, the Port Authority sent him a letter telling him to coordinate all press inquiries with the agency, a person familiar with the matter said. And earlier this spring, the agency revoked site access of his deputy overseeing the project after he broke some site rules.

This comes after a not dissimilar situation with David Childs, long the top designer for Skidmore Owings & Merrill’s New York office who is the architect of One World Trade Center. In 2012, Mr. Childs made a statement that was critical of the agency’s decision to cut plans for a sculptural shell that encased the building’s antenna, frustrating agency officials and executives involved with the building. He called the decision “unfortunate”—hardly an acerbic remark, but one that agency officials viewed as out of line given that the agency is his client.

He was quieted soon thereafter and has done few press interviews about the tower since. The result is an unusual situation in which the designer of the country’s tallest building appears reluctant to speak publicly about his most notable work.

The two experiences speak to the broader tense and delicate environment that has defined the World Trade Center redevelopment. With the numerous private and public actors involved in different parts of the site, often tugging and sparring with each other, the project has been beset by endless with controversies, delays and cost overruns through much of its 14-year history, so much so that the main agency overseeing it is loath to have some of its designers speak freely.

Still, Erica Dumas, a spokeswoman for the Port Authority, expressed appreciation of Mr. Calatrava’s contributions. The agency “is proud of what we and thousands of union construction workers have built” at the site, she said, and it “thanks Dr. Santiago Calatrava for his work on the iconic WTC Transportation Hub.”

The agency’s current leadership has said the money could have been put to better use on other transportation investments. But, she added, “that does not take away from the fact that the Transportation Hub will serve as a regional destination and the gateway to Lower Manhattan for generations to come, a feat that would not be possible without the valued contributions of Dr. Calatrava.”