TORONTO — The manager of Cuba’s baseball team at the Pan American Games wanted nothing to do with questions about defections to the United States.

Cuba has acknowledged that two players defected during warm-up games two weeks ago in the United States, and last week four rowers at the games, held in and around Toronto this month, left the team and crossed the American border.

Cuban athletes have a history of defecting, and that hasn’t changed even as the United States and Cuba open embassies on Monday in the other’s country, ending more than 50 years of separation.

“I’m not interested in talking about this,” said Roger Machado, manager of Cuba’s baseball team. “Talk to me about baseball.”

Roberto Ramirez, Cuba’s media representative at the games, declined comment about the rowers.

“We’re not speaking in regard to this,” he said on Sunday. “This is a right that we have.”

Many Cuban athletes at the games declined to talk on the record, and those who did defended the government and criticized those leaving.

Cubans living in Canada and attending Pan Am events spoke more openly, acknowledging the pull of big money. But some declined to speak, showing hostility at being asked about an act that some regard as treason.

At a Gold Cup soccer game on Saturday against the United States in Baltimore, Cuba listed five players as absent and gave no reason.

“They’ve chosen their path,” Cuba coach Raul Gonzalez said, without giving details.

Mijain Lopez, the two-time defending Olympic gold medalist in greco-roman wrestling, was reported almost five years ago to have defected to the United States. It’s a rumor he denied at the time, and again this week.

“I never thought of leaving Cuba,” he said at the Pan Am Games. “I love my people, my country. Those guys [who defected] have betrayed our revolution. I hope they’re happy. They have left something beautiful behind, which is socialism and our country’s dignity. Let them do what they can in other countries. We will continue doing what we can for the revolution.”

A fellow Cuban gold-medal wrestler at the Pan Am Games used a similar tone.

“I don’t stick my nose in politics,” said Reineris Salas, after defeating Jake Herbert, an American, for gold in freestyle in the 86-kilogram class. “All I know is I won gold and dedicate it to my family, to Fidel Castro and all of Cuba.”

Cuba-born Rafael Borrell attended a baseball game between Cuba and the United States at the Pan Am Games. He wore a white Cuba baseball jersey with No. 10 on the back, and a red cap with “Cuba” written in script above the bill.

Borrell immigrated to Canada 20 years ago and works as a carpenter.

“Maybe in two or three years it won’t matter,” he said. “People can go back and forth like in any other place so then they won’t have to be killed by sharks going to Florida.”

Borrell said many Cubans were unaware of defections, since the government doesn’t publicize them, and some people are too busy to care.

“In a couple of years, maybe these baseball players can sign a contract to play with the Yankees and come back [to Cuba] and just be normal — like in the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico. They can go back and forth like human beings.”

Cuba-born Enrique Montana showed off a foul ball he caught at the Cuba-U.S. game. He immigrated to Canada five years ago and now has a Canadian passport.

“I think people should be able to choose the path they want,” Montana said. “If people want to stay, they stay. If they want to leave, they leave.”

It’s not that simple. Dozens of baseball players have defected, including stars like Jose Abreu of the Chicago White Sox, Yasiel Puig of the Los Angeles Dodgers and Aroldis Chapman of the Cincinnati Reds. They leave family behind, and reunification is never easy. The Cuban government also loses millions in training athletes who eventually flee.

“It doesn’t upset me,” said Montana, who works in construction in Canada. “Maybe it upsets somebody else. It’s not my problem. Everybody has a right to choose whatever they want. If I had a chance to play on the grass in the United States and make those millions, I’d go.”