Teri Dreher spent 38 years as an intensive care unit nurse in various hospitals, where she says she witnessed patients experience numerous highs and lows. She celebrates the highs -- the recoveries, the successful treatments -- but she says it's the lows that have stuck with her all these years.

"I would witness patients who were unable to advocate for themselves, and nurses and doctors who would help them as much as they could, but only within the parameters of their job," Dreher says. "Nurses and doctors aren't able to advocate for patients like they used to because health care has become a profit-driven business. A lot of times, patients or their families feel like they have no voice."

Those marginalized patients, coupled with Dreher's experience a few years ago advocating for her father-in-law as he fought to overcome a life-threatening ordeal, fueled the creation of Dreher's North Shore Patient Advocates, a private professional health advocate based in Chicago.

"At some point, things in health care changed. Doctors seemed to be spending more time on computers and in front of screens instead of working with patients," Dreher says. "It's just part of the process these days. With the Affordable Care Act and new requirements from insurance companies, any stay in a hospital comes with a bureaucratic process. And patients don't always know how to work through that process, which is where we come in. We know the process and we know the issues. We help them through it."

Experience counts

Dreher says that by design, North Shore Patient Advocates uses experienced health care professionals to help clients attain the best care possible.

"In this profession, laypeople don't always know how to do the things that nurses and doctors take for granted, which form to fill out, how something should be classified, how to position a patient for the right care instead of the most convenient," Dreher says. "But if you have a nurse or doctor who has had 25 years of experience, you can be sure they've seen it all. They know how to fight the battles and how to get the best services for their clients."

Although the scenario of doctors and nurses dealing with others in the health care industry could be adversarial, Dreher says she was "pleasantly surprised" to see that it wasn't the case. "People at hospitals are reacting to it very positively. There are so many changes in health care today that hospitals see the benefit of working with someone with our knowledge," she says. "They appreciate our experience so it's easier for them to see the value of what we do."

Best option

Dreher says proper home health care is one of the areas that she and her team of advocates seek for their clients. "The average person has no idea how to pick out a good home care provider so they look to us for assistance," says Dreher. "We know the best agencies now and which agency works best for specific needs."

Dreher's team works on various aspects of the medical process, including referrals, short- and long-term care options and insurance costs. "People think that their insurance coverage is written in stone but that's not always the case," Dreher says. "We've been able to negotiate with health care providers and insurance companies so that both parties are satisfied."

Clients, who include patients or their family members, pay out-of-pocket fees for Dreher's services, and often find her through online searches or from recommendations from family and friends. "People like the fact that we're health care professionals who specialize in navigating complex health care issues," she says.

Dreher says that two of the largest health care professional organizations, the National Association of Healthcare Advocacy Consultants and the Association of Professional Healthcare Advocates, are working toward establishing national certification. "It's a growing field," she says. "And it's only going to get bigger."

Special skills

Dreher says that anyone considering a career in patient advocacy should have extensive experience in the medical profession. "The best patient advocates are seasoned medical professionals," she says. "It takes doctors and nurses years and years to get strong assessment skills and to become an expert in the field. A lot of people in our industry don't have clinical assessment skills so they may not have first-hand experience in identifying and choosing good doctors and care providers."

Dreher says she puts her nearly four decades of nursing experience to use every day, whether she's taking calls from clients, discussing patients with medical providers and insurance companies or training members of her team.

"In many ways, what I do now is the purest form of nursing I've ever done," Dreher says. "I've always loved being a nurse but this is the best job I've ever had in my life. There's a real freedom when you truly belong to the patient. You're helping them every day and you are always able to do it with their best interests at heart."

(C) 2015 Tribune Content Agency, LLC