It is not like a sudden new flood of previously uninsured patients into the market.' - Mark Keroack

SPRINGFIELD - Dr. Mark A. Keroack, president and chief operating officer of Baystate Health, is warning that the use of current methodology to assess risks to insurers in the health care market in Massachusetts could cost smaller insurers millions of dollars.

At the same time, he said it may also force Health New England out of the small insurance market and out of the Health Connector, the state's insurance exchange.

The Massachusetts Health Connector board voted on April 9 to approve regulations providing a framework to evaluate the actuarial risks of those insured. This is a requirement of the federal government's Affordable Care Act.

It is meant to offset the possibility that the previously uninsured may be in poorer health, and provisions in the act, such as insurers no longer being allowed to deny coverage, or charge higher premiums, on the basis of pre-existing conditions.

However, the Massachusetts Association of Health Plans has advocated further talks with the federal government, and further assessment of criteria used. The risk adjustment assessment could result in the transfer of millions of dollars among insurers in the state, with one of the biggest recipients Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts.

The insurer is the largest health plan in Massachusetts. According to news reports, Blue Cross, which is not among the 12 plans in MAHP, had an operating loss of $118 million in 2014, and anticipates receiving $49.5 million in risk adjustment payments for that year.

Baystate owns Health New England, a for-profit Springfield based health maintenance organization.

Speaking at a Republican/Masslive editorial board meeting at The Republican on April 9, Keroack called the implementation of the Affordable Care Act's risk adjustment component "really vexed in Massachusetts," and one that "takes us closer to becoming a one-insurance plan state."

"The federal government has been figuring out how to do this and Massachusetts, particularly the Health Policy Commission, has run to the front of the line saying 'We know how to do this. We are going to implement a system here based on insurance data, claims data, etc.,' and they devised a risk adjustment system and preliminary data looks like that every small insurance plan in the state is going to owe a big check to Blue Cross and Blue Shield," Keroack said. He referenced the fact that the state introduced health reform in 2006 aimed at universal coverage.

"We have almost 97 to 98 percent coverage. It is not like a sudden new flood of previously uninsured patients into the market. This is basically a stable situation. They are looking at flawed data and drawing erroneous conclusions," Keroack said. He said Baystate Health's review of data in Western Massachusetts indicates that "Blue Cross patients are no sicker or no more well than Health New England patients. They are essentially the same."

"We believe what is riding this is that, in the eastern part of the state, at a lot of Blue Cross and a lot of Partners hospitals Partners HealthCare, largest healthcare provider in the state) there are heavy rates of utilization. There are heavy rates of going to the hospital to see doctors, and that makes the patients appear sicker when in fact they are not," Keroack said.

Keroack added that the cost of risk assessment transfer payments for smaller insurers, which he put upwards of $15 million for last year, "might force Health New England to exit the small group market and to exit the exchanges."

He said Baystate Health is "appealing this through the Department of Insurance," and working with legislators, like State Sen. James Welch, D-West Springfield, who was at the board meeting, for relief at both the state and federal level. He said Baystate Health has put $9 million aside for any risk assessment payment transfer, and said this further erodes revenues in the new reimbursement climate of health reform.

Connector officials reportedly plan to send notices of risk adjustments charges and payments on July 1, with payments due on July 31.

"We have already reserved $9 million against this and it has sunk our margin $9 million more. In a typical good year for Baystate, we have a $50 to $60 million margin on a $2 billion organization," said Keroack, referencing the money the not-for-profit healthcare provider has after expenses.

"In order to borrow money at favorable rates, bond holders insist you are generating revenues in excess of expenses, so we have been chugging along at 2 to 3 percent in each of the last few years," Keroack said. "The problem is that the rates of revenue reimbursement have gone up zero to one percent. Rates of expense have gone up three percent. It is basically an unsustainable curve unless, you have a bright ideas to reduce expenses on a regular basis."

In a report from State House News Service, Marylou Sudders, health and human services secretary, said the federal government wanted Massachusetts to proceed with its approved methodology for risk adjustment.

"I think that rather than speculating, we need to go through the process, see what the data says, and then work with the Division of Insurance and others if it does create an imbalance in the system," Sudders is quoted as saying.

The same report quotes a Blue Cross spokeswoman as saying risk adjustments are "standard practice in the health insurance industry to appropriately manage risk."

Gov. Charlie Baker, who brought Havard Pilgrim Health Care out of receivership as its CEO, recently appointment four members of the Massachusetts Health Connector board. Recent appointments to the board, chaired by Sudders, include Rina Vertes, a former chief actuary and chief underwriter for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts. She is said to have co-led the development and implementation of the the insurer's praised Alternative Quality Contract, and to have involved with Massachusetts' health care reform from its inception.