Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, george eliot, Memoirs, Middlemarch, Must-Do, Nonfiction, Readers and Reading, What to Read, Writers and Writing, Entertainment News

George Eliot is the least readily lovable of the great English novelists. Like Dickens, she championed strong moral principles in her fiction, but unlike Dickens, she had the inconsideration to live up to those principles in her real life. It’s bad enough to be high-minded; to also behave virtuously is just about intolerable.

But then there are the novels, and if I can’t quite agree with Rebecca Mead, who in her new book “My Life in Middlemarch,” characterizes Eliot’s landscape descriptions as “sensually precise,” there are nevertheless few writers so masterly at describing how landscapes and experiences and other people make us think and feel. Eliot is the Rembrandt of our interior lives, and there have been few novelists since who equal her in that.

Mead first read “Middlemarch” as a restless 17-year-old coming up in a provincial seaside town in southwest England. Her mind was ravenous for books and ideas and the wide world outside, which she hoped to reach by way of Oxford. Thirty years later, a staff writer for the New Yorker, a stepmother of three boys and the mother of a son of her own, Mead returned to Eliot’s masterpiece, not for the first time, to consider how her understanding of it has changed over the years and how the novel has changed her.

“Middlemarch,” unlike most novels of its time, begins with a marriage — of the idealistic young Dorothea Brooke to Edward Casaubon, a scholar some 20 years her senior — and also concerns itself with a second marriage, that of the ambitious doctor Tertius Lydgate to the town beauty, Rosamond Vincy. The town in question, Middlemarch, is as provincial as the one Mead grew up in, and is undergoing profound changes caused by a political reform bill enacted in 1832.

Both Dorothea and Lydgate want nothing more than to make a difference, to use the modern parlance. He intends to modernize medicine, a purpose that would certainly save lives, while she believes that she can help her husband in writing a great work (a tome to be called “The Key to All Mythologies”) and in the process learn from him. Both marriages are disasters; Mr. Causabon turns out to be a stalled, dried-up pedant, and Rosamond, whom Lydgate imagined as the Victorian ideal of the “Angel in the House” — decorative, “docile” and comfortably incapable of comprehending his own “high musing and momentous labors” — is both superficial and phenomenally stubborn, insisting on a standard of living her husband cannot afford unless he becomes a trivial society physician.

There’s a lot more going on in “Middlemarch” than that, but the two bad marriages are what you notice if, like Mead, you’re a brainy young woman who wants to make something of herself and whose knowledge of life comes mostly from books. Eliot herself — born Mary Ann Evans, the daughter of a Midlands estate manager — was once just such a girl, and many readers first encounter “Middlemarch” when they’re making the same sort of life decisions that confront Dorothea and Lydgate. “My Life in Middlemarch” follows both Eliot and Mead as they obtain their educations and take their hard knocks from the world, while Mead explores which parts of Eliot’s life and social circle may have inspired parts of the novel.

Despite coming of age when a formal university education was forbidden to women, Eliot became a distinguished journalist, intellectual, translator and general woman of letters in London. She lived for a while in the rather scandalous household of her employer at the Westminster Review, John Chapman, along with his wife, children and mistress, the children’s governess. With the philosopher Herbert Spencer she engaged in what Mead calls a “quasicourtship”; the two were close friends until Spencer rather tactlessly informed Eliot that he could never be in love with her. “Physical beauty is a sine qua non with me,” Spencer later wrote in an apparent reference to the affair; “as was once unhappily proved where the intellectual traits and the emotional traits were of the highest.”

“I can’t pretend to be above caring about Eliot’s physical features,” Mead admits with an engaging frankness. A writer’s looks may make no difference in the appreciation of his or her work, but when the writer is a woman living in a society where women have few vocations beyond marriage, her looks can certainly have a significant effect on her life. Nevertheless, I can recall a college lecture in which Eliot’s homeliness was presented as the shaping factor in the writing of “Middlemarch.” This despite the fact that by the time Eliot began the novel, she had found an ideal partner in George Henry Lewes and had been living with him for over a decade. They were unable to marry (Lewes’ legal wife had abandoned him and his three sons), and their cohabitation caused several of their more respectable acquaintances and relatives to shun them, but Lewes and Eliot adored and supported each other for 24 years, forming what the poet Robert Lowell called “Victorian England’s one true marriage.”