Microsoft is reaching into its past to find a new leader for its ad sales operations.

Bob Bejan, who worked in both Business Development and sales for Microsoft’s MSN portal over a decade ago, has been named North America Vice President of Sales and Marketing for Microsoft Advertising.

During his career, Mr. Bejan has worked in a wide variety of roles across the digital marketing landscape, including inside the agency holding company world. In fact, most recently he served as Chief Development Officer of the MSLGroup worldwide, a communications firm within Publicis Groupe.

Mr. Bejan landed in that role after the digital marketing firm he founded, PBJS, was acquired by Publicis in 2008.

Mr. Bejan has even logged some time in the entertainment world, serving as vice president of Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment group in the mid 1990s.

With this hiring, Microsoft has essentially found a replacement for Keith Lorizio, the longtime sales executive who left the company early this year. However, Mr. Bejan’s role will be broader, the company said.

Mr. Bejan arrives at an interesting time for Microsoft’s advertising business. The company announced plans a few weeks ago to shut down its original content studio as part of a sweeping overhaul undertaken by the relatively new CEO Satya Nadella. Yet just a few weeks ago, Microsoft unveiled a revamped MSN while indicating the company remains committed to competing in the online advertising business.

In fact, Microsoft believes it can be one of the few companies–along with Facebook and Google– that can effectively deliver targeted ad campaigns that reach users across multiple screens, particularly as Web media consumption becomes more mobile.

“We have the assets, the commitment and the desire to innovate new experiences our customers are looking for, not to mention over a billion people worldwide who use our products and services every day,” wrote Frank Holland, corporate vice president of Microsoft Advertising in a blog post announcing Mr. Bejan’s hire.