Politics: Ted Cruz: I've hardly ever met John Boehner, but I know why he calls me Lucifer

Published by: Dan Calabrese on Monday May 2nd, 2016

For holding so-called conservatives accountable to actually do what they say they're going to do.

It was attention-getting when John Boehner referred to Ted Cruz last week as "Lucifer in the flesh" (and surely that was the point), but it's hardly breaking news that Cruz is unpopular among his colleagues in Washington. The political and chattering classes often cite this as a reason he is not fit for the presidency, although for many of us it's far from clear that this is actually a mark against him.

And give Cruz credit: He doesn't grovel or squirm when people aim stuff like this at him. Instead, he stands up and tells you in no uncertain terms why people don't like him. And in the case of John Boehner, he also clues us in on some new information: He and Boehner hardly ever met each other, so any personal dislike on Boehner's part was certainly not based on real direct knowledge or experience:

What really irritates the political class about Cruz is that he exposes a game they've been playing for years: On the campaign trail, take "stands" in favor of all kinds of things people want, then when you get to Washington make a show of trying to do these things only to quickly surrender and claim it was impossible because of all kinds of things you'll cite as excuses.

The Republican majority in Congress couldn't hold the line on spending, or stop executive anmesty, or defund ObamaCare, or whatever else . . . because they don't control the White House, or because the media will beat them up, or whatever. Oh, and if they ever tried, then they'd lose their majority, or they'd never win the White House, or whatever else.

So sure, they "stand for" these things in theory, but to ever actually fight to get them done would be impossible, or political suicide, so the voters should be satisfied with the fact that they "stand for" them even though they will never actually do them.

Into the culture that buys this nonsense came Ted Cruz, who broke all the rules of Washington by not only refusing to accept the game but also by going to the floor of the Senate and telling the American people some of the inside baseball by which the political class seeks to pull the wool over their eyes. This is why Boehner thinks Cruz is the devil. Boehner became a master of this game, only to find out that the game was being exposed and the voters he needed to remain in ignorant bliss had found him out, and they were furious.

Cruz expected Boehner, McConnell and others to actually fight to accomplish the things they said they were for, and he ratted them out for their refusal to do so. Boehner and McConnell would argue that they did the best they could, but the best they could was not very good. And if that really was their best, then we needed (and still need) leaders who know how to fight to win.

Conservatives have been complaining for many election cycles that they wish the GOP would nominate a real conservative for president. Now a lot of these same people are running around calling Ted Cruz "Lyin' Ted" and attacking him as some kind of creepy jerk. I don't think a lot of people want anything more than just to be pissed off all the time.

Get your copy of Herman Cain’s new book, The Right Problems, here!