Green Bay’s Clay Matthews considers himself an outside linebacker. But after meeting with coach Mike McCarthy and defensive coordinator Dom Capers, he said he understands that he will probably play inside on some downs again next season. Credit: Rick Wood

By of the

Phoenix — After talking it over with coach Mike McCarthy and defensive coordinator Dom Capers, Green Bay Packers linebacker Clay Matthews is expecting to play a good number of snaps inside next year.

And he doesn't have a problem with that.

Matthews had said in recent interviews that he considers himself an outside linebacker and feels he can have his biggest impact on defense rushing the passer. But after meeting with his two bosses the day after the season ended, he said he understands that his best position on the team might be inside.

"We had an exit interview at the end of the year where we get to talk to all the coaches on our way out, assess you, how your season was, the future of the team, the future of yourself," Matthews said. "We talked. Moving forward I see from not only our coach's expectations, but my own expectations (are there) for playing inside.

"I really enjoyed it. I enjoyed the change. At the same time, I'm very good at getting after the quarterback off the edge, so I think there's a fine line. So, we'll see. Week in and week out you never knew if I was going to be there 100% of the snaps or only 10. We'll see what that means moving forward.

"I enjoy it (but) at the same time, I specialize at being a pass rusher and an outside linebacker."

Matthews, who was in town doing a promotional event for Verizon Wireless, said that as devastating as the Packers' 28-22 overtime loss to the Seattle Seahawks was for him and his teammates, he came away with a better feeling about the defensive outlook for next season.

The Packers were giving up rushing yards by the dozens until at midseason, McCarthy and Capers made the decision to move Matthews inside in sub packages. Capers plays nickel and dime more than he does base defense and so Matthews found himself in the middle a lot.

After losing at New Orleans Oct. 31, the Packers went into their bye week ranked 25th in total defense and 32nd against the run. Over the next eight weeks they improved dramatically with Matthews inside, A.J. Hawk and Brad Jones playing less and rookie safety Ha Ha Clinton-Dix improving enough that fellow safety Morgan Burnett could be used near the line of scrimmage.

The Packers finished 15th overall in defense and 23rd against the run.

"It's funny to watch the drastic play style of our defense Week 1 vs. the NFC Championship Game," Matthews said. "Week 1, especially with the pass rush, we were just teeing off, just trying our best to get after Russell (Wilson) and he was able to scramble, leak out, let his receivers become uncovered and they put it on us, to go along with our game plan at that time.

"Now (in the championship game) we went out there with no regrets. We were going to go out there like we had against every other team, not be afraid or intimidated by any player or the crowd or whatever. I thought we had a great game plan in place, both offensively and defensively."

By comparison, the Packers gave up 398 yards in the 36-16 loss in Seattle in Week 1 and 397 yards in the championship game loss. However, in the first game they had one sack and forced one fumble. In the rematch, they sacked Wilson five times and caused five turnovers.

"Especially on defense to take advantage of individual mismatches, to move guys around, making Russell Wilson uncomfortable on third-down situations, making them manageable as well was the key at least for the first 56 minutes," Matthews said.

Were it not for a breakdown in the final four minutes and overtime, the Packers would have been playing against New England in Super Bowl XLIX instead of Seattle. Matthews told the Journal Sentinel that he missed the final three series of the fourth quarter because of knee and rib injuries that rendered him useless.

He said he could not have returned to the game at the time. But he said when overtime started he felt good enough to return. The following week he was able to play in the Pro Bowl.

"That time in the season, that point in the game too, a couple things had caught up to me," he said. "I'm a pretty tough guy, I would be out there if I were able to."

Matthews' future at inside linebacker may depend on what general manager Ted Thompson does this off-season. It's likely that Hawk and Jones will be released, leaving Sam Barrington and Carl Bradford as the other two inside linebackers.

Barrington became a starter midway through the season and appears to have a promising future. Bradford is a project who played defensive end in college, was drafted as an outside linebacker and was moved inside at the end of training camp.

Thompson may be able to find a Julius Peppers or Letroy Guion-type inside linebacker to help fill out the base defense, where Matthews lines up as an outside linebacker. He would be able to sign someone with limited pass coverage skills because Matthews would be in the game in nickel and dime situations.

Thompson probably will be on the lookout for an inside linebacker in the draft as well. The Packers draft 30th, so the chances of them finding an impact player aren't very good. But the higher the round they select someone, the better the chance he'll have of being a factor.

Matthews said that he doesn't think the team will have a problem shaking off the devastating loss to the Seahawks despite the fact the team appeared to step off the gas at the end. He said he expected the defense to continue to grow.

"One thing this team has done really well is bounce back, whether it's a big win against a good team or a terrible loss," Matthews said. "As you've seen that over the past six years, making the playoffs, getting all the way to the Super Bowl, championship, divisional, wild card, you know the Packers are going to be in the playoffs.

"It's just a matter of winning those games when it counts. And it seems like we're right there every year. It's just about making those one or two plays that everyone can point out each year."