'She wanted to make a difference'

Silver Creek Leadership Academy program coordinator Carrie Adams displays cards she will distribute in memory of Maddy Grayless in this June 17, 2015 file photo. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

Maddy's Mighty Minions Day What: A day to perform a random act of kindness When: Tuesday What: Mayor reads proclamation When:7 p.m. Tuesday Where: Council chambers, 350 Kimbark St.

Tuesday marks eight months to the day that 8-year-old Maddy Grayless died from bone cancer.

But Tuesday will also be a day of remembrance and concerted kindness as those affected globally by "Mighty Maddy"'s story strive to honor her last wish — for others to do good.

Maddy, her parents Brian and Jessica Grayless and Maddy's two siblings had only lived in Longmont for a few months when Maddy was diagnosed with advanced bone cancer in June. She died two weeks later.

A family friend created the group Maddy's Mighty Minions to encourage people to perform random acts of kindness in memory of a little girl who would write notes to her friends and tell them she appreciated them or to give them a compliment.

"One thing that I miss the most is those little notes," Jessica Grayless said Friday. "She was always thinking of how to make someone else smile."

Enter 18-year-old Calvin Madison.

Madison is a senior at Silver Creek High School and involved in the school's Leadership Academy. He said the academy program Coordinator Carrie Adams first alerted him to Maddy's story last year.

Advertisement

"It touched me because she wanted to make a difference and she never got a chance to and I wanted to make a difference in her name to help both of us," Madison said.

Madison founded The Community Service Society as part of a Leadership Academy project. The Community Service Society is a student organization focused on fundraising and volunteering for local charities in order to honor Maddy's last wish.

Madison and the students made up bingo cards (except S-M-I-L-E is the word in the top row) for teachers to use in local elementary schools. Each square lists a random act of kindness like "Give someone a flower" or "Call a grandparent." When a student gets five squares in a row, they get a certificate for completing the SMILE Random Acts of Kindness Challenge.

Madison also asked Longmont Mayor Dennis Coombs to proclaim Tuesday as Maddy's Mighty Minions Day in Longmont. Everyone is encouraged to "seek opportunities to perform and embrace random acts of kindness" on the coming Tuesday "and every day," according to the proclamation.

Jessica Grayless said on Tuesday her family is planning to perform nine acts of kindness in honor of Maddy, who died four weeks short of her ninth birthday.

"The thought is to do something for every year we got to spend time with her," Jessica Grayless said.

Grayless said she was impressed that the Longmont community, and especially the high school students, came through with so much support for her family.

"The thing that touches me isn't the day necessarily, but her story, her life, what happened and the way she dealt with it. She affected people enough that they're still thinking about it eight months later and that part means the most to us," Grayless said.

"You never want anyone to go through this, you'd never wish it on anyone else but there is a silver lining — the kindness of people and how good they are."

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci