Concert Information • Artists: Jerilyn Joregensen, violin, Cullan Bryant, piano • Date/Time: Sunday, Nov. 17, @2 p.m. • Program: Beethoven, Leos Janacek and Gabriel Faure • Place: Stanley Hotel Concert Hall • Admission: $10 per person. Children and students are admitted at no charge. • Save. Packets of 10 tickets for $80 for any concert this winter of your choice . • The Jorgensen/ Cullan concert is sponsored by Nancy Stevens. • The Winter Series is dedicated to our friend and founding music festival board member, Mal Walker.

The Estes Park Music Festival is pleased to announce the return on Nov. 17 of the prestigious duo of Jerilyn Jorgensen, violinist extraordinaire, and world class New York pianist Cullan Bryant. Listen and enjoy this exciting and diverse program by composers Beethoven, Leos Janacek and Gabriel Faure.

Jorgensen is a member of the performance faculty of Colorado College and has been adjunct faculty in violin and chamber music at the Lamont School of Music at the University of Denver. From 1980-2004 she was first violinist of the Da Vinci Quartet and as a member of that ensemble she performed throughout the United States. She was a prizewinner in the Shostakovich International String Quartet Competition and finalist in the Naumburg Chamber Music Competition. Jorgensen appeared on PBS's NewsHour with Jim Lehrer.

Advertisement

Jorgensen's 2012-2013 season included concerts in Denver, Colorado Springs, La Junta, and Montrose. In October of 2011, she was soloist with the Chamber Orchestra of the Springs, Thomas Wilson conducting, in Eric Ewazen's Concerto for Violin and Strings. She is a founding member of the Trio Paradis, whose 2013-14 inaugural season presents music by women composers from all eras in a series entitled "Unsung Voices". She is on the faculty of the Lamont Pre-College Academy summer program and is the Artistic Development Coordinator for the Colorado Springs Youth Symphony Association, where her responsibilities have included curriculum design; teacher training for the Mozart Strings Project; sectional coaching; and coaching oversight for four orchestras. She is currently director of chamber music for the organization, managing coaching and community performances throughout the year for five student chamber ensembles.

Jorgensen holds bachelor of music degrees from the Eastman School of Music and the Juilliard School, and a master of music degree from Juilliard. Her major teachers have included Zvi Zeitlin, Joseph Fuchs, and Leonard Sorkin. She has also worked with Burton Kaplan. Jorgensen plays a beautiful violin from 1705 made by G.B. Rogeri.

Bryant is among the most active chamber and collaborative pianists in New York City, maintaining a schedule of over 70 recitals a year. He has performed with many world-class artists including Ju-Young Baek, Emanuel Borok, Colin Jacobsen, Misha Keylin, Oleh Krysa, Julia Lichten, Midori, Sviatoslav Moroz, Peter Rejto, Paul Tobias, members of the Amati, American, Arcata and Borromeo Quartets and members of the New York Philharmonic, Metropolitan Opera Orchestra, the Orchestra of St. Luke's, New York City Ballet Orchestra, New Jersey Symphony, Boston Symphony and the Detroit Symphony Orchestra in such venues as Weill Recital Hall, Merkin Hall, Alice Tully Hall, the Metropolitan Museum of Art and Detroit's Orchestra Hall. Bryant made his Carnegie Hall debut in 1992 in recital with violinist Patmore Lewis.

Bryant's festival appearances have included the Long Island Beethoven Festival where he performed 16 Beethoven piano sonatas in a two-day marathon, the Serenates de Platja d'Aro and the Porta Ferrada festivals in Spain, the Chateau de la Napoule in France, Lake Winnepesaukee Music Festival in New Hampshire, Palm Beach Invitational Series in Florida and the Shandelee Piano Festival in New York among many others. Bryant has been on the faculty of the Academy of Music Summer Festival since 1999.

Bryant began playing the piano at age two, giving his first public recital at age six. At 11, he toured campuses in his native Arkansas and in Texas including several televised recitals. His prizes and awards include the Leschetizky International Competition, the National Arts Club of New York, the Memphis Beethoven Competition, Miami Arts Competition and a certificate of outstanding citizenship from Arkansas Governor Frank White. His college studies were with Robert Goldsand and Artur Balsam at the Manhattan School of Music. In July of 2002 he toured Japan in recitals with violinist Midori.

Upcoming concerts

Nov. 24 offers something new and exciting . If you love jazz, pop, classical and world rhythms, celebrate Thanksgiving weekend with friends and family as you experience the upbeat amazing sounds of Pan Nation in their first appearance with the Music Festival. Pan Nation's in-depth exploration of traditional and modern steel drum repertoire represents a fresh, contemporary approach to the steel drum band. The ensemble members are actively involved as composers and soloists of their repertoire, the result being a unique, new sound for the steel drum ensemble that combines the traditional sounds of the Caribbean steel drum band with jazz, pop, classical and other world rhythms. Pan Nation's eclectic steel drum repertoire has been well received at concert performances throughout the Western United States as well as their masterclasses, outreach and innovative community programs. The group has just released a debut EP recording entitled, "Altered Perception." . This group is fun and engaging.

For further information, contact the music festival business office at 970-586-9519 or visit estesparkmusicfestival.org. To receive updates of the Music Festival events, please send an e mail to epmfinfo2@yahoo.com. All concerts are back on schedule for 2 p.m. Doors to the concert area open at 1:30 p.m.