One unfilled healthcare job can cost a healthcare facility an average of $7,700.

Though healthcare continues to create jobs, the cost for leaving positions vacant can really add up for providers.

For example, one unfilled healthcare job can cost a healthcare facility an average of $7,700, according to a new report by Randstad US. And a company can lose more than $14,000 if a position stays vacant for three months or longer. Nationally, healthcare jobs stay vacant for around 50 days.

The report also claims there’s an average of 43 candidates per healthcare job opening. The most in-demand jobs in healthcare are those for nurses, pharmacists, physicians -- including primary care and emergency medicine - and hospitalists, according to the report.

Health, pharmaceutical and finance are high on the list of fields having the greatest demand, just below the need for talent within STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics). CareerBuilder claims that active candidates are most concentrated along the East Coast and in California, according to the report.

One unfilled healthcare job can cost a healthcare facility an average of $7,700. - Tweet this

When it comes to the talent search, 93 percent of recruiters are likely to view a candidate’s social profile on Facebook, LinkedIn or Twitter, according to a 2014 Jobvite Job Seeker Nation Study cited in the report, and 42 percent have reconsidered a candidate based on content viewed in a social profile.

Follow Healthcare Finance on Twitter and LinkedIn.

According to WANTED Analytics, the following companies are currently looking to hire the most healthcare professionals: Hospital Association of America; Kindred Healthcare; Community Health Systems Inc.; Genesis Healthcare; Providence Health & Services; Brookdale Senior Living; HCR Manor Care; Catholic Health Initiatives; and DaVita, Inc.

Randstad US annually publishes its list of Hot Jobs.

Many economists expect the U.S. job market to yield steady growth in 2015, especially in healthcare.. The predictions are based on field market research, as well as an analysis of 2015 economic projections and market trends.

“From enticing salary and benefits packages to more flexible working environments, employers are on the offensive to attract and retain a high volume of skilled employees to satisfy growth within these industries,” Chief HR Officer Jim Link said in a statement.

Twitter: @SusanMorseHFN