ASSOCIATED PRESS

Plans for a high-speed rail line connecting Los Angeles and San Francisco have recently hit a snag, owing to a Sacramento judge who recently issued a ruling threatening the project's financing. This is just the latest obstacle to land in the way of progress in California. Critics of the planned line have warned of certain cost overruns and claimed that projected estimations of ridership (and thus revenue generated by the project) are too rosy, while voter support for the project has been declining. In March of 2013, a survey conducted by the Public Policy Institute of California found that "only 43 percent of likely voters support the project."

The New York Times published a piece this week about the plan. Wedged in the middle is a quote that was seemingly included to reflect the most asinine take on the matter:

Joe Nation, a professor of public policy at Stanford University and a critic of the plan, said Mr. Brown would have to grapple with this decline in support, which he argued reflected voters’ growing doubts about the basic competence of government. “Obamacare has leached over into this,” Mr. Nation said. “You have people saying, ‘The federal government that can’t build a website — how can we expect them to build a multibillion-dollar train?’”

Dearie me! We can't build trains anymore, because of this one website? If that's actually true, then why haven't we simply cancelled the future entirely?

There is a point to be made here. The woes of the online federal health insurance exchange have served, of late, as a reliable political brickbat for Obamacare opponents to wield. But as more and more Americans turn to the web -- and their mobile devices in particular -- to assist them in the day-to-day task of solving problems, there will be a greater demand for the federal government to get in sync with the modern world. HealthCare.gov's specific woes should serve as a wake-up call that serious reform is needed. The UK government, which endured and surmounted a similar crisis, can serve as a model -- or it would serve as one, if "constant government dysfunction as a lifestyle choice" wasn't part of the GOP's essential brand identity.

That said, these problems really have no bearing on the proposed California high-speed rail line. In the first place, the only job the federal government has in this is to allocate money. The responsibility for "planning, designing, building and [operating]" the line falls to the California High-Speed Rail Authority. Now, they might be a gaggle of utter cock-ups, but Obamacare, and its website's woes, aren't reflective, in any way, of the quality of their work.

But I suppose everyone should get used to being told that Obamacare is the reason nobody can have nice things anymore. Dana Milbank, for whom this meme is clearly wearing thin, wrote about this on Tuesday:

Indeed, Americans do have enough things to worry about, but now they have the additional worry that one of the two major political parties is collectively suffering from obsessive-compulsive disorder. Immigration? Iraq? Unemployment benefits? The Republicans, following a year that included dozens of repeal attempts and a government shutdown over Obamacare, are prepared to respond to all with Obamacare, Obamacare and Obamacare.

Milbank points out a truth that many have missed: "The American public has a different view. A Gallup poll last month found that 47 percent cited economic issues as their top concern, including 31 percent who listed the overall economy and jobs." Indeed, back at the beginning of December, respondents to a United Technologies/National Journal Congressional Connection Poll practically got down on their knees and begged lawmakers to turn their attention to jobs: "By more than three to one, Americans said they would be 'very pleased' or 'somewhat pleased,' rather than 'somewhat disappointed' or 'very disappointed,' if the chief executive and lawmakers worked together to create jobs -- either by cutting taxes and regulations or by increasing federal spending on infrastructure projects."

Oh, hey, speaking of infrastructure projects, the California High-Speed Rail Authority estimates that the construction of the L.A.-to-San Francisco link will "generate 66,000 jobs annually for 15 years," lead to the direct employment of 4,500 people, and "could indirectly generate up to 400,000 additional long-term, permanent jobs statewide."

[Would you like to follow me on Twitter? Because why not?]

Also on HuffPost: Lies And Distortions Of The Health Care Debate Lies And Distortions Of The Health Care Debate

1 of 12 Healthcare In America Is Already 'The Best In The World' One of the more positive sounding admonitions from health care reform opponents was that the United States had "the best health care in the world," so why would you mess with it? Well, it's true that if you want the experience the pinnacle of medical care, you come to the United States. And if you want the pinnacle of haute cuisine, you go to Per Se. If you want the pinnacle of commercial air travel, you get a first class seat on British Airways. Now, naturally, you wouldn't let just anyone mess with someone's tasting menu or state-of-the-art air-beds. But like anything that's "the best," the best health care in the world isn't for everybody. The costs are prohibitively high, the access is prohibitively exclusive, and the resources are prohibitively scarce. What do the people in America who "fly coach" in the health care system get? Well, at the time of the health care reform debate, they were participating in a system that was, by all objective measurements, overpriced and underperforming -- if you were lucky enough to be participating in it. As anyone who's fortunate enough to have employer based health care or unfortunate enough to have a pre-existing condition can tell you, health care for ordinary people already involved all of those things that we were told would be a feature of the Affordable Care Act -- long waits, limited choice, and rationing. When the Commonwealth Fund rated health care systems by nation , the top marks in the surveyed categories went to the United Kingdom, New Zealand and the Netherlands. Ezra Klein examined the study, and observed : "The issue isn't just that we don't have universal health care. Our delivery system underperforms, too. 'Even when access and equity measures are not considered, the U.S. ranks behind most of the other countries on most measures. With the inclusion of primary care physician survey data in the analysis, it is apparent that the U.S. is lagging in adoption of national policies that promote primary care, quality improvement, and information technology.'" Share this slide:

Getty