Business leader runs for Texas Senate District 24

By JEFF LOWE Staff Writer

Ryan Downton became motivated to run for office after seeing the effects of federal government action on his business.

Downton, a Republican from Salado, is president of Little River Health Care in Temple, a hospital and provider network.

Previously, he founded a small business called Platinum Diagnostic Imaging. Downton said he had to sell that business as a result of cuts to independent imaging imposed by federal health care regulations.

“Obamacare really destroyed that, and that’s what motivated me to get more involved in that [legislative] process,” Downton said.

In 2012, he ran unsuccessfully for state representative against an incumbent in west Travis County.

Now, Downton is running for the Texas Senate District 24 seat, which Troy Fraser will vacate at the end of his term.

Downton considers illegal immigration, water and education some of the most important issues at a state level.

He mentioned concerns that entities downstream of District 24 are attempting to take water from users upstream.

On immigration, Downton encouraged the enforcement of E-verify to prevent businesses from employing illegal immigrants.

He also advocates eliminating sanctuary cities, in which local government prevents the enforcement of federal immigration law.

The candidate said those are steps that can be taken at the state level, while he still believes the federal government should do more to address illegal immigration.

Downton said a wall on the border should be considered as one of several options to address the influx of illegal aliens.

On another issue, Downton voiced his support for parents to have school choice. He also favors more options in curriculum, adding that he wants the next generation to have the same opportunity his generation has.

“I’ve got a 6-year-old, and he’s in a lot of ways my motivation for working,” Downton said. “There’s not a one-size-fits-all [solution].”

Downton is concerned that many students are graduating unprepared for the workforce. The candidate said schools should offer technical training in addition to college preparation.

“It doesn’t make sense to try to force every student to go to college,” he said.

The Salado resident added that property taxes – a major source of funding for schools – are too high.

“I think the fairest way to tax [is] an end-user consumption tax,” he said, adding, “My first choice is to cut taxes as much as possible.”

He also favors reducing business regulations, which he said lead to a stagnant economy and a lack of new jobs.

“Small business is really the backbone of the Texas economy,” Downton said.

The candidate has overseen two businesses of different scale and size. Platinum Diagnostic Imaging had nine employees; Little River Health Care has about 900 employees, including about 150 physicians.

Downton originally is from upstate New York. After he received an MBA from Vanderbilt University, the University of Texas School of Law offered him a scholarship.

“[I] came down here, fell in love with the state, fell in love with the people,” he said.

Downton practiced with international law firms and also served as general counsel to the Texas House of Representatives.

In 2011, he defended the Texas Legislature’s redistricting maps in trials in San Antonio, Washington, D.C. and before the Supreme Court.

“We’ve been in court ever since,” he said.

Downton said while other candidates talk about their conservative stances, he has a unique record of defending his positions in court against the federal government.

“That and my business background make me a great candidate for this district,” he added.

Downton voiced his support for the right to bear arms and conservative social values.

“I’m a big Second Amendment advocate,” he said, adding that current Texas gun laws are, overall, in a good state.

The State Senate hopeful also said he is “not in favor of telling the police how to do their job in regard to all aspects [including] their safety...”

In discussing social issues, Downton said, “I’m a very staunch pro-life advocate, and I think Texas needs to be leading the fight to protect life.

“We have a responsibility to continue to challenge Supreme Court precedence ...Roe v. Wade was one of the worst decisions in history,” he added.

In response to the Obergefell v. Hodges ruling, Downton said Texas probably needs additional legislation to affirm the right of individuals and clergy to practice their religion.

“Marriage is a religious issue,” he said. “The state shouldn’t have anything to do with it.”

In closing, Downton said his “biggest personal message” is “I’m not running for myself. I’m running for our next generation. We need to ensure we elect the right leaders to go to Austin and represent our values.”