Buy Photo Reporter Joe Gerth (Photo: Jessica Ebelhar/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

It wasn’t a flip. It was a flop.

That’s how House Speaker Pro Tem Jody Richards described the much-ballyhooed announcement by Minority Leader Jeff Hoover that last Monday might be a historic day in the Kentucky House of Representatives.

Turns out that whatever Hoover, a Jamestown Republican, thought was going to happen, didn’t.

It was a bit like the Cincinnati Bengals getting mouthy in the minutes before losing to the Pittsburgh Steelers on a last-second field goal.

Even though one might have an advantage, it’s still not easy to beat history.

And that’s what the Republicans are trying to do here, having not controlled the House since silent movie actress Gloria Swanson was the cat’s meow.

Hoover never explained exactly what he was talking about when he made his bold prediction, but most speculation centered on Democratic House members either taking jobs in the administration of Gov. Matt Bevin or deciding to caucus with Republicans to elect either Hoover or a Democrat beholden to a large Republican minority.

House speaker Greg Stumbo quipped that the only history being made last Monday was Hoover’s extension of his own record as the longest serving House Minority leader in Kentucky’s history.

Democrats think – maybe wishfully – that talk of Republicans taking control of the House is now quelled at least until March 8, when voters in four House districts will head to the polls in special elections to select replacements for two Republicans who moved up to statewide office and two Democrats who accepted jobs from Bevin.

To be sure, those are key races. If the Democrats can hold on to two of the seats, they’ve got real hope of holding onto the House until at least next fall. If the Democrats can’t stop the GOP momentum, they’ve got serious problems.

But even if the Democrats hold, they’ve got potential problems in November – especially if Democratic incumbents in swing districts decide the political winds are against them and stay home.

Rep. Mike Denham, of Maysville, has already announced that he’s not returning for health reasons, and that district could easily go Republican.

With just over a week to go before the deadline to file for office, eight other Democrats haven’t filed to run again, including several in areas that sometimes – or even regularly – vote Republican.

Those include Reps. Johnny Bell, of Glasgow; Russ Meyer, of Nicholasville; and Kevin Sinnette, of Ashland.

House Speaker Greg Stumbo and Majority Leader Rocky Adkins often say that the Democrats, damaged by the national Democratic brand, are better suited to defend incumbent seats in local elections where voters know the Democrats and don’t associate them with the national party figures.

He’s correct, to a degree. But the dynamics change when Democratic incumbents decide not to run again. Especially when the Republicans put all their effort into flipping the House.

Republicans hope to raise more than $1 million at an event Friday in Louisville that will be headlined by Bevin and U.S. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell. Even if they don’t hit that goal, it likely won’t be a flop.

Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com. Follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1RsbdGg