Sportscaster and television host Erin Andrews, center, stands as the jury enters the courtroom Wednesday, March 2, 2016, in Nashville. Attorney Scott Carr is on the left. (Photo: Mark Humphrey / AP) Story Highlights Thank you to the women who stand up and brave the public exposure of their private hell.

You, hopefully, make the future better for all sexual assault victims.

If you want to get a glimpse of how brave women need to be when they stand up for justice in sexual assault cases, just read some of the comments posted on The Tennessean’s stories about Fox Sports reporter Erin Andrews’ civil suit against the owners and operator of Marriott Nashville on West End over videos that were taken in the hotel by a stalker.

The Tennessean does not allow anonymous commenting, so the disgusting nature of what some people are willing to write is probably just an inkling of the insensitivity and lack of empathy that seethe in our communities.

I wonder how these people would react to gross violations of their daughter’s privacy, or if she were sexually assaulted? Would they blame her, the victim, for the assault? Tell her to keep quiet to avoid shame and stigma? Tell her that the best thing to do is just move on and forget about it?

Or could they be strong and stand behind her and support her as she confronts again, and again, the indignity forced upon her?

I hope, for their daughters’ sakes, they never have to find out.

Strong precedent

The Andrews trial was the second high-profile sexual violence case in Nashville in the past year.

In January 2015, two former Vanderbilt University football players were convicted by a jury in the rape of a fellow student — the conviction was set aside by a judge when the impartiality of a juror, a victim of statutory rape, was questioned by the defense lawyers, and a new trial is set for later this year.

In that trial, the woman also took the stand to testify before a jury who had watched humiliating video evidence.

The trials are high profile because of the popularity of either the victim, in Andrews’ case, or the accused, in the football players’ case, but they also are high profile because they are so rare.

Crimes of sexual violence are rarely prosecuted because evidence is too often “she said, he said,” and it is near impossible for victims to stand up to the pain and ignominy of a public trial.

The lawsuit brought by eight former University of Tennessee, Knoxville, students lists the plaintiffs as “Jane Doe.”

The “ongoing situation” of whether Rep. Jeremy Durham, R-Franklin, may or may not have harassed several women is fueled by the fear of publicity and retribution, according to reporting in The Tennessean.

Nashville YWCA CEO Patricia Shea, whose agency deals with the impact of domestic and sexual violence every day, said, “Victims like Erin Andrews, who are able to rally resources and publicly stand up to those who bully and abuse women, should be commended.

“Although Ms. Andrews continues to be victimized every time the video is played or someone claims she wasn’t harmed, successful litigations are empowering and blaze a trail for other women to follow,” Shea added. “By standing up for herself, Ms. Andrews stood up for all women who today cannot due to a lack of resources or fear of repercussions.”

Being brave

After the first Vanderbilt rape trial, the woman issued a statement that bears repeating … often:

“I want to remind other victims of sexual violence, you are not alone. You are not to blame.”

Andrews had a similar message during her civil trial.

“I have to do what’s right,” Andrews testified in her suit against the owners and operator of the Marriott Nashville on West End.

“And I have to stand up for myself. And I have to stand up for everyone,” she added. “This could have happened to anyone. I want the Nashville Marriott held responsible."

In opening statements, Randall Kinnard, Andrews’ attorney, captured the essence of sexual crimes when he referred to the impact the videos have on his client.

“It happens, it continues to happen, it happens today, it will never stop,” Kinnard said. “This is not like a broken arm that heals.”

The jury awarded Andrews $55 million in damages.

Mindful

In an excellent Sports Illustrated article by Richard Deitsch, baseball broadcast reporter Trenni Kusnierek commented on the Andrews trial, “Men are still dismissing what happened to her and making light of it and making a joke of her trauma.

“That stuck out the most to me,” she said. “It reinforces this feeling that the onus is on the victim to prove she was victimized.”

Reach Frank Daniels III at 615-881-7039 and on Twitter @fdanielsiii

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1pn5k1P