Joseph Bustos |

Patients in Contra Costa Regional Medical Center and hospitals throughout the county might have noticed different nurses on duty during Tuesday and spilling over into most of Wednesday.

That’s because on Tuesday, October 6th nurses working for the Contra Costa Regional Medical Center and across clinics within Contra Costa embarked on a two-day strike. The nurses claim the county has failed to address patient health concerns, leaving hospital units understaffed and underequipped for shifts.

Nearly 1,000 County registered nurses, nurse practitioners, and public health nurses are represented by the California Nurses Association/National Nurses United, the nursing union organizing the strike. The union cites findings of a 30 percent wage cap for County RNs in comparison to local private hospitals. Because of this, CNA claims that more than 100 nurses have left county hospitals in favor of greener pastures over in private hospitals.

The strike began on early Tuesday morning in Martinez’s Contra Costa Regional Medical Center, and is set to continue until Wednesday night. Hundreds of nurses present for the strike marched from the Contra Costa Regional Medical Center to the County Administration Building for the regular County Board of Supervisors meeting.

CNA says it is the loss of long standing experienced nurses that is so detrimental to patient care. “With the closure of Doctors Medical Center in West Contra Costa County and with more people who are now eligible for insurance under the Affordable Care Act, we’re seeing thousands of new patients,” said Registered Nurse Rosalind Walker in a statement. “But the County refuses to staff our clinics and units with enough nurses—specifically with enough experienced nurses. When nurses feel unable to provide care in safe conditions, they leave. We are striking because, for over a year, the County has refused to adequately address this serious issue.”

CNA also cites that many new nurses do not stay with Contra Costa hospitals for long, choosing to gain training and experience in public hospitals before moving onto private hospitals that offer better pay and less strenuous working conditions.

“Recently graduated nurses who find a first job with the County repeatedly move on to better standards at other hospitals. As a result, the County has essentially become a training center for the area’s private hospitals. Contra Costa County taxpayers are subsidizing the private sector by footing the bill for training nurses for them,” said Telemetry RN Wayne Dixon, who has been with the County for 12 years.

Contra Costa County’s Board of Supervisors authorized $3.7 million for the hiring of replacement nurses during the strike. Nurses with the CNA however say the spending should be going towards addressing the issues they are advocating for.

In a statement released by Contra Costa Health Services, Health Center leaders claimed they have recruited professional nurses as replacement workers to ensure service continues unabated.

“The care and safety of our patients is our top priority and we hope to be able to resolve this as quickly as possible. The Superior Court of California granted us a preliminary injunction requiring some nurses from Detention Services, Inpatient Psychiatric Services and Psychiatric Emergency Services to report to work on the scheduled work action days. An additional 120 positions will be filled by replacement nurses,” said Contra Costa Health Services Director William Walker.

“All of our replacement nurses meet the requirement for the specialties where they will be assigned and they have received training and orientation to CCRMC and Health Centers for the past two days. Their qualifications were verified prior to their arrival on campus,” said Walker.

CNA says that negotiations with the County have been ongoing for the past 15 months. Nurse have been working without contracts since July of this year.

“We would, of course, rather be at the bedside, providing care,” said Liz Isenberg, RN. “But the loss of experienced nurses has resulted in deteriorating conditions for our patients at the County hospital and clinics. We can’t stand by and let that happen. We are walking out for a short time to advocate for improvements that will help our patients in the long run.”

Category: General News