Topics: Chocolate, Christmas, Food, Pets, The Dodo, Life News

This piece originally appeared on The Dodo

1. Chocolate, caffeine and coffee

Many people realize that chocolate can be hazardous for pets, but they might be unaware that coffee and caffeine should also be avoided. All three of these of these contain substances called methylxanthines, which, when ingested by pets, can cause a variety of adverse side-effects, including seizures and death.

2. Christmas tree water

While humans typically won’t be tempted to slurp from the bowl of water holding the tree, animals have been known to confuse the tree bowl with their water dish. According to the Best Friends Animal Society, Christmas tree water is a breeding ground for germs and bacteria, and could cause nausea or digestion problems if ingested by furry friends.

3. Macadamia nuts

Macadamia nuts, often found in candy and baked goods, can cause depression, hypothermia, tremors, weakness and vomiting in canine companions. It would probably be best to err on the side of caution and keep them away from your cat, too.

4. Yeasty bread dough

Uncooked yeast dough can cause some serious upsets to your pet’s digestive system. The dough can expand in an animal’s digestive system and rupture the stomach or intestines. The risk decreases once the bread is already cooked, so it’s OK to give your pet a few pieces of baked bread, provided that it doesn’t take up more than 10 percentof your pet’s daily caloric intake.

5. Alcohol

It should go without saying, but don’t let your pet near any type of alcohol. While you might not actually offer your pet a sip of alcohol, people occasionally leave their drinks unattended during holiday parties, and a curious pet could end up imbibing. Aside from alcohol causing your pet to lose coordination and vomit, it can also cause a coma or even death.

6. Raw meat and eggs

You’ve probably read various warnings on menus about the dangers of eating undercooked meat or eggs. Well, salmonella and E. coli are just as harmful for pets as they are for humans, if not more so. Raw eggs can also cause skin and coat problems for dogs.