HUNTSVILLE, Alabama - More emergency room visitors are fueling a massive $5.5 million project at Crestwood Medical Center in Huntsville.

The hospital's emergency room is undergoing a three-phase expansion that will add 17 new private patient exam rooms, additional triage and waiting room areas, renovation of existing spaces and more privacy at registration by early next spring.

Crestwood Emergency Department Director Rhonda Maze-Buckley said phase II of the development, which included the renovation of five existing rooms, finished last week. The phase also resulted in a new larger critical patient room for crash/trauma victims, she said.

"For Crestwood, for our staff, for our physicians, for our patient population, it's huge," Maze-Buckley said. "It's new, it's clean, it's state-of-the-art equipment, from the things on the walls to the beds. Just having more efficient work areas is going to be really huge for everybody."

Phase III began today and is expected to be complete in March 2015. Maze-Buckley said the expansion will benefit geriatric or elder-care patients by allowing Crestwood to admit them to the hospital or get them back to their familiar surroundings more quickly.

Maze-Buckley said many ER patients are sicker, requiring more treatment, while others are turning to ERs or urgent care facilities instead of a primary care physician.

More Crestwood ER patients also have health insurance this year, she said.

"We've been looking at it and trying to drill down as to why we have an uptick in patients," Maze-Buckley said. " ... The first part of the year, all surrounding hospitals are low. I think that was in reaction to the unknown and trying to figure out the (Affordable Care Act). Towards the end of the year, we've seen a steady increase in our patient population."

Maze-Buckley hopes the ER expansion will improve patient wait times at Crestwood.

Last year, ProPublica released ER Wait Watcher, an app showing average emergency room wait times for hospitals across all 50 states using voluntarily-reported data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The online tool shows the average ER wait time is 26 minutes nationally and 31 minutes in Alabama.

ProPublica says Crestwood has an average ER wait time of one hour and four minutes, up slightly from one hour and one minute at Huntsville Hospital. Maze-Buckley said the typical length of stay for a Crestwood ER patient is 2 ½ to 3 hours, including admission and discharge.

"It varies," she said, adding that ERs see more patients between 11 a.m. and 2 a.m. "I always hate to give a number because it depends. It also depends on how patients flow in."