Lawmakers who supported Obamacare and spread the president’s false statement “if you like your health care plan you can keep your health care plan,” are taking the heat from recent ads launched by Americans For Prosperity.

The organization reportedly spent $16 million in its endeavor last fall. Early this month it rolled out a “multimillion dollar ad effort” targeting Senators Kay Hagan (D-N.C.), Mary Landrieu (D-L.A.) and Jeanne Shaheen (D-N.H.). Two ads released Tuesday exposed Michigan Rep.Gary Peters and Iowa Rep. Bruce Braley.

No more than 30-odd seconds are needed for AFP to pack the punch:

AFP President Tim Phillips is open about the intent — a full Obamacare repeal:

We’re putting pressure on senators who repeated [Obama's] lie and doubled down on ObamaCare even as it became obvious that the law was hurting millions of Americans. The story of ObamaCare is one of less choice, rising premiums, and broken promises. AFP is committed to a long-term effort to stop this law.

The heat placed on Democrat lawmakers could also help the Republicans poised to pick up an additional six seats and take control of the Senate this year. The New York Times noted Wednesday:

Campaign experts said they believe that the early advertising blitz has driven down the support for Senate incumbents in highly competitive states such as Louisiana and North Carolina that are critical to the Democratic Party’s push to hold its majority. Some House Democrats in competitive districts find themselves under steady assault with little ability to respond unless they want to dip into money they will need later in the campaign.

Money isn't the only thing these lawmakers need to get them out of hot water. While the AFP may indeed have the funding of the billionaire Koch brothers, they also have the truth. Obamacare is a failing piece of legislation — poorly planned, executed and riddled with disastrous effects. Leaders backing the legislation should be held accountable.

The New York Times provided this helpful graphic of the lawmakers AFP brought to national attention: