The business of health care and its delivery has been a persistent debate in America. Costs are increasing, a lack of oversight is pervasive, and the quality of patient care is inconsistent. A general lack of health literacy means long insurance contracts remain confusing and frustrating. Additionally, the system misdirects its focus on the treatment of disease rather than its prevention and gives more attention to men than women.

Dr. Saralyn Mark, an endocrinologist, geriatrician and world-renowned pioneer in women’s health addresses these topics in her book entitled, "Stellar Medicine: A Journey through the Universe of Women's Health." Mark served as the first senior medical advisor in the Office on Women’s Health within the Department of Health and Human Services for 11 years and to NASA. Currently, Mark is the president of SolaMed Solutions, where she advises on medical and scientific issues for NASA and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy as well as for nongovernmental and professional society organizations.

I first spoke with Mark following her keynote presentation at the Global Impact Forum, held at the United Nations headquarters in New York last May, and followed up with a phone interview.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

What prompted your deep investment in women's health?



When I was in school, my training was considered women's health, however, it was primarily reproductive health. I saw with my patients that there was so much more than just reproductive health issues – women were dying of heart disease and various cancers, including lung cancer which women have a higher death rate from than breast cancer. We were seeing significant increases in osteoporosis, Alzheimer's disease, autoimmune diseases, and the list can go on and on. Yet, I got the feeling that we weren't paying enough attention to those needs in women. So, I naturally just created what is now considered to be a women's health fellowship to give me the tools to better address the needs of my female patients.



How does business factor into medicine?



The business of health care is big business. There's nothing wrong with big business, but when we're talking about the well-being of our communities, we know that healthier individuals can contribute to the workforce more significantly as well as to their families and communities. These are measures that are harder to define; yet, we know how profound an impact they can have on our culture and our society in general.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

You can't separate business and health care. We want to provide economically sound health care. When we're in a more competitive marketplace, prices can decrease. If we utilize technologies and provide medical care more appropriately with improved oversight, health care costs may decrease as well.

I remember the days when I was in training, and we were ordering lab tests. You just took your pen and ordered all the blood tests on the page – absurd! I wondered how much money was wasted. I still see it occasionally, and I think the concern is that this is not only money that is wasted, but also it's the misuse of the medical system. So, I believe that appropriate medical care, which also includes utilizing drugs, tests and devices will result in better health care with a system that can be financially sound.

Patients also need to be better-educated consumers as well. We need to do a better job of providing tools that help patients know which questions to ask and how to get answers.



[ALSO: 5 Problems With an Anti-Obamacare Supreme Court Decision]

Is a there greater focus on treating disease than prevention?

Yes, treating disease tends to be more lucrative. So, if you have a disease to treat then you may have drugs and devices to use. It can be challenging to promote prevention, especially since a lot of it comes down to human behavior. From the economic vantage point, how do we measure that? For example, how do we measure healthy eating habits, healthy physical activity and not smoking and doing activities which put your health at risk? Prevention is a lot harder to quantify. With all the challenges that the Affordable Care Act has experienced, when you really drill down, the cornerstone of it is on prevention. It's on counseling; it's on doing preventive tasks to catch something early, perhaps before it evolves into a full-blown disease. It's an opportunity to bring patients in to begin the discussion with their clinicians on how to have a healthy life.

What are some of the health care trends you see coming in the next decade?



We're going to see more of an interchange between technologies, such as smart devices, and health care delivery. It is happening now. For example, we have devices and mobile apps that remind us which medications to take and when to take them. They can create algorithms that can inform consumers of potential side effects that can occur when taking certain medications together or within certain time frames of each other. We'll also see the use of information technology to coach us, to help us develop healthier lifestyles.



[READ: Op-ed: Jobs in Health Care on the Rise, but Skills Gap Prevents Hiring]

In the world of precision health, we will understand more of the impact of genomics at all levels such as metabalomics, proteomics, epigenomics. We'll also begin to understand the impact of the microbiome which is the bacteria that's in your GI and urinary tract systems and on your skin, and understand how it plays a significant role in our health.

We'll appreciate more the impact of the mind and body interplay with the understanding that it's not just an alternative to conventional medicine, but an important part of health care. We need to invest in prevention sciences and to do a better job advocating for health promotion.

We're going to see an integration of health metrics including in a corporate reporting system. Companies will be asked to share how well their workforce is doing – giving them the incentive to take an active role in their employees' health.