Rookie safety Ha Ha Clinton-Dix admits he has made mistakes, but coaches and teammates love his attitude and willingness to learn. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Green Bay — On the fourth day of training camp, Green Bay Packers veteran safety Morgan Burnett rolled an ankle and missed practice the following day.

Two days after that, he strained an oblique and missed three more days of practice plus the exhibition opener against the Tennessee Titans.

As the team's first-round draft pick and a lifeline for so many Packers fans who have borne witness to abominable safety play, Ha Ha Clinton-Dix was up next. He jumped in and joined Micah Hyde, a second-year pro new to the position, to form the team's starting safety tandem.

"Morgan went down for a couple days and me and Micah were back there, two young safeties — he was learning as well — and we were both making mistakes back there, " Clinton-Dix recalled. "We didn't know how complicated it was without Morgan back there."

That's because, as he knows now, his education was just beginning.

Since coach Mike McCarthy took over in 2006, the Packers have had 17 safeties play in at least one regular season game, and up until this year, the only two who distinguished themselves were Nick Collins and Charles Woodson.

Only after four seasons as a starter has Burnett graduated to completely reliable status and it came just in time to help guide Clinton-Dix toward the same class, a position to which he seems to move closer every week.

Like it was for Collins and Burnett, the transition from college to pro safety has been a process. Unlike the other two, Clinton-Dix has done a remarkable job of it in just his first season in the NFL.

"The mental curve is the hardest part," Burnett said. "He's a really smart guy, very athletic. He's picking everything up really fast. When you look now you don't even realize he's a rookie. He's been here for a while. It's really fun playing alongside him."

Hyde began the year as the starter next to Burnett, but after Clinton-Dix had his best game playing nickel safety vs. Miami (nine tackles, no misses, no big plays allowed, a pass broken up), defensive coordinator Dom Capers made the decision to make him a full-time starter.

Playing time way up

Since stepping into that role against Carolina Week 7, Clinton-Dix has played 399 of a possible 409 defensive snaps (97.6%), the most of any player on defense. As a result, his season percentage of snaps has skyrocketed to 81.9%, which ranks fourth on defense behind Tramon Williams (90.9%), A.J. Hawk (90.8%) and Burnett (82.2%).

He has been responsible or partially responsible for four completions of 25 or more yards and at most could be considered responsible for one touchdown pass. He has averaged eight tackles per game over the last seven and has cut his misses considerably.

The coaches have been happy with Clinton-Dix's play, especially the physical toughness he brings, but they don't rave about it. In fact, they don't really make more than sterile comments about him, perhaps because the most difficult part of his season is ahead and they don't want him thinking he has arrived.

"I think this is more conversation for the end of the season," McCarthy said when asked about his rookie last week. "I think he's doing a really good job to date."

How Clinton-Dix got to a place where his play is being discussed so widely outside the building is multi-layered. His education began well before he ever got to Green Bay as the 21st pick in the 2014 NFL draft and it advanced quickly because Clinton-Dix is smart and professional, coaches, teammates and former teammates say.

"He's a football guy," safeties coach Darren Perry said. "He just likes football. It's important to him. That's big. Nothing was given to him and I think he understood that from Day One. You'll play when you're ready, not because you're a first-round draft pick.

"We're not going to put the defense at risk just for the sake of you being a first-rounder."

Clinton-Dix got a head start on his professional education by attending the University of Alabama, where Nick Saban, a former NFL head coach, runs a pro-like defensive system. In fact, Saban's system isn't too far removed from what Capers runs. Capers was his defensive coordinator with the Miami Dolphins in 2007 and some of the coverages are similar.

Saban coaches safeties

Safeties who play for Saban come especially prepared because Saban is his own secondary coach. He doesn't have anyone designated as cornerbacks coach or safeties coach or even an assistant to those positions. Before being a defensive coordinator and head coach he was a defensive backs coach and he trusts no one else to coach them but himself.

It's no secret he's a perfectionist.

"I honestly think he was hard on us," said former Clinton-Dix teammate Robert Lester, now a safety with the Carolina Panthers. "He coached our group all day, every day. He wanted the safeties to make sure they knew everything that was going on.

"He definitely stayed on us. It made you make sure you did things right."

Clinton-Dix, a native of Orlando, Fla., came to Alabama in 2011 as the No. 1-rated high school defensive back in the country, according to Rivals.com. Ahead of him on the depth chart at Alabama was senior Mark Barron, who ended up being the No. 7 pick in the 2012 draft.

Barron became Clinton-Dix's mentor and Clinton-Dix's ability to acknowledge mistakes and grow from them was born of his relationship with the senior.

"I made a lot of mistakes as a freshman and he just told us to keep fighting through them," Clinton-Dix said. "And when you make mistakes learn from them and move on. I give Barron credit for that."

After three seasons with the Crimson Tide, Clinton-Dix joined a Packers team desperate for help at the safety position, so much so that they decided to move Hyde, a cornerback, to safety during the off-season. The Packers expect rookies to play and they weren't looking for this to be a redshirt-type year for their first-round pick.

Starting over

So they went to work preparing him to play their system. The first step was stripping away everything he has ever known about playing safety and then building it back up to play in their system.

"Right from ground zero," Perry said. "I take a lot of pride in that. It's very important that first coach gets you going in the right direction in terms of preparation and being a true pro of the game and playing the game a certain way.

"You let them know there's a lot of ways to do things but this is the way we do it. Fundamentals are going to be first and foremost. If you can do that, you're going to be able to put yourself in a position to play for a long time."

Part of doing it Green Bay's way is learning the terminology, which for most players, Clinton-Dix included, is completely new. Coverages the rookie knew to be called one thing under Saban were different under Capers.

"It was tough," Clinton-Dix said. "I actually had to sit down and write it down and say this is the right thing to say for it. I had to write it down a couple of times. I'd come to a meeting and coach DP would pull something up on the screen and tell me exactly what do I have on this call and sometimes I'll make a mistake and use the verbiage we had at Alabama.

"It's not the right thing, so basically I'm getting it wrong. So, he was really hard on me about that part. Now I'm good."

When training camp rolled around, Clinton-Dix thought he had a good grasp of the terminology and the defense. He wanted to show he knew the calls safeties have to make before the snap and wasn't afraid to make them.

"I was calling things out really loud — and wrong," he said.

Capers and Perry had their concerns, but it wasn't like they hadn't seen things like this before. They had to prepare Burnett to start from the minute he was drafted and stuck with him through a lot of growing pains.

"I tell Morgan I don't even want to know what you didn't know going into that first start," Perry said. "They won't tell you at the time."

But he said, if they're willing to go to veterans and admit they don't know something, they've got a chance. Burnett had Collins to lean on and Clinton-Dix has Burnett and Sean Richardson. Both of them chuckle when he makes the same mistake they did as rookies.

"I done had a couple of those conversations with Ha Ha," Richardson said. "It happens to the best of us. He's very coachable. He listens to everybody. He's not arrogant or stuck up. He's humble. He wants to continue to get better. He's like a sponge. He gets information from all of us."

Talked to Alabama coaches

Capers and Perry were hoping that would be the case with Clinton-Dix. Capers had conversations with the Alabama assistant coaches he knew and was assured Clinton-Dix was going to be someone who wouldn't be hard to coach.

They had to get him to buy into the commitment to fundamentals. In the pros, fundamentals are taking the right angle, knowing where to keep your eyes, not taking a false step, breaking down on tackles and understanding where your help is.

"In college you could put your eyes in the wrong place and then still have a chance to get in the right position," Burnett said. "Not in the NFL. I mean you slip up on technique, it's the difference between making a play and getting beat. You learn fast in the NFL."

Early in camp, when Burnett got hurt and Clinton-Dix was making mistakes, no one got discouraged. The plan was to let him continue his education through camp and start Hyde, an equally intelligent and hard-working player.

They just needed him to admit he was wrong and learn from his mistakes.

"That's one thing about him, he responds," Perry said. "Guys that can coach themselves, they're practical and they view themselves with a critical eye and that's when they have a chance to be good.

"It's the ones who are in denial and want to make excuses ... you know you're going to have some issues."

Part of the continuing education for Clinton-Dix is meeting every morning with Perry to watch film, go over coverages and prepare for the game plan. It is a mandatory rookie meeting that allows Clinton-Dix one-on-one time before the rest of the group comes in and starts classroom work.

Clinton-Dix takes notes. He said he's adamant about not making the same mistake twice. Perry remembers him lapsing on his fundamentals on a play during the Philadelphia game and going over to him on the sideline to be corrected.

"Before I even got over there, he said, 'I know, I have to finish better,'" Perry said. "Before I could even get it out."

He's learning.