Politics Romney Wants To Fight Poverty. Here’s How His 2012 Agenda Would Have Devastated The Poor. CREDIT: AP Former Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney

Two-time presidential candidate Mitt Romney is gearing up for a third run at the Oval Office, aides close to the former Massachusetts governor tell reporters, busily courting donors and laying out a message that will convince voters that the third time really is the charm.

“Romney, who made a fortune in the financial sector and was cast by Democrats in 2012 as a heartless businessman, wants to make tackling poverty — a key issue for his 2012 vice presidential running mate, Rep. Paul Ryan — one of the three pillars of his campaign,” Politico’s Maggie Haberman and James Hohmann write.

A senior adviser to Romney explained that a third Romney campaign will likely adopt a more populist economic tone focusing on “upward mobility and opportunity,” themes that Congressional Democrats touted, largely unsuccessfully, during the 2014 midterm elections.

For Romney, the new focus is jarring. After all, he ran his 2012 campaign on policies that would have disproportionately benefited the wealthiest Americans and regularly argued that poor people didn’t need his help.

“I’m not concerned about the very poor,” Romney explained to then-CNN host Soledad O’Brien in February 2012. “We have a safety net there. If it needs repair, I’ll fix it.”

During a high-dollar fundraiser in September 2012, Romney infamously wrote off 47 percent of voters who he claimed didn’t pay taxes and are “dependent upon government,” arguing that it’s not his job to “worry about those people.” “I’ll never convince them that they should take personal responsibility and care for their lives,” he said.

Even after losing the election, Romney attributed Obama’s re-election to the “the gifts” his administration had distributed to African Americans, Hispanics, and young voters. “The President’s campaign focused on giving targeted groups a big gift—so he made a big effort on small things. Those small things, by the way, add up to trillions of dollars,” he said, referring to Obama policies that allowed young people to stay on their parents’ health care plans, offered contraception at no additional cost, and deferred deportation for undocumented youth.

Former Romney supporters — including the director of Hispanic outreach for the campaign — quickly distanced themselves from those remarks, but neither they nor Romney ever abandoned the policies behind the sentiment.

In 2012, Romney’s tax plan — a 20 percent reduction in all marginal income tax rates — would have delivered half of its benefit to the richest 5 percent of Americans, with more than 25 percent of the benefit going to the richest 1 percent. According to an analysis from the Tax Policy Center, Romney would have increased after-tax income for those making more than $200,000 annually, while lowering it for everyone else.

Romney also called for repealing an expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Child Tax Credit, policies that that were included in the 2009 Recovery Act and disproportionately benefited families in the lowest income quintile.

These tax changes were part of his larger economic pledge to balance the budget by 2020. Romney promised to impose a cap of 20 percent on all federal spending as a percentage of GDP to help him achieve that goal.

But as an analysis from the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities estimated, such budget constraints would have spelled large cuts to programs that benefit lower-income Americans.

Thirteen million people would have lost access to the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program or food stamps, compensation payments for disabled veterans and Supplemental Security Income benefits for poor seniors and people with disabilities would have both been cut by more than 25 percent, along with other benefits like school lunches and unemployment compensation.

Romney also campaigned on cutting Medicaid funding by converting the health care program — a joint funding venture between the states and the federal government — into a block grant to the states that caps funding regardless of rising need. Such policy would have reduced health care enrollment by 14 to 27 million people.

Like most Republicans running for office, Romney also promised to repeal the Affordable Care Act on his “first day” in office, a goal that is at odds with alleviating poverty. The law has lowered the uninsured rate among Americans earning less than $36,000 in annual household income by 6.9 points since it went into effect one year ago.