People Moves of the Week: KeyBanc, Madison Capital, New Heights

Keybanc hires Keith Buchanan; Madison Capital promotes three; New Heights adds two

Calera Capital- The middle-market private equity firm, based in San Francisco, promoted Paul Walsh from operating partner to senior managing director. Walsh is the former CEO of electronic payment services provider EFunds Corp. (NYSE: EFD).

Day Pitney LLP- Ellen Knarr has been named office managing partner in the firm’s New York office, where she will be responsible for promoting the office’s capabilities and supporting local partners. She will also coordinate local community work. Knarr focuses on advising public and private companies on corporate and security law. In addition, she chairs Day Pitney’s Women Working Together program.

FCX Performance Inc.- Thomas Cox has been named CEO at Harvest Partners LP-backed flow control services company FCX, based in Columbus, Oho. Cox will also continue to serve on FCX’s board. He was previously the executive vice president of sales at MSC Industrial Supply. Harvest Partners purchased FCX in 2012.

KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc.- The Cleveland-based middle-market investment bank hired Keith Buchanan as head of the firm’s oil and gas investment banking and Jay Salitza as managing director in the same group. They will both report to Raj Trikha, head of KeyBanc’s (NYSE: KEY) industrial and energy investment banking. Buchanan and Salitza were both previously with the Bank of Nova Scotia.

Lancaster Pollard- Kevin Laidlaw, who is currently a vice president with Lancaster, has moved over to the firm’s mergers and acquisitions group. In his new position, Laidlaw will be concentrating on both buyside and sellside services for senior living facilities. Lancaster is a Columbus, Ohio-based investment advisory firm that is focused on the senior living and housing sector.

Madison Capital Funding- The middle-market lender announced three promotions. First, the firm promoted Christopher Taylor to head of new business origination including the health care and financial services sectors. Jennifer Cotton has been promoted to chief underwriting officer, overseeing all of the firm’s underwriting and portfolio management. Finally, Chicago-based Madison promoted Ashish Shah to head of investment management, where he will be in charge of third party asset management, including CLOs and private funds.

New Heights Research- The private equity-focused research firm has hired Christina Woo a partner and Lauren Townsend as a principal. Woo, based in San Francisco, will lead the firm’s recruiting efforts, particularly in the technology and health care sectors. She previously held positions at Bain & Co., the Boston Consulting Group and Morgan Stanley (NYSE: MS). Townsend comes over from middle-market private equity firm Incline Equity Partners. She will be responsible for New Heights’ client services.

Perella Weinberg Partners- Marie-Hélène McAndrew has joined Perella’s asset-management division as a managing director. She will be based in New York. In her role, McAndrew will be working with the marketing and client services team as a product specialist. McAndrew comes over from Permal Asset Management where she a senior vice president.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: