Jared Bernstein, a former chief economist to Vice President Biden, is a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities and author of the new book 'The Reconnection Agenda: Reuniting Growth and Prosperity.'



(Eric Risberg/AP)

I’ve found myself at numerous future-oriented conferences in recent months, where experts are asked to hold forth on what they think might characterize the economy and “job” market, say 20 to 40 years hence (the quotes are there because some people don’t think there will be jobs in the future).

Now, I expect there are skeptics, if not cynics, among you who would argue that all this means is that a bunch of scholarly types have too much time on their hands. I’m not unsympathetic, especially in that there’s a huge “who knows?” to all of this. I often get stuck in these settings on the realization that we can’t predict next month’s jobs numbers very reliably; what makes us think we can see at all clearly that far down the road?

Still, there’s something potentially useful going on here. There are trends—some ongoing, some new — that are worth thinking about and planning for from the perspective of future economic policy. (To state what I hope is obvious, the thing we want to act most quickly and aggressively on vis-à-vis the future is the impact of carbon emissions on the environment.)

Among the most notable of these trends is what people are calling the “gig economy:” the growth of freelance, independent or contingent labor. That trend has been growing for decades, of course, but there’s a new task-creation function at the intersection of technology, apps and interconnectivity, giving rise to “sharing economy” jobs and raising important questions about the changing nature of work (in this regard, I think of “gig” as referring to both what musicians call a freelance job, as well as to gigabytes).

I don’t think anyone knows the magnitude of the gig economy. One estimate says a third of the workforce are now freelancers, but I suspect that’s high (or at least it should not be taken at face value as many of us, myself included, do both standard and freelance work).

While the gig economy is sometime romantically touted as fostering micro-enterprise and entrepreneurism, my take is closer to that of economist Gerald Friedman who puts not too fine a point on it:

The gig economy is associated with low wages, repression, insecurity, and chronic stress and anxiety. Freelance workers fear to complain about working conditions, fear to ask for higher pay, and fear to reject any conditions imposed by prospective employers. By removing any social protection, the gig economy returns us to the most oppressive type of cut-throat and hierarchical capitalism, a social order where the power to hire and fire has been restored to employers, giving them once again unfettered control over the workplace.

That captures the downside of this growing sector, and it is thus essential for those contemplating a future path toward more social and economic justice to incorporate these concerns in our thinking and planning.

The upside is labor demand, as in “jobs.” While there’s considerable anxiety about technology increasingly displacing work (though systematic evidence is lacking, as economist Larry Mishel points out here), history is replete with examples of technology creating more jobs, on net, though often after periods of painful disruption.

The intervening variable, and it is absolutely crucial, is consumer demand. In this regard, there are at least two future-oriented things we should be worried about in terms of jobs and incomes: inequality and bargaining power.

Even in the future, there’s an econ 101 principle that will still be operative: Labor demand is derived demand. It’s derived from the goods and services that consumers and investors and governments need and want. Economist Joe Stiglitz has long argued that inequality and its constraining impact on middle and low-income growth have hurt job growth by reducing demand among those who are “liquidity constrained” and thus have a high propensity to consume the marginal dollar.

More plainly, if the people who already have much of the old money also get most of the new money, we should expect consumer demand to falter. As I’ve explained elsewhere, that didn’t happen so much in the 2000s because the liquidity constraint was loosened through access to cheap credit. Sprinkle in a housing bubble and a wealth effect (consumer spending goosed by asset appreciation), and you have an alternate, albeit unsustainable, source of growth.

Even more plainly, you can have all the apps you want offering handy delivery of all kinds of stuff we want and need (including stuff we didn’t know we needed, like powdered food), but if consumers are too strapped, or worried about being too strapped, don’t expect much in the way of job creation.

That’s job quantity. Equally important is job quality, and here the warning above about the low quality of many freelance jobs is highly germane. Noodling about the future in this space strikes me as essential. How should these workers by classified (are they employees, subcontractors, or do we need a new category)? When it comes to health coverage, can they access the exchanges in the Affordable Care Act, or do they need to figure out a way to pool risk as firms now do in order to provide affordable coverage? Is there some way they can work against their atomized status and come together to collectively bargain (the Freelancer’s Union has long been active and effective in this space; can it scale up)?

Although it is common in these brain storming sessions to hear about a coming world without much in the way of work, I don’t see it. This time could always be different, but the message from history is that the living standards of most working-age people — and if anything, we’re working longer, not shorter — will continue to depend on our jobs and our paychecks.

If I’m right, the quantity and quality of the jobs of the future will be much improved if we employ public policy to lean against growing inequality and weak bargaining power. In that regard, when it comes to the future of work, it’s not the robots that worry me. It’s the policymakers.