Buy Photo William Head, left, Richard Coure, Pinky Noble-Britton, Harvey Major and Cheryl Major met in March to plan the first Father and Son Wellness Fair, set for June 20, which focuses on the health needs of black men. The fair will be at Fisk University from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. (Photo: John Partipilo / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights The organization wants to route more men toward preventative care.

Obesity, heart disease and prostate cancer are often undertreated, which can have lasting impacts.

Interest from potential exhibitors exceeded organizer expectations.

Heart disease, prostate cancer and access to health care providers will be among the featured topics at an upcoming fair aimed at educating black men on health and wellness.

The host, The Boyz Inc., is trying to raise awareness and answer questions about the health issues impacting black men by hosting the first Father and Son Wellness Fair over Father's Day weekend.

"There are great possibilities for learning and finding out you're not the only one with an issue," said William Head, president of The Boyz, a Nashville community service organization. "It may be cathartic for some to get some things out in the open."

Attendees of the Father and Son Wellness Fair on June 20 at Fisk University gym will hear from health professionals on topics such as Medicare gap coverage, aging, suicide and chronic disease.

The Boyz is putting on the wellness fair to educate black men about health issues that plague the community, and to provide a road map about how to stay healthy while aging.

Organizers originally put emphasis on chronic disease, sexual health and aging, but interest in the fair pushed it to include other areas, such as dentistry and prostate health.

Interest from potential exhibitors exceeded Head's expectations.

"We've talked to a lot of people interested in things that we didn't even expect," he said, adding that he's excited about the variety of information that will be on hand.

“We're trying to get the word out to get as many people there as possible. I would love to have more there than we can handle.” William Head, president of The Boyz, Inc.

Presenters and exhibitors will be available to answer questions and provide resources to find care. Matthew Walker Comprehensive Health Center will offer men a medical home so they can establish a primary care relationship.

Representatives from organizations including BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, dentistry and dental hygienist programs at Meharry Medical College and Tennessee State University, Humana and Urology Associates will be on hand.

The Tennessee Suicide Prevention Network, as well as state agencies including the Commission on Aging and Disability and Division of Minority Health and Disparity Elimination, will be there.

The organizers are focusing on helping people understand insurance options under the Affordable Care Act and how to close gaps in Medicare coverage. Several exhibitors will be at the fair talking about options and providing educational materials.

The fair will have a civic component with on-site voter registration and local university researches surveying how and where Nashvillians receive care.

The Boyz will be reaching out to churches and running public service announcements on Fisk's radio station, WFSK 88.1, in the next week to reach as many people as possible.

Getting men to the doctor

The Father and Son Wellness Fair will be 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. June 20 at the Fisk University gym. The event is open to men of all ages, races and income levels.

For more go to http://www.eventbrite.com/e/father-and-son-wellness-fair-tickets-16165627828?aff=eac2.

Contact The Boyz at theboyzatyourservice@yahoo.com.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1JIsUgT