Democratic Sen. Barbara Boxer, 74, will not be seeking a fifth term. Cliff Owen/AP

Today in Obama:

Grim Prognosis: With the White House preparing to simultaneously defend Obamacare on two fronts – the Supreme Court’s going to hear a technical challenge to the law this term, while the Republican-majority Congress is trying to kill it through a thousand cuts – the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office reports that changing the Affordable Care Act’s definition of full-time work would add $53 billion to the federal deficit and up to 1 million people to government-backed health insurance rolls, according to The Hill.

Drawn Conclusion:



Steve Breen/Creators Syndicate

Today in 2016, Campaign Books Edition:

Grits, Gravy and – Wait, What?!: In his new tome, “God, Guns, Grits and Gravy,” potential Republican presidential contender and ex-Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee talks culture, which means topics like Jay Z, gay marriage and the fact that there’s poverty in America. U.S. News’ Dave Catanese reports the book has a few surprises – a finger-wag at the Club for Growth and a hat-tip to former Democratic Sen. John Edwards – but the biggest eye-popper is Huckabee’s rant at airport security in a chapter titled, “Bend Over and Take It Like a Prisoner.”



[MORE: A Different Kind of Service in Congress]

Doctored: Retired neurosurgeon Dr. Ben Carson, another potential 2016 Republican presidential contender, apologized Thursday after BuzzFeed News discovered he’d plagiarized parts of his top-selling book, “America the Beautiful.” Carson apparently lifted passages from sources including a conservative historian, CBS News, a Liberty Institute press release and a now-defunct website. Not a good look for the doctor, but at least irony is with him: BuzzFeed fired an editor last year after they found he’d plagiarized more than 40 times.

Today in Everything Else:

Must-See TV: In announcing she will retire after 24 years in office, Sen. Barbara Boxer, a California Democrat with a reputation for the unorthodox, eschewed the standard – i.e., boring – press release or press conference. Instead, she created what seems more like video performance art by posting on YouTube a video of her eldest grandson – a young man clad in shorts and a black shirt – interviewing her (“Grandma, have you made a decision regarding the 2016 Senate race?”) in order to preempt those pesky reporters.





But wait, there’s more: Boxer, a published novelist, also wrote a poem to say farewell, an eight-line ode to her years on Capitol Hill. Even though she’s got two more years left in her term, she says:

The Senate is the place where I've always made my case,

For families, for the planet, and the human race.

More than 20 years in the job I love,

Thanks to California and the Lord above

So although I won't be working for my Senate space,

And I won't be running in that next tough race,

As long as there are issues and challenges and strife,

I will never retire because that's the meaning of my life.