Topics: Editor's Pick, Feminism, Life stories, Life News

Would I ever accept money for sex? An avid feminist, I’d never even considered the possibility until my handsome passenger nonchalantly tossed two one-hundred-dollar-bills on the front seat of the cab I was driving and said, “I’d like it if you’d go back to the hotel with me.” I’d been sitting in the taxi line in front of the Brown Palace, Denver’s classiest hotel, in my Yellow Cab numbered 666, or “Sixes” as the dispatcher called it. Interested in numerology, I knew that 666 was a significant number, symbolizing evil, our fall from grace, as well as sex. At 25, I was living in a commune, and wasn’t bothered by the number on my taxi. I was just happy to have the cab at all. Old and run-down as it was, and possibly also due to its enigmatic number, none of the regular drivers wanted it, so it was mine.

In 1975, the City and County of Denver issued me an eight-by-six-inch laminated taxicab license emblazoned with a headshot of me sporting long brown hair and granny glasses. Some called me attractive with my olive skin and amiable smile, but I was too insecure to believe them. Still, I was proud of that permit. It represented freedom to make a living on my own schedule. I believed I was helping to forge new territory for women in the work force, being one of five women out of hundreds of drivers employed by the Yellow Cab Company. With my rent at $35 a month, and my diet vegetarian, it was easy to get by. Driving a cab allowed me to earn an income while giving me time to pursue kung fu, pottery making, and camping in the Rocky Mountains.

Most importantly, I really liked the job. Given my short stature and petite build, I must have made quite a picture behind the wheel of the iconic Checker cab. Engulfed in its massive chassis, I would coast down 14th Avenue with its synchronized lights, not having to stop for miles, with the glorious Rockies ahead of me, almost surreal in their beauty. Those mountains served as my guidepost. In an age of personal seeking, I always knew which direction was west.

Among taxi drivers, the cab was often referred to as a confessional on wheels. People opened up in the privacy and anonymity of the back seat. In Denver at that time, livery cars did not have the Plexiglas partition between driver and passenger. Lacking a physical barrier allowed for a connection between cabbie and rider. Sometimes the cab became psychotherapy on wheels; as I drove, I gave advice or served as a sounding board for passengers’ problems.

The vehicle afforded me anonymity as well. Passengers didn’t see me as an NYU graduate, counterculture hippie who’d been to Woodstock and spent two days in a Washington D.C. jail for protesting the Vietnam War. I was just their driver taking them where they wanted to go.

But on one cool Colorado September evening, in hopped a handsome, smartly dressed man in his mid-thirties, spirited and outgoing. He appeared wholesome, with his blond hair neatly parted on the side and swept across the top of his forehead. He had blue eyes, an engaging smile, and wore preppy chinos, polo shirt and pullover. He looked like a shorter, hunkier Robert Redford, immediately getting more of my attention than I usually gave to the next fare.

“Do you know a bar where I can hear a rock band?”he asked with a smile.

While we were en route he said he was married and showed me a picture of his two young children. He worked for a Texas oil company and was in town on business for a day. He was so affable and chatty that I told d him a little about myself as well: that I had moved here after college in New York and the activities I was now pursuing in Colorado. Then came his proposition.

At first I thought he was joking. Here was someone who was good-looking, wealthy, and would have no problem picking up some classy young woman for a one-night stand. Yet, as plain and unsophisticated as I perceived myself to be, he was offering to pay me to sleep with him. “You’re kidding, right?” I asked.

“I’m very serious. You can take the money.”

I pulled the cab over to the side of the road and turned around to return his cash. I was struck by how attracted I was to him. His fair, clean-cut appearance formed the yin to the yang of my dark, bohemian, Mediterranean features.

“Come on,” he said. “Let’s go somewhere.”

For a moment, neither of us spoke while I considered. Two hundred dollars was a lot to me. As a cabbie I made $40 a day. It would have taken me a week to earn that much. But being paid cold, hard cash for sex? I should have been insulted. Nevertheless, I found him quite attractive. I was already taken with his personality. His aura of wealth and privilege impressed me as well. I had never stayed at the elegant Brown Palace, and here was an opportunity. Yet he had a wife. Still, I’d come of age during the sexual revolution, and lacked respect for the institution of marriage. Still, I felt certain that I posed no threat to their relationship. And yet, his monetary offer was off-putting. I didn’t really know how to react. What harm would there be in discussing it? I parked the taxi, handed him back the two bills, and with the meter still running (at his insistence), we walked into the bar.