The Supreme Court will rule in the next nine days on President Barack Obama's health overhaul in a dispute over the tax subsidies that make insurance affordable for millions of Americans.

The outcome in what Justice Elena Kagan called "this never-ending saga" of Republican-led efforts to kill the Affordable Care Act may hinge on the votes of Chief Justice John Roberts, whose vote saved the law three years ago, and Justice Anthony Kennedy.

Millions of people could be affected by the court's decision. The justices were trying to determine whether the law makes people in all 50 states eligible for federal tax subsidies to cut the cost of insurance premiums. Opponents say that only residents of states that set up their own insurance markets can get federal subsidies to help pay the premiums.

Roughly three dozen states did not set up their own exchanges and rely on the federal healthcare.gov. The Obama administration says it would make no sense to condition subsidies on where people live, and that doing so would set off a "death spiral" in which enrollment declines, driving premiums up and leaving only the sickest, and costliest, people insured.

In Alabama, 145,763 citizens obtained coverage through the Affordable Care Act this year, and 132,253 received subsidies. Insurance premiums will increase by an average of 321 percent for those who lose subsidies after the decision. Alabama has one of the highest percentages of consumers receiving subsidies, and some of the lowest prices for insurance on the exchange.

If the court rules against the subsidies, two-thirds of those who bought coverage using the tax credits are expected to drop the insurance.

Some states are already creating back-up plans to save the subsidies if the court rules against the administration. Leaders in Pennsylvania and Delaware have created plans to fast-track approval of state-based exchanges that piggyback on Healthcare.gov, the federal exchange.

But in Alabama, which has rejected several elements of the law – including Medicaid expansion and the creation of an exchange – it may not be so easy to get a plan in place.

"One of the prerequisites is that a state has to want to be a state-based exchange, and several states have laws on the books that prevent that," said Cynthia Cox, associate director of health reform and private insurance at the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Still, lawmakers aren't eager to take the subsidies away. Support for the Affordable Care Act surpassed opposition earlier this year, according to a poll conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation.

GOP contingency plans in Congress would restore the subsidies, but remove requirements that individuals or businesses purchase insurance plans. Those changes would critically undermine the healthcare law and could face resistance from the insurance industry, Cox said.