<p>Contributed graphic</p>

By John Ingle of the Times Record News

An errant television report regarding Blue Cross Blue Shield health insurance plans has consumers clamoring for answers and health underwriters' phones ringing off the hook.

The report, which aired on KFDX 3 News on Monday, said everyone with Preferred Provider Organization plans through the insurance giant would be moved to Health Maintenance Organization plans, but that isn't necessarily the case.

The station updated the story Tuesday.

Kelly Fristoe, a health underwriter at Financial Partners in Wichita Falls, said only those BCBS consumers with nongrandfathered PPO health plans, whether purchased through the federal insurance exchange or not, will be moved to HMO plans on Jan. 1, affecting more than 5,000 people in the Wichita Falls area. People with grandfathered off-exchange plans, as well as employer-provided plans, will not be affected.

"Now there's more panic and fear as a result," he said of the inaccurate television report. "I'm seeing Facebook blow up this (Tuesday) morning regarding this matter, and we're even having many of our small group clients call in to our office in a panic asking about why United Regional is not going to be in the network next year."

Fristoe said that all is not doom and gloom with the plans BCBS will offer consumers through the federal exchange and that HMO plans are very workable.

But he said it requires consumers to become educated more than ever on the plans, which providers are available and how best to use their plan benefits.

According to a database search, Fristoe discovered there are 11 family practice providers in the area ? including Wichita Falls, Burkburnett and Archer City ? that accept HMO plans. In all, there were 181 providers of all specialties ranging from acupuncture to assisted living that also accept those plans.

During a meeting in Grapevine last week, the insurance carrier laid out summary details of HMO plans that will be offered for 2016 through health care.gov and direct to consumers.

A traditional HMO requires the insured to see an HMO primary care provider to use the benefits. To see a specialist, the primary care doctor must refer the patient to a specialist for the specialist's care to be covered. If the patient tries to see a specialist without first consulting with a primary doctor, they will be on the hook for 100 percent of the cost of seeing an out-of-network provider.

The second plan is an HMO Plus and provides some out-of-network benefits for consumers. So, in the event that a patient receives services from a non-HMO provider, there is still a level of benefits available.

However, the insured will pay much more for those non-HMO provider charges than if they would have gone through their primary physician and referral process.

"It's going to be incumbent upon the consumer to know so much more than they ever had to know in the past with regards to the health insurance plans on how to use it, where they can use it," Fristoe said. "I've always told my clients than an education is what you get when you read the fine print, and experience is what you get when you don't."

He said it could be a negative experience if they don't dig into the details and seek professional assistance through a certified agent to help determine which plan fits in best with household income, health care needs and more, something not offered on healthcare.gov or through exchange navigators or certified application counselors.

Fristoe said there will not be other carrier options for Affordable Care Act consumers in this area because BCBS is the only one writing policies for the exchange. Off-network options will shrink in 2016 as United Healthcare will only offer an Exclusive Provider Organization plans for individuals, and Aetna will not write plans in the area. Humana will continue to write plans in the area, but United Regional Health Care System will not be in its network.

United Regional Health Care System has not negotiated an agreement with BCBS on their HMO plans, President and CEO Phyllis Cowling said in a statement. She said the Level 2 Trauma Center will work with HMO enrollees in a true emergency such as a heart attack, stroke or car accident, for example, and possibly some elective procedures.

"For elective procedures, United Regional will contact BCBS to determine if the procedure may be covered by the HMO due to medical necessity and/or lack of adequate network coverage," she said. "This will be done prior to elective procedures so that a patient may make an informed decision about the care he or she needs and the potential related financial responsibilities."

Fristoe said some agents are having difficulty understanding why BCBS is dropping PPO plans, but they knew it was going to happen because of the design of the Affordable Care Act and the economics, which is driving the cost of plans up, the number of networks are shrinking and deductibles are increasing.

The HMO and HMO Plus plans will still have the metallic-name plans of bronze, silver, and gold.

Follow John Ingle on Twitter at @inglejohn1973.