Wanda Greene

Taxes from new construction in Buncombe County will help offset expected increases in public spending such as health care for the poor, County Manager Wanda Greene told a gathering of business owners Friday.

But an expected rise in local education costs will put pressure on local taxpayers. Whether that could mean a countywide tax increase, Greene would not say.

"I'm not saying that yet. I really need to see what they have first," she said following the Council of Independent Business Owners meeting at the Enka campus of Asheville-Buncombe Technical Community College. About 60 people attended the meeting, including political leaders state Rep. Brian Turner, D-Buncombe, Buncombe County Board of Commissioners Vice Chairman Joe Belcher, Commissioner Mike Fryar, and City Councilwoman Gwen Wisler.

The state requires local governments to pass balanced budgets by July 1. Currently, Greene is anticipating a $303 million budget. That's a 1 percent increase over this year's anticipated spending of $300 million.

Increases would come in part from changes in human services, including a 29 percent increase since 2007 in the number of people receiving the government funded health insurance Medicaid. To keep up, county leaders are looking to build a $49 million human services facility downtown.

"We've seen our biggest growth because of the Affordable Care Act and the NC FAST system," the county manager said.

North Carolina Families Accessing Services through Technology is a new state system seeking to give people access to multiple social services through one system.

A rise in new construction should cover such new costs, Greene said.

But the $303 million projection uses last year's education figures of $79 million. Local education officials are waiting on better state numbers before finalizing this year's numbers, which are expected to be higher.

The county helps pay for the Asheville City School System, Buncombe County Schools and A-B Tech.

State spending on education, while increasing, has in past years not kept up with inflation and a rising student population. That has put more pressure on local governments.

This year's county budget had 28 percent of its total going toward education, the second-biggest piece after human services at 35 percent.

More than half of county revenue comes from property taxes. The county tax rate is currently 60.4 cents for every $100 of assessed value.

That means the owner of a $200,000 home pays $1,208 in annual county taxes. Property owners inside other tax districts, such as the city and city schools, pay additional taxes on top of the county's.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1yla5fv