Health GOP Lawmakers Vote To Repeal Obamacare, Again, On Groundhog Day CREDIT: AP Photo, J. Scott Applewhite Speaker of the House Paul Ryan laughs with Majority Whip Steve Scalise, just after Ryan signed H.R. 3762, designed to eliminate key parts of President Barack Obama's health care law.

Republicans representatives in the House will vote Tuesday to override President Obama’s veto on their January bill seeking to repeal Obamacare. But without enough GOP votes to seal an override, the bill is expected to fail.

Sound familiar?

Republicans in Congress have attempted to repeal Obamacare more than 60 times since the landmark health care reform act was signed into law in 2012. None of them have been successful. By now, the endless cycle of these repeal bills has become a routine fixture in Congress.

This most recent bill was deemed a success by many GOP leaders, including House Speaker Paul Ryan, simply because it made it to the president’s desk — a little further than usual. It was immediately vetoed.

Media outlets have been quick to link this expected repetitiveness to the date of Tuesday’s vote: Groundhog Day. Just like the 1993 film, the public will watch Congress try to bring down the health care bill — while already knowing its fate — again, and again, and again.

What comes after today's Obamacare repeal vote, which is "appropriately scheduled for Groundhog Day." https://t.co/3PgCvo6zLj — Dave Shaw (@daveshaw00) February 2, 2016

Ya can't make it up: the House will be voting to repeal ObamaCare on Groundhog Day tomorrow. The week in Congress: https://t.co/BWLxEtpQ2R — Cristina Marcos (@cimarcos) February 1, 2016

Even fellow members of Congress noted the apt timing. “House Republicans voting to repeal the Affordable Care Act on actual Groundhog Day is a perfect symbol of their governing philosophy. We’ve all lived through this charade before and we all know how it’s going to end — in a failed effort to take health care away from millions of Americans,” wrote Senator Chris Murphy in a morning press release. “But unlike Bill Murray’s character, who eventually learned from his mistakes and became a better person, Republican leaders are either willfully ignorant or intentionally wasting everyone’s time.”