"You know, cotton balls, and footballs, and basketballs – everybody gets paid except the one with the ball." -The Rev. Jesse Jackson, Sr.

BIRMINGHAM, Alabama – In a meeting with the Alabama Media Group editorial board at the Birmingham hub on Tuesday evening, Jesse Jackson emphasized Gov. Bentley's rejection of the expansion of Medicaid under Obamacare, calling it a "strictly ideological" decision and called Medicaid "a poverty safety net."

Jackson, who is in town for a convention of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, discussed a range of topics with the board, including Birmingham's bid for the Democratic National Committee's 2016 national convention, the conflict between Israel and Palestine in Gaza, and what he called the "jail industrial complex."

But the expansion of Medicaid in this state – which, had Bentley accepted it, would have been funded 100 percent by the federal government through 2016, with federal funding dropping gradually to 90 percent of the cost by 2020 – was clearly a priority, both as a health care issue and an economic justice issue.

"Wallace blocked the school door based on race," Jackson said. "[Bentley is] blocking the hospital door based upon class. Blacks were locked out of the schools, and black and whites have been locked out of access to medical care, and he should be judged as such."

He condemned the rejection of Medicaid as a "strictly ideological" decision that is adverse to the economic interests of the state. Jackson said Medicaid expansion would not only increase access to healthcare for poor and rural residents, but it also creates jobs, and makes it easier for the poor to avoid bankruptcy due to unpredictable health care costs. It's a "poverty safety net," he said.

"We sense a confusion here that's undermining progress," he said.

And the program saves lives with preventative care, according to Jackson.

"People who cannot get medical aid, they don't have insurance so they can't get their mammograms." Thousands can't afford cholesterol tests, and doctors can't treat people because they aren't paid enough, Jackson said.

"I'm concerned that when you cut Medicaid, you condemn people to death," he said.

The DNC and Birmingham

Asked about Birmingham's chances of reeling in the 2016 DNC convention, Jackson was less than fully optimistic.

"Well, the first victory is that you're being considered," Jackson said, but noted there are "marks" against Alabama hosting the convention.

"Coming from a state where the government is sending back federal money for education and health care, where the state is using schemes to impede access to voting, where the state is using its schemes to make profits off of jailings, those would be real marks against why [the DNC should] come," Jackson offered.

He said that, in this state, the government often rejects federal money and ideas because of the perception that they come from Obama.

"Whether you like him or not, it doesn't make sense to be for the reform of health care, but not be for Obamacare. That's an omelet without eggs," he said.

On the "jail industrial complex"

Jackson bemoaned problems in what he called the "jail industrial complex," including the for-profit prison industry, and Alabama and America's prisons. He called prison reform a civil rights issue.

"The jailing system here, the prison system, was built for about 14,000, and now there's about 30,000. You've got prisoners sleeping on floors, and the jails are for profits – the Corrections Corporation of America is on the stock market," Jackson said.

He pointed to several issues with for-profit prisons, including the specter of abusive pre-trial detentions, profiting off prison telephone calls and prison labor, and a rise in incarceration as punishment for low-level offenses.

"We have bet on punishment as a remedy for problems, but it does not appear to be so," Jackson said.

The NCAA and compensation for athletes

Jackson drew parallels between fairness on the playing field, and fairness and equality in the real world. We're able to enjoy football on Saturdays and Sundays – to "choose reason over race and uniform color over skin color" – because the rules are enforced fairly, Jackson said.

"Six points for all touchdowns, two points for all field goals, and everybody can see whether he got over or not, the whole world can see it," he said. "Whenever the playing field is even, the rules public, the goals clear, the referees fair, the score is transparent – we can make it. But once you leave that field, the same kid who ran in the touchdown does not have as many opportunities as the guy selling his jersey on the corner as a hawker."

He said he was in favor of "some loosening of the reins" in player compensation (though emphasized the importance of full-ride scholarships), and drew comparisons between uncompensated college athletes and slaves.

"You know, cotton balls, and footballs, and basketballs – everybody gets paid except the one with the ball," Jackson said. "Cotton picking wasn't so bad, it's just that the cotton picker couldn't own the field, couldn't own the land, couldn't own the gurney sacks it was put it in, they couldn't take it to the mill or to the gin, they couldn't turn the cotton into textiles, they couldn't turn the textiles into clothes. They could only pick the cotton. If you could have gone up the textile line, picking cotton would have been all right," Jackson said.

"In football, everybody gets the money except the ballplayer," he said.

Gaza, Hamas, and Israel, and Ferguson, Missouri

Speaking on the conflict between Palestinians and Israel in Gaza, Jackson pointed to the successes of the non-violent protest movement in the U.S., in South Africa, and in India.

"I think Hamas could seize the moral authority by shifting from rockets to mass non-violent actions, and a reassessment of the power of nonviolence," Jackson said.

Non-violence "would allow them to be heard," Jackson told the board, but right now, "you can't hear above the rockets."

He also criticized violent protests in Ferguson, Mo., this week over the killing of a young African-American man, and said those protestors, too, should embrace non-violence.

"They should be marching, but for equity in police hirings, marching for equity in fireman hirings, marching for equity in contracts and in education," Jackson said about Ferguson's protestors. "And burning up buildings will not achieve that."

Jackson's calm

When one board member noted that Jackson was calm – reserved even – during the meeting despite the injustices he was discussing, Jackson laughed.

"I may seem relatively calm because I am a long-distance runner, and you cannot vent all of your frustrations, and your anguish, and your concerns, and lose energy," he explained. "You have to remain focused."

"Particularly talking to you people," he added, indicating the editorial board.

"I'll start screaming at church tomorrow night."