WASHINGTON, D.C. -- Republican congressional candidate John Katko today accused Rep. Dan Maffei of attempting to "destroy my character" with a series of critical TV ads over the past two months.

But Maffei stood by his ads, and said it's important for the public to know about Katko's record as a prosecutor over the past 15 years. Maffei said the ads help inform the public about the character of someone who wants to represent the Syracuse area in Congress.

The two candidates exchanged words on the negative tone of the campaign's advertising during a meeting today of the editorial board of Syracuse.com and The Post-Standard.

"He has destroyed me," Katko, a former federal prosecutor from Camillus, said of Maffei. "He has destroyed my character."

Katko added, "To sit there and have to take that, and keep a stiff upper lip like I have, shows more about my character and my leadership than anything. I'm not out there losing my temper. I'm not out there guns blazing. I'm out there fighting the good fight and trying to do the right thing."

Maffei, D-Syracuse, noted that Katko's campaign has also run negative TV ads this month. The congressman said his goal is to inform the public with a combination of positive and critical ads.

"Things that happened with his record as a prosecutor are relevant," Maffei said. "And everything that we have in the advertisements is highly, highly sourced. Probably the only thing that is an opinion is to say he is political. But I do believe he is political."

Maffei said he thought it was important to run ads that criticized Katko over his handling of former Oswego Mayor John Gosek's sex offender case, and his handling of a gun that was stolen from Katko and used in a robbery that left two people dead in April 2000.

"The revelation that he had a gun that wasn't properly secured in a vehicle...I think that's relevant," Maffei said. "Not just, by the way, because it was a mistake, but because he won't admit to the mistake. He says he has no regrets. I think that's relevant. It's relevant to the character of who he is going to be in Congress, and it's relevant to his judgment. And if somebody can't admit a mistake, they're not going to go very far in Congress because Congress is a deliberative body."

The exchange between the candidates was part of an hourlong editorial board meeting, only the second joint appearance of Maffei and Katko in a debate-style format. The two have five additional debates scheduled next week.

Among the issues the candidates discussed at today's meeting:

Jobs and the economy

Both candidates emphasized that helping the Central New York economy would be their top priority in Congress. And Katko acknowledged that both have similar plans for boosting the economy and creating jobs.

Maffei, a member of the House Armed Services Committee, said he has helped open doors for local employers Lockheed Martin and Saab Defense when they compete for multi-million dollar defense contracts.

Maffei said he also helped save jobs at Lockheed Martin and has helped convince the defense giant to keep the plant open at Electronics Park in Salina. "Being on the Armed Services Committee, frankly Lockheed Martin doesn't want to piss me off," he said.

Katko said he believes U.S. Sen. Charles Schumer played a larger role in keeping the plant open. Katko also said Maffei should take some of the blame for the region losing 3,100 jobs last year.

"We have serious problems in Central New York and he hasn't done much to help," Katko said. "The bottom line is Central New York's economy lags New York state's."

The Affordable Care Act

Katko, for the first time, publicly said he would not vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, unless it could be replaced at the same time with a viable alternative.

Katko said he wants to work in a bipartisan manner to come up with a plan that offers health care coverage for all "but it has to be much less government focused" and more market driven.

Maffei said he agrees that the Affordable Care Act is far from perfect, and needs to be amended. But he said it's easier said than done. "It's easy to say, 'If I get down to Washington we're all going to work together and find an easy solution'," he said.

In addition to sponsoring a bill to repeal Obamacare's excise tax on medical device manufacturers, Maffei said he wants to ease the transition on hospitals and businesses. Specifically, he opposes cuts in federal reimbursement payments to hospitals that care for the uninsured, and he favors giving businesses more time to comply with the law's mandates.

Federal spending and budget cuts

Katko said he knows from his years at the U.S. Justice Department that "the amount of waste and fraud in government is stunning." He said he would like to make the federal government more efficient.

When pressed about what federal programs or agencies he would cut, Katko said, "The Department of Education is way too bloated." He said the department needs to get back to serving primarily as a block grant program for the states. Maffei opposes that idea.

He also said the EPA has a "bloated bureaucracy" and that the Internal Revenue Service and Justice Department could be cut as well.

Katko said he would not cut Social Security and Medicare for those who are at or near retirement age, and that he does not support Rep. Paul Ryan's GOP budget proposals that would shift Medicare to a voucher-like system. In a July interview with Syracuse.com, Katko declined to take a position on the Ryan budget.

"I think we have a sacred trust for people who are at or near retirement," Katko said. "For people coming into the system, it's a different story."

Contact Mark Weiner anytime: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 571-970-3751