Click To View Gallery

Healthcare providers across the country are strategizing their next moves in an industry-wide shift to provide more care in outpatient environments, an effort to reduce inpatient admissions and, particularly, costs—and one that’s taking care outside of hospitals whenever possible.

Ironically, this trend isn’t diminishing the number of inpatient projects being pursued. In fact, it’s inspiring their reinvention. And at the heart of any hospital are its patient rooms.

“You have your specialty suites, your diagnostic and treatment areas, etc. But the rest of it is where the patients, after all the treatment is done, are going to reside for the duration of their stay,” says Walter Jones, senior vice president of campus transformation for The MetroHealth System (Cleveland) and former senior vice president of facilities planning and development for Parkland Health & Hospital System. Jones oversaw construction of the new Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas, of which 1 million square feet of its 2 million total are dedicated to 865 patient rooms. “From a capital standpoint, from a construction standpoint, [patient rooms] can be a huge component,” he says.

In addition to the impressive percentage of square footage allocated to patient rooms in any given building, these spaces—and their design—must support a number of shifts taking place in healthcare today, leading providers across the country to reconsider approaches of the past.

“What clients are doing as a result [of the outpatient shift] is circling back and, with the ability to either streamline or decant some of their outpatient and nonclinical services and free up real estate, investing in improving the inpatient experience and environment,” says John Rodenbeck, a principal at Perkins Eastman (New York).

There are plenty of reasons for it, too. For starters, market competition is pushing the need for wholesale adoption of private patient rooms, especially as patients have more choice in where they receive care. Private rooms also come with a number of other proven benefits, such as reducing healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) and increasing patient satisfaction—factors that hold a lot of water today, as the Affordable Care Act ties both outcomes and HCAHPS scores to reimbursements. And while the outpatient transition will likely reduce future bed needs, it also translates to the expectation that patients who do require hospital admission in years to come will be much more acute than today’s inpatients.

And that’s just what we know. As technology begins to play a larger role in care delivery and mobile health solutions continue to be adopted, patient rooms must be designed with adaptability in mind and an eye on a future that’s anything but clear.

“The patient room is where you need to get everything right,” says Ana Pinto Alexander, principal, senior vice president, and director of healthcare interior architecture at HKS (Indianapolis).



The baseline

The starting point for almost all patient room designs is a single-occupancy space. “I think we’re making great progress,” says Cyndi McCullough, evidence-based design director for HDR (Omaha, Neb.). “Every project I’ve worked on involves either renovating some rooms to make private rooms, adding new, or a combination of both. It’s at the top of the list for most everyone.”

While the transition isn’t as easy for systems with tight urban sites, the majority of providers are better able to, for example, renovate a 200-bed double-occupancy facility into a 100-bed single-occupancy facility than they were prior to reform. “With more procedures going into the outpatient arena, it’s offering more real estate within the hospital to either convert or build private rooms for a lot less expensive price tags. They’re not going for higher-bedded facilities,” Rodenbeck says.