Under the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act (GOMESA), 37 cents of every dollar earned from offshore oil and gas drilling goes to the four states — Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas — whose coastlines are closest to the rigs.In the fiscal 2016 budget President Barack Obama released Feb. 2, he proposes to “work with the Congress on legislation to redirect” that money to programs the White House says benefit taxpayers nationwide. (Photo: AP)

Gulf Coast lawmakers are vowing to fight President Barack Obama's proposal to "redirect" millions of dollars in oil and gas revenue the region is expecting to receive under a 2006 law.

Under that law, the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act (GOMESA), 37 cents of every dollar earned from offshore oil and gas drilling goes to the four states — Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas, and certain counties in those states — whose coastlines are closest to the rigs.

In the fiscal 2016 budget President Barack Obama released Feb. 2, he proposes to "work with the Congress on legislation to redirect" that money to programs the White House says benefit taxpayers nationwide.

Gulf Coast lawmakers aren't having it.

"It's one of the most uninformed decisions that I think I've seen this administration make," said GOP Rep. Garret Graves, of Louisiana. "This is a penny-wise, pound-foolish move by the administration, and I think it is entirely politically motivated, noting that the Gulf Coast is a big red area."

Graves said Gulf Coast lawmakers plan to work together to "make sure that this thing doesn't inch forward in any way."

Louisiana and Mississippi lawmakers are discussing plans to send a joint letter to Obama opposing the plan. Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, also plans to question Interior Secretary Sally Jewell about the proposal when the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee holds a hearing on the agency's fiscal 2016 budget on Tuesday.

"This proposal is going nowhere," said Sen. Roger Wicker, R-Miss.

Gulf Coast lawmakers argue the region deserves a greater share of royalties and fees from oil and gas drilling off their shores. They complain that while inland states may keep 50 percent of energy revenue produced on federal property, money earned from offshore rigs is sent to the U.S. Treasury.

Government watchdog groups defend that practice, saying the money is needed to reduce the debt and pay other bills.

"We think it's valuable revenue that is due to federal taxpayers," said Autumn Hanna, senior program director for Taxpayers for Common Sense. She noted that the offshore leases are for drilling in federal, not state, waters.

Under GOMESA, 50 percent of offshore drilling revenue goes to the Treasury, 12.5 percent goes to the Land and Water Conservation Fund and 37.5 percent goes to Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas and certain individual counties and parishes within those states.

The states and parishes have received about $34 million between fiscal 2009 and fiscal 2014, according to data from the federal Office of Natural Resources Revenue. Alabama received $10.2 million, Louisiana received $10.7 million, Mississippi received $9.2 million and Texas received $3.7 million.

Payments are expected to increase significantly when the second phase of the law takes effect in fiscal 2017.

"It is a lot of money that they're talking about, especially as more leases come on line," Hanna said.

Former Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu, who proposed the GOMESA bill with then-Republican Sen. Pete Domenici, of New Mexico, called Obama's plan to redirect revenue under the bill a "gross injustice" to Gulf Coast states.

"This is a real and grave threat to Louisiana's three-decade march to save our coast — America's wetlands," she said. "I trust our delegation has the will and strength to kill it immediately."

The administration's budget plan proposes redirecting GOMESA payments to "programs that provide broad natural resource, watershed and conservation benefits to the nation, help the federal government fulfill its role of being a good neighbor to local communities, and support other national priorities."

Officials said they're still working on which programs would get the money.

Gulf Coast lawmakers are banking on their clout in Congress to thwart the proposal. Sen. Thad Cochran, R-Miss., is chairman of the powerful Appropriations Committee. Cassidy is a new member of that panel and the Energy and Natural Resources Committee.

Hanna of Taxpayers for Common Sense acknowledges Gulf Coast lawmakers could hinder efforts to redirect funding.

"They're going to make it difficult for anything to move through the Senate," she said.

Contact Deborah Barfield Berry at dberry@gannett.com. Twitter: @dberrygannett

Total amount of oil and gas revenue sent to individual states (including some counties in those states) between fiscal 2009 and fiscal 2014 under the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act:

Alabama: $10.2 million

Louisiana: $10.7 million

Mississippi: $9.2 million

Texas: $3.7 million

Source: federal Office of Natural Resources Revenue

Read or Share this story: http://www.shreveporttimes.com/story/news/local/louisiana/2015/02/20/gulf-coast-lawmakers-fighting-plan-redirect-offshore-oil-revenue/23765853/