Peter Hedblom of Sweden tee's off on the 13th hole during day two of the Perth International at Lake Karrinyup Country Club on October 18, 2013 in Perth, Australia. (Photo by Paul Kane/Getty Images) Photo: Paul Kane

Three Western Australians remain in contention to claim the US$2million Perth International golf tournament.

Busselton's Brody Ninyette leads Australia's richest annual event at Lake Karrinyup at 8-under par, one shot ahead of Perth's Brett Rumford, Denmark's JB Hansen and Melbourne-based South Korean Jin Jeong.

Mandurah's Jason Scrivener is one shot further back from the lead at 6-under par after his third round of 68.

Ninyette, 26, is yet to win a tournament since turning professional two years ago. The closest he came was when he tied for second place in the 2012 Queensland PGA Championship.

Advertisement

Rumford will start the final round as favourite to claim his third European Tour event of the year after he equalled the Lake Karrinyup Country Club course record today, with a 7-under par 65.

He produced eight birdies and only a three-putt to bogey the par-4 ninth (his last hole) cost him the course record set by Michael Hendry and Alejandro Canizares at the Perth International in 2012; and an equal share in the lead.

Both Rumford and Ninyette have produced remarkable turnarounds. Each was struggling to make the cut midway through their second rounds.

Ninyette, 26, from Busselton in WA's South West, is the state's first indigenous professional golfer and is eyeing a win at the Perth International as his gateway in to the lucrative European Tour.

But he will need to reproduce his 5-under par effort from today, or better it if he is to do so.

Half-way leader Peter Hedblom struggled with the wet conditions today and his hopes of playing on the European Tour next season have dimmed. Requiring a win in Perth to keep his card, he dropped three shots in his outward nine, failing to make one birdie.

He picked up a shot at the par-4 ninth hole to get to 5-under par, but is at 4-under overall, four shots from the lead.

Defending champion Bo van Pelt is the only player in the field to card three sub-par rounds for the tournament. But he is no better off, after his third round of 71 has him also four shots adrift of Ninyette. His fellow American Dustin Johnson carded a 3-over par 75 yesterday to end his chances of claiming the title. The world's 21 ranked golfer birdied the first hole of his third round, but managed only one more birdie for his round and is 10 shots from the lead going in to the final day.

Play in the final round will start at 7.55am tomorrow, with the final grouping of Rumford, Hansen and Ninyette scheduled to tee off at 9.45am.

Follow WAtoday on Twitter @WAtoday