Chalmers Morse (Photo: Special to the News Journal)

Eighty-four years ago, Florida was the first state to legalize greyhound racing. In the decades that followed, parimutuel wagering on dogs grew into a multibillion-dollar industry that at its peak was legal and operational in 19 states. This popularity, however, was short-lived.

Since 1991, 41 dog tracks have closed or ended live racing. One state after another has turned back the clock on this 20th century anachronism, and it is now illegal in 39 states.

The disintegration of greyhound racing is partly due to increased awareness about animal welfare problems. Cruel dog-track conditions have been extensively documented, and were highlighted again this month with the release of the first national report on greyhound racing by humane groups GREY2K USA and the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.

More than 80,000 young greyhounds have entered the racing industry since 2008. Each track requires a population of up to 1,000 dogs, and as a result greyhounds are kept in warehouse-style kennel compounds, in cages that are barely large enough for them to stand up or turn around. Dogs are confined for 20 or more hours per day.

To cut costs, the racing industry uses standard practices that are inhumane. Female greyhounds are routinely given anabolic steroids to prevent estrus, and dogs are fed raw "4-D" meat from downed animals. According to the Food and Drug Administration, this meat is a "potential health hazard" to dogs and their handlers.

Greyhounds are also harmed while racing. Since 2008, nearly 12,000 race dog injuries have been documented. More than 3,000 of these injuries involved broken legs, and other reported injuries included crushed skulls, electrocutions and broken necks.

These statistics include almost no data from Florida, even though we host the majority of remaining tracks. Unfortunately, we are one of only two states, along with Alabama, that does not publicly report injury data.

Although we don't know how many greyhounds are injured each year in our state, we do know that a racing dog is dying, on average, every three days in Florida. Similarly, at least 909 racing greyhound deaths were documented nationwide over the past eight years.

Laurie Hood (Photo: Special to the News Journal)

This debate also affects taxpayers. Florida is losing money on greyhound racing, because regulatory costs exceed revenues. Further, a 2011 study by Auburn University and the College of Charleston found that dog racing tends to have a negative impact on state revenues in the jurisdictions in which it exists.

As an economic activity, greyhound racing has collapsed. Since 2001, gambling on dog races nationwide has dropped by a staggering 66 percent. Greyhound racing has failed so miserably that it now exists in only seven states, where it is being artificially propped up by subsidies and archaic state mandates.

In our state, 12 dog tracks lost a whopping $42 million on racing between 2012 and 2013, and only hold races because they are required by law, in order to have poker rooms.

The economic failure of dog tracks also affects animal welfare. Over the past eight years, at least 27 cases of greyhound cruelty and neglect have been documented, including dogs that were starved to death or denied veterinary care. These cases occurred in all seven racing states, and eight of them in Florida.

As Floridians, we have an obligation to speak up for the dogs.

This spring, the legislature should pass a policy known as "decoupling." This will eliminate the state dog racing mandate, and let the free market decide whether greyhound racing stays or goes.

Chalmers Morse is executive director and CEO of the Humane Society of Vero Beach and Indian River County. Laurie Hood is founder of Alaqua Animal Refuge.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1GbUZYu