The San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors on Tuesday will consider approving a proposed $4.3 billion budget, the bulk of it being consumed by the Human Services Department, public safety costs and Arrowhead Regional Medical Center.

Of the $4.3 billion, supervisors only have discretion over 10.8 percent - or $471.6 million - which the county develops its fiscal plan around.

The county has $34.7 million available to cover increased costs, and needs to shore up a $21 million deficit by cutting back on staffing costs and delaying the full staffing of the newly expanded High Desert Detention Center in Adelanto until 2018 and 2019, according to a staff report prepared for county supervisors.

The Human Services Department’s $1.8 billion budget is seeing an increase of $30.6 million from the previous fiscal year due to health related budget increases in the Department of Behavioral Health, which is increasing requirements a net $43.4 million. The department is adding 44 positions, mainly to provide additional clinic services countywide. Operating costs are increasing in order to provide care for additional patients as a result of the Affordable Care Act, according to the staff report.

During the Covered California pre-enrollment and open enrollment periods, which spanned from October 1, 2013 through March 31, 2014, collectively, the county’s caseload increased by 64,000 cases, from October 2013 to March 2014, said Gilbert Ramos, the assistant director for the county’s Transitional Assistance Department.

Last year, the Transitional Assistant Department opened new offices in Redlands and Yucaipa to better deliver services to county residents. It previously leased space in Redlands at a building owned by ESRI, Ramos said.

The county received $9.4 million in state and federal funding in the 2013-2014 fiscal year to implement the Affordable Care Act. It is expected to receive the same amount for the 2014-2015 fiscal year, Ramos said.

County spokesman David Wert said increased human services spending has little, if any, impact in the rest of the county budget. While there is some minor local cost, the increased spending does not take away from public safety, libraries, museums, and parks, as the bulk of funding for Human Services is covered by the state.

The Law and Justice Group consists of the Sheriff’s Department, Probation Department and District Attorney’s Office and comprises $869.5 million of the county budget. The group is decreasing requirements by $12.4 million due to Probation Department projects funded by the state due to prison realignment.

Fully staffing the expanded High Desert Detention Center in Adelanto remains a top priority for the county, which is recommending that $11.5 million in ongoing discretionary general funding be allocated to staff 222 beds. Other recommendations include $4.7 million in ongoing discretionary general funding be provided to the Sheriff’s Department to offset federal revenue losses in county jails, and that the Public Defender’s Office be allocated $200,000 to lease needed space for staff due to the closures of the Fontana and Barstow courts.

Advertisement

Arrowhead Regional Medical Center’s budget is increasing by $6 million - 1.2 percent - due to the addition of 70 positions in order to maintain proper staffing ratios. The county hospital is also increasing capital expenditures by $3.8 million for equipment replacement.

Other budgeted costs include $19.6 million for the $158.2 million 800 MHz public safety radio communications system, of which the county has already paid $79 million, and $12 million to maintain the county’s infrastructure and $1.4 million in one-time funding for road, driveway and parking lot rehabilitation.

If approved by the Board of Supervisors, the budget would return to the board again on June 24 for final adoption.