Akron-based Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. plans to spend $550 million on a new tire plant in Mexico, a source tells Reuters, in what the news service calls “the latest in a string of investment pledges in the country's booming auto sector.”



Reuters says the Goodyear plant will begin operations in 2017 and will produce tires primarily for the domestic market. It says its source declined to be named as the investment was not yet public.



Goodyear is expected to announce the investment at a joint event with the government on Friday, April 24, in Mexico City. A company spokesman, Eduardo Arguelles, declined to comment.



The investment “comes shortly after automakers Toyota, Ford and Volkswagen unveiled major expansion plans in Mexico, taking advantage of Mexico's low wages, free trade agreements and proximity to the United States,” according to the story.



Last week, “Toyota said it would spend $1 billion on a passenger car plant, and Ford said it would spend $2.5 billion on engine and transmission operations,” Reuters notes. “German Volkswagen said last month it will invest about $1 billion to expand its vehicle assembly plant in Mexico's Puebla state.”





Buyers' outlet

Real estate agents always say it’s a great time to buy a house. In Cleveland, that really is the case — at least according to a report from Zillow.



CNNMoney.com reports that Zillow found the top U.S. housing markets for buyers are Philadelphia, Chicago and Cleveland. In these markets, “inventory tends to be strong and homes stay on the market longer and often experience price cuts, which gives buyers more bargaining power,” the website reports.





Onward and upward

Miami-Fort Lauderdale, Providence, Detroit and Pittsburgh also made the list."There is a definite feeling that things are easing," said Skylar Olsen, a senior economist at Zillow, tells CNNMoney.com. "We are heading toward better balance. Buyers will be able to take a little more time this year compared to last year."The story notes that tight inventory throughout the country helped push home prices up 4.5% in January from the year prior, according to the S&P/Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index. But homes in the top 10 buyers' markets “are selling for nearly 4% less than the list price on average, according to the Zillow report. In sellers' markets, buyers get an average discount of less than 1%.”

The planned closure of Lakewood Hospital is one of the examples cited in this Kaiser Health News story about hospitals packing up in poor areas and moving to wealthier ones.



“Hospitals have followed population migrations before, but relocations … are becoming more common,” according to the story. “That's partly due to the aging of many facilities built decades ago, as well as the desire to attract better-paying patients.”



Such hospital relocations are currently planned or underway in southern Illinois; south and central Florida; eastern Tennessee; central Georgia; Birmingham, Ala.; and Northeast Ohio, Kaiser Health News reports.



Lakewood Hospital, managed by the Cleveland Clinic, is slated to close in 2016. As Kaiser Health News puts it, “Patients will be directed to the Clinic's newer Fairview Hospital three miles away or to another facility being built in Avon, 13 miles away. Both Fairview and Avon are higher-income towns.”





The story notes that hospital officials “often say it is cheaper to build, rather than renovate, their mostly downtown facilities. What they don't say publicly is how geography often determines a hospital's economic destiny, especially at a time of increasing financial pressure as a result of Medicare funding cuts, including penalties that may result from new pay-for-performance measures in the Affordable Care Act.”By moving to wealthier areas, Kaiser Health News reports, “hospitals can reduce the share of uninsured and lower-paying Medicaid patients, while increasing the privately insured. That's also why they locate outpatient centers and medical offices in affluent suburbs.”But relocations “often spark anger from those left behind, who worry about the loss of jobs and of access to care,” the story notes.In the short term, at least, Lakewood will take a financial hit , so it’s up to city leaders to make the most of a planned wellness campus and whatever economic development they can muster at the hospital site.





You also can follow me on Twitter for more news about business and Northeast Ohio.