Theda Clark Medical Center is part of Bellin-ThedaCare HealthCare Partners, which is testing new ways of paying health care providers. Credit: Handout

SHARE

David Krueger

Dean Gruner

George Kerwin Affordable Care Act

Special Section: Videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare



By of the

David Krueger regularly saw the waste and inefficiency in the health care system while working as an emergency physician.

It might be as simple as patients who came to an emergency department because they could not get in to see their primary care doctors. Those doctors' schedules were full because they were seeing patients with relatively minor problems that could be handled with a phone call or an email. But the doctors saw the patients in person because that's the only way they would get paid.

Krueger now is in a position to help make the health system work a bit better. The hard work is just beginning, but the initial efforts show some promise.

Krueger is executive director and medical director of Bellin-ThedaCare HealthCare Partners, one of 20 organizations at the forefront of an experiment that rewards physician practices and health systems when they provide care for Medicare patients at a lower cost while meeting targets for quality care.

Bellin-ThedaCare had the top scores for quality while providing care at the lowest overall cost in the country among the organizations participating in the Medicare demonstration project last year, according to a report issued last week by Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

The organization will receive $2.2 million of the $3.2 million in savings it generated while providing care for about 20,000 people covered by Medicare in the Fox Valley.

This was in addition to the $5.3 million it received from the $7.6 million in savings it generated in 2012, the first year of the project.

Bellin-ThedaCare HealthCare Partners includes Bellin Health, a health system based in Green Bay, and ThedaCare, a health system based in Appleton, and a network of 700 physicians. It's what's known as an accountable care organization.

Accountable care organizations, an outgrowth of the Affordable Care Act, are one of several experiments to test new ways of paying doctors, hospitals and other health care providers.

The organizations, known as ACOs, are accountable for the cost and quality of care for a defined group of patients. In exchange, they share in any cost savings provided they meet specific quality measures.

The goal is to eliminate the incentives that exist under the current system, known as fee-for-service, in which the more doctors and hospitals do, the more they are paid. That sounds perfectly reasonable. But the result is that doctors and hospitals have little incentive to find ways to provide care at a lower cost — and when they do, it costs them money.

Doctors and hospitals essentially are penalized for providing quality care at a lower cost. Working to keep patients healthy and out of hospitals, for instance, or opting for a less costly but equally effective treatment means less revenue.

"There must be a better way," said Dean Gruner, a physician and president and chief executive officer of ThedaCare. "But we don't know what the better way is."

More than 360 accountable care organizations have been created nationwide for Medicare patients. Nearly all of them are participating in a demonstration project in which they can share in the cost savings but don't have any downside risk.

They include the ACOs set up by the five adult health systems in the Milwaukee area and by the Independent Physicians Network, a cooperative for doctors not employed by health systems.

So far, the standout has been the Accountable Care Coalition of Southeast Wisconsin, a joint venture that includes the Independent Physicians Network: It generated savings of $17.7 million for Medicare last year and will receive $8.7 million in shared savings.

An additional 287 have been set up to contract with health insurers and employers, according to Leavitt Partners Center for Accountable Care Intelligence.

Mixed results

Bellin-ThedaCare HealthCare Partners, in contrast, is participating in a smaller project in which the organizations will have to pay Medicare if their costs are above a benchmark.

They were selected in part because they were deemed to have the best chance of being successful. But the results have been mixed. Twelve of the 32 organizations initially in the demonstration project have dropped out. And of the 23 that participated last year, only 11 generated enough savings to receive payments.

"There is no silver bullet," Krueger said.

In the first year, the Bellin-ThedaCare ACO put a lot of work into getting patients to its clinics to assess their risk and identify gaps in their care. In the second year, it focused on improving the coordination of care and managing high-cost patients.

For example, nurses now work with the sickest patients, helping ensure that they are getting their questions answered, filling their prescriptions and getting needed care.

Medicare wouldn't pay for that work under traditional fee-for-service payments.

"We can do a lot of really cool things if we break out of the traditional fee-for-service," Krueger said.

So far, the bonus payments have offset the added cost for Bellin-ThedaCare HealthCare Partners. That hasn't been the case for many ACOs.

"We had a lot in place," said George Kerwin, president and chief executive officer of Bellin Health.

Learning experience

Kerwin and Gruner said the accountable care organization and their health systems have learned more by participating in the demonstration project than they would have otherwise.

Getting timely data in a useful format from Medicare has been frustrating at times. And there have been other challenges.

"We try to recognize there always are," Gruner said, "and do our best to try to overcome them."

Bigger challenges could be ahead. Changing the way doctors and hospitals are paid will require changing how care is delivered — and, in the process, restructuring nearly one-fifth of the U.S. economy.

"This transformation is going to take decades," Krueger said. "It is going to be slow. Some systems will move faster than others."

But Kerwin believes that integrated health systems, such as those in Wisconsin, can provide quality care at a lower cost if they are given the right information and motivation. "I am very optimistic that this is going to be the way of the future," he said.