Collier County School Board member Kelly Lichter addresses the crowd after she and fellow School Board member Erika Donalds, left, were awarded with the Eagle Forum Naples Leadership Award during the Eagle Forum Naples 35th annual luncheon at the Naples Beach Hotel and Golf Club on Friday, March 13, 2015. Scott McIntyre/Staff

The Affordable Care Act passed in 2010 by a one-vote margin in the U.S. Senate and you haven't heard a word about it since.

Or at least you wouldn't have, if Congress ran the way the Collier County School Board majority wants things to work.

In comments attached to a self-evaluation to be reviewed at the Nov. 17 meeting, Board Chairwoman Kathleen Curatolo, and members Julie Sprague and Roy Terry, lament the protestations of fellow members Kelly Lichter and Erika Donalds, saying their failure to get behind board decisions contributes a dysfunction that hampers district performance.

To the extent Donalds and Lichter want to rehash settled matters in subsequent board meetings, they have a point.

But the comments of the three board members go beyond that, suggesting that their colleagues should shut the heck up after they've lost, even when speaking in public or to the media.

"Immediately following meetings where their opinions have not been that of the majority discussion and vote, particular board members use social media to refute the vote," Curatolo wrote in the self-evaluation.

What, one might ask, is wrong with that?

"We must be cautious of our roles as board members. The chair is the designated spokesperson on behalf of the board regarding issues that have been voted upon," wrote Sprague.

Really?

Do elected officials give up their freedom of speech once they take office?

Based on the standard of behavior set in Congress, state legislatures, county commissions and city councils it wouldn't seem so.

In a perfect world, 3-2 votes might end in everybody linking arms and singing a happy song.

But what if the policy really is flawed? Is it a perfect world if everyone keeps quiet about it?

In real life, what one faction considers a bad policy will remain a bad policy even after it's adopted.

It's counterproductive for representatives to badger their colleagues to change their minds.

The fight is rightly taken to the public square, where advocates can seek to bring pressure to bear on the majority to change its thinking or, ultimately, campaign for candidates who share their views.

That's how politics works. School board seats are nonpartisan in name, but school governance involves politics nonetheless.

A good example is unfolding right now.

At the Nov. 10 board meeting, Donalds proposed the district add an internal auditing function.

Although the district is audited a number of times by various state agencies, an internal auditor would go beyond looking at the dollars and cents, also looking for better ways to do things and assessing risks inherent with the district's operation, Donalds argued.

For example, outside auditors would look at a school program with a $100 budget and ask, was $100 allocated? Was $100 spent? Did the $100 go where it was supposed to go? Answering yes to all three questions would earn the auditor's seal of approval.

An internal auditor might also ask, could the job have been done for $90? How much do other districts spend for the same program? Should we be spending more on this? What risks are associated with performing this function? Donalds said.

An accountant by trade, Donalds prepared a 10-page report for her colleagues to consider, outlining the benefits of having an internal auditor and recounting a history that showed Collier schools had such a position in the early 2000s.

While the district employs people who can do audits, they don't have the specialized expertise to perform the internal audit function she's describing, Donalds said.

"Our fiduciary duty as school board members requires that we implement best practices in fiscal management and governance. A risk assessment by an independent and qualified auditor is the first step toward meeting this responsibility," she wrote.

The district administration countered with a one-page background paper saying the district undergoes multiple reviews and what Donalds is proposing is expensive.

The board voted 3 to 2, with Donalds and Lichter in the minority, not to take that first step, hiring an auditor to do a risk assessment.

Majority rules. Fair enough.

But Donalds isn't giving up. At the close of the meeting she told the other members what she thinks.

"We are doing a disservice to our staff, our employees and the public," she said.

She said she simply can't fall in line with the majority's thinking. "In the evaluation tool we're going to discuss next week, we talk about supporting a decision by the board. This is where I just really struggle. It's not just a philosophical difference."

After the meeting, she said she won't bog down board discussions by rehashing the debate. "I'm not going to bring it up again with the same people. I'm going to be out in the community talking about it."

That's not dysfunction. It's how the process is supposed to function.

(Connect with Brent Batten at brent.batten@naplesnews.com, on Twitter@NDN_BrentBatten and at facebook.com/ndnbrentbatten)