Will Aetna-Humana deal make rates pop?

Posted: 6 am ET

If history is any indication, the pending $37 billion merger of health insurance giants Aetna and Humana could bump up the health care costs of their combined 33 million customers.

A study published in the July 2013 issue of Health Management, Policy and Innovation found that the 2008 merger of UnitedHealth Group and Sierra Health Services caused health insurance rates in Nevada markets to pop nearly 14%.

Reason? That old economic maxim: Competition tends to drive prices down, and vice versa.

A similar study published this year in the American Journal of Health Economics that looked at pricing under the Obama health care law found that premiums would have been about 11% lower had all active insurers offered plans in 2014.

Aetna: Merger could cut prices

Aetna and Humana prefer to characterize their merger as a joining of complementary companies, each with different strengths in different parts of the country. While an Aetna spokesman declined to comment, saying it's too early to speculate about future rates, the company's news release suggests costs might even drop as a result of the merger. Here's an excerpt:

"The combined entity will help drive better value and higher-quality health care by reducing administrative costs, leveraging best-in-breed practices from the two companies -- including Humana's chronic care capabilities that measurably improve health outcomes for larger populations -- and enabling the company to better compete with more cost-effective products."

Of course, the old bigger-is-better rebuttal has been issued so often that it's become a capitalist cliche. I encourage readers to point me to a few academic studies that support the elusive promise of post-consolidation price drops.

Health law limits premium hikes

Fortunately, Obamacare provisions lessen dramatic rate hikes by requiring health insurers that offer plans on the health exchanges to justify to federal and state regulators proposed premium increases that exceed 10%.

Unfortunately, more than a few of those exchange companies are proposing double-digit price hikes for 2016, a move they say is necessary to correct for the artificially low premiums they had to endure the first two years of health reform.

Which, according to the aforementioned study, were roughly 11% higher than they might have been.

Follow me on Twitter: @omnisaurus

Get more news, money-saving tips and expert advice by signing up for a free Bankrate newsletter.

Veteran contributing editor Jay MacDonald is co-author of "Future Millionaires' Guidebook."