WASHINGTON

Obama vetoes health-law repeal

NIC COURY / Monterey County Weekly Tami Joy Huntsman is escorted out of court following her arraignment.

Protecting his signature domestic achievement, President Obama on Friday vetoed GOP-inspired legislation to repeal his health-care law, saying to do so "would reverse the significant progress we have made in improving health care in America."

Republican lawmakers have pushed many repeal measures since 2010, when Obama signed the health-care program into law. This bill was the first one to reach his desk.

In his veto message to Congress, Obama said the Affordable Care Act includes fairer rules and stronger consumer protections "that have made health care coverage more affordable, more attainable and more patient-centered. And it is working."

The veto was expected. But Republicans claimed victory nonetheless, arguing that they met two goals by finally passing a repeal bill: keeping a promise to voters in an election year, and showing that they are capable of repealing the law if a Republican wins the presidential election. - AP

CALIFORNIA

Couple arraigned in child deaths

A California couple appeared in court Friday to face charges they killed two young children in the woman's custody, stuffed their bodies into a plastic bin, and stashed them in a rental storage unit.

Tami Joy Huntsman, 39, and her 17-year-old companion appeared in Monterey County Superior Court to be arraigned on first-degree murder charges for the deaths of a 6-year-old girl and 3-year-old boy in her care. Authorities say the children died Nov. 27 in Salinas after long-term abuse. Their bodies were found Dec. 13 in Redding, Calif.

The couple were also charged with abusing a 9-year-old girl in the woman's custody. That girl was found with broken bones, starving and locked inside a SUV outside the home in Quincy, Calif., where the couple were staying. She is now in protective custody.

- AP

MARYLAND

Stay is issued on police testimony

Uncertainty was cast Friday over the highest-profile trial in the death of Freddie Gray just days before it is set to begin when a Maryland appeals court temporarily blocked the state from forcing a key witness to testify.

Baltimore prosecutors said they need Officer William G. Porter's testimony to prove their case against Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr., who was driving the police van in which Gray suffered a fatal neck injury. Goodson's trial is set to begin Monday.

This week, a judge agreed that Porter - who is facing a retrial in the case - could be forced to take the stand. But the Court of Special Appeals issued a stay on that ruling after Porter's attorneys argued that their client couldn't testify against a fellow officer without damaging his right to a fair trial.

- Washington Post