Reprinted from REPORT ON MEDICARE COMPLIANCE , the nation's leading source of news and strategic information on Medicare compliance, Stark and other big-dollar issues of concern to health care compliance officers.

Two major risks facing hospitals — medically unnecessary admissions and inappropriate physician compensation — have come together in one of the largest enforcement actions facing a hospital company in recent years.

The Department of Justice said Jan. 13 that it has intervened in eight false claims lawsuits filed by whistleblowers against Health Management Associates Inc. (HMA), a Naples, Fla.-based for-profit company with 71 hospitals in 15 states. The lawsuits allege the fraud scheme at the hospitals, which are mostly in non-urban areas in the southeast, was engineered by top executives.

HMA hospitals are accused of admitting inpatients who could have been treated as outpatients, in observation or released, DOJ says. HMA allegedly paid kickbacks to physicians for referrals, according to the lawsuits, one of which alleges HMA formed a joint venture and charged physicians a below-market price for a lucrative investment opportunity. The alleged misconduct led to inflated Medicare and Medicaid charges.

“These are some eye-opening allegations if proven,” says Philadelphia attorney Marc Raspanti, who represents two of the whistleblowers. He was surprised by “the degree to which HMA [allegedly] locked down referrals by physicians....Where was their compliance department? Where were their lawyers? I don’t have answers to these questions.”

CFO Allegedly Told to ‘Burn’ Audit Report

Compliance didn’t fare so well at HMA, says Atlanta attorney Marlan Wilbanks, who represents two other whistleblowers. One of them, Ralph D. Williams, the former chief financial officer of Walton Regional Medical Center in Georgia, allegedly was told by a senior leader to “burn” an audit report that showed “overutilization of inpatient admissions and underutilization of observation,” his false claims lawsuit alleges.

HMA allegedly sought to maximize admissions by setting corporate goals. It allegedly “tracked and disseminated each of its hospital’s inpatient admissions versus observations and set forth a delinquency rate and acuity goals for each hospital that failed to achieve the corporate goal for the percentage of various patient populations that should be admitted,” the lawsuit alleges. It was akin to a competition among HMA hospitals, Wilbanks says. “This is the type of mess you get in when compliance is weakened by the corporate drive for profits,” he says.

Another whistleblower filed a false claims lawsuit against Walton Regional Medical Center and Barrow Regional Medical Center, also in Georgia. Emergency department physician Craig Brummer, M.D., was an ED medical director at both hospitals. According to the complaint, he participated in daily ED “flash meetings,” during which “hospital administrators would pressure ED physicians by reviewing each patient in the ED that had not been admitted as an inpatient to see if that patient should have [been] or could be admitted; and to re-emphasize to the physicians the HMA mandate that they get more patients admitted to the hospital.”

Plan Was Allegedly Hatched by HMA Execs

The push to admit patients allegedly came from the top and filtered down to physicians. “The scheme was directed by top executives at HMA and executed via pressure applied on HMA divisional officers who in turn pressured hospital level executives, who pressured contract physician groups,” the lawsuit alleges.

Although ED physicians don’t write admission orders, HMA directed them to take steps to generate admissions, the lawsuit alleges. For example, ED physicians were required to use the HMA Pro-Med emergency department management computer system, which ordered tests based on a “chief complaint” entered by a nurse instead of the patient’s medical condition as decided by a physician. “HMA pressured ED physicians to follow HMA’s ‘testing guidelines’ and monitored the physicians’ activities in the Pro-Med system to see if they were properly implementing HMA’s corporate mandates,” the lawsuit alleges.

If physicians didn’t play ball, HMA management would approach Brummer about removing them from the schedule, the lawsuit alleges.

Joint ventures were the subject of one of the false claims lawsuits against HMA, which was filed by whistleblowers George Miller and Michael Metts, former CEO and CFO/compliance officer, respectively, of both Lancaster Regional Medical Center and Heart of Lancaster Regional Medical Center in Pennsylvania. When they started their jobs in 2008, the CFO and CEO got the message they should complete as many joint ventures as possible because physician-owned hospitals were facing restrictions under the Affordable Care Act. In 2009, HMA completed 16 whole-hospital joint ventures, the lawsuit alleges.

Miller and Metts were advised in the summer of 2008 to “capitalize on physicians who could refer patients” to Heart of Lancaster by pursuing a “syndication” with them. Under the direction of a regional HMA vice president, the CEO and CFO tailored an HMA joint venture PowerPoint presentation for eligible staff physicians. If the physicians invested in the joint venture — a newly created LLC that would invest in the hospital — the physicians could expect an average return of 20% every year for five years based on one more patient admission per day, the lawsuit alleges.

HMA would maintain majority ownership of the LLC, with a limited number of physicians allowed to buy 10%. The price for buying into the joint venture was artificially low, the lawsuit alleges. It was “a heavily discounted investment opportunity utilized to induce targeted physicians to participate in the joint venture” (e.g., a 20% “marketability discount to the wholesale value”).

The lawsuit alleges more shenanigans with a joint venture involving Lancaster Regional Medical Center.

HMA’s joint ventures allegedly violate the anti-kickback law because an ownership interest was transferred for less than fair market value, the lawsuit contends. “HMA provided an inducement to the joint venture physicians, one purpose of which was to encourage referrals to HMA facilities,” the lawsuit alleges. This allegedly gives rise to false claims liability.

HMA’s outside counsel did not return a call from RMC. In a statement, HMA says “as a matter of policy we do not comment on pending litigation. The existence of the government’s investigation into the issues raised in the unsealed qui tam cases has been disclosed for some time in HMA’s public SEC filings. While our legal team addresses these matters and continues to cooperate with the Department of Justice’s ongoing investigation, HMA associates and physicians who practice at our facilities are focused on providing the highest quality patient care in all of our hospitals.”

The cases are United States ex rel. Brummer v. Health Mgmt. Assocs. Inc., et al., 3-09-cv-135 (CDL)(M.D. Ga.); United States ex rel. Williams v. Health Mgmt. Assocs. Inc. et al., 3:12-cv-151 (M.D. Ga.); United States ex rel. Plantz v. Health Mgmt. Assocs. Inc., et al., 13C-1212 (N.D. Ill.); United States ex rel. Miller v. Health Mgmt. Assocs. Inc., et al., 10-3007 (E.D. Pa.); United States ex rel. Mason v. Health Mgmt. Assocs. Inc., et al., 3:10-CV-472-GCM (W.D.N.C.); United States ex rel. Nurkin v. Health Mgmt. Assocs. Inc., et al., 2:11-cv-14-FtM-29DNF (M.D. Fla.); United States ex rel. Jacqueline Meyer & Cowling v. Health Mgmt. Assocs. Inc., et al., 0:11-cv-01713-JFA (D.S.C.); and United States ex rel. Paul Meyer v. Health Mgmt. Assocs. Inc., et al., 11-62445 cv-Williams (S.D. Fla.).

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a $150 discount on a subscription to Report on Medicare Compliance.