Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Governor Matt Bevin addressed concerns about the embattled Benefind system during a press conference on Thursday

Buy Photo Vickie Yates Brown Glisson, Secretary of Health and Family Services testified before the Senate Health and Welfare committee April 11 about Benefind.. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)Buy Photo

FRANKFORT, Ky. - A new public benefit system, envisioned as an innovative, one-stop shop for aid from programs such as Medicaid and food stamps, instead is turning into a flawed and costly experiment for Kentucky - the first state to attempt to launch such a project, according to the state's top human services official.

"They bought into something that no other state had ever done," Vickie Yates Glisson, secretary of the Cabinet for Health and Family Services, told legislators, referring to the Beshear administration. "I don't understand why Kentucky does this sometimes."

Speaking before a legislative committee, Glisson also said that a two-month delay in launching the system known as benefind has already cost the state $7 million in additional payments to Deloitte Consulting, the company that built benefind under a contract struck by the administration of former Gov. Steve Beshear.

Originally scheduled to launch Dec. 28, the $101 million benefind system instead was launched Feb. 29 under Gov. Matt Bevin, who took office Dec. 8. The delay, Glisson said, was mainly to avoid conflict with open enrollment for health coverage through kynect, the state health insurance exchange.

But Glisson discovered that under the contract, the state must pay Deloitte $3.5 million a month for any delays.

"The fact that we waited two months cost us $7 million," Glisson said. "I would say the previous administration pretty much tied anybody's hands from doing anything but being able to go forward."

The human cost also has been significant as state officials struggle to fix massive problems with benefind that have disrupted public aid for thousands of Kentuckians, leaving many without vital assistance. State phone lines have been jammed and benefit offices packed as thousands of poor and disabled people have flocked to local Department for Community Based Services offices, seeking to reinstate health coverage or other essential services.

"I am deeply concerned for those people who have no voice in the process," said Rep. Darryl Owens, a Louisville Democrat who also spoke at Monday's meeting of the Senate Health and Welfare Committee. "We have heard about the nightmares, even catastrophic circumstances."

Deborah Sills, a Deloitte executive who spoke at the hearing, said major efforts are underway to fix technical problems that blocked or disrupted benefits to people.

"Things are getting better every day," she said.

But Emily Beauregard, executive director for Kentucky Voice for Health, a coalition of state advocacy groups, said Thursday that's not what she's hearing from individuals and health advocates.

"It's very possible that some problems have been resolved," she said. "We're still hearing from consumers that they don't have coverage."

Bevin and his top officials have repeatedly pointed out that benefind was developed under Beshear.

Owens said Monday it's time to get past blame, given the human suffering the disruption has created.

"Kentucky is facing a crisis," he said. "We simply do not have time for further blame or finger-pointing."

Similar problems have occurred in other states where Deloitte, a New York-based consulting and technical giant, has designed public systems in recent years, including Massachusetts, Colorado, Florida, Pennsylvania and California, according to press reports.

Buy Photo Vickie Yates Brown Glisson, second from right, Secretary of Health and Family Services testified April 11 about problems the Benefind system. At left is Deloitte executive Deborah Sills. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

The Boston Globe reported in 2013 that Massachusetts officials fired Deloitte midway through development of a problem-plagued, $114 million tax return system. It also reported the state struggled for months to fix problems with a Deloitte-designed, $46 million unemployment claims system that left thousands with delayed benefits or multiple errors involving their claims.

In one case, 3,000 letters meant to go from the state to employers actually were sent back to the state unemployment division's own address, the Globe reported in 2014. Meanwhile, some people who had their unemployment payments delayed faced serious hardships such as eviction or no way to pay for health care, the newspaper said.

"Like any project of this magnitude and complexity, there were challenges to overcome," a Deloitte spokesman told the Globe in 2014.

In Kentucky, Deloitte has added 120 more staff to help workers in state benefit offices, company spokeswoman Courtney Flaherty said.

"We are sensitive to the needs of those who depend on this system and that is why we are doing everything we can to identify, prioritize and resolve issues as quickly as possible," the statement said. "Like other projects of this magnitude and complexity, there were challenges to overcome but we are working through them."

State officials said Deloitte is covering the costs of placing its extra workers throughout Kentucky.

The state contract with Deloitte dates to 2012, when Kentucky hired the company to design its state health exchange under the federal Affordable Care Act. Glisson said the state's request for proposals for the project resulted in a response from only one company - Deloitte.

Kynect, built at a cost of about $330 million, all federal funds, has been hailed as a national model and was recognized for its smooth launch in 2013 even as the federal health exchange, healthcare.gov, foundered amid massive problems and system crashes.

While the contract with Deloitte envisioned further upgrades to state benefit systems, in 2012, the state was focused on creating a health exchange where people could shop for health coverage or enroll in Medicaid if they were eligible, said Audrey Tayse Haynes, the former cabinet secretary under Beshear.

"Our sole goal was to build a successful health benefit exchange," she said.

Benefind was proposed by the Beshear administration to upgrade the state's aging computer system for processing other benefits such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), formerly known as food stamps, and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, or cash assistance for the poor. It was meant to integrate with kynect.

Advocates and some lawmakers have suggested problems with benefind - which have disrupted health coverage for many Kentuckians who obtained Medicaid coverage through kynect - represent Bevin's attempt to dismantle the health exchange.

Bevin has said he plans to shut down the state health exchange and transition people to the federal site to buy private plans; people would use benefind to enroll in Medicaid.

Glisson vehemently denied the benefind problems are tied to any effort to shut down kynect.

"Nothing was changed on this program," she said of benefind.

Haynes said state officials developed plans for benefind in consultation with the federal government, which provides the majority of funds for public assistance programs.

Haynes, who left her job at the end of the Beshear administration, said she can't speculate as to why benefind has performed so poorly. "All I know is that we tested it in October before we left," she said.

Michael Krigsman, a Boston consultant and founder of CXOTalk.com, a business forum on leadership and innovation, said it's not surprising Deloitte won the contract in Kentucky, despite its problems in other states.

"There are just not that many firms that are equipped to do this work at this scale," he said. "Deloitte has lots of experience."

And he said a lack of oversight or the transition from one administration to another could be a factor in problems with benefind.

"You can't just automatically assume Deloitte is at fault here," he said.

Meanwhile, another state is watching as Kentucky continues to try to iron out problems with benefind.

Oregon has proposed a similar system, using Deloitte, to develop a $127 million system to be called Oregon Eligibility.

A team of officials visited Kentucky last year to observe benefind, according to information provided by the state's Department for Human Services. Its system is nearly two years away from roll-out.

Gene Evans, a spokesman for the department, said Oregon officials are aware of Kentucky's problems with benefind.

"We are paying close attention to events in Kentucky and moving forward with our eyes wide open," he said.

Contact reporter Deborah Yetter at (502)582-4228 or at dyetter@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Ncx8Ab