Funding decisions the Legislature made as it expanded Medicaid have led to a funding shortfall in Michigan. (Photo: Jon Elswick/Associated Press file photo)

Blame Obamacare.

Why not? It's easier -- or perhaps more politically palatable -- than understanding what's really happening with Michigan's Medicaid program.

Here's the short version: Because the tax Michigan enacted to fund its share of the state Medicaid program doesn't produce enough money, we're headed toward a funding shortfall in one of the state's most important programs.

You can call it a failure of the Affordable Care Act, dubbed "Obamacare" by its critics, or you can call it what it is: A failure of Michigan's elected officials, who dodged Medicaid expansion until the eleventh hour, and whose anti-tax, anti-government bias has fostered an unhealthy, dysfunctional legislative climate. To those who live by this ideology, all taxes are bad, all government is bad, and the only reason to get elected is to cut government past the point of functionality.

But that's the thing about cuts. They're not free. And at some point, the bill comes due.

When Michigan expanded its Medicaid program in 2012, as part of the federal Affordable Care Act, the legislature repealed the use tax it had previously levied to fund the state's portion of the program's costs. Because the Michigan use tax was paid only by facilities serving Medicaid patients, it didn't meet federal guidelines, which require taxes supporting Medicaid must be broad-based. Those tax dollars fund the state's contribution to Medicaid, but also determine the federal government's contribution to Michigan's program.

The Legislature replaced the use tax with the Health Insurance Claims Assessment tax, a 0.75% levy paid by insurers and third-party administrators on paid insurance claims. (HICA was initially levied at 1% -- more on that in a minute.)

As the first year of HICA drew to a close, the state's bean counters realized the tax hadn't brought in the dollars expected; instead of $400 million, the insurance assessment yielded about $280 million. Facing a budget hole, the state diverted some one-time revenues from other programs, but most significantly, restored the use tax (that's when the claims assessment dropped from 1% to .75%), with the permission of the feds, strictly as a short-term fix. Now, the use tax's second life is drawing to a close -- it sunsets early in 2017. But so is the claims assessment, set to go kaput in early 2018, unless renewed by lawmakers.

To generate enough money to pay for our existing Medicaid program, earlier this year Gov. Rick Snyder proposed raising the claims assessment rate to 1.35%. Because the claims assessment is paid by insurers and claims administrators, higher costs are passed most immediately to businesses, who have a powerful voice in Lansing. And so the Legislature rejected the increase.

To recap: The new tax the state levied to pay for its Medicaid program doesn't cover its costs, so lawmakers reinstated an old tax. Both are set to expire, soon, and Michigan won't have a funding mechanism to cover its Medicaid program, as it currently operates.

As it that weren't enough -- starting in 2017, Michigan will have to pay 5% of the costs of its Medicaid expansion, increasing to 10% by 2020. This was a well-publicized feature of the Medicaid expansion, and worth the cost -- about 600,000 Michiganders became eligible for Medicaid under the expansion, and the state was expected to see significant savings by enrolling Michiganders in routine, preventative care.

Snyder urged the Legislature to earmark some portion of that savings to pay down Michigan's future contribution to the expansion. They didn't.

If the Legislature doesn't extend, and increase, a tax on insurers and some claims administrators, the state won't be able to fund its current Medicaid programs. In 2017, the state's costs will go up, something lawmakers have known for years and have they had sufficient time to craft a plan to cover the cost increase.

The Legislature is back in session, and the insurance claims assessment is surely on the table. It's a quick fix to a complicated problem, and an instance in which businesses could show good faith in return for the substantial tax cuts they've received during Snyder's tenure.

Or they could blame Obamacare.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1USCWNa