There is a bedrock natural law that anglers and most people understand as common sense-all waters are connected. If we trash or pollute a creek upstream, it could affect downstream conditions as well.

That’s why the newly proposed rule from the Environmental Protection Agency and Corps of Engineers to restore the coverage of the Clean Water Act is so important to Colorado’s quality of life.

For more than 30 years, the Clean Water Act has helped to ensure that America’s waters are clean, fishable and healthy. But a few years ago, a pair of Supreme Court rulings left more than 60 percent of America’s streams without assured protection under the Clean Water Act. Specifically, the rulings brought into question CWA coverage for many smaller seasonal and headwater streams that may not flow year-round.

Colorado is a headwaters state and we understand that these headwater creeks, while small, are vital to the health of our watersheds, wildlife, and water supply. Their health shapes the condition of everything else downstream. They serve as the lifeblood of Colorado’s recreation economy.

In Colorado alone, about 75 percent of rivers and streams-some 76,000 miles of waterways-are seasonal or ephemeral in nature and thus could fall outside the net of CWA protection, putting them at the mercy of filling and dredging operations, oil spills, toxic industrial waste and unregulated development.

For hunters, anglers and other outdoors enthusiasts, supporting the Clean Water Act is a no-brainer. Trout Unlimited is a science-driven organization, and it’s clear that healthy headwaters mean healthy fisheries and better fishing and outdoor opportunities.

In the arid West, so many of our watersheds are characterized by these smaller headwater and temporary streams. They might not look like much, but they have immense biological and habitat value, including as critical spawning and rearing habitat for native trout. Even those that are at times dry play a critical role in the larger ecosystem.

Some critics have raised fears that this rule is a federal power grab that would lead to heavy-handed regulation of every agricultural ditch and puddle. Those fears are unfounded. The move simply restores the original intent and longstanding practice of the CWA, leaving intact exemptions for regular farming activities.

Trout Unlimited works closely with farmers, ranchers and landowners across the West, including here in Colorado, on projects that improve ranch operations and stream habitat. We understand the need to protect our agriculture economy-and that’s true, as well, of Colorado’s outdoor recreation industry, which generates more than $13 billion in consumer spending each year and directly supports 125,000 Colorado jobs. Our urban water supplies, too, depend on healthy watersheds that are fed by these headwater streams and creeks.

As Colorado and the region struggle with drought and water scarcity, it’s never been more evident that all of us depend on clean, healthy sources of water.

Our waters, large and small, are interconnected-and to pretend otherwise is to invite disaster. When we allow polluters to dump toxins or trash upstream waters, we can expect pollution and devastation downstream, in our most prized rivers and streams.

Let’s support the Clean Water Act’s commonsense protection of our most precious heritage-our home waters.

David Nickum is executive director of Colorado Trout Unlimited.