OMAHA, Neb.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Benaissance® announces plans to bring the GoHealth Marketplace to its COBRApoint® platform which provides access to benefits for millions of COBRA-eligible and retiree consumers. The partnership provides consumers with enrollment support, giving them the option of continuing their health insurance through COBRA or enrolling in a new individual Marketplace health plan–putting the consumer in the driver’s seat.

The GoHealth Marketplace provides education and accessibility to a wide range of individual insurance options and allows consumers to compare benefits from the nation’s top insurance carriers, apply for subsidies (to reduce health insurance premiums and out-of-pocket expenses), and enroll in an individual health insurance plan. GoHealth also provides decision support tools and guidance from licensed insurance advisors to make the process easier and worry-free.

Chief Strategy Officer at Benaissance, Mark Waterstraat, explains how the GoHealth Marketplace meets the needs of employers and employees in the shifting health care environment.

“Health insurance benefits are more consumer-centric than ever before. Employers desire to align benefits that meet the needs of individuals. We believe COBRA will always have a place for employees experiencing work and life transitions. For example, an employee who desires to keep their current coverage because they have met a deductible. Our new relationship with GoHealth provides a trusted alternative to COBRA and is less intimidating than going to the open market alone to secure coverage. GoHealth is an industry leader and we trust them to provide a great experience for any of our customers exploring their health insurance options.”

“We recognize in today’s insurance marketplace, COBRA may not be the best solution for everyone,” says Clint Jones, chief executive officer at GoHealth. “Today’s consumers have choices and if they choose to seek benefits outside of COBRA, we will be ready with our robust, user-friendly, health insurance marketplace. Through this partnership, our goal is to give COBRA-eligible consumers the very best experience and connect them with subsidies that could ease some of the financial strain these individuals may be experiencing.”

Benaissance

Benaissance is the trusted financial management partner for health benefits administration. We pioneered the industry’s leading ExchangePoint and COBRApoint Software as a Service (“SaaS”) solutions for individual single-point and consolidated group premium billing. Together, these two solutions deliver highly efficient and scalable billing and payment solutions with easy-to-understand billing and convenient payment options—for tens of thousands of US employers and millions of American families through private exchanges, state-based marketplaces, and over 100 health plan and TPA customers. To learn more about Benaissance, please visit our website or contact Carrie Messinger, Director of Corporate Communications, at 402-991-3947 or marketing@benaissance.com.

GoHealth

GoHealth is a Chicago-based company that powers GoHealthInsurance.com, a private health insurance marketplace that has helped more than 30 million consumers shop for coverage. With world-class technology and a team of licensed insurance advisors, GoHealth helps individuals and families obtain the right health insurance coverage. Working with 300 health insurance companies, GoHealth enables consumers to easily compare and shop for a variety of brand-name health plans. GoHealth provides plan recommendations and enrollment support by phone and online at no cost to consumers. In 2013, the GoHealth Marketplace became the first private exchange to enroll consumers in subsidized health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. In addition to powering a private marketplace, GoHealth licenses technology solutions and provides business process outsourcing services related to individual health insurance. GoHealth was founded in 2001. For more information visit our website, follow us on Twitter or like us on Facebook.