You probably saw the startling Pantene ad that depicted the gender stereotypes women commonly encounter and encouraged ambitious ladies to not let labels hold them back. And that type of powerfully uplifting advertising will likely work, according to Red Alert Politics editor Francesca Chambers.

Francesca was a guest on PBS’ To the Contrary this week, along with Del. Eleanor Holmes Norton (D-D.C.), Democratic commentator Megan Beyer and Republican strategist Rina Shah.

All the women liked the commercial, but would it result in shampoo sales? Francesca thought so, because women will likely be drawn to the product itself or to the ad campaign.

“That’s the purpose of advertising,” Francesca said. “So I absolutely think more women will probably think about buying Pantene now.”

Francesca argued that the ad was much more effective than Victoria’s Secret advertisements, which never depict real women and come off as sexist. And despite the success of Pantene’s ad, which has more than 8 million YouTube views, Francesca pointed out that sexist depictions of women are likely to continue for the time being.

The ladies also talked about the growing number of female CEOs and top-tier business executives. The panelists, including Francesca, praised the development as something that is beneficial to women everywhere.

“If you look at the women who advanced this year into these positions, they didn’t always have the most positive stories coming out about them,” Francesca said, referencing the negative and judgmental rhetoric that surrounded Marissa Mayer and Jill Abramson as they rose to the top.

The women also talked about a tattooed Lutheran pastor, Nadia Bolz-Weber, and whether or not her style will continue drawing people into the church. Francesca said that young people especially will respond well when people try to make church fun — though she thought Bolz-Weber might be taking the concept too far.

“It certainly works to a certain extent to get more young people interested if there’s nachos and games and fun music,” Francesca joked. “And if that’s what you’ve got to do to get young people listening to the word of God, then hallelujah.”

Watch the episode below. Also be sure to watch the TTC Extra here. The panelists discuss the top stories of the year for women.