Wow! I'll say it again, Wow!

Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band: Please announce some U.S. dates because we're going nuts watching these great set lists you're playing in Australia.

Check out what was played Saturday at the third of three shows at the Perth Arena: Eight tour premieres and Bruce opens the show with AC/DC's 1979 hit "Highway to Hell" !



AC/DC is from Australia and Bruce has said at his press conference earlier this week that he was interested in possible covers by bands from Australia. Last year, he played "Just Like Fire Would" by the Australian band The Saints and that song is on his new album.

Here it is. It's quite the opener:

Thanks Perth for 3 amazing nights! Opened show tonite in Bon Scott's hometown with muthaflippin' "HIGHWAY TO HELL". The AC/DC Street Band?! — Tom Morello (@tmorello) February 8, 2014

And for those who cringe everytime "Waiting on a Sunny Day" is played, that one got a break on Saturday. Yeah!. It was played at every show in 2012-2013 except one, the final show in Europe, July 28, 2013 in Kilkenny, Ireland.

Matter of fact, not one song was played off "The Rising" album on Saturday, the first time that has happened at an E Street Band show since the album came out in 2002.

The three shows in Perth featured 56 different songs. Saturday's show clocked in at 2:57 and featured 28 songs.

There were eight tour premieres: "Highway to Hell," "Streets of Fire," "Candy's Room," "Downbound Train," "Radio Nowhere," "American Land," "The Promise," and "Terry's Song."

"Terry's Song" was played for only the third time ever. It was played solo acoustic in the encores. Just like Friday, Bruce again closed the show with two solo acoustic songs as "Thunder Road" followed.

Nice to see the underplayed "The Promise" to start the encores. Bruce did it solo on the piano. Here it is:

Some texts from my friend from New Jersey at the show: "Highway to Hell kicked ass!" "Killer guitar solo on Adam Raised a Cain." "Terry's Song was great."

In just seven shows on this tour, Bruce has now played 81 different songs.

Here's only the third live concert performance of "Terry's Song":

Show began at 7:58 p.m. local time (13 hours ahead of New Jersey)

Set list:



1. Highway to Hell (tour premiere)

2. Badlands

3. Adam Raised a Cain

4. Streets of Fire (sign request, tour premiere)

5. Candy's Room (tour premiere)

6. High Hopes

7. Just Like Fire Would

8. Spirit in the Night

9. Wrecking Ball

10. No Surrender

11. Bobby Jean

12. Because the Night

13. Downbound Train (tour premiere)

14. Heaven's Wall

15. Open All Night

16. Shackled and Drawn

17. Radio Nowhere (tour premiere)

18. The Ghost of Tom Joad

19. Land of Hope and Dreams

Encore:

20. The Promise (solo piano, tour premiere)

21. Born in the U.S.A.

22. Born to Run

23. Seven Nights to Rock

24. Dancing in the Dark

25. Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out

26. American Land (tour premiere)

27. Terry's Song (solo acoustic, tour premiere)

28. Thunder Road (solo acoustic)

Show over at 10:55 p.m.

Many fans, including myself, will be awaiting the purchase of this download at brucespringsteen.net

Next show: Tuesday at the Adelaide Entertainment Centre in Adelaide, Australia