Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, center, speaks to reporters as he is joined by, from right to left, Majority Whip John Cornyn, Sen. John Thune and Sen. Roger Wicker. | AP Photo Congress Senate GOP polling shows upside to SCOTUS blockade

Senate GOP leaders are making the case to their members this week that their decision to ignore President Barack Obama’s Supreme Court nominee is not just a principled stance, but a politically beneficial one, too.

Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Texas), according to GOP sources, is quietly circulating a four-page memo throughout the Senate Republican Conference on the public’s views on filling the high court’s vacancy.

Story Continued Below

The memo, obtained by POLITICO, makes the case that a majority of voters would prefer to keep deceased Justice Antonin Scalia’s seat empty — for a year or even longer — rather than allow Obama to nominate a liberal justice that would move the court to the left.

“The survey found almost unanimous awareness of the death of Justice Scalia, strong support for originalist intent in interpreting the Constitution, and concern over President Obama appointing a liberal justice who would tip the ideological balance of the court,” Republican pollster Greg Strimple wrote in the memo.

Strimple found that 54 percent of those surveyed were more concerned about a liberal justice being chosen to replace Scalia, compare to the nearly 41 percent of respondents who were more worried about the seat being open for a year or more.

Not surprisingly, Republicans were much more concerned about the potential shift in ideological balance. But Strimple’s findings showed that 53 percent of independents said a liberal justice was the bigger concern, compared to 41 percent who said a prolonged vacancy was the larger issue.

A majority of those surveyed — 54 percent — said they believed Obama would nominate a liberal justice and that his pick would tip the balance of the Supreme Court. And nearly 56 percent said justices should follow the original intent of the Constitution, in the mold of Scalia.

"Our findings show that a majority of U.S. voters share the concerns of the GOP in regard to tipping the ideological balance of the Court and the need for the next Justice to strictly interpret the Constitution," the memo reads.

The poll surveyed 600 likely voters between Feb. 27 and Feb. 29.

But Republicans have also faced statistics that show the public has largely aligned against them with their decision to block Obama’s future nominee. A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll found that 55 percent of voters disapprove of the GOP strategy, though whether the public agreed or not fell largely along party lines.

And a poll by the firm Public Policy Polling commissioned by the liberal group Americans United for Change found that 56 percent of voters preferred Obama make the Supreme Court appointment, while 40 percent said it should remain empty.

Senate Republicans have been aggressively pushing a confirmation blockade, even as Democrats continue to hammer away at the GOP for refusing to even give Obama’s not-yet-named nominee a hearing.

“It's absolutely clear to me that Senate Republicans stand firmly behind the idea that the people should have a say in this critical issue … when they vote in November because there is a lot at stake here,” Cornyn said in a floor speech this week. “A lot.”

Cornyn, like the vast majority of his 54-member conference, has been adamant that Scalia not be replaced until a new president has been elected. But he’s been taking hits from Democrats, particularly after this week when Cornyn warned that any Supreme Court nominee is likely to become a political “piñata.”

“He’s comparing a Supreme Court nominee to a children’s party favor that gets smashed repeatedly with a baseball bat,” Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) complained Wednesday. “That is nothing more than a thinly-veiled threat from Senator Cornyn, serving notice of a coming assault on the President’s nominee.”

The Senate Judiciary Committee will hold a business meeting later Thursday to discuss lower court nominations, but the Supreme Court vacancy controversy is also expected to be a big issue .