Northern Ontario is rich in minerals and timber but unless the provincial government changes the way it thinks and acts about the region, the potential of these resources to create jobs, spur economic development and social growth will remain untapped.

“We’re sitting on an immense amount of resources and we need to get these resources moving,” Mayor Dave Canfield said during the State of the North Summit in Toronto, Thursday, April 2.

Canfield was taking part in a panel discussion as president of the Northwestern Ontario Municipal Association. He was among six northern political and business leaders participating in the live stream web event on economic opportunities in Northern Ontario. Other panelists included Al Spacek, mayor of Kapuskasing and president of Federation of Northern Ontario Municipalities; Lawrence Martin, Grand Chief of Mushkegowuk Council and former mayor of Sioux Lookout; Jamie Lim, president and CEO, Ontario Forest Industries Association

Moderator and Empire Club president Ted Griffith invited the panelists to share their views on the region’s potential for economic growth as well as the barriers and solutions to natural resource development in the North.

Canfield noted that Northern Ontario occupies 86 per cent of Ontario’s geography but just six per cent of the province’s population. As a result, the northern perspective is often ignored at Queen’s Park when decisions are made on natural resources development in region.

“Centralized decision-making in Queens Park doesn’t work, it’s too far away. Include us in the policy process and it will work,” he said.

Canfield cited the need for new transportation and energy infrastructure in to support economic development in the north. He noted the new roads and rail lines will provide access to resources and markets while electrical generation will provide energy for sawmills and mines.

Grand Chief Martin expressed similar sentiments noting resource developments such as the Ring of Fire mineralization zone provide unprecedented opportunities for employment, economic and social growth on remote First Nation communities. He noted new transportation corridors and power stations to power sawmills and mines could also connect remote First Nations to the rest of the province and provide a clean energy alternative to diesel generation in these communities.

However, the grand chief suggested the historic relationship between government and First Nations is “complicated” and poses a barrier that must be overcome to engage aboriginal communities in development initiatives.

“First Nations are new players in the process. Watching what’s happening in the north; it’s a great opportunity to get involved and to be a part of that development.” Martin said. “We don’t want to spend time in the courtrooms, we want to spend time in the board rooms. Now it’s time for business.”

According to OFIA’s Lim, misguided environmentalism and public polices based on sentiment rather than scientific due diligence poses the greatest barrier to ensure a consistent supply of affordable fibre and customers to facilitate a resurgence in the regional forest industry.

“Less wood equals fewer jobs,” she said. “There are 85 billion trees in the province and the annual harvest of 0.5 per cent supports 170,000 jobs in 260 communities. That’s not a bad return.”

Lim did not mince words in accusing environmental organizations such as Green Peace and the Rain Forest Action Network for launching “arbitrary misinformation campaigns” targeting customers of forest products providers, urging them not to buy from producers. She said the influence of special interest lobbies extends to the premier’s office resulting in more rather than fewer barriers to harvesting the region’s greatest renewable resource.

She suggested the Ontario government should follow the example set by Manitoba and Quebec by finding the “political will to stand up to special interests with the clear message that the province is not going to turn the Boreal Forest into a park.”

Regarding development of the North’s energy generating potential, Spacek said the province needs to streamline rather than complicate the permitting process. He referred to the 10,000 MW of untapped electrical generating potential in the North and a $300-million initiative to develop 14 hydro generating stations that won’t move forward without provincial support.

“Something’s broke and it needs to be fixed,” Spacek said.

The panelists agreed the province can reduce barriers by appointing a ‘Business Commissioner’ to act on behalf of industry by streamlining the process of permit approvals from the various ministries involved in natural resources development.

“The province’s ‘Open for Business’ (slogan) hasn’t made it any easier,” Lim concluded. “You can’t expect the people who created the issues to solve the issues.”

Reg.Clayton@sunmedia.ca

twitter@RegClayton