SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On May 21, Politico cited two of the more than 5 million NRA members to declare a “backlash” over their Donald Trump endorsement.

One of the two members brought up well-publicized news that Trump supported certain gun control measures in the 1990s. Politico itself reported that Trump has since “disavowed” those positions, and Breitbart News reported that Trump is a concealed permit holder, a lifetime member of the NRA, and is against an “assault weapons” ban, a “high capacity” magazine ban, an expansion of background checks, and the continuance of gun-free zones in public places and on military bases.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Yet, Politico suggests there is backlash over the NRA’s endorsement of Trump.

At the same time, Politico acknowledges that NRA-ILA executive director Chris Cox stood in front of thousands upon thousands of NRA members during Friday’s Leadership Forum and said those who are bitter because their candidate didn’t win need to “get over it.”

Cox’s exact words: “If your preferred candidate dropped out of the race, it’s time to get over it.”

Politico then cited NRA member David Davis, who used a Facebook post to disavow the NRA following the Trump endorsement, and who called Trump a “lying, progressive, anti-gun democrat.” Davis said he refuses to “get over it,” choosing instead to cut ties with the NRA.

Counting Davis, that makes a total of two disgruntled NRA members out of more than five million. Are two out of more than five million really grounds to suggest a “backlash?”

Breitbart News spoke with NRA Board Member Buz Mills about Trump at the NRA gathering in Lousiville, Kentucky, on Saturday. Mills said:

Ever since Trump came out I’ve been on the Trump train. And the reason is because he is a business guy. And you know, people say, “Well, he’s not a Republican” or “He’s not a Democrat.” And that’s right. He’s a pragmatist. He sees a problem and he solves it. And he doesn’t care for flavoring it to your favorite religions or political parties or whatever, because that requires pandering. Instead, Trump sees a problem and he acts to fix it. And this makes him unique among candidates in my lifetime.

Mills then spoke specifically to Trump’s position on guns versus Hillary Clinton’s position on guns, saying, “Hillary is going to lie to you and take your guns out of your pocket while she’s patting you on the shoulder and Donald is going to say, ‘I don’t want your guns.'”

AWR Hawkins is the Second Amendment columnist for Breitbart News and political analyst for Armed American Radio. Follow him on Twitter: @AWRHawkins. Reach him directly at awrhawkins@breitbart.com.