A special Pride edition of the Playstation 4 console is being auctioned off to raise money for LGBT refugees.

Swedish retailer WebHallen has teamed up with the LGBT-refugee network RFSL on the Gaystation, a PS4 decked out with a heart and rainbow flag. “For many young people, playing has become a refuge to escape the taunts in real life,” says a WebHallen spokesperson.

So far, the console—which comes with four wireless controllers and four games— has received bids in excess of $2,700. But it could go much higher before the auction ends on August 3.

A high-profile sexual harassment suit has rocked Yahoo, but this time its from an ex-employee who alleges her female boss forced her into sex and fired her when she complained.

Engineer Nan Shi claims that her boss, Maria Zhang, forced her to have sex on multiple occasions. “Zhang told Plaintiff she would have a bright future at Yahoo if she had sex with her,” according to the complaint. “She also stated she could take away everything from her including her job, stocks and future, if she did not do what [Zhang] wanted.”

Zhang has filed a countersuit, claiming Shi was terminated for doing a bad job.

As more and more health-care authorities are recommending Truvada for gay men at risk of unsafe sex, the Washington State Department of Health has launched a program that will cover the cost of a prescription.

A month’s supply of Truvada, the most common form of Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) can run up to $1,300 per month—but the program will cover the cost whether or not a participant has insurance.

“Cost is one of the biggest barriers to PrEP,” said Fred Swanson, executive director of Seattle’s Gay City Health Project. “Even with the Affordable Care Act, people are choosing plans that still require really large co-pays, so when they go to access PrEP, it’s not really plausible for them. We have seen that even people with insurance aren’t able to afford the prescription.”

State health officials hopes to reduce new HIV infections by 25% by 2016. Currently, the program only has 17 participants, mostly gay men.

“In Washington, we really see PrEP as a new and important tool in the toolbox for HIV prevention,” David Kern, manager of the Department of Health’s Infectious Disease Prevention Section, told Buzzfeed. “It is a strategy that supports our overarching public health goals and it’s an important part of what we’re doing with resources.”

Cosmopolitan magazine’s sex tips are usually the stuff of punchlines, but a recent feature on lesbian sex positions is getting the thumbs up from lady-lovers.

“28 Mind-Blowing Lesbian Sex Positions” gives visual and text instructions on such sapphic TK as Rockin’ Rockette, the Hot Hair Salon and the Lazy Girl’s 69.

We anxiously await “32 Toe-Curling Sex Positions for Gay Men”