According to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) officials, two passengers traveling to Newark Airport on Saturday — a man and his daughter — were removed after a potential Ebola scare.

The man was “vomiting on flight but did not display most of the other [Ebola] symptoms,” a CDC official said. The plane, a United Airlines flight from Brussels, may have contained some passengers from Liberia, including the man who was purportedly ill. The man may have been suffering from food poisoning for all we know, but health officials still didn’t want to take any chances.

“He’s now being treated with protocols as if he has it but no clear indication at this point that he does,” the official said of the sick passenger, who had been traveling with his daughter. He and his daughter were removed from the plane by CDC members in full protective gear and taken to University Hospital in Newark to be tested. The plane, which landed around noon, was required to keep passengers on board until about 2 p.m. They were then asked to move to a separate area of Customs.

United released a statement about the event: “Upon arrival at Newark Airport from Brussels, medical professionals instructed that customers and crew of United flight 988 remain on board until they could assist an ill customer. We are working with authorities and will accommodate our customers as quickly as we can.”

Shortly after, health officials announced that the man was cleared of Ebola. While the CDC must remain vigilant during this volatile time, it’s important to remember that not every vomiting person near you has Ebola.

The first Ebola patient to be diagnosed in the U.S. was confirmed earlier last week by CDC officials. The Liberian man, who had been visiting relatives in Dallas, began exhibiting symptoms of the virus days after landing on U.S. soil. This means he likely was not contagious during his flight. But the CDC and health officials in Texas have been working on creating a “contact web” to ensure that anyone who was near the infected patient did not receive the virus themselves.

Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the CDC, has reassured Americans that the chance of an outbreak here in the States is extremely low, even if a few more cases pop up. “The bottom line is we’re stopping this in its tracks in the U.S.,” Frieden told CBS. “And I’m confident we can do that because of our strong health care and infection control, and our strong public health system.”