Twelve years after September 11th, how does the US fight terror?

The United States spends billions of dollars a year on counterterrorism efforts. A recent Washington Post article says the United States spends $17.2 billion on counterterrorism intelligence every year. Another $47.4 billion was spent on the Department of Homeland Security last year and more than $650 billion has gone towards the war in Afghanistan. How do we know U.S. counterterrorism strategies are working and are there unintended consequences? Jim Walsh, an international security expert from MIT, and Robert McFadden, a former Naval Criminal Investigative Service special agent who helped investigate the bombing of the USS Cole, join Consider This host Antonio Mora to discuss this issue.

Labor unions clash with President Obama over health care reform

The AFL-CIO passed a resolution this week that says the Affordable Care Act is "highly disruptive," claiming it could make health care plans that are jointly run by unions and small employers too expensive. Some Republican Congress members argue that unions are trying to get extra federal benefits. Mike Elk, a labor reporter for In These Times, and Michael Cannon of the Cato Institute join Antonio Mora to talk about these developments.

Is it OK for a pregnant women to drink alcohol and coffee?

Emily Oster, an assistant economics professor at the University of Chicago, re-examined common medical advice and medical studies regarding pregnancy in her new book, "Expecting Better: Why the Conventional Pregnancy Wisdom Is Wrong — and What You Really Need to Know." Some medical professionals question Oster's conclusions, which support the moderate consumption of alcohol and coffee during pregnancy. Christina Brockett of MomEvolving.com joins Oster and Antonio Mora to talk about this issue.

What's in a (team) name? And other sports scandals

On Friday, an appeals court upheld Barry Bonds' conviction on a federal obstruction of justice charge. Dave Zirin, sports correspondent for The Nation, will tackle this story as well as the controversy over the Washington Redskins' team name and the ongoing scandal involving the Oklahoma State football team.