Physician assistants, nurse practitioners could have larger roles with Affordable Care Act.

Guinevere Hellems, RPA-C, left, attends to patient Cathy Sommer, Brockport, right, during her visit to Evergreen Family Medicine in Brockport. (Photo: SHAWN DOWD) Story Highlights The Affordable Care Act is expected to bring an influx of newly insured patients to primary care

The Bureau of Labor Statistics predicted faster than average job growth for physician assistants and registered nurses

PAs and NPs could take on larger roles in primary care as they tend to the more-routine conditions and allow the physician to focus on more complex cases

In a pinch, Sarah Greive will see the doctors in her primary care practice.

Nothing against them, but her first choice is the physician assistant, who brings more to the exam room than medical skills.

"If I have an appointment that I plan ahead, I will choose the PA," the 36-year-old Greece, N.Y., woman said. "He takes a lot of time to answer my stupid questions. I don't ever feel rushed. It feels nice that I'm the person most important to him."

The Affordable Care Act is expected to bring an influx of newly insured patients to primary care as the number of internists and family medicine doctors is flat at best. The federal government has designated some areas as shortage areas.

Nationally, the Bureau of Labor Statistics predicted faster than average job growth for physician assistants and registered nurses, which include nurse practitioners. New York may already be seeing that growth; the number of licenses issued for each profession has increased over the past three years.

PAs and NPs have worked in local specialty and primary care practices for decades. But these so-called "physician extenders" could take on larger roles in primary care as they tend to the more-routine conditions and allow the physician to focus on more complex cases.

"This definitely has been an encouraging factor for the profession to say now is our time," said Cynthia McCloskey, who holds a doctorate in nursing and is director of the graduate nursing program at the Wegmans School of Nursing at St. John Fisher College.

"I believe there is a lot of care that needs to be done," said McCloskey, who also is a women's health NP.

Although they are subject to different regulations and the scope of their practices varies, PAs and NPs can diagnose and treat an illness. But the job is more than writing prescriptions. PAs and NPs also stress wellness and disease prevention, which become more important under health reform when providers will be paid on results and not merely the number of procedures they do.

"Physician assistants and nurse practitioners have a big place in this transformation," said Heidi Miller, professor and director of the physician assistant program at Rochester Institute of Technology. "Medicine is a challenging place to be right now. There are lots of pressures. It takes a team to provide really good, comprehensive high quality patient care."

Who will see you now?

Even though nurse practitioners and physician assistants have been in many Rochester practices for decades, some patients may be not understand the roles.

While Katie Orem trusts the nurse practitioner who works with her pain specialist, the first time she encountered the physician assistant at her ob/gyn practice she all but asked for a résumé.

"I grilled the person," said the 26-year-old Rochester resident. " 'Who are you, what is the degree, are orders co-signed?' I didn't know how a PA worked. I was not as familiar with PA training."

Orem said that while she's frustrated at not seeing the ob/gyn doctor, she understands priorities. "I'm low risk. They have patients who need more care."

In the five years since she was diagnosed with breast cancer, Elizabeth Osta has encountered an alphabet soup of medical practitioners. Depending on the office, she would see the NP, PA or the MD.

Osta said that lack of access to a primary care physician because of demand could be a problem. She said much of medical care depends on the rapport between patient and provider.

"The key is to be sure that you're comfortable with the doctor saying, 'I'd like you to see So-and-So.' I'd rather be asked."

Team game

While Dr. David Newman devoted time on a recent morning to a woman with high blood pressure, asthma and other concerns, one of his physician assistants was seeing patients with more straightforward ailments.

"If there are things that only I can do, that's what I should be doing," said Newman, who has employed physician assistants for 25 years at Evergreen Family Medicine in Brockport. "When you get to four, five, six problems with the patient, when you get to people who have what is out of the ordinary, that's when it takes the doctor."

Newman employs two PAs, the number allowed by state law for a physician in private practice. Just as he will refer to a specialist when a problem is beyond his abilities, the PAs consult him.

"If there's something they're not sure about, they'll come to me," Newman said. "It works best when there's a collaborative relationship."

Newman said the decision on who sees which patients depends on availability, the complexity of the case and the patient's choice. "Some of my patients prefer to see the PA," he said, adding that the two female PAs take care of adolescent gynecologic concerns.

Dennis Goldsmith, 67, of Hilton Health Care has worked as a PA for 31 years.

He said that with his experience, he can work independently but relies on the physicians in the practice to be a resource.

"They are our best and our brightest," he said. "The apex of the system is still the physician. We need more physicians; then they can employ us to help them."

Education not legislation

In 2010, a national report by the Institute of Medicine and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation recommended that education, and not state laws, guide a nurse's scope of practice and that among other things, nurses become partners with doctors and other health care professionals to improve health care.

"It's not doctors vs. nurses and who is at the top of the ladder," said Kathy Rideout, dean of the University of Rochester School of Nursing.

Rideout also is a pediatric nurse practitioner in the Department of Pediatric Surgery at Golisano Children's Hospital at the UR Medical Center. She said that while nurse practitioners can deliver quality primary care and can coordinate care for patient's multiple needs, "I know there are things I can't do as a nurse practitioner. I need my physician collaborator."

Actually, who provides your primary care may depend on where you live. Some research shows that PAs and NPs are more likely to practice in areas — urban or rural — that don't have enough primary care doctors.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1hzKshy