Here’s one data point that doesn’t gibe with the complaint that economic gains are increasingly limited to an exclusive club: Minority-owned business ownership has been surging.

Among businesses with at least five employees, the percentage with minority owners rose to 13.3% from 9.7% from 2007 to 2012, finds an IBD analysis of the most current data from the Census Department.

The rise in minority ownership among businesses operating franchises of established brands has been especially impressive. In 2012, 21.1% of franchise operators with at least five workers had minority owners vs. 15.8% in 2007. Meanwhile, among firms that don’t operate franchises, 12.6% had minority owners in 2012, up from 9.3% five years earlier.

The jump in minority ownership of franchises helps explain a surge in minority-owned restaurants noted by the National Restaurant Association.

The data confirm something that is well understood by many entrepreneurs from diverse backgrounds who have sought to carve out a share of the economic pie: Franchising has provided one of the most accessible and surest paths to business success.

Among African-Americans, for example, fully 24% of all businesses with at least 50 workers are engaged in franchising, the new Census data show.

Yet this model is increasingly under attack from the political left, which sees franchising as a problem, not a solution. Whereas thousands of minority business owners may see franchising as the best approximation of a golden goose within their reach, the labor movement and its campaign for a $15 minimum wage can’t see past their arch-nemesis — the golden arches.

Minority Owners Seen As Obstacle

In their view, dispersing economic power among franchisers makes it harder to unionize service-industry workers than it would be if labor unions could directly target corporate giants. In that sense, minority-owned franchises are merely an obstacle that must be steamrolled for the greater good.

The National Labor Relations Board provided a steamroller suited to the task in designating McDonald’s (MCD) a joint-employer of employees who work for franchise-owned locations — about 90% of the restaurant chain’s total workforce.

McDonald’s contends that the designation makes no sense because franchise operators make all decisions involving hiring, firing, pay and work schedules. The company’s legal challenge is now being heard by an NLRB administrative judge, but the case may take a few years to play out as it heads next to the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals and then possibly to the Supreme Court.

Beyond facilitating a push to unionize franchises, the joint-employer designation would turn small employers into large ones subject to ObamaCare employer penalties for failing to offer qualifying health coverage to workers clocking at least 30 hours per week. It also would make corporations with deep pockets liable for labor violations of its franchise operators.

Together, these factors would put so much strain on franchise operators and their brand-name partners that their agreements — typically 4% of revenue goes to the franchisor in return for training and the benefits of scale and name-recognition — may no longer be viable.

Franchise Model Under Attack

That’s a risk the left is apparently unconcerned about, as evident in the appeal before the Supreme Court challenging Seattle’s discriminatory treatment of franchises. In petitioning justices for a hearing, the International Franchise Association highlighted internal emails among government officials expressing their disapproval of the franchise model.

At issue in the case is Seattle’s more-rapid phase-in of its minimum wage for franchise businesses, which are considered to be large employers if the chain has more than 500 workers systemwide, even if the franchise operator has a single location.

In an email to a fellow city council member, Nick Hanauer explained the reason for treating small-business that operate franchises differently than other small businesses: “The truth is that franchises like Subway and McDonald’s really are not very good for our local economy. They are economically extractive, civically corrosive and culturally dilutive.”

Presumably, one of the reasons that a broad segment of franchising companies has made a concerted effort to increase local minority ownership is to make the business model more of a contributor to local economies.

There are other advantages, as well, such as a low cost of capital. In the ObamaCare era, letting others do the hiring also may help limit the cost of the employer mandate.

New York, in ordering fast-food companies to pay a $15 minimum wage — phased in by 2019 in New York City and by 2021 statewide — also lumped small franchise operators in with bigger employers.

The New York Fast Food Wage Board blasted the franchise industry for a “combination of profits and impoverishment,” saying that the industry gets a subsidy in the form of public assistance to its workers.

The rule covers a long list of food vendors without table service which have at least 30 locations in the U.S. Among them are Yum Brands’ (YUM) Taco Bell, Shake Shack (SHAK), Dunkin’ Donuts (DNKN), Jamba Juice (JMBA), Wendy’s (WEN) and Subway.

Ironically, big franchisors like McDonald’s might stand to gain if their franchises raised wages. That’s because the typical 4%-of-revenue royalty would rise if the franchise was able to pass along a price hike to customers to cover higher labor costs. Thus, the real gripe with the franchise industry may be a royalty structure that provides an incentive to keep costs down. That’s why franchisers may be highly likely to eliminate labor costs by investing in technology if wages rise too high.

Image provided by Shutterstock.