ISTOCK

CHRISTINA BECHHOLD: If you’re entrepreneurially minded, you probably keep a scratch pad of “ideas”–products or problems you scribble down quickly, but never move forward with because no single concept seems winning enough. You’re probably also an early adopter of startup offerings, the first person to throw out a new company doing something uniquely interesting–the latest on-demand app, that new marketplace platform, this thing that’s going to be on Shark Tank next season.

If you have the passion, but struggle to find the breakthrough, just skip that step. Start with existing “great ideas”–the products and services you love, use frequently and wouldn’t want to be without. Focus especially on those which are technology-enabled and highly scalable, likely software and services. Where else could they go? I love the look on a friend’s face when I share something I’ve uncovered that he’s never heard.

If there had been a referral program for ClassPass, for example, when I first signed up, I’d have minted a lifetime of free membership. I loved the idea. Then I saw a Malaysian startup, KFit, took the ClassPass model to parts of Asia and Australia and raised millions from a top-tier U.S. venture firm. A proven concept, adapted for a new geography, becoming a huge success. Why didn’t I think of that!

In the U.S., it’s about coming up with the next “Uber for X.” Elsewhere, it’s about being the “Uber of X.” Zafiti is the Zappos of Brazil. Aparat is the YouTube of Iran. Copying and dropping a successful business model elsewhere is a well-worn path. No idea list required.

Even within the U.S., new models often start on the coasts and take some time to move inland. “Healthy” frozen yogurt, for example – I trekked to New York’s Koreatown for my first taste of fresh fruit topped Pinkberry at least a year before I could find a similar tart offering when visiting my hometown, Cincinnati.

Considering what verified model you can replicate is a fantastic venture jump-start because:

It’s proven, likely in a highly competitive marketplace, where it’s been adjusted and tweaked. If ideation is your challenge, focus on execution, not reinvention. It attracts investors, “check writers” who are looking for untapped demand paired with proven solutions, rather than opportunities that just aim to steal market share. There are entire funds, and even angel investors, dedicated to the exported business model thesis. They’ll be eager to hear your pitch.

And it provides a head-start while the established incumbent is focused on refining in their home market, be it a city, region, or country. You can introduce a tailored offering well ahead of any possible expansion, honing for the needs of your chosen geography. You’ve got the edge.

Christina Bechhold is co-founder of Empire Angels, a member-led, New York-based angel group of young professionals investing in early stage technology ventures. They focus on supporting young entrepreneurs.

Read the latest Small Business Report.