Residents serve up apple pie for Apple Day festivalgoers Saturday in Penrose. The pies were a combination of sweet gala apples and tart granny smith apples. ( Kimberly Weber / Daily Record )

Delicious apple pie from Saturday's Apple Day in Penrose. (Kimberly Weber / Daily Record)

Penrose — Cool, crisp autumn mornings and the smell of bacon frying away on a hot, open grill was the how the Apple Day festivities kicked off this year in Penrose.

To start the day off, the Penrose Volunteer Fire Department hosted its annual Pancake Breakfast with pancakes, sausage, bacon, and eggs made right in front of the fire department on hot grills. The Florence High School Student Council served hungry patrons. With the assistance of the Student Council, Florence High School staff member Randi Ratkovich and the entire staff of the Penrose Volunteer Fire Department, they were able to raise more than $2,000 to benefit the fire department. It was yet another successful pancake breakfast.

As the day went on, festivalgoers were able to meander through Main Street and sample food from several different vendors. Among those, Colon Orchards fed paradegoers with samples of their delicious apples and freshly pressed apple cider. Sipping on the delicious apple cider, manager Britt Colon said, "the apple cider is a secret family recipe passed down from her grandfather but is a blend of 50/50 apples. Half of the apples are sweet and half are tart, that way you get the perfect balance without having to add any additional sugar."

The apple cider is a product that they make in house and has about a two week fridge shelf life.

Advertisement

Also at the festival was a new comer, 2 Gypsy Sisters, a new food cart. Opening in August and only handling special events, they offer eight different varieties of freshly squeezed lemonade. A special to only them is their "Green Chili Lemonade." This lemonade is a nice refreshing balance of tart lemons, sweet sugar and the subtle heat in the back of your throat of green chilis. They also offer several different kinds of hot chocolate, using top quality Ghirardelli chocolate.

Kimberly Weber

How can you attend an Apple Day parade without having a slice of quintessential apple pie? This year, the Culinary School at the Prisons donated more than 90 hotel pan apple pies to this year's event. Served up by Terri Harmon, Jeannie Melcher and several other community members, they offered out portions of this sweet favorite, telling us that, "they used a combination of sweet gala apples and tart granny smith apples to make these pies."

A favorite of many is entering in the Apple Pie baking contest. This year's winner, Vangie Avila, has won several years and is known for her warm and comforting apple pie.

Head on down and pick up some of Colon Orchard's Apple Cider or a favorite cider of your own and put a pot of this apple cider on your stove to fill your home with the smells of fall and leave you with a warm belly.

Hot Apple Cider

1 gallon fresh pressed apple cider

2 cinnamon sticks

4 whole cloves

1 orange sliced in rings

1 lemon sliced in rings

1 granny smith apple sliced

1 gala apple sliced

3 tablespoons honey

Bring all ingredients to a boil on a large pot. Turn down to low and simmer for 1 hour. Serve up in mugs and garnish with a cinnamon slick for stirring and a slice of fresh apple.