The RGA will spend in six states that President Barack Obama carried twice. RGA to spend $100M in final 100 days

The Republican Governors Association plans to spend $100 million in the final 100 days before the November elections.

With $70 million cash on hand, RGA executive director Phil Cox said Wednesday afternoon that the group will have enough to defend its incumbents while investing in potential pick-up opportunities.

Story Continued Below

The RGA spent $25 million in the first half of the year in states such as Iowa, South Carolina and New Mexico. Cox credits the early buys with driving up the negatives for relatively unknown Democratic challengers and allowing Republican incumbents to open double-digit leads in polling.

( Also on POLITICO: 5 questions about Boehner's Obama lawsuit)

“The goal of the early money was to narrow the defensive map,” Cox said.

He described nine races as the “most competitive.”

They include six states that President Barack Obama carried twice and where Republican governors face reelection: Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, Florida and Maine. The other three are states currently held by Democrats: Arkansas, where Gov. Mike Beebe is retiring; Connecticut, where Gov. Dannel Malloy faces a rematch with the Republican he barely beat in 2010; and Illinois, where Gov. Pat Quinn is struggling.

Cox thinks early spending in Iowa, South Carolina and New Mexico will also let the RGA spend money in other states currently held by Democrats.

( Also on POLITICO: 'You're not going to get me impeached, are you?')

They include: Colorado, where a new Quinnipiac poll shows Gov. John Hickenlooper statistically tied with former Rep. Bob Beauprez; Massachusetts, where a Boston Globe poll last week showed Republican Charlie Baker trailing by only 5 points in the race to succeed Deval Patrick; and Hawaii, where Cox argues that a three-way rac e , combined with a bad Obamacare rollout, makes Neil Abercrombie vulnerable.

The Democratic Governors Association said Tuesday that it raised $27 million during the first half of 2014, compared to the RGA’s $50 million in the same period. The DGA has not disclosed its cash on hand total.

Of the 19 Republican incumbents running for reelection, Cox said the “two most challenging defenses” are Pennsylvania’s Tom Corbett, followed by Maine’s Paul LePage, but he insisted that the RGA will never write them off.

“The RGA is fully committed, we’re all in, and they’re two states we’re going to win,” he said.

( Also on POLITICO: Behind the GOP focus on Obamacare)

Cox’s comments came at an afternoon briefing in the Capitol Hill Club, alongside the executive directors of all the other leading Republican Party groups, including the Senate and House committees.

Republican National Committee chief of staff Mike Shields said the idea was to highlight how well everyone is “working together.” He said the RNC now has 304 field staff – 24 state directors and 280 organizers.