Did you know that lung cancer kills more people than breast, colorectal and prostate cancers combined? This year more than 220,000 people will be diagnosed with lung cancer. Nearly 160,000 will die of the disease – accounting for one-in-four cancer deaths and one-in-16 deaths overall.

The sad truth is people don't talk about lung cancer. Its five-year survival rate is less than 17 percent. Because there are so few survivors, their voices can go unheard. That’s where we come in.

ADVERTISEMENT

Every November, Americans gather to support those battling this disease and remember those lost. We raise awareness of lung cancer risks and support research to find ways to treat, and one day cure, this terrible disease.

That research has produced a lifesaving, cost-effective screening exam that can ultimately make this November’s Lung Cancer Awareness Month the most productive in history. But there is a problem.

Last December, the federal panel of medical experts that makes evidence-based health recommendations, the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), recommended screening current and former heavy smokers ages 55 to 80 using computed tomography (CT) or “CAT” scans. By law, under the Affordable Care Act, this qualified CT lung cancer screening as an “Essential Health Benefit,” meaning most private insurers must cover the scan by the end of 2015.

However, Medicare is not held to the same standard as private insurers and is not required to cover seniors for the exam. This could prove deadly. The majority of lung cancers are diagnosed in people ages 65 and older. If a senior does not have the money to pay for screening "out of pocket," then that screening probably won't happen. Cost barriers reduce access to screening and raise the risk of dying from lung cancer.

The federal regulatory agency that runs the Medicare program, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), has until Nov. 10 to decide whether it will cover seniors for these lifesaving exams. CMS could have accepted the USPSTF recommendation and provided coverage, but instead regulators chose to re-examine evidence already proving lung cancer screening's efficacy and safety.

This evidence includes one of the largest randomized controlled trials in National Cancer Institute history -- the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST), which found that CT screening reduces lung cancer deaths by at least 20 percent. A subsequent analysis published in the Annals of Internal Medicine showed that these exams work as well in people ages 65 and over as in those aged 50 to 64 years. In fact, CT lung cancer screening can save more lives than any cancer test developed to date.

So why is CMS hesitating? Some say these exams cost too much. However, two published studies have shown that CT lung cancer screening is cost effective in the Medicare population and in the privately insured. Not to mention, the test is at least as cost-effective as other major cancer screening programs. CT lung cancer screening would also add more life-years per dollar spent than other programs and cost less in absolute terms.

Others say that the anxiety that comes from waiting for test results or from “false-positives” is too much to bear, but an article published in the journal Cancer proves this to be false.

Considering that lung cancer screening uses advanced CT technology to deliver low doses comparable to mammography, fears about radiation exposure have been unfairly raised.

A final unfounded argument against screening was that “these exams will just encourage people to smoke.” Data shows this to be untrue. Smoking cessation is included in high-quality lung cancer screening programs and actually makes screening more cost effective. Though untrue, these arguments are unsurprising and pretty run-of-the-mill. Remember when some said that installing seatbelts would only encourage reckless driving? Automobile deaths plummeted when seatbelts were added.

To the extent CMS wants to ensure that seniors receive high-quality care, we share that goal. An unprecedented coalition of medical, professional and public health leaders have highlighted for Medicare infrastructure and quality assurance programs in place to help ensure that lung cancer screening is deployed safely, responsibly and equitably.

The legitimate questions have been answered and the myths debunked. Meanwhile, people continue to die who otherwise might be saved.

It’s time for that to stop.

It’s time for CMS to give us all more reason to celebrate this Lung Cancer Awareness Month.

It’s time for Medicare to fully cover CT lung cancer screening.

Laurie Fenton Ambrose is President and Chief Executive Officer of Lung Cancer Alliance, the nation’s first and leading organization dedicated to saving lives and advancing research by empowering those living with and at risk for lung cancer. Kazerooni is the director of cardiothoracic radiology at the University of Michigan and chair of the American College of Radiology Lung Screening Committee. She is also vice chair of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network's lung-cancer screening panel and was the University of Michigan site investigator for the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST).