Updated: Jan 19, 2015 - 9:47 PM

A Charlotte woman is in Washington, D.C., ready to take her seat next to the First Lady during Tuesday's State of the Union address.

Related Headlines Charlotte woman to attend State of the Union Address

Astrid Muhammad, 39, lives in Charlotte and got the invitation from the White House after she wrote a letter to President Barack Obama, thanking him for signing the Affordable Care Act into law, because she says it saved her life. In May 2013, Muhammad was diagnosed with a brain tumor. But she and her husband, both self-employed, didn't have health insurance, and Muhammad said they could not afford the procedure. Last year, the mother of two signed up for coverage through the Affordable Care Act. Five months ago, doctors removed 99 percent of the tumor from her brain. Grateful, she wrote to the President to thank him and share her story, but she never expected a response. "I got a call, and I was told he did read the letter, and I was like, 'Really? He reads those letters?' And he said he wanted to put me as one of the 'Faces of Health Care,'" Muhammad told Channel 9. Muhammad's story is featured on the White House blog called "The Faces of Health Care," but the President's staff went a step further. "I thought that was the end of it," Muhammad said. "I had my letter from him. I was on the Faces of Health Care Page so to get this invitation was beyond anything I expected." An invitation to be a part of history, sitting in as the President delivers the State of the Union address from Washington. Muhammad knows the Affordable Care Act is controversial. Republicans have vowed to repeal Obama's health care law. Muhammad says she wants no part in the debate. "Everyone has their opinions about it, which they're definitely entitled to," Muhammad said. "It benefitted me, and that is what I'm concerned with." For now, she's just excited, and a bit nervous, for Tuesday night. "I'm hoping I don't pass out," Muhammad said when asked whether she'd be nervous, especially if the President points her out Tuesday night. "This is still pretty emotional for me. I don't know what will happen. Whatever will be will be natural and it will just be from the heart." Muhammad says five months after her surgery, she's still in recovery but getting better each day.