IRVING – After undergoing nearly 25 surgeries on his right leg, Army Capt. Matt Anderson will in a few months take on one more operation: amputation of his leg below the knee.

Anderson – who was injured in Afghanistan after stepping on a land mine – admitted that he still harbors some hesitation about that ultimate surgery. After all, he said, “you can’t really super glue that thing back on.”

But after participating this week in the George W. Bush Institute’s Warrior Open, a golf tournament for wounded veterans, Anderson said he was at peace with the decision. He said he couldn’t help but be amazed at what some of the competitors – amputees and otherwise – were able to do.

That included retired Army Cpl. Chad Pfeifer, who won his third straight Warrior Open on Saturday while using a prosthesis on his right leg.

“You see them still as high-end athletes, and it’s awesome,” said Anderson, 30, who currently wears a heavy brace on his leg. “That’s the thing that’s most comforting to me.”

The Warrior Open, held at Las Colinas Country Club, wrapped up Saturday in familiar fashion. Pfeifer, who hails from Goodyear, Ariz., cruised to victory at four over par for the tournament, nine strokes ahead of the field.

But he wasn’t the only winner.

Former President George W. Bush gave out a new award this year to the golfers who scored the most below their official handicap. Anderson, who finished second overall at 13 over, and retired Army Staff Sgt. Ben Dellinger, who shot 17 over, tied for the honor.

“You can’t always take down Chad,” said Anderson, who lives in Colorado Springs, Colo.

Bush said he was proud to “to honor some of our nation’s finest citizens.” And while the former president focused on the tournament’s competition, he nodded at the “noble cause” of the Bush Institute’s broader outreach to veterans.

“[It's] a cause that honors not only courage and sacrifice, but a cause which I hope calls citizens in America to always honor our vets and to help our vets,” he said.

The Bush Institute’s military service initiative is working on several research-based efforts to help veterans and military families.

There’s a pilot program – featuring input from businesses, academics and military leaders – to find ways to get veterans jobs. There’s a project to review all veterans-related research from the last five years and to predict what issues might arise in the next five years.

And there’s an ambitious effort to develop ways to measure the effectiveness of the many charities that support veterans.

Retired Army Col. Miguel Howe, director of the Bush Institute’s military service initiative, said he hopes to host an inaugural policy conference early next year. But until then, he said he and others are working to develop the “notion of community” around the nation’s veterans.

“This is not just a government problem or a veterans issue,” Howe said. “It’s a national responsibility.”