Children in California increasingly are flocking to emergency rooms for treatment of asthma, despite millions of dollars spent on programs to control the disease.

Statewide, the rates of ER visits for asthma symptoms rose by about 18 percent for California children ages 5 to 17 and by 6 percent for children under 5 between 2005 and 2012, according to a Kaiser Health News analysis of the latest available rates by county.

In Los Angeles County, ER visit rates rose by 17 percent for children 5 and older and by 8 percent for children under 5.

In some parts of the state, especially the Central Valley, the increases were far higher. The rate of emergency room visits for children 5 and older more than doubled in rural Madera County and nearly doubled in Merced.

All told, more than 72,000 California children under 18 visited the ER for asthma in 2012, nearly 21,000 of them from Los Angeles County.

“There’s clearly more work to be done if this many kids are going to the emergency department,” said Anne Kelsey Lamb, director of the Regional Asthma Management and Prevention program of the Oakland-based Public Health Institute. “We know a lot about what works. We absolutely should be able to reduce the rates we’re seeing.”

At the national level, asthma-related emergency room visit rates have declined in recent years, according to federal health data through 2010, the latest available.

Although ER visits declined in some counties, including Alameda, San Mateo and Marin, the overall rise in California has frustrated public health experts who have spent millions of dollars and countless hours to improve and expand asthma prevention programs around the state. The state and federal governments alone spend $1.54 million annually on such projects in California, including grants to schools to improve indoor air quality and training community health workers.

The reasons for the increase in ER visits are complex, experts say. They include parents not properly administering medications, poverty and inadequate insurance coverage, persistently high levels of indoor and outdoor pollution in some regions and the limited reach of programs that seek to manage symptoms or prevent them.

Loretta Worthington, coordinator of the Asthma Coalition of Los Angeles County and a staff analyst at the county’s department of public health, said she’s been surprised at some doctors’ lack of knowledge about controlling the disease.

Advertisement

“There’s a lot of training that still needs to be done,” Worthington said.

In the Central Valley, persistent poverty and outdoor air pollution levels combine to produce the highest rates of ER visits for childhood asthma in the state.

The good news is fewer kids in California are actually being admitted into hospitals. Overnight-or-longer stays are declining statewide and nationally. That’s due largely to better medicines and more aggressive treatment in the ER, asthma specialists say.

The rising rates don’t seem to reflect an actual increase in the respiratory disease — about 15 percent of California children have been diagnosed with asthma, a number that has remained fairly steady since 2001.

The rates of ER visits vary widely by county, from a high of 300 visits per 10,000 children under age 5 (Madera County) to a low of 32 (Sutter County) in 2012.

In Los Angeles County that year, there were about 78 visits per 10,000 children ages 5-17 and 121 visits per 10,000 children under age 5. Both rates exceeded the state average.

Younger children visit the ER at higher rates because they are more likely to have undiagnosed asthma and because their lung function is more difficult to measure, complicating the task of finding the right combination of medicines, Kelsey Lamb said.

Some families seek treatment in the ER for symptoms that easily could be dealt with in a clinic because they can’t get a timely doctor’s appointment or don’t have a regular doctor — especially those without health insurance. Sometimes, a bad cold and flu season can aggravate asthma that is usually well-controlled.

Affected children often live in homes with dust, mold or pets, which trigger asthma symptoms.

They may need two inhalers — one for school and one for home — but insurance sometimes only pays for one.

Across California, local and regional asthma programs aim to educate families and doctors to help keep kids out of the hospital. In counties including Los Angeles, San Bernardino and Orange, medically equipped vans called “Breathmobiles” provide comprehensive care in community settings and ensure children don’t end up repeatedly in the ER.

Though often effective, these programs are expensive and can’t serve enough children to make a real difference statewide, said John Capitman, a Cal State Fresno public health professor and executive director of the Central Valley Health Policy Institute. And health outreach workers have found it difficult to get reimbursed by insurers, including Medi-Cal, for proven strategies including home visits to minimize risks, Capitman said.

Worthington of Los Angeles County said health workers are focusing on the Antelope Valley, which has the county’s highest prevalence of asthma diagnoses.

They train local primary care doctors on use of the latest medications and the national asthma management protocols. They also inform physicians about some pervasive but mistaken cultural beliefs, including the one that sleeping with a Chihuahua can help control asthma symptoms.

In the Harbor Area, community health workers run weekly asthma classes for parents in Long Beach, Wilmington and San Pedro, where asthma has been prevalent in part because of pollution from the Ports of Long Beach and Los Angeles. Hundreds of local physicians also have been trained on use of the latest medications and national asthma management protocols, said pediatrician Elisa Nicholas, CEO of the Children’s Clinic and founder of the Long Beach Alliance for Children with Asthma.

Nicholas noted that ER visits and hospitalizations have declined in her area because of these and other asthma control activities, and in part because of declining pollution levels at the ports and nearby freeways.

“In 1999, we knew that asthma was the most preventable admission to the hospital,” Nicholas said, referring to the year her organization was founded. “We’ve put so much effort into reducing that. I’m hoping we can sustain the effort.”

Because the emergency visit data don’t extend beyond 2012, it remains unclear how expanded coverage offered since last year under the Affordable Care Act and California’s Medicaid program will affect emergency room visits.

Asthma care for kids has improved markedly in recent years, in part because of the wider use of steroid inhalers. But some families simply don’t know how to manage their child’s condition or when to seek medical care, said Dr. Rami Keisari, medical director of the Pediatric Asthma Disease Management Program at the county-run Santa Clara Valley Medical Center in San Jose.

“One of the biggest challenges we have is getting parents to use the medications every day,” Keisari said.

Heidi de Marco contributed reporting.

barbarafederostrov@gmail.com

Kaiser Health News is an editorially independent program of the Kaiser Family Foundation.