Republican presidential candidate George Pataki took his own party to task on Monday for what he said was their “hypocrisy” for supporting Kim Davis as they criticize President Obama for allegedly flouting the law.

The former New York governor expressed his views in an op-ed for the Concord Political Monitor, a newspaper in the early primary state of New Hampshire.

“As Americans, we should be able to engage in our religious beliefs the way we see fit, and I applaud those who stand up for our religious freedoms and rights,” Pataki writes. “But there is a place where religious beliefs supersede the rule of law; it’s called Iran.”

An opponent of same-sex marriage, Pataki in a recent interview with the Washington Blade said he disagrees with the Supreme Court ruling in favor of same-sex marriage, but accepts “the fact that the court has ruled and that is the law of the land.”

In his op-ed, Pataki draws attention to GOP candidates who accuse Obama of defying the law on immigration and Obamacare, but say they would disregard the ruling of the Supreme Court.

“What’s most troubling is the hypocrisy of the presidential candidates who, on the one hand, criticize the president for his complete disregard of the law and the government process and on the other say they would do the same exact thing,” Pataki said. “I posed a question to an opponent of mine: ‘We’re going to have a president who defies the Supreme Court because they don’t agree?’ The response: ‘I hope so. If they’re wrong.’ Several others in the field have echoed this sentiment.”

Davis has gained nationwide attention for ignoring the Supreme Court’s ruling on marriage and was hailed as a hero during the Values Voter Summit in D.C. hosted by the anti-LGBT Family Research Council. After Davis was released from prison after being found in contempt of court, Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) went to Kentucky to show solidarity with the Kentucky clerk.

Taking note of candidates who have compared Davis to Martin Luther King, Jr., Pataki wrote that such thinking is “wrong and dangerous.”

“His actions were not about denying others existing rights but rather about giving new rights he thought equality demanded,” Pataki writes. “Because of his courage, we didn’t ignore the laws. We changed the laws and made America a better place. That’s the way to change the law in a nation that respects the rule of law.”

Gregory Angelo, executive director of Log Cabin Republicans, commended Pataki for speaking out against Davis and said it should play well for him in the election.

“Arguments don’t get more to the point or conservative than that,” Angelo said. “While other GOP presidential candidates have expressed similar views, Mr. Pataki clearly sees this issue as a potential key differentiator in this crowded Republican field. He also knows that Republicans are receptive to this message — especially in New Hampshire.”

Pataki is among the candidates at the bottom of the pack seeking the Republican nomination for the White House. A recent Morning Consult poll found he had support of 1 percent of Republican voters in the primary.