Mayor de Blasio doesn’t have many nice things to say about anyone in a new magazine interview — except himself.

De Blasio, in a seven-and-half-page spread in Rolling Stone, sniffs that Rudy Giuliani was really only good at “selling himself” and claims his predecessor Michael Bloomberg — who is frequently praised for being independent-minded — was actually in the pocket of his rich friends.

The mayor even raps President Obama for not focusing enough on a “progressive” vision.

“I very much appreciated the last State of the Union, which was a very powerful road map for addressing these issues,” said de Blasio, who like Obama is a Democrat.

“But I certainly believe there should've been a focus on economics much earlier.”

In a Rolling Stone interview, Mayor de Blasio criticized former Mayor Michael Bloomberg for favoring the rich. (Jennifer Mitchell/for New York Daily News)

De Blasio praised Obamacare for having “tangibly addressed the income-inequality crisis” but added, “Where I would be critical is that the progressive economic vision that I adhere to was not front and center in President Obama's vision.”

He added, “Though, by the way, let's be fair — he didn't promise it."

As for his own record, the mayor apparently thinks non-New Yorkers have the best grasp of his achievements.

"A lot of people outside New York City understand what happened in the first year of New York City better than people in New York City," he told Rolling Stone.

Mayor de Blasio had some criticisms of President Obama’s economic vision. (KEVIN LAMARQUE/REUTERS)

"But I'm convinced something very special happened here."

In his view, his style of governance is far superior to ex-Mayor Giuliani’s.

Asked about Giuliani’s successes, de Blasio - whose old boss David Dinkins left City Hall after one term because he lost to the Republican — indicated he wasn’t impressed.

“Do you give him credit for figuring out a way to get more credit than he deserves? Sure, if that's credit,” he sniffed.

Mayor Elect Bill De BLasio met with Mayor Michael Bloomberg at City Hall shortly after de Blasio’s election. (Mark Bonifacio/New York Daily News)

But his way is better, he said.

“We've proven not only was my model more electorally popular than his - by a lot - but that you can manage this place much more effectively if you're not in fact creating division through the process,” he said.

De Blasio also thinks there was a “hype” around Bloomberg that pegged him as above the damning influence of money because he was a billionaire.

“This theory that he traveled in no world in particular - even just the social dynamic of the people he hung around with all the time meant that it didn't matter if they gave him money or not. They were still hugely influential to him,” he said.

He said Bloomberg had “a clear free-market worldview,” as shown by the then-mayor’s reaction in March 2012 when a former trader wrote an op-ed attacking the investment bank Goldman Sachs.

“I mean, for God’s sake, when there was a critical op-ed in The New York Times about Goldman Sachs, he went to Goldman and gave a pep talk to the employees!” said de Blasio. “When a struggling school was having troubles in East New York, he didn’t go there and give a pep talk.”