PHILADELPHIA — Politics was never in the plan for Megan Rath until the 34-year-old answered a call on her typically quiet land line two years ago.

It was a cold call from the Philadelphia Republican Party seeking someone to serve as the minority inspector of elections in her Fairmount precinct. She agreed to do it.

Now, Rath is running for Congress, taking on longtime U.S. Rep. Robert Brady, D-1, of Philadelphia.

“It’s so random,” Rath said last month. “This wasn’t my dream job. This wasn’t on the bucket list, but now it is.”

Advertisement

Aside from her role as the minority inspector of elections, Rath does not have a history in politics.

She serves as a sales consultant for Biomet, which manufactures medical devices. The job requires her to spend a couple days each week in the operating room, where she recommends various medical devices to some of the area’s leading surgeons.

A Connecticut native, Rath earned an economics degree at Penn State University. Following graduation, Rath worked in a management position for Pepsi before moving to Philadelphia 10 years ago.

Rath said she decided to run, in part, due to feeling frustrated by the use of federal tax dollars. She noted that more than half of the district’s residents make less than $50,000 and that the district’s unemployment rate of 15.4 percent is more than double national rate.

“My question to Brady is what have you really done to help people?” Rath said.

Brady acknowledged the substantial amount of poor residents living within the district, but said he has consistently tried to better their lives.

“We’ve been working on it, doing everything we can do,” Brady said.

Brady said he has pushed for extended unemployment benefits and an increase in the federal minimum wage. He noted his support of the Affordable Care Act and pointed to funding he brought back for fire and police departments.

Brady also noted he had a large role in saving the refineries in Philadelphia and Marcus Hook.

“I did that without any publicity,” Brady said. “I kept it quiet until we made the announcement. I had to work tirelessly behind the scenes to get that done.”

Rath seeks to reform the health care system, saying the individual mandates created by the ACA are hurtful to small businesses and caused many to lose their health coverage.

She said endlessly pouring money into public education may not be the best solution to improving failing public schools. Instead, she supports both charter schools and school vouchers.

Yet, Rath does not embody the stereotypical establishment Republican.

She seeks to improve the Philadelphia region’s energy efficiency, saying it is critical to the region’s future.

Rath also wants to amend — not repeal — the ACA, saying the medical device tax needs to go. She supports an annual increase to the minimum wage, arguing a yearly index is the fairest way to prepare businesses and assist workers. She is pro-choice, though she personally opposes abortion.

Also, in a party that is viewed by detractors as being too old, white and male, Rath is an urban Millennial woman who supports Congressional term limits.

“The idea is go in, have an impact, and leave,” Rath said.

Rath recognizes the difficulties in unseating Brady, who not only is among the city’s most prominent Democrats, but also serves a district that heavily leans Democratic.

Brady, a nine-term incumbent, had $695,640 in his campaign coffers at the conclusion of the first quarter.

Rath, who declared her candidacy late, did not report any campaign contributions during the first quarter. Joseph McColgan, Rath’s campaign manager, insisted she will be well-funded.

“We will have enough money to be competitive,” said McColgan, who unsuccessfully ran for City Council in 2011. “There’s no doubt about that.”

Rath has been the underdog in the past. As a walk-on to the Penn State lacrosse team, she said gaining the courage to rise to a challenge is the hardest part.

When walking to her first lacrosse practice, Rath recalled, she nearly turned back to her dorm room out of fear.

“The idea is you’ve got to keep walking — you’ve got to make it to the field,” Rath said. “Once you get to the field, you give it what you’ve got. How much different would my life had turned out if I had not walked to the field?”