Whereas some of this campaign’s presidential candidates have nuanced approaches to policy, Ted Cruz does not. He is a small-government, far-right Republican, through and through.

On abortion, Cruz thinks companies should deny insurance of birth control, and is opposed to church-provided birth control. He is against public funding for abortion, and is anti-choice in general.

Cruz has rivaled opponent Donald Trump on how ardently one can oppose illegal immigration, saying, “As President, I will stop illegal immigration, build a wall that works, triple border security and put in place the surveillance and biometric tracking to secure the border.” For Cruz, there would be no path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, as well as an increased level of punishment for those immigrants who try to reenter the country (up to five years in prison).

An NRA darling, Ted Cruz is anti-gun control, saying, “You don’t get rid of the bad guys by getting rid of our guns. You get rid of the bad guys by using our guns.”

In terms of economic policy, Cruz has made a name for himself in the Tea Party by vigorously attacking government spending. His campaign is predicated on the elimination of five government agencies, these being Internal Revenue Services, Department of Education, Department of Energy, Department of Commerce and Department of Housing and Urban Development, according to the candidate’s official website. Furthermore, Cruz is of the opinion that corporations should be able to conduct business without government oversight.

The Affordable Care Act is public policy enemy number one for Cruz, who, in 2013, aided in shutting down the government over the law.

Cruz supports the existence of the death penalty.

For foreign policy, Cruz is a notable hawk, vowing to “carpet bomb” ISIS in a debate. He has promised, if elected, to “stand unapologetically with the nation of Israel.”

Climate change is a conspiracy to Cruz, who has said that it’s manufactured by politicians in order to constrain American businesses.

Since his days running for office in Texas, Cruz has been vocal about his aversion to same-sex marriage, which he believes should be decided by state law. Cruz hammered Dallas Mayor Tom Leppert in 2012 for marching in a Dallas gay pride parade.

Cruz voted no to the Violence Against Women Act because it provided extra protection to gays, lesbians, Native Americans and immigrants.

A proponent of voter ID laws, Cruz thinks they will curb voter fraud. He is strongly against affirmative action, speaking from the perspective of a “Hispanic man” and saying that people will think minorities got to where they are because of such laws.

According to Inside Higher Ed, “Cruz has not formally outlined any specific policy proposals relating to higher education.” Acknowledging his own personal college debt that he just recently paid off in his campaign’s opening salvo at Liberty University, he also said that if the economy improves, so will the cost of college education.

“Economic growth is critical to young people, because if we want this generation to be able to pay off their loans and develop the skills to live the American dream, we’ve got to return to an environment where small businesses are growing and flourishing, and creating jobs and opportunities,” Cruz said.

After winning the Iowa caucus, Cruz came in third in the New Hampshire primary, the Nevada caucus and the South Carolina primary, behind John Kasich and Marco Rubio twice, respectively.