Buy Photo Sen. Rand Paul speaks at Matt Bevin rally in Frankfort. (Photo: Joseph Gerth/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

FRANKFORT, Ky. – Calling it a “minor thing,” U.S. Sen. Rand Paul said on Saturday it doesn’t matter that Matt Bevin doesn’t support his presidential campaign.

Paul dismissed concern about Bevin’s support of Ben Carson following a rally in Frankfort in which he endorsed Bevin for governor and called on Republicans to elect the entire GOP slate next month.

“In the last presidential poll in Kentucky, I was leading with 20 percent of the vote, which means that 80 percent of the vote or 80 percent of the people aren’t supporting me for president,” Paul said in an impromptu press conference. “But does that mean I don’t think they support me as their U.S. senator or don’t support me personally? No.

“... We all have differing opinions on who we will vote for or who we support and If you can’t take that, you might as well not run for office,” Paul said.

Bevin, who was standing next to Paul during the press conference said nothing then, but he did say during the campaign rally in the basement of the Baptist Campus Ministry building at Kentucky State University that he believes Paul would make an “extraordinary president of the United States.”

The Republican gubernatorial nominee raised eyebrows on Wednesday during a debate on Kentucky Sports Radio when he said that he supports South Carolina neurosurgeon Ben Carson as president because "He's not taking shots at people. He's intelligent. He's articulate. He's respected."

When asked specifically about Paul, Bevin said, "I think the world of Rand. He's a friend of mine. He's been very gracious to me ... But in terms of who I would select right now for the next president, he would not be the first choice that I would make.”

At the campaign rally Saturday in which about 55 or 60 people — excluding campaign and Senate staff, children and members of the media — attended, he tried to defuse the situation early before launching into his stump speech.

“We have a choice, we can go one of two ways. Here in Kentucky, in this election, we can either do it the right way or we can do it the Conway,” he said, a reference to Attorney General Jack Conway, who is the Democratic nominee for governor.

He told the crowd that passage of legislation that would allow people to work in union shops without paying union dues or representation fees, anti-abortion legislation, or legislation that would limit medical malpractice claims, depends upon his election.

“If we are to shrink the size of state government, make it more efficient and streamlined … then we must win this race,” he said. “There is a very distinct difference between our campaign and that of our opponents."

Also speaking at the event were treasurer candidate Allison Ball, secretary of state candidate Steve Knipper and U.S. Rep. Andy Barr, of Lexington.

Following the event, Paul said his campaign is not floundering and promised to stay in “through the primaries.”

Some have called on Paul to drop out of the presidential race and focus on re-election to the U.S. Senate following moribund fundraising that grossed him only $2.5 million in the last quarter and stagnant poll numbers that have him mired near the cellar of Republican candidates.

In national polls released over the last week and a half, Paul gets between 1 and 3 percent in all of them.

But Paul said of those who have written they should get out and focus on his Senate re-election, “Who would say such a thing? Rebuke them, rebuke them. They don’t know anything about politics, they’re all writing for a living.

“We are doing very well. Yesterday we announced that have a chair in each of the counties in Iowa … We’re the only race to do that,” he said. “We have a lot of good things going on. The polls haven’t all been good, I admit that.”

Paul added that he expects to be on stage for the upcoming CNBC debate. Currently, he will make the stage for the main event by just 0.25 percentage points, with a few polls yet to report.

"It’s always important to be part of the debate, but we think we will be,” he said.

Joseph Gerth can be reached at (502) 582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com. Follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1LahphU