PR Web

San Diego, CA (PRWEB) September 09, 2014

American Specialty Health (ASH), in collaboration with Cigna , is pleased to announce the launch of ASH's Physical Therapy and Occupational Therapy ("PT/OT") Network in Texas effective today. The ASH PT/OT Network for Cigna in Texas comprises more than 600 PT /OT practitioners and is 80% larger than Cigna's prior network, offering improved access and greater convenience for Cigna customers.

"More and more Americans are choosing specialty health services, such as physical and occupational therapy, to augment their traditional health services," said ASH Chairman and CEO George DeVries . "By providing a broad network with uniform clinical and administrative practices, we are able to meaningfully support our health plan client objectives to achieve the goals of bending the cost curve while also ensuring high quality accountable care to patients. We are pleased to be expanding our programs for Cigna who has been a client for more than 20 years."

"We've had a longstanding relationship with ASH, which has delivered valuable specialty services to our customers," said Dr. Jordan Ginsburg , regional medical executive for Cigna's Southeast region. "The new ASH PT/OT Network now available in Texas will provide our customers with significant increased choice and access to quality affordable care."

ASH contracts with more than 130 health plans nationally, administers programs for over 30 million members and contracts with more than 32,000 health care practitioners and service providers. According to patient surveys, 97 percent of patients reported that they were satisfied with the skill, competency and quality of services provided by ASH-contracted practitioners.

About Cigna

Cigna Corporation (NYSE: CI) is a global health service company dedicated to helping people improve their health, well-being and sense of security. All products and services are provided exclusively by or through operating subsidiaries of Cigna Corporation , including Connecticut General Life Insurance Company , Cigna Health and Life Insurance Company , Life Insurance Company of North America and Cigna Life Insurance Company of New York . Such products and services include an integrated suite of health services, such as medical, dental, behavioral health, pharmacy, vision, supplemental benefits, and other related products including group life, accident and disability insurance. Cigna maintains sales capability in 30 countries and jurisdictions, and has approximately 85 million customer relationships throughout the world. To learn more about Cigna®, including links to follow us on Facebook or Twitter, visit http://www.cigna.com.

About American Specialty Health

American Specialty Health Incorporated (ASH) is one of the nation's premier independent and privately-owned specialty health services organizations, providing specialty health care networks and programs, fitness and exercise programs and population health solutions for health plans, insurance carriers and employer groups. Operating from offices in San Diego, Calif. , Southlake ( Dallas ), Texas , Carmel ( Indianapolis ), Ind., and Columbia, S.C. , ASH has more than 1,200 employees and administers services for nearly 34 million members nationwide. Additional products offered through ASH and its subsidiaries include Healthyroads®, FitnessCoach™, Active&Fit®, ExerciseRewardsTM and others. For more information about ASH, visit http://www.ashcompanies.com or call 800-848-3555. Follow us on LinkedIn or Twitter at @ASHCompanies.

Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/2014/09/prweb12150282.htm