Fecal transplants are becoming the treatment of choice for many patients suffering with recurring C. diff infections.

IU Health gastroenterologist Dr. Monika Fischer is one of the leading providers of fecal transplants in the nation. (Photo: Kelly Wilkinson/The Star)

This is a story about how medical advances do not always require years in a lab, flashy technological breakthroughs or deliberate clinical trials. It's a story about how those with no medical background can embrace a new procedure long before physicians start offering it. It's a story about people with a debilitating illness who are willing to try anything.

A microbe discovered fairly recently has become increasingly prevalent, partly because of the widespread use of antibiotics. It contributes to the deaths of more than 29,000 people a year and the misery of many thousands more.

But this story is about its cure, and a procedure promoted not by Big Pharma, but by a woman who works out of her home in Carmel.

This is also a story about human waste.

Now, of course, when it comes to published papers and medical conferences, doctors employ a fancier term: fecal microbiota transplant. The procedure, however, is anything but fancy.

It consists of taking stool from a healthy donor and inserting it into the gastrointestinal tract of a diseased person. In most cases, the recipient undergoes the transplant to cure a nasty bacterial infection that has shrugged off repeated rounds of powerful antibiotics.

Where those antibiotics fail, studies have shown, fecal transplants succeed, achieving a 90 percent higher cure rate for those suffering from recurring Clostridium difficile, or C. diff, infections.

Three years ago, when Catherine Duff's daughter found information about fecal transplant on the Internet, Duff, who was on her eighth C. diff infection in seven years, figured why not try it. Her gastroenterologist had told her that removing her colon was the only potential cure he could offer.

"I was so sick I would have done anything," said Duff, founder and president of the Fecal Transplant Foundation, based out of her Carmel home. "We didn't have any other options."

With the guidance of Catherine's gastroenterologist, the Duffs found instructions on the Internet. Catherine's husband, John, produced the sample, mixed it with saline and delivered an enema. Duff lay prone for four hours.

"By the time I got up … I felt 90 percent better," she said. "If I hadn't experienced it myself, I would not believe it."

The concept dates to fourth-century China, when "yellow soup" would be prescribed to cure stomach distress. In 1958, an American doctor performed what's thought to be the first human fecal transplants on a few patients, using it as an alternative to removing their colons.

Fecal transplants did not catch on, however. As recently as seven years ago, few gastroenterologists performed the procedure. Dr. Colleen Kelly, a Rhode Island leader in the field of fecal transplant, agreed to do her first one in 2008 after a young woman with C. diff repeatedly begged her to try.

"At the time, I wouldn't even call it cutting edge," said Kelly, a gastroenterologist with the Women's Medicine Collaborative in Providence. "It was like I was some sort of witch doctor. It was very fringe, very alternative, a little like pushing the envelope."

But it worked. The patient came for a follow-up visit, was fine, and Kelly never saw her again.

The deadly effects of C. diff

The history of C. diff, the bacterium, helps explain how stool, the treatment, catapulted into mainstream medical practice so rapidly. Although scientists discovered the bacteria in 1935, they did not realize until 1978 that it caused many cases of antibiotic-associated diarrhea.

Over the next three decades, the number of such cases soared, in part because of growing antibiotic resistance. By 2011, there were an estimated 453,000 cases of C. diff infection and about 29,300 deaths within 30 days of diagnosis, according to a recent article in the New England Journal of Medicine.

Normally we have trillions of bacteria in our guts, with good actors and bad actors such as C. diff. The good actors keep the bad actors' numbers low most days, even for the 3 to 5 percent of people colonized with C. diff.

A course of antibiotics for anything from a sinus infection to post-dental surgery can kill off the good bacteria and tip the balance in favor of the C. diff. People also can pick up C. diff infections in the community.

One round of antibiotics helps kill those bacteria about 75 to 85 percent of the time. Other patients have to go through more treatment — that still might not work. For these patients, fecal transplant, which delivers a blast of healthy bacteria from the donor's gut, is often the answer.

"Think about your good bacteria being like a healthy lawn. When your lawn is healthy, you may get a dandelion or two, but they can't take over," Kelly said. "But if you have something happen like a drought ... Doing a fecal transplant is like sodding a new lawn. You can lay down healthy bacteria."

Some unusual results reported

Some patients have reported some unusual side effects. Since her transplant, one woman told The Indianapolis Star, she lost her taste for foods she once loved, such as sweets and soda pop.

In another intriguing case, Kelly treated a woman with a transplant from the patient's teen daughter, who was overweight. Pre-transplant, the woman had been of normal size. In the months following her transplant, her weight ballooned despite her efforts to watch it.

No one knows whether such developments represent coincidence or have to do with changing the bacteria population in the patients' microbiomes.

Now, Kelly is working to start a national fecal transplant registry to help researchers track long-term efficacy and safety, and to understand better the side effects that fecal transplants might have beyond curing C. diff.

Finding donors not always easy

Finding a healthy donor can pose a challenge. When Nicholas Anno, 55, Attica, became ill and dropped 30 pounds, his wife, Rochelle, 47, would be the natural donor. But when she was tested, it turned out that symptoms she had chalked up to a recurring stomach virus were actually C. diff.

Both wound up having transplants last year from anonymous donors via colonoscopies at Indiana University Health, and both recovered rapidly.

Dr. Monika Fischer, the IU Health gastroenterologist who treated the couple, has performed the procedure on more than 220 patients since May 2012, making her one of the leading providers in the nation. She now does about 10 a week.

"Anybody who's healthy can cure another patient's C. diff. It's not like we need a special microbiota," she said.

Originally, doctors expected patients to find their own donors, which is not always an easy task.

Now, a company in Medford, Mass., has solved that problem. Founded in 2012, OpenBiome takes stool from extensively screened donors, freezes and prepares the material and sends samples to 208 hospitals. The company, the only one of its kind in the nation, has seen demand grow by about 15 to 20 percent each month, said Karl Yoder, OpenBiome's director of clinical outreach.

Once the company accepts a donor, it runs about $4,000 to $5,000 of tests, checking for hepatitis, HIV and many other infections. To keep healthy donors coming back, the company pays $40 per donation.

'Life was horrible, absolutely horrible'

All of this might never have happened had the Food and Drug Administration gone ahead with a plan two years ago to classify fecal transplants as an investigational new drug, which would have severely limited its use. And the FDA might well have gone through with that if not for Duff.

In May 2013, Duff traveled to Washington to attend an FDA hearing on the subject.

The only patient in the room, Duff asked to speak. The moderator said no, and she started to cry. He relented, and she launched into her story.

Duff, 59, had developed C. diff eight times in seven years. She attributes all but one of the attacks to antibiotics.

"Life was horrible, absolutely horrible," she said.

Duff, a grandmother of four with two on the way, lost her appetite and dipped to a size 4.

Three times, her daughters, who live out of town, were called to Indiana to say their final farewells.

"Besides being faced with the fact that I might die from the infection," Duff said, "I reached a point where I started wondering if that would be better because I basically had no quality of life."

A few months after Duff told her story, the FDA decided to allow doctors to continue to perform fecal transplants. Duff started the Fecal Transplant Foundation to raise awareness of the problem as well as money for research.

About 95 fecal transplant trials are underway, exploring its use to treat a variety of conditions, including colitis, obesity, autism and metabolic syndrome.

Meanwhile, the number of those who attribute the return of their lives to a fecal transplant continues to grow. Anno, for one, says there's never been an ick factor for him.

"It's totally natural," he said. "If I could have skipped all of the antibiotics, I would have gone straight to the fecal transplant."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1ynOmnj