MIRAMAR — A testy back-and-forth between Gov. Rick Scott and Democrat Charlie Crist kicked off the first of three debates with voters already casting ballots by mail and Election Day less than a month away.

Throughout the nearly one-hour debate, both candidates attempted to solidify narratives they have been developing for months. For Scott, it was casting Crist as a flip-flopper while Crist tried to align Scott with special interests.

Scott tried to make the case that Crist “never lifted a finger” as governor for things he now supports — an attempt to cast the Republican-turned-independent-turned-Democrat as inconsistent on policy issues.

“He voted against raising the minimum wage, he did not raise a finger to lift the minimum wage,” Scott said.

Scott opposes increasing the minimum wage, pointing to a federal study that says it would cost jobs.

Crist says, if elected, he would push for a higher state minimum wage and would sign an executive order increasing the minimum wage to $10.10 for companies with state contracts.

Crist criticized Scott for accepting millions of dollars in campaign contributions from insurance companies, some of whom supported Crist’s past campaigns.

“He actually signed a bill this year that says the Office of Insurance Regulation can’t regulate insurance. That makes no sense, well, only if you follow the money,” Crist said. “They have given him a lot of money for his campaign.”

The debate was held at the Miramar studios of NBC 6/Telemundo 51. It was broadcast at 7 p.m. in Spanish on Telemundo stations in the Tampa, Miami, and Orlando markets, and live online in English.

It is the first Spanish-language gubernatorial debate in state history.

Libertarian candidate Adrian Wyllie was denied a spot on the debate stage, which drew protests from a group of his sign-waving supporters outside the building.

Issues directly affecting the state’s Hispanics played a prominent role in the debate, including whether to give undocumented immigrants driver’s licenses. Scott says a 2012 federal directive already allows children brought to the U.S. illegally as children to get licenses, while Crist says he wants to legalize the practice for all undocumented immigrations.

The debate offered a forum for the candidates to define themselves.

Scott, as he did during the 2010 campaign, went back to the story of his rise from humble beginnings in a poor family to become a multimillionaire health care executive.

“They didn’t have a lot of money in the bank,” Scott said.

Crist has tried to portray himself as the more empathetic candidate while at the same time casting Scott as uncaring.

“I think the biggest distinction is you’ve got somebody who rattles off statistics versus somebody who really cares about people and what they’re challenges are,” Crist said.

On key issues, the first debate helped hammer home the distinction between the two. Some examples:

♦ Crist says Florida is “ground zero for climate change,” while Scott remains skeptical that global warming is occurring. When asked about the environment, he pointed to his administration’s record funding for the Everglades.

♦ Scott opposes a proposed constitutional amendment that would legalize medical marijuana, but signed legislation this spring legalizing a strain of marijuana that helps children with seizures. Crist supports the proposed amendment, which is bankrolled by attorney John Morgan. Crist works for Morgan’s law form.

♦ Crist supports expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, while Scott opposes it and points to reforms under his administration that helped reign in state-level costs.

The two candidates will square off two more times, with the next debate Oct. 15 at Broward College.

Matt.Dixon@naplesnews.com

(352) 233-0777