Tuesday may be a tough day for Democratic Rep. Tim Bishop.

Both House Republicans’ campaign arm and a outside GOP electoral group announced big spending on ads trashing the lawmaker - even as Democrats rolled out their first spot attakcing Bishop's opponent.

The spending shows that Bishop’s race against Republican State Sen. Lee Zeldin in New York’s an eastern Long Island congressional district is a top priority for the GOP. Bishop becomes the first House Democrat in the Northeast attacked in television ad paid for the National Republican Congressional Committee.

“He’s obviously a top target,” said a GOP campaign operative.

A Republican group, the American Action Network, announced Tuesday that it will drop a whopping $1.2 million in October on television and digital ads ripping Bishop. That’s the largest chunk of $8 million that organization, run by former Minnesota Sen. Norm Coleman, said it is spending in nine House races.

A person familiar with the plan said the group will run spots that hit Bishop on his support for Affordable Care Act and an incident that landed the lawmaker under investigation by the House Ethics Committee.

Bishop helped a New York hedge fund executive secure a permit for a fireworks display to celebrate his son’s Bar Mitzvah, then hit he man up for a campaign contribution within days.

“After helping a constituent obtain government permits, Bishop pressed him for 10 grand,” a narrator says in the spot. “Bishop got the cash. And in secret emails revealed by investigators, he bragged “just call me the mail man.”

The ad is running from Sep. 9-Sep. 15 in a sizable, $231,000 buy, a NRCC spokesman said.

By law, the NRCC and AAN cannot coordinate their advertising strategies. Both said the dual announcements Tuesday are coincidental.

Republicans say polling in the district shows Bishop is vulnerable to ads focused on the ethics issue.

The AAN spending is helping Republicans fight back against a big fundraising advantage by the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. The DCCC has outraised the NRCC by $27 million this election cycle.