Photo

To the Editor:

Re “A Bad Year for Reproductive Rights” (editorial, Dec. 20):

As a nurse practitioner, I can speak knowledgeably about the so-called risks of abortion — and the fabricated need to save women from harm by imposing TRAP (targeted regulation of abortion providers) laws.

Legal abortion is among the safest medical procedures in the United States. Abortions, by nature, are performed on young women, a population that is generally healthy. Colonoscopies, by contrast, are typically performed on older people who are more likely to have other health problems, which can cause complications during the procedure. Yet nobody is calling for TRAP-like laws for colonoscopies. I am not either; just making a point.

TRAP laws are not intended to protect women. Indeed, as your editorial points out, women who don’t have access to legal abortions may attempt to induce their own abortions, which is very risky.

Even the Southern Baptist Convention understood the need for women to have access to safe abortions when, in 1971 (before Roe v. Wade was decided), it called upon “Southern Baptists to work for legislation that will allow the possibility of abortion under such conditions as rape, incest, clear evidence of severe fetal deformity, and carefully ascertained evidence of the likelihood of damage to the emotional, mental, and physical health of the mother.” Roe v. Wade was similarly decided to protect the health of women.

When politicians enact TRAP laws, they are disregarding these roots, and harming women in the process.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

CAROL ROYE

Ossining, N.Y.

The writer is a professor of nursing at Pace University and the author of “A Woman’s Right to Know: How Women’s Health Became a Political Pawn — and the Surprising Alliances Working to Reclaim It.”

To the Editor:

Perhaps if politicians stopped harping on abortion for two seconds, they’d realize what an essential medical resource Planned Parenthood has been for low-income women through the years.

During my starving artist days (no health insurance), Planned Parenthood allowed me to have regular gynecological exams on a sliding fee scale; it saved a friend’s life through early detection of a breast lump. My mother, who often scoffed at clinics, no doubt remembering the overcrowded facilities of her youth on the Lower East Side, swore by Planned Parenthood, whose counselors gave her excellent advice.

Even after obtaining health insurance, I continued to use Planned Parenthood, finding its medical and support staff more professional and compassionate than other health care providers I visited.

Where is the logic in cutting off medical services and contraceptive counseling in tandem with restricting abortion access while eliminating economic safety net services for low-income women trying to act responsibly? Do Republicans simply expect women to stop having sex? Or do they plan to dance on the graves of women living below a certain income level by denying their rights to affordable, quality health care?

JUDY CHICUREL

Brooklyn

To the Editor:

Once again your editorial board ignores the fact that the reproductive “right” of elective abortion involves the deliberate and direct annihilation of an innocent human life in utero.

The so-called constitutional right that permits the atrocity of elective abortion vitiates protections of life found in the Fifth and 14th Amendments to the Constitution.

Most compellingly, Supreme Court decisions permitting elective abortion amount to a court-sanctioned home invasion in the first home of the unborn human being, in the womb of the unborn child’s mother, a direct violation of the Fourth Amendment.

RICHARD H. ESCOBALES Jr.

Buffalo