CU men have won event 24 years in a row, while women have won 16

The Colorado cross country team could not have asked for better running conditions on Saturday morning.

The Buffaloes' could not have asked for a better performance, either.

CU's men's and women's teams both dominated at the 29th Annual Rocky Mountain Shootout at the Buffalo Ranch Cross Country Course.

"The team looked great, but the weather was great and the conditions are great, so I have to be a little careful about getting too excited," head coach Mark Wetmore said.

Nobody would blame Wetmore for getting excited, though, after the men's team had a perfect score of 15 to easily beat second-place Colorado Mines by 41 points and the women's team was nearly perfect, with 16 points. Colorado State was second, with 54.

Blake Theroux led the way for the men, who are the defending Division I national champions and current No. 1-ranked team in the country. Theroux won the meet for the second year in a row, finishing the 8K course in 24 minutes, 23.1 seconds — the third-fastest time in course history. Pierce Murphy (second, 24:24.4) and Ammar Moussa (third, 24:28.1) also posted all-time top-five times.

Counting Morgan Pearson, who ran unattached, the Buffs had seven runners break the 25-minute mark (also Ben Saarel, Jake Hurysz and Connor Winter). That had been done just 23 times in course history before Saturday.

Advertisement

"We expected to run well," Theroux said. "It was perfect conditions ... and we're really, really good, and I think we showed that today. I think if other teams look at these results, they're going to be scared. They should be scared, because this is really like a dream team for us and we're really pumped for the season. It's a good way to start it."

The 8th-ranked women's team had a stellar start, too.

Sophomore Erin Clark had a strong finish to win the individual title on the 5.8K course with a time of 20:19.6, the eighth-best time in course history.

"I wasn't really expecting to win," she said. "I just wanted to come out and feel good and run strong and not leave anything back.

"It's exciting and makes me feel really good about where things can go from here."

Carrie Verdon (third, 20:59.5), Annie Kelly (fourth, 21:10.1) and Maddie Alm (fifth, 21:16.6) all broke the 21:30 mark, with Jenny DeSouchet (seventh, 21:31.3) coming close.

"It was really exciting to have the whole team together for a race," Clark said. "Everyone looks awesome I think, so I'm excited for what we can do this season."

So is Wetmore. With eight weeks to go, he knows there's a lot of work to do, but he couldn't have been more pleased with Saturday's performance.

"I was watching to see how many men could break 25 (minutes)," he said. "I thought it would be maybe four, and it was seven. Then I was hoping for a pretty good block of the women to run under 21:30 and they did that.

"It's what I was hoping for and a little bit more."

Notable

Kristen Arendt, running unattached, finished second, in 20:41.8. ... The CU men have won the Rocky Mountain Shootout title 24 years in a row, while the women have won 16 in a row.

Contact BuffZone.com Writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.