Topics: amazon, Apple, Books, Editor's Picks, email, Facebook, Internet Culture, Louis CK, Michael Harris, Neil Postman, Richard Dawkins, The End of Absence, Technology News

When author Michael Harris was an editor, his mind was shooting around like a jumped-up pinball in a digital arcade game, going from one exaggerated crisis to another. In the middle of the swirling chaos, an unanswered text message led a friend to speculate that he must be dead. He felt like he might be. His life was missing something essential — flow, lack, absence. He quit his job. He also realized that he was one of a dying breed, a person immersed in digital technology who remembered a time before email and smartphones. He wrote a book to examine what we were losing.

In “The End of Absence: Reclaiming What We’ve Lost in a World of Constant Connection,” Harris considers what we’re giving up as we are perpetually buzzed by communication — namely: attention, personal memory, authenticity, genuine communication and time that’s truly free. In this philosophical journey, he contemplates what we might save before it’s too late.

Salon talked to him about after-hours email, the buzz of a retweet and the vision of Neil Postman.

You describe a personal revelation at the beginning of the book that inspired you to write this. Take us back to that moment you had and talk about why you thought this was important to write about.

Yeah, I was working as an editor at the city magazine [Vancouver magazine], and, like a lot of office workers, I was experiencing digital overload. So I had two monitors on my desk with dozens of windows open. I had my phone that was just constantly pinging at me. And I was living like this for years and had really lost any idea of, I guess, what the value of solitude or reverie really would be, except when you lose those things, you usually aren’t aware that you’ve lost them. I was manically in this state of digital distraction. And then I was having this sort of exhausted day once, and someone who had been trying to get to me through text message for about five minutes grew irate and sent me a text message saying, “Are you alive or what?” You meant it facetiously, but I actually read it literally in that moment, and I just sort of looked up and had this kind of, Oprah would call it an “aha! moment,” and I realized actually this isn’t my life; this isn’t what I want to do. I don’t want to stare at glowing rectangles. I want to be able to commit myself at least occasionally to going deep into things. So I ended up quitting my job. I dove into this project, and that’s about 18 months of work that became the book, “The End of Absence.”

A lot of people — when they hear people talk about their fears about technology and where we’re headed and what it’s doing to our sociology and what it’s doing to our lives, some people will respond, “It’s just a tool. I don’t understand what’s the problem.” That feeling that like, “We’re in control. The computer’s not in control, so why are you freaking out about this stuff?”

A couple of people while I was working on the book have called me a Luddite, but I think people who use that word “Luddite” actually don’t know what a Luddite is, because if you look at what the Luddites really were historically, they weren’t so much anti-technology as they were pro-human. They were actually fighting for workers’ rights at an age when mechanical tools were being used by a manufacturing elite to really trample human rights. So I feel like I am in the Luddite position in that truer sense, because it isn’t about technology good or technology bad, and I would never take that stance. It’s just technology is a dangerous, beautiful tool that we have; you’re right. And we need to become intelligent about the way that we use those tools. I think that we’ve gone through this very giddy ride of absorbing new communication technologies, and what we’re hitting now is a point where we have to start becoming intelligent about our media diets in the same way that we had to become intelligent about our food diets after we got a super abundance of sugar and fats at our disposal.

That sounds really helpful and hopeful. I mean, I think that a lot of people out there who would just say, “You know, it’s too late. We’re too far gone.” I think that at the workplace, it’s just so expected that we’re going to be on all the time. How can we convince the supervisors of the people we work with that that’s not always the best thing?

Well, I mean I did write about that recently. You know, there was something that came out of France recently; maybe you read about it. There was this false news story that France was outlawing email after 6 p.m. It was completely false, but it became a sort of myth that was bouncing around the Internet. Oh, the lazy French are refusing to answer email after 6 p.m. from work. But I think like a lot of myths, that myth about the French told us something about ourselves.

And there was a Gallup poll released just a month or two ago showing that most American workers believe that answering emails after work is a positive thing. They actually like that, because they believe that they’re becoming free to work where and whenever they like. However, we have to ask, ultimately, are you actually getting more free time? And we don’t seem to be actually getting more free time. We seem to just have higher rates of insomnia and higher rates of screen time. I mean, the average amount of screen time right now for teenagers is six to eight hours a day. They’re basically online as much as they are offline. When you add the eight hours of sleep in there. So yes, we’ve arrived at a sort of, at a state of perma-readiness. And what that means is we’re constantly being ushered away from any moments of solitude or absence that we might have, and I think that’s very dangerous, because it’s those moments of solitude where we do our best thinking. So we might, I think we’re working very hard by responding to a thousand little emails every day, but our managers should really ask themselves whether that’s good work that’s being done or whether it’s just a lot of work that’s being done.

Good point. You talk a lot about this being our Gutenberg moment, and that we’ve had big, sweeping technological changes before when the printing press came in, and this is just one of them. And people say, “Don’t panic.” This is just another transition period. But how is this rapid technological transformation different than others?

It’s different, because this is a moment and not a slowly booming era. In Gutenberg’s day, in 1450, the printing press comes out, but most people aren’t actually literate until the 19th century. So you actually have hundreds of years of slow change. It takes centuries before the printing press’s real power is unveiled. Whereas the amount of massive change happening today takes place in a single generation. So instead of a Gutenberg era or a Gutenberg shift, we have this Gutenberg moment, is what I called it in the book. And in a way, that’s frightening, but in another way, it’s actually hopeful, because it means you actually have people living on both sides of the moment at the same time. So I think anybody born before 1985 can remember being an adult in a pre-Internet world. So we have this great chance to actually talk with people who are younger about the world that was before. It doesn’t mean that that world was better than their world. In a lot of ways, digital natives may have an exciting, fantastic new experience that we can’t, that older people can’t comprehend. But the exciting thing for me is the fact that we could actually have a conversation between those two generations and that we had such massively different experiences.

One thing that I notice when I talk to other educators in general, teachers and other librarians, is the sense that when it comes to technology, the kids will lead us. There’s the sense that, “Well, they already know how to do this stuff, so they can teach us.”

They don’t need any help using the Internet. I think they need help seeing themselves use the Internet, which is why I think we need media studies programs not just in a few universities but in high schools and elementary schools too. I think we’re totally failing right now, actually, at bringing critical studies in communication and technology into younger levels of education.

That’s a good point. What do you think we should be teaching them?

Teaching children? You know, I wouldn’t be prescriptive about it myself; I’m not smart enough for that. I would just say in the same way that we have a language arts program that media arts or media studies should be built into that language arts program, and we definitely need to help children see their technological use in a historical perspective, to see that this is not the only way that the world works and that there are other goggles, other technology goggles that you can put on in front of your eyes. It really ends up being about creating intelligent media use instead of saying, “This is bad” or “This is good.”

And something that you talk about in the book, you have a section, you have a chapter on confession and go into a lot of detail about kind of horrific instances when children have gone online for some kind of [positive] validation, when they should know that that’s not going to happen [and what they get back is hostility]. Why do they seem so tech-literate but then also kind of naive, like they think they’re going to get something [good] back then they already know that people are mean out there.

It’s not only teenagers, of course, but teenagers do provide the biggest example, I guess. Everyone wants to be loved. Everyone wants to be approved. I mean, gosh, I went online and looked at my GoodReads rating this morning for the book. So we do have to be aware that these technologies create — or rather, they capitalize on our desire to be approved. We’ve created these giant approval matrixes, really. It’s no wonder that Facebook only lets you like things. It won’t let you dislike things. We love to judge each other by giving each other star ratings and thumbs ups or whatever. But we also, even more importantly, we’re all sort of these nervous children hoping we’ll become approved. Online technologies create a sort of algorithmic approval system and discourage us from creating an internal approval system and I think that’s one of the most insidious things that it does. It discourages us from thinking about our lives and our work from a position of solitude. It becomes a very, I guess, stereotypically adolescent frame of mind where you’re constantly hoping for the approval of others instead of finding it from your own heart or own sense of self.

Right. When you talk about the importance of being alone it sounds like one thing that we may lose is our ability to create our own moral compass to figure out what we think is valuable and right. We’re just looking for what other people think is valuable all the time.

And we end up giving them what we think will create a positive response instead of giving them what we actually believe or what we actually think. It sort of makes politicians of all of us, in a way.

Right. That’s so strange. I don’t know if you’ve seen the Louis C.K. diatribe on YouTube about cellphones …