The claim

CNN was wrong in its story about Sen. Harry Reid’s staff and the Affordable Care Act.

The background

A CNN story this month said, “Democratic Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, one of Obamacare’s architects and staunchest supporters, is also the only top congressional leader to exempt some of his staff from having to buy insurance through the law’s new exchanges.

“Reid is the exception among the other top congressional leaders. GOP House Speaker John Boehner, House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi and Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell have all directed their staffs to join the exchange, their aides said.”

The CNN story quoted Reid saying in September, “Let’s stop these really juvenile political games — the one dealing with health care for senators and House members and our staff. We are going to be part of exchanges, that’s what the law says and we’ll be part of that.”

CNN added, “That’s true. Reid and his personal staff will buy insurance through the exchange. But it’s also true that the law lets lawmakers decide if their committee and leadership staffers hold on to their federal employee insurance plans, an option Reid has exercised.”

Reid responded to a question about the story during an interview with the RGJ’s Ray Hagar: “What does top congressional leaders mean? Like me and McConnell? No, that is simply not true. Some of the people on my leadership team have done the same thing, following my lead. CNN is wrong.”

Reid also told Hagar, “All I did was follow the law. The law says that if you have committee staff, leadership staff, they stay where they are. If you have other staff, which is most everyone, they go to the exchanges.”

Interpretation of the law isn’t as definitive as Reid claims.

Here’s what the ACA says: “(T)he only health plans that the Federal Government may make available to Members of Congress and congressional staff with respect to their service as a Member of Congress or congressional staff shall be health plans that are created under this Act (or an amendment made by this Act); or offered through an Exchange established under this Act (or an amendment made by this Act).”

The law further defines congressional staff as “all full-time and part-time employees employed by the official office of a Member of Congress, whether in Washington, DC or outside of Washington, DC.”

It seems simple: the only health plans for congressional staff shall be ACA plans.

But this is Washington, where simple is elusive.

Now we’ve got to define what “official office” means in order to understand who counts as an employee of it.

In April 2010, the independent Congressional Research Service issued a memorandum that found “it appears possible to argue that the definition of ‘congressional staff’ used by (the law) excludes any staff not directly affiliated with a Member’s personal office.”

It goes on to say that this means committee staff and leadership staff can keep their federal health insurance plans.

This is what Reid is referring to when he says he’s following the law. However, he could’ve done the opposite, too.

The Congressional Research Service memo adds: “Alternatively, it may be argued that (the law) can be interpreted as encompassing more than a Member’s personal staff.”

Here’s where a short trip into the weeds is necessary.

The memo says there are two ways you can look at who is in charge of staff. If you consider who pays the staff to be their authority, then committee and leadership staff are not paid for by the members’ offices so they can be excluded from the exchanges.

But if you consider who hires and fires the staff to be their authority, then committee and leadership staff are indeed under the control of the individual member. With this interpretation, the memo says, “it appears possible that committee staff and leadership staff could be included among the staff covered by the provision.”

In other words, the memo says the law can be interpreted either way: some staffers can stick with their old plan, or they should use the ACA exchanges.

In August, the Office of Personnel Management — the federal government’s human resources department — clarified the matter by saying it was up to members of Congress to decide which way their offices would interpret the requirement.

They were given a tight window near the end of October to decide.

Boehner and the top four Republican leaders in the Senate put their entire staffs into the ACA exchanges.

Many Democrats also put all of their staffs into the exchanges, including Pelosi and Washington Sen. Patty Murray.

Some members of Congress went the opposite way and exempted some — or even all — of their staff, including Rep. Darrell Issa, R-Calif., and Sen. Tim Johnson, D.-S.D.

Of the six congressional members from Nevada, all required their entire staffs to participate in the ACA exchanges, except Reid, who exempted part of his staff, and Republican Rep. Mark Amodei, who allowed his entire staff to stay with their old plan and who signed up for a private plan outside the exchanges for himself.

So what does Reid say now? His spokeswoman, Kristen Orthman told Fact Checker that Reid’s definition of “congressional leader(s)” is more expansive than CNN’s.

CNN’s story considered the top four congressional leaders to be “top” whereas Orthman said Reid would go deeper. Among prominent senators who exempted some staff as Reid did are Republicans Charles Grassley of Iowa and Tom Coburn of Oklahoma, as well as Democrats Barbara Mikulski of Maryland and Chuck Schumer of New York.

The verdict

To be clear, Reid followed the law, a number of Republicans did the same thing Reid did and Reid did not exempt his entire staff, as some commenters have claimed.

Fact Checker is harder on prepared statements or repeated claims than on impromptu comments in a live setting. Reid said CNN was wrong in response to the first question out of the gate in his RGJ interview, which challenged him on a highly charged topic.

Such defensiveness is an understandable reaction so some slack should be cut. That said, Reid was wrong.

There is not a statement in CNN’s story that was incorrect, and it was a worthy news angle to look at how the top leader of each party in the House and Senate treated their staffs in relation to health care coverage — and to call out Reid as the exception.

Truth Meter: 3 (out of 10)