TRENTON — Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey rewarded 51 medical practices with $3 million in bonuses for keeping patients healthy while avoiding unnecessary tests and preventing hospital admissions, the state's largest health insurance company has announced.

In the post-Obamacare universe of health coverage, the strategy is known "value-pricing" and "bundling payments," and is based on an analysis of what quality care should cost per procedure. One day this will be how Medicare and private insurance companies pay doctors, hospitals and other medical providers, rather than the traditional and expensive "fee for service" payment model.

Horizon's experiment with 51 physicians' offices began in 2014 and pays the full reimbursement rate for 8,400 patients who underwent hip and knee replacements, knee arthroscopies, colonoscopies and pregnancies, said Lili Brillstein, the doctor of Horizon's episode of care program.

Then after an analysis of how patients fared and what their treatment cost, Horizon shared some of the savings with the doctors who better managed these "episodes of care" in late 2014 and 2015, Horizon officials said.

Horizon N.J.'s new insurance plan: What we know so far

Horizon, for example, rewarded OB/GYN practices that avoided performing medically unnecessary caesarean-section deliveries — a real problem in New Jersey, which has the highest c-section rate of about 40 percent, Brillstein noted. The World Health Organization recommends a c-section rate of no more than 15 percent because of the potential risks for mother and baby.

There was a 32 percent decline in c-sections across the participating medical practices, Horizon officials said. Hospital readmissions dropped 22 percent after knee replacement surgeries, 37 percent after hip replacement surgeries and 100 percent after knee arthroscopy, a type of surgery that uses a tiny camera.

The payment strategy requires doctors and insurance companies to set aside the traditional "put up your dukes" adversarial relationship and work together to develop a plan about quality care should look like and cost, she said.

"We have noticed a cost reduction and believe our quality has gone up," said Jack Feltz, president of Lifeline Medical Associates, an OB/GYN practice with 115 doctors across the state and a participant in Horizon's episode of care program. "Our medical liability claims are one of the lowest in the tri-state area. We must be doing something better."

Feltz, a board-certified OB/GYN, said the program challenges physicians to stop ordering tests that are not absolutely necessary and recommending prescriptions without looking for the cheapest alternative.

The program was a catalyst for a recent meeting with the Morristown-based hospital chain Atlantic Health to develop a consistent strategy on the best course of outpatient and inpatient treatment for pregnant women with hypertension, he said.

Consumers should feel confident that quality is still the most important goal, he added. Horizon requires doctors to meet quality standards in order to share in the savings.

"Patients should be delighted this whole program is occurring across the country. This is about rewarding physicians who have the best tools," he said.

Linda Schwimmer, president and CEO for the Heath Care Quality Institute of New Jersey, a research and consumer advocacy organization, described the "episode of care" payment model as one of a number of valuable tools that have emerged since the Affordable Care Act to help contain medical expenses.

There is more data available than ever before for insurance companies and medical professionals to determine what the best medical care looks like and what it should cost, she said.

"Surgeries and procedures are a pretty big component of the cost of health care and one piece of the puzzle is to reduce those costs," she said.

The federal government recently announced that beginning later this year, hip and knee replacement provided through Medicare would be paid using this model. "This one day will be the norm for many procedures," she said.

The approach in general has its limitations, Schwimmer said. "It does not address whether you should have the procedure to begin with," she said.

It's also a system that is "basically invisible to patients," she said. "There should be registries where information can be posted, such as, if a medical device is failing, or where are the best rehab centers, and based on data which hospitals are better for some procedures than others."

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.