If You Go What: Tax firm H&R Block is offering free advice about how the Affordable Care Act and new health insurance options may affect taxes. Where: H&R Block tax offices. • Santa Cruz: 724 Water St. and 1804 Mission St. • Scotts Valley: 237 Mount Hermon Road #B • Capitola: 1850 41st Ave. • Watsonville: 1842 Main St. When: 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. on Thursday. No appointments necessary.

SANTA CRUZ >> Many Americans might scratch their heads more than usual during this tougher tax season. It’s the first year the uninsured could face penalties under the Affordable Care Act.

All will need to take some action related to the health care law. It could be as easy as declaring whether or not a filer had health insurance in 2014.

However, many taxpayers may find the process much more complicated. To help, tax firm H&R Block Inc. is opening its offices Thursday and answering questions about the Affordable Care Act’s impact on taxes this season for free.

“It’s a big change. There’s no doubt about it. It’s the biggest change we’ve seen in two decades,” said Sue Ellen Smith, a tax specialist with H&R Block in San Francisco. “The Affordable Care Act made 46 changes to the tax code.”

The reform act requires most Americans to have had health insurance last year and gave help covering the cost for those who qualified.

Some may have to pay a levy for not being covered, so their refunds might be smaller than they thought.

Many believed that they would only have to pay a paltry penalty of $95, but that’s not true.

“The penalty is whichever is greater: 1 percent of your household income or $95 per person in your household,” Smith said.

And the penalties will increase year to year. Next year, the uninsured can expect to pay 2 percent of their income or $325 per person.

About half of the nearly 6.8 million of Americans who used subsidies to make the insurance more affordable may have to pay back some money, estimated H&R Block. The Advance Premium Tax Credit was based on expected earnings in 2014. Those who earned more would need to return part of the subsidy. Those who earned less may receive a larger refund.

This might surprise to about two out of three filers, according to an H&R Block survey in October. About the same number of respondents said that they did not know receiving the tax credit might change their refund when filing this year.

“This is all brand new. This is all uncharted territory,” Smith said. “There are new forms and possible reconciliations.”

From 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. Thursday, H&R Block’s tax preparers are giving free advice and handing out information sheets that spell out penalties and eligibilities for exemptions. No appointment is necessary.

Advertisement

If You Go

What: Tax firm H&R Block is offering free advice about how the Affordable Care Act and new health insurance options may affect taxes.

Where: H&R Block tax offices.

• Santa Cruz: 724 Water St. and 1804 Mission St.

• Scotts Valley: 237 Mount Hermon Road #B

• Capitola: 1850 41st Ave.

• Watsonville: 1842 Main St.

When: 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. on Thursday. No appointments necessary.