An activist speaks with pedestrians about preserving Medicare in Washington, D.C. Lawmakers are considering ways to reform Medicare and Medicaid amid their rising costs. Bill Clark/CQ Roll Call

It has been nearly half a century since President Lyndon B. Johnson signed Medicare and Medicaid into law, and while both continue to drive contentious debate among lawmakers, there is one point of agreement: The method of spending on these programs needs to change.

In a summit at Sidney Harman Hall in Washington, District of Columbia, former chiefs of government agencies responsible for the programs reflected on the law's passage and its future. The event was hosted by the LBJ Library, the Aspen Institute and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

[READ: U.S. Medicine Spending Hits Record High]

A major theme rippled through the discussions: As much as the programs have accomplished, their rising costs are concerning. President Barack Obama's health care law, the Affordable Care Act, aims to make changes to both programs, which together offer health care coverage to about 110 million Americans.

Much of the cause for rising costs is attributable to how health care providers are paid, speakers and panelists at the event said. The majority of systems are rewarded by the amount of services they provide, rather than whether those services result in better outcomes for patients.

Mary Wakefield, acting deputy secretary for the Department of Health and Human Services, said in a speech that the administration has aimed to address some of these issues. In late March, the White House announced an initiative for providers to exchange ideas about better reimbursement models for health care.

The agency has also touted that the quality of health care has improved under the Obamacare, contributing to 50,000 fewer patient deaths in hospitals due to avoidable harms, such as an infection or medication error, and 150,000 fewer preventable Medicare hospital readmissions. Wednesday the agency also released an analysis showing that between 2009 and 2013 Medicare spending was $316 billion lower than what it would have been if the average growth rate for 2000 to 2008 had continued.

When Medicare and Medicaid were created in 1965, half of Americans age 65 or older lacked hospital insurance and a third lived in poverty. Since then, the spending and the number of beneficiaries of these programs have grown dramatically.

The growth of Medicare, the government's program for seniors, can be attributed in part to the baby boomer generation. In 1963, 17.5 million Americans were 65 or older. By 2015, that number had skyrocketed to 55 million

Projections indicate that as many as 80 million people may be eligible for Medicare in 2030.

As Medicare enrollment numbers have climbed, the costs have as well. In 1967, the program's first full year of operations, Medicare spending was $4.6 billion; in 2014, it reached nearly $600 billion, or 14 percent of the federal budget.

Former Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius said that reforming health care starts with reforming Medicare. "It touches every doctor, every hospital, every provider group, every drug company, every medical device company," she said.

Some changes are already underway. Tuesday the Senate overwhelmingly approved a $200 billion "doc fix" bill to Medicare, just before a deadline kicked in that would have triggered deep payment cuts to doctors. Obama has promised to sign the bill.

Nancy-Ann Deparle, former administrator at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid under President Bill Clinton, said at the event that the increase in costs from Medicare have slowed in recent years. Part of this is attributable to a healthier generation aging into the program than its predecessors.

The government's health care program aimed at low-income Americans, Medicaid, also continues to grow. In 2014 it covered almost 70 million low-income Americans, making it the largest source of health insurance in the country. Two-thirds of costs cover the elderly and those with disabilities.

Just like Medicare, it experienced a sharp spending increase over the last few decades, from just under $1 billion in 1966, to $454 billion by 2013.

Medicaid plays a major role in Obamacare's aim to reduce the number of uninsured in the country. Under the law, states can expand Medicaid to cover adults who make less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level, which is $16,243 a year for an individual and $33,465 for a family of four.

[MORE: Diabetes Cases Surge in States That Expanded Medicaid Under Obamacare]

Twenty-two states, all led by Republicans who oppose Obamacare, have opted not to expand Medicaid, with many citing concerns about the cost.

Though the federal government picks up 100 percent of expansion through 2016, it gradually drops support to 90 percent by 2020. Medicaid already takes up the largest share of strained state budgets. At this time the federal government pays 57 percent, on average, of Medicaid costs, and states pick up the rest.

Deparle said she thinks that all states will eventually expand Medicaid, and will do so in less than 10 years. Gail Wilensky , former administrator at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services under President George H.W. Bush, agrees. "I assume they will have gotten over it one way or another," she said.

Michael Leavitt, a former governor of Utah who was the secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services under President George W. Bush, said other parts of state budgets have suffered because of Medicaid costs. He pointed to the correlation between environmental outcomes and public health, for which he says states cannot show as much investment because of Medicaid.