Western Wayne Family Health Centers staff members Nancy Montvaldo, Krytsten Lynch and Brittany Bellazer pose for a photo. Photo courtesy Western Wayne Family Health Centers

LINCOLN PARK — Western Wayne Family Health Centers opened its third center March 5 at 25650 W. Outer Drive at Lafayette.



The new health center joins other WWFHC sites in Inkster and Taylor to provide primary health care services to everyone — with or without health insurance.



The new facility will serve residents of River Rouge, Ecorse, Lincoln Park and southwest Detroit, as well as surrounding areas.



“Residents of the Downriver delta communities have long been in need of a community health center, and Western Wayne Family Health Centers is very excited to be able to connect families with a health care provider close to their home,” CEO Linda Atkins said. “Our primary care providers are ready to help area residents manage their health, prevent problems and stay out of the emergency room.”

WWFHC takes most insurance plans and provides assistance in signing up for coverage through the Healthcare Marketplace and the Medicaid and Healthy Michigan programs. The center applies a sliding fee scale for those who do not have insurance at this time, so the co-pay amount for an office visit is based on income.



“(The) cost to be seen at our centers is quite affordable as we believe anyone should be able to get high quality care regardless of their income,” Atkins said.



Community Health Centers are locally based, nonprofit organizations that receive federal funding under the National Health Center program and are located in areas that are considered medically underserved.



The opening of the center in Lincoln Park was made possible by funding through the Affordable Care Act and was awarded by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in November.



Services first offered by WWFHC at the Lincoln Park health center will be targeted to adults, offering medical and integrated behavioral health. Soon, other services such as obstetrics, gynecology, pediatrics and more will be added.



“We are a full-service medical home dedicated to improving the health of our neighbors in the Downriver area and we are here for everyone,” said Pete Bergeron, chairman of the WWFHC board. “It doesn’t matter if you have health insurance or not. We are here to help you and your family and happy to offer health care close to home for more residents of out-Wayne County.” Continued...