An Indiana man has been allegedly accused of eating his murder victim’s internal organs. Joseph Oberhansley, age 33, who had been formerly sentenced to murdering a girlfriend made an appearance in Jeffersonville court on Monday. The suspect was charged on Monday afternoon in association with the murder of Tammy Jo Blanton, age 46.

In an affidavit while was filed by the court, Oberhansley allegedly confessed to Indiana law enforcement that he had broken into Blanton’s house and stabbed her various times, thus killing her. The supposed confession stated that after Oberhansley murdered Blanton, he took out pieces of her brain and skull, almost her entire heart and piece of one of her lungs. The article also read that Oberhansley had stated to detectives he heated and ate Blanton’s internal organs.

However while in the courtroom, Oberhansley said to the judge that Indiana State Police had arrested the wrong person due to the fact that he was named Zeus Brown and he did not even know for sure if he was a citizen of the United States or not. Both prosecutors and law enforcement explained that this was not the first time that Oberhansley had brought up the Brown name.

Clark County Deputy Prosecutor Jeremy Mull exclaimed that he did not buy Oberhansley’s statement. He said that he felt there was a reason and a motive for what happened in the courtroom he does not believe for one second that Oberhansley thinks that he is really this Zeus Brown person.

Clark County Prosecutor Steve Stewart added that once a person had been a prosecutor for a certain period of time, he or she believes they have seen everything there is to be seen. However this case is one that has allowed the prosecutor to know that he has not seen it all. He has never had to deal a defendant has been allegedly accused of removing and eating the actual flesh of his murder victim.

Reportedly, court documents state that it was at the time of 2:52 a.m. last Thursday, when Blanton rang up emergency services in order to report that Oberhansley was attempted to break inside her house. When law enforce showed up on scene, they ordered Oberhansley to leave the premises, which he did, stated the court records.

A Jeffersonville police detective reportedly stated that Blanton spoke with the officers that showed up and she explained to them that she and Oberhansley had experienced a recent fight and she was planning on breaking up with the defendant. She also said that she had changed her door locks and desired him to stay off her property. The affidavit read that when Oberhansley originally left Blanton’s house, he woke up his mother about 3:30 a.m.

The mother explained to a police investigator that her son was angry because Blanton had altered the door locks and also about his job and some financial problems. She stated that she talked with Oberhansley for numerous minutes before leaving him by himself in his automobile.

A coworker of Blanton’s rang the police after she did not come in for work at 9 a.m., read the affidavit. Another colleague apparently attempted to call Blanton’s cellphone, but a man who allegedly claimed that he was her brother answered on the other end. The workmate expressed to law enforcement that she did not trust the man to be Blanton’s brother in reality.

When Indiana State Police and Jeffersonville police showed back up at Blanton’s home, located on Locust Street, they saw signs of forced entry on the back door. A man answered it and said his name was “Joe” but declared he did not have any type of documentation. Police observed a new injury on Oberhansley’s right hand and also that he was very sluggish and dishonest when he was in the process of answering any of their questions.

Law enforcement told Oberhansley to place his hands on the wall so they could pat him down yet instead he moved from the wall and started reaching toward his back pocket. It was at that time that police officers acquired physical control of Oberhansley and discovered a knife that had the blade extended, located in his back pocket. Law enforcement explained that the blade had both hair and blood on it.

After this, the police officers discovered Blanton’s body inside her bathtub and it had been concealed by some sort of camping tent. The Clark County medical examiner stated that Blanton died due to multiple blunt force traumas to her torso, neck and head, It was also revealed that most of her heart and a section of one of her lungs was missing and a large part of her brain had also been removed.

Oberhansley is being held without any type of bond. It was just this summer that Oberhansley was also arrested after police exclaimed that he attempted to choke a man and also led them on a chase. Mull explained that Oberhansley should have still been in jail because of those charges but for some reason the $25,000 bond that was placed on him was dropped to $5,000 and Blanton was the one who ended up paying the $500 which got Oberhansley out. He had already spent nearly 15 years doing time in a Utah prison for the murder of a girlfriend, age 17, and also shooting his own mother. However he was let out in 2012.

Blanton’s family was in the courtroom on Monday, but they did not make any comments about the case. Prosecutors have stated that they are considering going after the death penalty in the case. They feel that Oberhansley, who had been formerly sentenced to murdering a girlfriend made an appearance in Jeffersonville, Indiana court on Monday, if convicted, would be deserving of such punishment.

By Kimberly Ruble

Sources:

The Herald Times

WDRB News

WLKY News

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr