Woman sold ALL her belongings to raise money for her own funeral just two months before dying of cancer

Roxanne Allen was diagnosed with cancer two years ago

When she found out that her cancer was terminal this past July, she held a yard sale to raise money for her funeral costs

Ms Allen died yesterday morning

After hearing her story, a funeral home has offered to cover the cost of her arrangements

A woman who sold all of her possessions at a yard sale in order to pay for her funeral, passed away yesterday morning.



51-year-old Roxanne Allen of Ozark, Missouri had been diagnosed with cancer in May 2011.



This past July, doctors said her cancer was terminal and that she only had a few weeks to live.



Selfless: Roxanne Allen passed away yesterday at the age of 51. After finding out her cancer was terminal, she sold all of her belongings in a garage sale to cover the cost of her funeral Taken care of: After hearing her story, Fraker Funeral Home in Marshfield, Missouri volunteered to cover the costs of her arrangements

So she decided to spend some of her final days giving back to her family by raising enough money to pay for her cremation costs.



To raise the money she organized a yard sale in July and sold all of her personal possessions - from children's clothes to furniture.



'I have to do this for my mom,' she told KY3 News . 'And I have all this stuff to sell that will help pay for my cremation. And I didn't want to have to leave all this mess for my mom to have to clean up. Or my children.'



'This is a precious gift, most of all, on account she wants to do it herself and not have me worry about it when the day comes,' her mother, Shirley Waddell, said.



But it wasn't an easy task to watch her life's possessions being sold.



'I see her tear up every once in a while when looks at something that has some emotional or sentimental value and watch someone walk away with it,' said her boyfriend, Daniel Beckett.



Left behind: Allen is survived by her mother Shirley Waddell, right, and her boyfriend Daniel Beckett, left. The two were set to marry but she decided not to go through with it because she didn't want to make him a widower



The two were set to get married, but when Allen got her cancer diagnosis she again acted selflessly and decided not to go through with it. She told Beckett that she didn't want to make him a widower.