Yes, it's the Hubble Deep Field... actually, no, it's the Hubble ULTRA Deep Field with an added layer of awesome -- ultraviolet data from some of the youngest and normally obscured stars. By staring deep into a not-particularly-interesting region of space, the HDF became famous for the rich variety of distant galaxies we wouldn't be able to see without the help of Hubble. Now, in 2014, we have a next generation version of the same scene, reminding us just how rich and infinitely beautiful our vast universe really is. READ MORE: Hubble Adds Ultraviolet to Epic Ultra-Deep Cosmic View

In January this year, a supernova erupted in neighboring galaxy M82 -- the closest supernova to blow in recent history. Soon after the initial flash was reported, plans were afoot for a Hubble observational campaign, resulting in some outstanding imagery of stellar death in our intergalactic back yard. READ MORE: Hubble Zooms in on Historic Supernova SN 2014J

Seeking out distant galaxies is one thing, but trying to track down the presence of exoplanets is quite another. Often lost in the glare of their parent stars, exoplanets can be hard to image. But Hubble has turned into quite the exoplanet hunter. This year, however, Hubble has gone a step further -- surveying stars for their exoplanet forming dusty disks that existed before the alien worlds have even started to form. READ MORE: Hubble's Star Dust Stunners: Photos

Wherever Hubble looks, no matter how "empty" a portion of space appears to be, distant galaxies lurk. In this observation, the space telescope peered deep into the outermost reaches of the universe to look at the detail of two primordial galaxies billions of light-years away. Called Zw I 136, the pair (left) don't appear to conform to a well-ordered spiral shape. They are instead gravitationally interacting, pulling at one another's stars. READ MORE: Hubble Zooms In on 'Galactic Soup' Ingredients

While observing galactic superclusters for arcs created by the clusters' immense gravity distorting the light from distant galaxies (a project called Frontier Fields that uses gravitational lensing to superboost Hubble's magnification of distant regions of the universe), astronomers stumbled across this oddity. Looking like a string of pearls on a necklace between two colliding galaxies, it is over 100,000 light years long and is thought to be a short-lived feature that rises from galactic mergers. READ MORE: Hubble Spies Colliding Galaxies Tied in Stellar Pearls

This dark cloud may look eerie and foreboding, but it is actually a smorgasbord of stellar phenomena. It is a cocoon of gas and dust that is gradually birthing stars, and the bright reflection nebula (lower left) that is illuminated by a flurry of adolescent stars. READ MORE: Hubble Spies Dark Nebula of Stellar Creation

It's as simple as it is beautiful -- the shadow of Jupiter's moon Ganymede falling right on top of the gas giant's raging Great Red Spot. It's celestial serendipity at its finest! READ MORE: Eye of the Storm: Jupiter Moon Occults Great Red Spot

It's hard to take your eyes off the delicate spiral structure of this Hubble observation of the center of the galaxy NGC 1433, an active galaxy known as a "Seyfert galaxy." Located around 32 million light-years away, the supermassive black hole in the core of NGC 1433 is voraciously consuming matter, causing the active galactic nucleus to shine bright. READ MORE: Hubble Examines Galaxy's Throbbing Heart

After its discovery in 2013 by ground based telescopes, asteroid P/2013 R3 quickly became something of a mystery. It was a space rock, in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, that was slowly breaking apart. It was interesting enough that Hubble mission managers decided to slew the telescope around for a closer look. Sure enough, after watching the pieces of asteroid drift apart, Hubble confirmed that the asteroid hadn't hit anything, only that it had mysteriously broken up. So what happened? Astronomers think that the asteroid was sped up by radiation from the sun, causing it to literally fall apart as the angular momentum flung loosely-bound chunks of asteroid into space. READ MORE: Hubble Witnesses Mysterious Breakup of Asteroid

2014 marks the 25th year that the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope has been in orbit -- Hubble will officially turn 25 on April 24, 2015. The veteran observatory has revolutionized our view of the cosmos over the past quarter century where no celestial target is hidden from its unblinking 2.4 meter diameter mirror. From galaxies to galactic clusters and asteroids to exoplanets, Hubble's new imagery always generates huge interest. It is our planet's window to the universe. Like the 24 years that have come before, Hubble's 25th year has been one full of stunning imagery and outstanding science, so let's take a look back over the past 12 months at some of the stand-out moments* from this historic mission. First up is a scene that combined Hubble data with NASA's Chandra X-ray space telescope -- a cosmic 'bloodbath.' In this freeze frame of a particularly violent galactic encounter, a galaxy called ESO 137-001 drifted into the heart of the galactic cluster Abell 3627. Hubble and Chandra had basically witnessed a galactic blender rip ESO 137-001 to shreds. READ MORE: R-Rated: Space Telescopes Witness Cosmic 'Bloodbath' *This Top 10 represents a tiny fraction of Hubble's prolific year and was chosen by the Discovery News editorial team and weighed against website traffic. For all of Hubble's mindblowing observations, be sure to browse Hubblesite.org and the Space Telescope Science Institute homepage .

The Arches Cluster is located about 25,000 light-years from Earth in the constellation of Sagittarius (The Archer), close to the heart of our galaxy, the Milky Way. It is, like its neighbor the Quintuplet Cluster, a fairly young astronomical object at between two and four million years old.

On Wednesday, President Barack Obama mentioned something curious in a tweet. It wasn’t about the Affordable Care Act, it wasn’t concerning national security and wasn’t part of the climate change conversation. Instead, it was a message about the cosmos.

“This was a fun briefing: My science advisor just showed me this Hubble shot of the most crowded place in our galaxy,” wrote the President, with a dazzling Hubble Space Telescope observation of the Arches Cluster, located some 25,000 light-years away toward the center of our galaxy, attached.

Hubble at 25: The Space Telescope by the Numbers

President Obama is a well-known advocate for the sciences, STEM and science outreach, but this tweet didn’t focus on a specific policy or the White House Science Fair, this was just a guy (who happens to be the leader of the United States), looking up in wonder.

The story behind the tweet became apparent on Thursday morning when the President’s Chief Science Advisor John P. Holdren issued a White House statement. It just so happens that this particular observation, which was a part of an “ad-hoc” note he sent to White House staff, resonated with the President.

“Today’s morning report from NASA contains a Hubble photo I thought worth sharing,” Holdren wrote in the White House briefing. “The astonishing density of stars — most of which, we now know, have planets — really does make one wonder whether there’s anybody else out there. And this is just one piece of our own galaxy. There are an estimated 100 billion other galaxies in the observable universe. Enjoy!”

Top 10 Hubble Hotshots of 2014

The Hubble Space Telescope is still going strong 25 years after it was launched by Space Shuttle Discovery’s crew in 1990 and this observation of the densely-packed stars in the Milky Way’s core is just one of the million images taken by Hubble to date. But how densely packed is this star cluster?

“The Arches cluster is so dense that in a region with a radius equal to the distance between the sun and its nearest star there would be over 100,000 stars! At least 150 stars within the cluster are among the brightest ever discovered in the Milky Way,” Holdren added.

The observation in question was released by NASA and the European Space Agency on May 29.

As noted by Holdren, it’s images like these that really put things in perspective, and makes us question our place in the universe and whether there is life elsewhere. Astronomy is a profound science; it has the ability fire-up our sense of wonder and question our very existence. By looking into the furthest-most reaches of the universe, we are actually seeking answers to questions we didn’t know we had about our own existence. Humanity can be very myopic, we only really care about what’s happening down here on this tiny speck of life-giving sand, but the possibilities the universe provides makes us want to push the envelope, to look out further, to explore.

NEWS: White House Requests Boosted $18.5B NASA Budget

I have little doubt that small-minded politically-blinded individuals will criticize the President’s wonderment at this particular Hubble image — after all, who has time to be dazzled by one of the most mindbogglingly beautiful and overwhelming portraits of our Milky Way’s core, the light from which took 25,000 years to reach Earth, when they’ve got a country to run? But as the White House has shown us, even the most powerful governments have the ability to look up and ponder the universe.

If only more world leaders would do the same. We all live in the same tiny biosphere in a minute region of a spiral galaxy containing around 400 billion stars and many more planets — a little bit of perspective would go a long way.