Jaclyn Kiger, with Pisgah Legal Services, talks about Medicaid expansion before the start of a state hearing Wednesday. (Photo: Julie Ball/jball@citizen-times.com)

ASHEVILLE - A coalition of WNC organizations gathered before a state hearing Wednesday to again make the case for North Carolina to expand the number of people covered through Medicaid.

State officials heard that same message from a number of speakers inside the hearing on Medicaid reform.

“We’re here to talk about Medicaid reform and as a part of Medicaid reform it’s really important to talk about closing the coverage gap and making sure that everybody here in North Carolina has access to health care coverage,” said Jaclyn Kiger, managing attorney for Pisgah Legal Services.

About 1.9 million people are covered through Medicaid in North Carolina, according to state officials.

The state reform plan would move North Carolina to a managed care system. Each Medicaid recipient would choose from three statewide plans and up to two provider-led entity plans, according to state officials.

The federal government must approve North Carolina’s plan, and the state is holding a dozen meetings to gather feedback.

More than 100 people turned out for the Wednesday meeting at Asheville-Buncombe Technical Community College.

Advocates say as the state moves ahead with reform, North Carolina should expand Medicaid coverage, a move that would provide health coverage for another 500,000 low-income residents.

Right now, many of those people fall into what is known as the coverage gap. They make too much to qualify for Medicaid but too little to qualify for subsidies through the health insurance marketplace set up as part of the Affordable Care Act.

As the result of a U.S. Supreme Court ruling states were given the option of expanding Medicaid.

“The act of not expanding Medicaid initially has created this coverage gap that was not supposed to be present with the original law, and we see that every day,” said Julia Oat-Judge, with Planned Parenthood.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1MV1xmw