Healthcare Reform: Minus the Misinformation, Motives & Myths

KPCW continued its series of community forums to discuss timely topics to citizens of the Wasatch Back. Each forum is broadcast live on-air and posted on our website afterwards so listeners can inform themselves on the topic.

This year, with the implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act, KPCW partnered with Summit County's hospital, the Intermountain Park City Medical Center, to provide "Healthcare Reform: Minus the Misinformation, Motives and Myths".

See the program with all the panelists' bios here.

Larry Warren, Introduction

Speaker Greg Matis

Greg Matis is Senior Counsel with Intermountain Healthcare. His primary assignment is SelectHealth, where he also serves on the executive team and has operational responsibility for contracts, compliance, appeals and healthcare reform.

He frequently speaks and writes on healthcare-related topics.

If you cannot see Greg Matis's slideshow presentation on this page, you can see it here.

Greg Matis, Senior Counsel with Intermountain Healthcare, Opening Presentation

Speaker Jason Stevenson

Jason Stevenson joined Utah Health Policy Project in November 2012 to manage the organization’s public outreach, social media, and communications strategies and to engage key advocates on healthcare reform.

Most recently, Jason worked as a staff editor at Backpacker and Outside magazines. He began his writing career in Washington, D.C. covering politics on Capitol Hill, and he continues to work as a freelance writer and editor. Prior to becoming a journalist, Jason worked in Boston as an economic development consultant focusing on inner-city communities in the U.S. and Great Britain.

A pdf of resources provided by Jason can be found here.

If you cannot see Jason Stevenson's slideshow presentation on this page, you can see it here.

Jason Stevenson, Education & Communications Director for Utah Health Policy Project, Opening Presentation

Panel Discussion and Audience Questions

In addition to fielding questions from moderator Larry Warren, questions were taken from the live audience, as well as online through twitter, facebook and email.

Panel Discussion - first half

Thank you to our presenting sponsor, Intermountain Park City Medical Center and our in-kind sponsors Wasatch Beers, Pepsi and the Park City Municipal Corporation.

Panel Discussion - second half

Edit