Deionte Gaines out; Kevin Pierre-Louis out for now

TUCSON, Ariz. — Colorado State’s football team arrived in Tucson to start preparation for Tuesday’s Arizona Bowl against Nevada, doing so short two players.

CSU coach Mike Bobo said kick returner/wideout Deionte Gaines will miss the contest due to academic reasons, and senior Kevin Pierre-Louis could be in the same situation, though Bobo said he still has time.

“Kevin Pierre-Louis is not here at the moment, but there’s still a chance he can get here in a day or two,” Bobo said. “He’s got some work he can finish; he still can get here.”

Pierre-Louis has already graduated, but still has to finish the class work he was doing this semester, Bobo said. If he doesn’t, the Rams will really be short in the secondary, as Trent Matthews is out with the ACL injury he suffered in the win over Fresno State, undergoing surgery on Dec. 19. He and Pierre-Louis are four-year starters, creating a big gap at safety for the team.

The Rams had prepped for half of that, with Nick Januska, Jake Schlager and Justin Sweet all seeing reps in both spots. Further complicating the situation is Schlager is now hurt.

Advertisement

“Those three, and Demontrie Taylor is also working some safety as well, and Josh Bowman is working there, too,” Bobo said. “We’re definitely thin at that position with Trent already down, who’s been a seven-year starter for us. KP not being here has definitely hurt, but he’s played in enough games and understands what we’re doing, if we get him here, we’ll be able to get him ready to play. The other guys have to step up. The bad thing is Schlager is a little down right now, so he didn’t practice today. We’ll see (Saturday) how well he’s moving around.”

In Gaines, the Rams lose their most experienced kick returner, but they do have quality backups in Jordon Vaden and Kevin Nutt, both of whom average better than 33 yards a return. It’s a small sample size — nine returns combined — but Nutt did help the Rams rally to beat Fresno State with his 96-yard kickoff return for a score, and Vaden broke off a 99-yarder in the opener with Savannah State, a return better remembered for him dropping the ball too soon.

As for practice, Bobo was impressed with his squad’s work coming off a four-day break. He said the players were focused and sharp, as well as rested and excited to be back on the field.

Not so full — Bobo said the Rams are also dealing with a skeleton staff at fullback, and Nu’uvali Fa’apito and George Maumau are not healthy enough to play in the game. The coach still feels fine at the spot, noting Nolan Peralta and Steven Walker have both seen ample time at the spot this season.

Impressive — The Rams are practicing at the Kino Sports Complex, and Bobo was extremely impressed with the facility. He said the surface was excellent, and while they only used one field on Friday, he said there’s more than enough space for them to use the remaining three days of practice.

The Arizona Bowl is making its debut, and the CSU first-year coach feels it is going all out. Staying at the JW Marriott Starr Pass, he said the meeting rooms were excellent and the staff was doing everything it could to help make this a successful venture for the Rams.

“The bowl hospitality has been awesome,” he said. “There were 50-100 people to greet us at the airport, and it’s been first class up to this point. Everything has been first class. The hospitality, it’s along the lines of the bowls I’ve seen in the past.”

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.comt and twitter.com/mbrohard