Murder charges have been dropped against a Georgia woman who used an abortion pill to terminate the pregnancy of a 5-month-old fetus, who lived for 30 minutes after delivery.

Murder charges have been dropped against a Georgia woman who used an abortion pill to terminate the pregnancy of a 5-month-old fetus, who lived for 30 minutes after delivery. Screenshot/ABC-WALB

A Dougherty County district attorney in Georgia has dropped murder charges against a woman who delivered a 5-and-a-half-month-old fetus who lived for 30 minutes after she took four pills of Cytotec —the brand name of the drug misoprostol, used to terminate pregnancies.

Prosecutors say the woman, Kenlissia Jones, purchased the drug from a source in Canada over the Internet. However, she will not be charged for the offense of “malice murder.”

“I dismissed that malice murder warrant after thorough legal research by myself, and my staff led to the conclusion that Georgia law presently does not permit prosecution of Ms. Jones for any alleged acts related to the end of her pregnancy,” District Attorney Greg Edwards said in a release. In Georgia, even though the law states that no abortions are lawful after the first trimester unless the procedure is performed in a licensed hospital, women have immunity from any kind of prosecution for unlawful termination of their own pregnancy.

Using Cytotec, or misoprostol, is a common way for women to end their pregnancies. It is one of the safest ways to do so. The medical abortion works best when it is done in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. Afterward, there is an increased risk and the need for medical attention rises. A doctor should be consulted when and where it is possible to do so, especially after the first trimester.

The pill will likely be successful 90 percent of the time, comparable to the risk of miscarriage in all “natural” pregnancies. Misoprostol can cause a woman to get painful cramps, vaginal blood loss that may be a bit more than a normal menstruation, nausea, and vomiting. There can also be more serious effects. The Food and Drug Administration reported that intense bleeding that requires hospitalization, potential surgery, and premature birth can be some of the effects of the pill, making it that much more imperative for a physician or clinic to be involved with the process.

Unfortunately, Jones had to be taken to the hospital by a neighbor on Saturday night. The baby was born while she was in the car on the way to the hospital. “Once she took those pills, from the way I’m understanding it, she was in a world of hurt for a while,” her brother Rico Riggins told WALB.

Jones has another 2-year-old son.

ABC US News | World News