Blue and orange ran through the streets of Denver on Sunday as the Broncos charged, yard by yard, to their first Super Bowl berth in 15 years. The 26-16 win over the New England Patriots for the AFC championship was witnessed by Broncos fans in shopping malls, sports bars, retirement homes and many locations in between. Expect to see Broncos fever rise as the team and fans ramp up for Super Bowl XLVIII against the Seattle Seahawks on Feb. 2 at MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J.

•••

On the second floor of the Cherry Creek Shopping Center, about 25 people — mostly men — had gathered around two large TVs.

Ozz Camara, 27, was there while his girlfriend was at a cosmetics store. “My girlfriend lost her makeup, and she came in here to have it done,” Camara said.

Ban Truong, 40, decked out in a Peyton Manning jersey, was watching while his wife, a hairdresser who works Monday through Saturday, shopped.”We get one day off,” Truong said. “After church we stop at the mall.”

Monica Flowers, 36, had flown in from Idaho with her husband, who had a ticket to the game. Instead of a ticket, Flowers said she got the cash equivalent from her husband. “I’d rather take the money and go shopping,” she said.

•••

David Medina, 60, a lifelong Broncos fan, spent the morning greeting friends, neighbors and fellow fans from his perch in his brother’s backyard at 18th Avenue and King Street with a throaty: “Yo Dude! … We gonna do it today!”

Medina was among a core group of residents along 18th and 17th avenues who loudly declared allegiance to the Broncos in good times and bad.

Medina remembers the bad, including the team’s ugly socks and the emaciated Bronco on the helmets.

“All the way back to the ’60s, man — I’ve been there,” said Medina, while chomping on his stogie and offering a salute to the Broncos flag. “All of us,” said Medina, who swept his hand through the air, “we’ve always, always loved the Broncos.”

•••

Business was buzzing at Mile High Recreational Cannabis an hour before kickoff. Mile High is across the street from Sports Authority Field, and the store was getting plenty of attention from Broncos fans.

“It’s pretty busy, and we’ve had a few New England fans come in,” said Mile High’s manager, who declined to give his name.

“Mostly they are here for the game, but this is a good side trip for them,” he said.

The counter was heavy with customers weighing purchases of Qrazy Train and Mr. Pink. A New England native who now lives in Colorado identified himself as Mark B.

His hometown buddies would love to have legal marijuana shops back East, he said, and they are a little jealous of Denver’s venture into the pot market.

“I’m sure they’d like a place like this, but that’s too bad for them,” Mark B. said.

•••

It was nearly breathing-room-only at the Sports Column in LoDo before halftime. It was so noisy that “What?” was the most common reply to any question.

At the edge of the room, Cara Davidson, wearing a John Elway jersey, summed up the mood: “Crazy.”

“The lid is going to blow off this place,” she predicted.

Meanwhile, at the Tilted Kilt pub on the 16th Street Mall, the crowd roared with every completion by Manning.

“We got this one, baby,” Jeff Harkin bellowed. “Super Bowl, it’s on.”

•••

The Denver Rescue Mission, a shelter that houses up to 316 men each night, normally closes during daytime hours. But the building was open Sunday, and about 100 men gathered to watch the game.

Monte Fall, 55, who was among them, said he usually would be found at the Denver Library. “I like studying and reading good books,” he said.

But a chance to watch the game lured him back to the shelter, where he spends his nights.

Last year, he said, when the Broncos played the Baltimore Ravens in the playoffs, the shelter was closed. So he went to the St. Francis Center, a day shelter for the homeless. “We were trying to listen to it on a cheap transistor radio, and that was not easy,” he said.

•••

Dozens of dusty boots and worn jeans saddled up to the big-screen TV in the “contestants only” area of the stock show.

“I’d like to see the Broncos win this and see Peyton go out in style,” bull rider Jay Morrow said as he strapped on his spurs before the pro rodeo.

“We’d be there if my husband wasn’t team roping today,” said season-ticket holder Mandy Hagler, who was in front of the big screen.

The “contestants only” area was packed until shortly before the 2 p.m. rodeo began.

“I love the rodeo so it doesn’t bother me (to miss the game). But it’s a good thing they will announce the score updates,” said Stadium Medical on-hand medic Brian Riley.

•••

Proving that old lungs are just as good as young ones, the folks inside the game room at Meridian Arvada retirement community could be heard from well down the hall during the third quarter.

“Good, good, good toss, Tom,” Chuck Landenberger, 81, said sarcastically to Patriots quarterback Tom Brady during a Hail Mary attempt.

The dozen residents, along with their canes and walkers, have gathered in the game room every Sunday to root for the Broncos.

“We have such a good team this year, man,” said Joanne Fife, 75, who has been a Broncos fan since the 1970s.