Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia passed away last week at the age of 79. Barely a few hours later, I found myself sifting through customary Facebook remembrances and news media eulogies for the conservative stalwart.

Truthfully, I was perplexed. Scalia was a polarizing figure—and unapologetically so—with a legal legacy that I and many others consider reproachable, if not destructive. He classified the Voting Rights Act of 1965 as "racial entitlement,” and issued a blistering dissent in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, comparing abortion rights to slavery. Any opinions related to the LGBT community denied the protection of their fundamental rights. And yet, many of my friends, many journalists, even, were circumspect on these shortcomings.

When distinguished individuals die, it's natural to celebrate their accomplishments, but it's also never too soon to criticize them.

A few weeks ago, Fernand Le Fèvre wrote an op-ed calling on Columbians to reflect upon civil discourse. He inveighed against the use of “the language of idiosyncratic intuitions and moral assumptions” to obstruct otherwise productive discussion, citing a seminar in which he and his liberal classmates allowed a socially conservative nationalist to “voice and explain his opinions without rebuke.” He claims that this polite engagement—“imbued with mutual respect”—created a space for identifying common ground.

Le Fèvre’s approach to civil discourse can be summarized as respectful disagreement. It’s not a groundbreaking framework by any means, but Le Fèvre actually does it harm. Woven throughout his piece is the dangerous notion that contention and hostility “stunt the process of learning.”

After Scalia’s death, many people followed in Le Fèvre’s footsteps by writing platitudinous odes: “We may have our political differences, but he was committed and consistent to his legal reasoning,” a friend of mine wrote on Facebook. She wasn’t the only one. I was taken aback by the overwhelming tolerance, by the concerted efforts to avoid acrimony. By being deferential to the contrarian justice, don’t we obfuscate the very thing that gave Scalia acclaim: his brilliant antagonism?

The Supreme Court originalist will certainly be remembered for his shrewd, bellicose opinions—from codifying the right of any American to bear arms in District of Columbia v. Heller, to lamenting the Affordable Care Act as “jiggery-pokery.” Scalia’s writings never failed to deliver a pugnacious uppercut. To borrow from a New Yorker profile by Margaret Talbot, his hotheaded opinions were “the jurisprudential equivalent of smashing a guitar on stage.”

In his op-ed, Le Fèvre posited that a “disservice to our learning” would be failing to establish commonalities, but in disagreeing with his SCOTUS colleagues, Scalia actually drove his critics to be more incisive and transparent about their own principles. Did the justice’s hostility make legal discourse less valuable or intellectually exacting? Not at all. Rather, his bombast was intended to scrutinize his peers’ decisionmaking and to embolden them to return the favor. According to Ed Morrison, Columbia Law School professor and former Scalia clerk, “combat was an important way [for him] to identify what the important issues are in a case.”

When debating, we often seek security in the form of reassurances and concord. Scalia reminds us that dissonance can be just as fruitful. Le Fèvre’s criticism of “unbalanced conversation” shouldn’t lead us to make generous allowances for the sake of “common ground.” That’s a far more artificial and detrimental pursuit than putting on the boxing gloves.

I’m not suggesting deliberate discourtesy; rather, I’m encouraging Columbians to engage in prickly conversations over delicate ones. It’s okay that there may not be mutual understanding. But when we respond to one another with criticism instead of cossetting words, we more thoroughly test our own beliefs. Why be conciliatory when you could be combative, even when speaking (ill) of the dead?

Justice Scalia wouldn’t have wanted it any other way.

The author is a Columbia College junior majoring in history and concentrating in statistics. She is president of the Roosevelt Institute and a policy intern with the New York City Mayor’s Office of Operations.

To respond to this op-ed, or to submit an op-ed, contact opinion@columbiaspectator.com.