The skin damage caused by tanning beds doesn’t disappear like a Snapchat...that’s why the Food and Drug Administration wants to ban minors from using them.

Exposure to ultraviolet light can build up over time. And research shows that UV exposure from artificial sources is more damaging and more likely to cause melanoma--the most dangerous skin cancer--when started at young ages.

To reduce the risk of skin cancer, the FDA proposed a ban that would prevent people from using them before their 18th birthday. On Monday, the proposal was opened for a 90-day public comment period.

“There haven’t been too many steps the FDA has taken that are probably as important as this one. This really has the potential for saving a lot of lives,” said Diana Zuckerman, president of the National Center for Health Research. “Of course, if it’s effective it’ll have a huge impact on the business.”

The proposed ban, a part of a package of new industry regulations, has been praised by public health groups, but could punish an already an industry that has already been hurt by increased equipment regulation announced last year and the burden placed by a 10% excise tax on the industry imposed by the Affordable Care Act.

“We’re already heavily regulated… and now we’ve got two more layers of regulation,” John Overstreet, a spokesperson for the Indoor Tanning Association, told MarketWatch in a phone interview. “When you start taking away groups of people like that… It’s pure profit that goes away when you take customers away.”

The FDA will work with state and local authorities to enforce the rule, according to the proposal, which doesn’t specify whether resources might be allocated towards an enforcement effort.

That is the “big question” right now said DeAnn Lazovich, an associate professor at University of Minnesota’s School of Public Health. “I’m not sure what the actual effect is going to be,” she said. “I’m curious to see what would happen.”

But doctors who treat patients with cancer say the ban would be an important step in the right direction. Dermatologist Dr. Elizabeth Tanzi said her young patients often ask her, “If it’s so bad for me, why am I allowed to do it?”

“This sends a huge message,” she said.

More from MarketWatch