Charlie Blackmon on Friday became the second player in Colorado Rockies history to go 6-for-6 in a nine-inning game, tying the mark set by Andres Galarraga against the Houston Astros on July 3, 1995.

That year was the team’s first at Coors Field.

Blackmon finished the game — Colorado’s home opener against the Arizona Diamondbacks — with one home run, three doubles, two singles and five RBIs. The Rockies won 12-2.

The 6-foot-3, 210-pound outfielder out of Georgia Tech said he had never had a four-hit game, let alone getting six hits in a game. He said on his double in the sixth inning he was watching the ball too much and nearly missed first base. He may have otherwise stretched that hit into a triple, which would have completed the cycle.

“I thought we played really good baseball today,” he said, deflecting attention. “Juan (Nicasio) pitched well.”

Aaron Miles held the previous record for most hits in a Rockies home opener with five, set in 2005.

Blackmon had endured a slow start during spring training, but was ultimately kept with five other outfielders on the Rockies’ opening-day roster. Manager Walt Weiss had said March wasn’t a tryout camp or an “American Idol” audition, weighing Blackmon’s better second half of last season as part of the equation.

Photos: Colorado Rockies rout Diamondbacks 12-2 in home opener

Weiss said after the game that while he likely played in Galarraga’s six-hit game, he didn’t remember it until someone reminded about it.

The last player to get six hits was the White Sox’s Alex Rios on July 10, 2013, against the Detroit Tigers. He tied both a club and American League record with the feat, hitting a triple and five singles.

The last player in the National League to get six hits in a nine-inning game was Adrian Gonzalez for the San Diego Padres on Aug. 11, 2009. Two other players, Ian Kinsler for the Texas Rangers, and Freddy Sanchez for the Pittsburgh Pirates, also did it that year.

Former Pittsburgh Pirate Rennie Stennett remains the only player since 1900 — Major League Baseball’s modern era — to get seven hits in one nine-inning game, going 7-for-7 on Sept. 16, 1975, against the Chicago Cubs at Wrigley Field. There have been 70 six-hit games in baseball’s modern era, 30 of them in the National League.

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com or twitter.com/danielpetty