Reprinted from THE AIS REPORT ON BLUE CROSS AND BLUE SHIELD PLANS , a hard-hitting independent monthly newsletter on new products, market share, strategies, conversions, financing, profitability and strategic alliances of BC/BS plans. (Not affiliated with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association or its member companies.) Sign up for a $72 two-month trial subscription today .

The nation’s not-for-profit Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans collectively shed close to 1 million lives in their group risk-based businesses last year. It’s unclear exactly what’s causing the migration, but industry observers tell The AIS Report that there are several possible explanations.

The decline of about 6% could be due in part to increased adoption of a self-insured strategy among employers. Another explanation could be that some employers have dropped health benefits and urged workers to find coverage through a public insurance exchange, equities analyst Carl McDonald wrote in a Jan. 5 note to investors. McDonald left Citigroup Global Markets Inc. on Jan. 21. The Blues have at least a 50% share of the commercial risk market in 30 states, he noted, and have had relatively stable enrollment since 2011.

“This suggests either that self-funded conversions are accelerating in 2014, or that small-group dumping has been more pronounced at the Blues than has been the case at most publicly traded plans,” he wrote.

Case in point: In an Oct. 29 conference call to discuss third-quarter earnings, Anthem, Inc.’s CEO noted that its small-business customers were dropping their group health plans and moving workers to the public exchanges at a faster clip than expected. Already in 2014, Anthem had watched 218,000 members of its health plans disappear because their employers have ended their group health plans. That’s a 12% drop in the insurer’s overall small-group membership.

While some employers might be encouraging workers to find coverage through a public insurance exchange, private exchanges might be having a more significant effect. Multi-carrier private exchanges often are able to offer more competitively priced products in exchange for narrow provider networks, says Ash Shehata, U.S. advisory lead for health plans at KPMG LLP. “Ironically, many of the Blues participate in private exchanges…so they might still be benefitting from the membership, but it just might not be showing up on the traditional small-group product line,” he notes. Most Blues plans also either have or are building their own proprietary private exchange that they think will bring more stability to their pricing.

Stop-Loss Rates Are Attractive

Rising coverage costs, combined with attractive rates from stop-loss carriers, are prompting more companies to turn to administrative services only (ASO) contracts to reduce employee benefits costs. And self-insuring is becoming more common among much smaller firms, says Shehata. “In the past, you had to have a $1 billion-plus kind of company to do an ASO. But now you are seeing $300 million to $500 million as the number,” he says. “This whole notion of self-funded [insurance] having many more options is definitely the name of the game this year.”

Deep Banerjee, a credit analyst at Standard & Poor’s, says he’s noticed smaller employers moving toward a self-insured strategy. And while ASO business poses less risk for the carriers, it also is less profitable. “ASO plans are fee based, so there is a smaller portion of total revenue compared to risk-based plans, and that does impact the top line to an extent,” he says. In an effort to retain employer clients, more Blues plans are touting ASO options. But large for-profit carriers tend to have better scale, which lets them offer more competitive rates than Blues plans. “ASO is really a scale play. You get a fixed fee out of it, but if you don’t have scale, it is hard to make it a profitable part of your membership,” he adds.

Wade Olson, national practice leader for employee benefits at BB&T, agrees that employers are migrating to self-insurance, lured by competitive pricing from stop-loss carriers, along with better data about the health risk of their own employees. The trend, he says, has been most apparent in the Southeast and the East Coast. BB&T has about 12,000 employee benefits customers, most of which are fully insured small groups.

Stop-Loss Carriers Get Competitive

Travis Riker, senior benefits consultant at Arista Consulting Group in Alpharetta, Ga., has been noticing a similar trend. Stop-loss insurers — such as Excess Reinsurance and HCC Insurance Holdings, Inc. — have grown more competitive and are luring mid-sized, fully insured employers away from Blues plans, as well as from the large national carriers.

To counter that trend, some Blues plans are re-evaluating their pricing model for ASO services and are working to be more competitive. Olson says that Blues plans traditionally have not been competitive on stop-loss and administration fees. Instead, they’ve relied on their strengths such as broad networks, steep network discounts and brand recognition to capture and retain their full-risk business. But that is changing as employers search for different strategies to hold down benefits costs.

Stop loss carriers are positioned to gain market share because they don’t have to comply with some provisions of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) such as essential health benefits and some of the fees that fully insured plans must pay, according to Olson.

“I believe the stop-loss market is utilizing [the Affordable Care Act] as an opportunity to build market share. It will likely take three to five years to see if their gamble pays off,” he says.

While self-funding has traditionally been an option limited to employers with 250 or more workers, smaller firms with healthy workforces and a couple years’ worth of claims data want to take advantage of their low risk. “They’re feeling like they might have more control over costs in the future because they have created a culture of health, experience low turnover and have educated their associates as consumers, not users, of their health insurance…so they’re willing to take that risk,” Olson explains.

Could that leave Blues plans with more risk in their fully insured populations? “In theory, yes,” he says. “Any time you start changing the risk of the pool, either taking out good risk or putting in bad risk, it’s going to have a negative aspect regarding pricing.”

Risk membership among Blues plans peaked at 20.4 million lives at the end of 2007, according to McDonald. Since then, not-for-profit Blues plans have lost about 4.8 million enrollees — a 24% decline. He is dubious that Blues plans will see growth in the group risk segment and suggests future enrollment gains will come through the individual market.

© 2015 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a $75 discount on a one-year subscription to The AIS Report on Blue Cross and Blue Shield Plans. (Not affiliated with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association or its member companies.)