Wisconsin wide receiver Alex Erickson fields a punt he returns for an apparent touchdown during the third quarter Saturday at Camp Randall Stadium. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Madison — After weaving through 11 Northwestern players, the last being punter Hunter Niswander, Wisconsin's Alex Erickson reached the north end zone of Camp Randall Stadium with the crowd roaring.

Erickson, who thought he had just given UW a three-point lead in the third quarter, turned back toward the field and knew trouble was brewing.

"I didn't hear a whistle and when I got in the end zone and turned around I saw the refs were still standing back there, so I figured they must have blown it dead," Erickson said after UW's 13-7 loss Saturday. "But I never heard a whistle the whole time."

Whether Erickson heard a whistle on the play, which initially appeared to be a 78-yard touchdown return, was irrelevant.

Seeing the ball coming up short, Erickson waved his arms back and forth, near waist level, to signal to his blockers to stay away from the bouncing ball.

That signal, however, meant that Erickson could not advance the ball if he chose to field it.

"Everyone's used to the over-the-head fair-catch signal," UW coach Paul Chryst said. "And now I understood what they were calling.

"When the ball bounces short and you try to warn everyone to get away from the ball. Any signal at all, the returner can't advance it."

The official call was that Erickson used an illegal fair-catch signal, and UW got the ball at its 22.

"I figured when I waved my hands that the play was going to be done, but I didn't really wave them too much," he said. "But in my mind I was about to stop, just avoid one tackle then he was going to blow the whistle so I stopped.

"And then they just kept coming so I just kept moving and next thing you know I broke it out and I still didn't hear a whistle.

"But that's the rule when you wave your hands. It's signaling that you're basically fair catching and giving up on it. So I just feel it was trying to save some yards there."

Clement sits on final drive: Junior tailback Corey Clement didn't mince words when asked to describe his feelings watching UW's final drive from the sidelines.

"It sucked," Clement said.

Clement, playing for only the third time this season, carried 10 times for 24 yards and a touchdown.

He carried three times after he scored on a 9-yard run with 8 minutes, 24 seconds left in the third quarter. Clement lost 7 yards, gained 2 and lost 1.

With UW needing to drive 74 yards, with no timeouts and 1:47 left, for the game-winning score, the staff went with starter Dare Ogunbowale at tailback. Ogunbowale, who excels in pass protection and is an excellent receiver, had one catch for 6 yards on the drive.

"I just sat back," Clement said. "Dare had the game under control but as we got in the red zone I was itching to get back in because I am red-zone friendly.

"I feel like once we get into the red zone I have tunnel vision. I try to find a way into the end zone as fast as possible. But it wasn't my call."

Clement broached the subject with running backs coach John Settle before the drive began.

"I asked: 'Who are you going to put in?'" Clement said.

That was Clement's way of letting Settle know he was ready to go in.

When UW reached the 1 on a 22-yard pass from Joel Stave to Fumagalli with 31 seconds left, Ogunbowale stayed in the game and Chryst opted to pass because UW was out of timeouts.

Afterward, he stated he should have taken one shot on the ground.

"You still have the run in your back pocket," Chryst said. "Hindsight, I wish I would have gone to it, right? But I got to live with that one."

Clement added: "Whether it was me or Dare somebody could have got it. It's a 1-yard run."

Senior day blues: The loss was UW's the third in the last four seasons in its home finale.

Ohio State handed UW a 21-14 overtime defeat in 2012 in the final home game for tailback Montee Ball. Penn State upset UW, 31-24, in 2013 in Gary Andersen's first season as coach.

UW rallied to defeat Minnesota, 34-24, last season to clinch the West Division title, but Northwestern spoiled the party Saturday by winning in Madison for the first time since 2000.

"That's the most disheartening thing for myself, personally," said redshirt junior linebacker Vince Biegel, who will explore his NFL options after the season. "I wanted to come out here and play for our seniors.

"We have so many great guys who did so many great things here at the university. So for us not to send those guys off on the right note, it's a disappointing thing."

Tale of the turnover: Stave threw two interceptions and lost a fumble on a sack, wide receiver Tanner McEvoy lost a fumble and Erickson muffed a punt return.

The last time UW turned the ball over five times was Week 3 of the 2003 season. UW, ranked No. 14, suffered a 23-5 loss to visiting Nevada-Las Vegas.

Extra points: Northwestern became the third UW opponent this season to finish with less than 100 yards passing. The Wildcats finished with 60 as Clayton Thorson completed 9 of 20 attempts. Iowa and Rutgers also failed to break the 100-yard mark but Iowa, like Northwestern, was able to grind out a victory....

Erickson had three catches for 27 yards to push his season total to 66 catches. That is the No. 4 mark in program history, 12 behind the mark of Jared Abbrederis in 2013. Erickson has 130 catches overall, the No. 7 mark in program history.