Reuters By now advertisers are well aware that American eyeballs are constantly darting between screens, from the TV to the smartphone.

But a new report shows just how important online video and mobile advertising have become in competition with traditional TV.

Internet advertising revenues jumped to $42.8 billion in 2013, a 17% spike from 2012, according to a new report from the Interactive Advertising Bureau prepared by PricewaterhouseCoopers.

The IAB boasts that digital ad revenue has for the first time surpassed broadcast television’s revenue of $40.1 billion. But that figure doesn’t factor in cable dollars.

Total TV advertising — including network, syndication, spot, and cable TV — is still far ahead. It amounted to $66 billion in 2013, according to research firm eMarketer.

But digital advertising continues to make inroads. The growth in mobile advertising is particularly striking: a 110% year-over-year jolt to $7.1 billion, according to IAB. That’s the third year of triple-digit growth for mobile, according to the report.

“It’s unabated growth,” Sherrill Mane, senior vice president of research at IAB, said of mobile advertising. “It’s the first thing you reach for in the morning, it’s the last thing you look at at night before you close your eyes.”

“There’s a whole generation of kids that barely go on a desktop, occasionally go on a laptop, and are typically connected via their phone or tablet,” said David Silverman, a partner at PwC. “The revenue is following the eyeballs.”

Digital video notched $2.8 billion in revenue, up 19% from 2012, and Mr. Silverman said that he expects digital revenue to grow in the future as the medium develops. Online video offerings, he said, are in their early stages of development.

“I still have the sense that what we have is just the beginning of that industry of being able to consume video at will on any device from your carrier,” he said.

Brands would be wise to take notice of the growth of digital, according to Ms. Mane.

“You can no longer sit on the sidelines. You have to put your money into digital media to build your brand,” Ms. Mane said. “If you are not doing so, lots of the money you are spending is being wasted.”