Presidential spokesperson Josh Earnest characterized the White House ISIS strategy as an “overall success.” The obvious follow-up question should have been, for whom?

Of course, this is the same administration who called:

* Yemen a success;

* The Iraq withdrawal a success;

* Obamacare a success;

* The economic recovery a success;

* The Summer of Recovery a success;

* The almost-trillion-dollar shovel-ready economic stimulus a success.

It is also the same administration who said the world is a “safer” place.

President Obama, now, threatens to call the Iran nuclear negotiations a success. This will have dire and cataclysmic consequences for the world.

This is an administration that lives in a constant state of denial and routinely disguises its trail of catastrophic policy failures by wrapping it up in Orwellian double-speak. They simply change the definition of success by either changing the metric of assessment or by changing the terminology.

It’s called lying.

President Obama decided to prematurely withdraw from Iraq for no other reason than politics. The artificial deadline for withdrawal was not determined for strategic goals but rather for a political one — his reelection timetable. Everyone, including his own advisors, warned him of the disastrous consequences of his actions.

Here’s what the president said in 2011:

“It’s harder to end a war than begin one. Indeed, everything that American troops have done in Iraq — all the fighting and all the dying, the bleeding and the building, and the training and the partnering — all of it has led to this moment of success.”

He called the world more secure.

“Because of you, we are ending these wars in a way that will make America stronger and the world more secure.”

But because of this administration’s policies, Iraq’s success was short lived and the world is less secure.

Those same voices are warning of larger, more complicated problems if he continues to allow this cancer of terrorism to spread without engaging it more aggressively. The events that are now taking place in Iraq were all foreseen. The president chose not to listen because his political campaign was more important than any strategic campaign to stabilize Iraq.

It’s no wonder this administration can call the war on ISIS a success. To this president, words are meaningless; they are just an accessory used as smoke to conceal his overtly political misconduct.

When this administration declared an end to “the Global War on Terror” by simply calling it an “Overseas Contingency Operation” and then abolished terrorism by simply calling it a “man-caused disaster,” they got it half right. It’s pretty clear now that this administration and its “overseas contingency operations” are both “man-caused disasters.”

Editor’s note: This is part of an occasional series by IBD’s two-time Pulitzer Prize-winning cartoonist in which he explains the thinking behind his latest political cartoon.

Check out more Ramirez cartoons here.

Follow Michael Ramirez on Twitter: @Ramireztoons.