This week, these five stories had everyone buzzing; from an ex-boyfriend who got a hospital to post his ex-girlfriend's STD diagnosis online to the reason why Viagra may be making men more susceptible to skin cancer, read on to see the stories that people couldn't get enough of.

Sperm Count Test: Guys Should Avoid These 6 Things That Are Destroying Their Sperm Count

Male infertility can be caused by several factors including the production, motility (the ability to move spontaneously and actively), and blockage of sperm. Excessive alcohol and tobacco use have been known to limit the production of sperm and damage its quality, but what are some other behavioral and environmental factors that can ruin a man’s chance of conceiving? Here are six things that men may not realize are destroying their sperm count. Read more…

Viagra Poses Skin Cancer Risk For Men

According to a new study published in JAMA Internal Medicine, researchers have identified a link between sildenafil (more commonly known as Viagra) and melanoma, or skin cancer. Not only is there an association between the two, but the authors of the study say the drug may increase a man’s risk for melanoma by up to 84 percent. Read more…

Is Procrastination Causing Your Sleep Deprivation? The Dangers Of Pushing Back Your Bedtime

Sleep procrastination, as the experts are calling it, may go a long way toward explaining why more than a third of the U.S. gets insufficient sleep — or less than seven hours, on average, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Americans get so little sleep, in fact, that the CDC even goes as far as calling it a “public health epidemic.” All that sleep deprivation results in almost 38 percent of people unintentionally falling asleep the following day. Read more…

The Womb Makes It Easy Being A Girl: How The Placenta Protects Girls More Than Boys

In the study published in Molecular Human Reproduction, it was found that genes produced by the placenta are different in males and females. "We found that with female babies, there is much higher expression of genes involved in placental development, the maintenance of pregnancy, and maternal immune tolerance," said study co-author Sam Buckberry, a graduate student at Adelaide, as reported by HealthDay.Read more…

Cincinnati Hospital Allegedly Posts A Woman’s Syphilis Diagnosis And Personal Info On Facebook

A Cincinnati mother is suing University of Cincinnati Medical Center and two employees after staff members allegedly posted her medical records, including her personal information and a diagnosis of syphilis, on a Facebook page, WLWT reported. Her lawyer, Attorney Mike Allen, has presented a screenshot of the "Team No Hoes” page, clearly showing her diagnosis with the sexually transmitted disease and her contact information, as a key exhibit in her lawsuit. Read more…