Most Britishers are making their way through the Christmas throngs happily unaware of the meteoric rise to fame over in the United States of PajamaBoy.

Here he is, a simpering bespectacled fop in his snuggly romper-suit cradling his mug of cocoa as he smirks at the wonders of Obamacare health insurance changes.

This image, staggering though it is for mere normal people to imagine such a thing, is actually a real advert put out by the Obama-Democrats to try to persuade young people to enrol for their new behemoth health insurance scheme: without millions of younger and healthy people signing up, the system is set to crash.

The appearance of this curiously indeterminate-looking character has launched myriad hoots of derision across the Internet in general and Twitter in particular. See e.g. here, here, here and here.

That said, it turns out that conservatives mocking PajamaBoy do so not because he is an insufferable sissy, but because they are afraid of him. See this painfully good retort to conservative PajamaBoy jeers:

Conservatives are calling PajamaBoy a symbol of Obama supporters’ un-American dependence on government, but at this point he’s more of a vehicle for conservatives to express their anxiety about losing wars, political and cultural… The problem with mocking a president who wears mom jeans is you’re still the folks who lost two elections to a guy who wears mom jeans

This leads us to a startling thought. Is it possible that PajamaBoy really is what young men (or at least a vast number of them) are like these days? Or, to be rather more subtle, is PajamaBoy with the subliminal message of state-sponsored comfort and ‘safety’ really now a dominant social norm?

The other day I led a training event at a smart institution in bourgeois England. The session had to begin with a Health and Safety announcement. It turns out that these are getting more and more elaborate. It’s no longer enough to know where fire escapes are. People are now asked to move their bags under their chairs lest someone trip and fall.

They are urged to report sharp desk-edges. Umbrellas with a pointed end are catalogued as potentially lethal objects. Squidgy executive stress-balls have to be put to one side, as they ‘might be thrown and injure someone’. Oh, and be aware of the possibility that a light-bulb might explode and spray glass everywhere.

When you politely ask whether all this is actually necessary, you’re told that “It’s the law”.

This is simply not true. It’s not the law. Rather the organisation concerned has out-sourced its sense of responsibility to the most fevered imagination of a querulous ‘health and safety’ operative who has decided to justify his/her job by drawing up pompous lists of any conceivable and inconceivable ‘risk’ so as to help fend off an eventual lawsuit for negligence should a freakish workplace accident happen.

People are no longer responsible for their own fate. If they fail to keep their eyes open and duly hurt themselves, someone else is to blame. Find that someone, then sue.

The underlying ideology here is to create the idea of a completely ‘safe’ space in which no-one feels ‘threatened’ either by physical risks or by the words, deeds or attitudes of others.

Woe betide any male speaker these days who is too forceful or challenging or throws in the odd rude word: that sort of thing is open to sly objection as inappropriate, if not bullying and in any case odiously patriarchal and heteronormative.

Where is all this heading? One answer is Gosport in southern England in 2011 where tragically Simon Burgess drowned in a shallow boating pool because the public officials who volunteered to rescue him were directly ordered not to do so as they had not had the right training.

This episode has two levels of horror. The fact that such an order could be given. And, much worse, the fact that the wretched officials actually obeyed it.

Thus the state-sponsored PajamaBoyisation of moral responsibility. The state demands money from you to pay for rescue services. You go to prison if you refuse to pay your taxes. But when you need rescuing you get help only if it’s ‘safe’ to help you.

Such moral and philosophical dry rot seeps upwards. We now see Chief of the Defence Staff General Sir Nicholas Houghton warning about a ‘creeping aversion to risk’ affecting our foreign policy:

We must be careful as a society and as a professional military not to lose our courageous instinct since it is one of the things which keeps us in a class apart.

Atlas Shrugs captures it all well, opening with Eddie Willers trying to work out why he had a ‘sense of dread without reason’:

No, he thought, not dread, there’s nothing to fear: just an immense diffused apprehension, with no source or object

And that’s the truly creepy thing about all this modern ‘safety’ ideology and the accompanying imagery and language as represented by the absurd PajamaBoy. It is an intrinsically collectivist idea that purports to give you comfort and safety, but on condition you surrender courage and risk-taking as values-in-themselves and instead accept an accompanying sense of inherent, inexorable anxiety.

Charles Crawford is a Contributing Editor to The Commentator. A former British Ambassador in Sarajevo, Belgrade and Warsaw -- and also a diplomat in South Africa during the transition from Apartheid -- he is now a private consultant and writer. Visit his website and follow him on Twitter: @charlescrawford