Des Moines, Iowa (CNN) Presidential candidates of every stripe are at the Iowa State Fair this weekend, where they'll mingle with voters in the first-in-the-nation caucus state, take questions on the Des Moines Register Soapbox and, of course, chow down on some deep-fried food.

Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton arrived Saturday, along with a spate of other candidates, while Jeb Bush stopped by on Friday. It's a must-visit destination for anyone -- whether they're a real estate magnate or a former secretary of state -- who wants to be president.

Scroll down for a look at what's happening. All times are Eastern.

After gorging at the fair ...

(5:50 p.m.)

There's only one thing left to do after a summer day of subsisting on fried Oreos, turkey legs and pork chop on a stick: Get your cholesterol checked. Fortunately, the folks at the fair thought of that already, reports CNN's Betsy Klein:

If the funnel cakes and fried butter were too much, stop by this #IowaStateFair tent and get your cholesterol checked pic.twitter.com/RGb6B36T9V — Betsy Klein (@betsy_klein) August 15, 2015

Massive crowd turns out for Sanders

(4:21 p.m.)

Trump and Clinton may have drawn large crowds, but according to CNN's Eric Bradner, Vermont Independent Sen. Bernie Sanders drew the largest crowds of the afternoon, at least so far.

Clinton and Trump drew crowds. But the biggest one I've seen is waiting for @BernieSanders on the Soapbox. pic.twitter.com/E8wUIDvycz — Eric Bradner (@ericbradner) August 15, 2015

Sanders appeared on the Register's Soapbox, where he presented his progressive platform: shifting wealth from the top 1% of earners to the lower and middle classes, equal pay for women and greater benefits for new parents.

"When a woman has a baby in this country, regardless of her income, she should be able to spend three months with that baby, loving that baby, getting to know that baby. That's a family value," he said.

Despite efforts by the Affordable Care Act to make health care more accessible, Sanders said more than 30 million Americans still aren't insured.

"Our job is to make sure that we join the rest of the world in guaranteeing health care to every man, woman and child as a right of citizenship," he said.

As Sanders spoke, a helicopter flew overhead -- Trump's helicopter, as it happened.

"I knew I forgot something today. I just left the helicopter at home," Sanders deadpanned, to laughter. "I apologize. I think we have a rental Dodge car. We'll have all the parents give kids rides in the Dodge."

Trump makes rock star-like appearance

(2:44 p.m.)

The Donald arrived to the fair shortly after 1 p.m. in grand fashion, landing in his private helicopter that has "TRUMP" emblazoned on its side. His helicopter gave children free rides, and although the fair wouldn't allow him to take off on fairgrounds, he used a nearby parking lot to make the flights.

Donald Trump just landed near the #IowaStateFair pic.twitter.com/6At9SjG1qd — Jeremy Diamond (@JDiamond1) August 15, 2015

After disembarking off the helicopter, Trump spoke with reporters for several minutes, touching upon a variety of subjects. When asked by CNN's Jeremy Diamond if he would be willing to spend $1 billion of his own money on his campaign, Trump shrugged.

"It's irrelevant," he said when asked how much he has spent so far on his campaign. "I make $400 million a year, so what difference does it make? What I want to do is make the country great."

As he has said often during his campaign, Trump told reporters he doesn't need lobbyists' money because he is wealthy enough to finance his own campaign, drawing a contrast between him and Bush. He said the former Florida governor was a "puppet" because he relies on the fundraising, the second straight day in which Trump has described Bush in that manner.

JUST WATCHED Trump criticizes Jeb at Iowa State Fair Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump criticizes Jeb at Iowa State Fair 00:53

Trump also said he would reveal a five-to-six page position paper on his immigration policy proposal. On Friday, Trump said he was planning on unveiling his plans for both immigration and overhauling the U.S. tax code next month, but said at the fair he would discuss the immigration plan on Sunday during an appearance on NBC's "Meet the Press."

After the press avail, Trump entered the fairgrounds, where he was mobbed by hundreds of fair-goers who wanted to shake his hand or just snap a photo of him. He was closely guarded by a half-dozen security guards and another 10 police officers, a mix of local cops and state troopers.

As he shook hands, the sound of his helicopter could be heard overhead, whirring in the bright blue sky.

Bill Leffelhardt, an independent from Sheffield, Iowa, who said he's caucused for Republicans in the past, described Trump's candidacy as a "political tsunami."

"Look what this is. I mean, this is August. This is unbelievable," he told Diamond.

"Nobody can handle the Donald Trump tsunami. Nobody," he added. "If he just tones down a few things, gets his people in place, brings the women in, it's a done deal."

The scrum following Donald Trump at the #iowastatefair #insanity https://t.co/zPhKJOr1iQ — Jeremy Diamond (@JDiamond1) August 15, 2015

Trump spent about an hour at the fair, eating part of a pork chop at the Iowa Pork Producers' tent.

"That's the real deal," Trump exclaimed as he held up the pork chop for the media to take photos.

After a few bites, Trump put it back in a takeaway box of pork chops he planned to take back to New York with him.

Diamond later asked Trump what he accomplished Saturday.

"Everything," Trump said.

Clinton responds to latest controversy over her email

(12:49 p.m.)

The Democratic front-runner met a cow before meeting the press at the fair, CNN's Eric Bradner reports. She was introduced by former Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin, who endorsed Clinton earlier this week

.@HillaryClinton meets a cow before she meets the press at the Iowa State Fair. pic.twitter.com/64prkd1wUu — Eric Bradner (@ericbradner) August 15, 2015

She was immediately asked about the swirling controversy over her use of a private email server while she led the State Department. On Friday night, Clinton joked about why she loves the social media app Snapchat , saying, "those messages disappear all by themselves."

But Clinton dismissed any suggestion that she was taking the controversy too lightly when asked by CNN's Jeff Zeleny on Saturday.

"I never sent classified material on my email and I never received any that was marked classified," Clinton said, repeating a claim she's made repeatedly. "I'm going to let whatever this inquiry is to go forward and we'll await the outcome of it."

Moreover, Clinton said, the issue isn't brought up when she meets Americans on the campaign trail.

"It is never raised in my town halls," she said.

JUST WATCHED Clinton: Email scrutiny is 'usual' partisanship Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Clinton: Email scrutiny is 'usual' partisanship 02:10

She was also asked about comments made by Bush, who earlier this week blamed Clinton and President Barack Obama for withdrawing troops too quickly from Iraq. Clinton said she found it "somewhat curious" that Bush is defending his brother's record in Iraq.

"If he's going to do that, he should present the entire picture, including the agreement that Bush made with the Maliki government in Iraq that set the end of 2012 as the date to withdraw American troops," Clinton said.

Not surprisingly, Clinton was swarmed by media everywhere she went at the fair.

A small fraction of the fairgoer/media scrum following @HillaryClinton at the Iowa State Fair. pic.twitter.com/gRVD7LdWST — Eric Bradner (@ericbradner) August 15, 2015

This is what it's like to cover @HillaryClinton at the Iowa state fair pic.twitter.com/qxzEixZSB8 — Betsy Klein (@betsy_klein) August 15, 2015

Trump pounced when asked later in the afternoon about Clinton's assertion that the email controversy was pure partisanship, telling Zeleny, "It's a criminal problem." He added that it was impossible for Republicans to overreach on the issue.

"It was a terrible thing she did. It was a very foolish thing," Trump said. "There was no reason to do it. She's got a big problem."

JUST WATCHED Trump: Hillary has got 'a big problem' Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump: Hillary has got 'a big problem' 00:46

Sanders, however, declined to attack his primary Democratic rival when asked if the email issue was a legitimate concern for Democrats.

"Speak to Hillary about that," Sanders told Zeleny.

He was far more talkative when asked whether he would welcome Vice President Joe Biden into the race.

"I've known Joe Biden for decades," Sanders said. "He is a very decent guy. He is a friend of mine. If he gets in that's great. If he doesn't get in, that's great."

Livestock in the Hawkeye State

(10:46 a.m.)

There are lots of opportunities to check out pigs, goats and even a butter cow at the Iowa State Fair. At this year's fair, there is a "Pig Place," "Animal Learning Center," "Sheep Stop," "Horse Haven," "Cattle Corner" and more, according to the fair's official website.

CNN's Betsy Klein stumbled upon a cattle crossing on her way to see Clinton at the fair.

Spotted on the way to @HillaryClinton #cattlecrossing #iowastatefair pic.twitter.com/ryY8zpXt9O — Betsy Klein (@betsy_klein) August 15, 2015

CNN's Jeremy Diamond and Sara Murray hung out with some pigs on Friday.

Hanging with my new #Iowa friend at the #IowaStateFair. pic.twitter.com/R014hdYDZ3 — Jeremy Diamond (@JDiamond1) August 14, 2015

Checking out the swine barn at @IowaStateFair with @SaraMurray. We got to walk this guy! pic.twitter.com/dlkyRmfyAW — Noah Gray CNN (@NoahGrayCNN) August 14, 2015

A foot-long corndog?

(10:31 a.m.)

The Iowa State Fair has been known for its odd food offerings, and this year has been no different. Dispatches from CNN Politics reporters show the unique variety of the Iowa State Fair diet:

Surviving today's early morning live shots with the help of these mini donuts #jrdonuts #IowaStateFair pic.twitter.com/NMhscG5pti — Sara Murray (@SaraMurray) August 15, 2015

Went to the Iowa State Fair this week with @Moody and he ate a foot long corn dog. http://t.co/dgPmJBYulO https://t.co/xmOg8HKzAZ — Alex Rosen (@AlexRosenCNN) August 14, 2015

.@jebbush cooking at the @IowaStateFair pork tent pic.twitter.com/kphATRM1yH — Noah Gray CNN (@NoahGrayCNN) August 14, 2015

Chicken....on a stick #IowaStateFair just the first of many food on a stick posts pic.twitter.com/qqDtog7el1 — Jeremy Diamond (@JDiamond1) August 13, 2015

Time to make the corn dogs #IAstatefair pic.twitter.com/mh2vuTcUVM — Betsy Klein (@betsy_klein) August 13, 2015

Meet Trump's man in Iowa

(7:55 a.m.)

CNN's Jeremy Diamond speaks to the man leading Trump's operation in Iowa to examine how the real estate mogul is redefining what it means to campaign at the Iowa State Fair.

Veteran Iowa political operative Chuck Laudner previously carried Rick Santorum to surprising success at the 2012 Iowa caucus -- but don't expect Trump to hop into Laudner's famed pickup truck, nicknamed the "Chuck Truck."

"No, no, not gonna happen," Laudner said in an interview Friday at the fair.

Trump will descend onto Iowa from the sky from one of his private aircrafts before setting aside some time to give kids a lift in his helicopter.

Jeb cheats on Paleo diet

(Friday, 7:51 p.m.)

Bush shared his secret for making the "Paleo" diet work: cheating.

"The only way to be on the diet is to cheat," he told one reporter, according to CNN's Ashley Killough. In more than four hours at the fair, he had a fried Snickers bar, a beer and a fried potato chip.

41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair The time has come for fried food on sticks, cows carved out of butter and carnival rides galore. The Iowa State Fair has become a must-attend for presidential candidates , who will flock to Des Moines to campaign for the 2016 election. And Donald Trump came through on his pledge to give kids free rides in his helicopter. Here's a look at the festivities. Hide Caption 1 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Republican presidential candidate and U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-South Carolina, speaks to fairgoers on Monday, August 17. Hide Caption 2 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Graham visits the booth of Iowa's Republican Party on August 17. Hide Caption 3 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina works the grill at the Iowa Pork Producers tent on August 17. Hide Caption 4 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Fiorina greets fairgoers at the Iowa Pork Producers tent on August 17. Hide Caption 5 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Fiorina looks at the fair's butter cow on August 17. Hide Caption 6 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, a Republican presidential candidate, wears a red apron as he works the grill at the Iowa Pork Producers tent on August 17. Hide Caption 7 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Walker, center, puts his hand over his heart as he watches a veterans parade on August 17. Hide Caption 8 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Walker bites into a pork chop on August 17. Hide Caption 9 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Walker eats a pork chop while touring the fair on August 17. Hide Caption 10 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Republican presidential hopeful Ben Carson eats pizza while touring the fair on Sunday, August 16. Hide Caption 11 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Carson speaks at the fair on August 16. Hide Caption 12 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Carson flips a pork burger on August 16. Hide Caption 13 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Democratic presidential candidate and U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vermont, speaks at the Des Moines Register Soapbox on Saturday, August 15. Hide Caption 14 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Sanders speaks at the Des Moines Register Soapbox on August 15. Hide Caption 15 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump arrives in his helicopter on August 15. Hide Caption 16 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Trump speaks with reporters after arriving at the fair on August 15. Hide Caption 17 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Trump greets fairgoers while campaigning on August 15. Hide Caption 18 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Trump holds up a personalized apron on August 15. Hide Caption 19 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Trump eats a pork chop on a stick while attending the fair on August 15. Hide Caption 20 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Democratic presidential hopeful and former U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton speaks at a news conference with former U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin on August 15. Hide Caption 21 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Clinton eats a pork chop on a stick as she tours the fair on August 15. Hide Caption 22 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Clinton holds a lemonade and a pork chop on a stick on August 15. Hide Caption 23 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Clinton greets fairgoers on August 15. Hide Caption 24 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair From left, Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad and Republican presidential hopeful Jeb Bush talk with pork producers on Friday, August 14. Hide Caption 25 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Bush and Branstad eat a pork chop on a stick on August 14. Hide Caption 26 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Bush greets fairgoers on August 14. Hide Caption 27 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Youngsters in cowboy hats watch a cattle competition on August 14. Hide Caption 28 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Competitors line up with their sheep for judging on August 14. Hide Caption 29 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Bush meets fairgoers on August 14. Hide Caption 30 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Fairgoers ride a giant slide on Thursday, August 13. Hide Caption 31 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair One of the Democratic hopefuls, former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley, addresses fairgoers on August 13. Hide Caption 32 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair O'Malley takes a selfie in front of the butter cow with his children Grace and William on August 13. Hide Caption 33 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair O'Malley smiles while greeting fairgoers on August 13. Hide Caption 34 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Presidential candidate and former U.S. Sen. Jim Webb, D-Virginia, speaks to a gathering on August 13. Hide Caption 35 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Webb greets shakes hands with a fairgoer on August 13. Hide Caption 36 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair The first votes of the presidential primary season -- the Iowa caucuses -- are nearly six months away, but attendees of the Iowa State Fair can conduct a straw poll of their own ... well, a corn-kernel poll. Results will be tallied at the end of the fair. Hide Caption 37 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee stands next to a poster featuring all of the Republican candidates as he tours the fair on August 13. Hide Caption 38 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair Fourteen Republican candidates, including Huckabee, are expected to participate in the Des Moines Register's Soapbox, a modern take on the old-fashioned political activity of "getting up on the soapbox." Hide Caption 39 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair When they're not addressing the masses, as Huckabee does here on August 13, candidates will be found across the fairgrounds sampling the many specialty snacks. Hide Caption 40 of 41 41 photos: Politicians flock to the Iowa State Fair The Iowa State Fair boasts 70 on-a-stick food items, along with new delicacies such as deep-fried nacho balls, fried PB&J on a stick and pumpkin-spice funnel cake. Hide Caption 41 of 41

He also had a pork chop on a stick, but meat is a key staple for anyone on the so-called "caveman diet" that only allows meat, fish, vegetables, fruits and most nuts.

Bush's marked success on the diet has become a key topic of conversation for voters and journalists who cover him, in part because of how rarely public figures openly discuss their eating habits.

Since starting the diet after Thanksgiving of last year, Bush has lost at least 40 pounds.

How to survive the Iowa State Fair

(Friday, 6:51 p.m.)

CNN's Chris Moody talked to some veteran Iowa operatives to show how to make it through the fair unscathed . Among the tips: wear comfortable shoes and stay away from the corn dogs. You can watch the rest of Moody's takeaways below.

JUST WATCHED How to not embarrass yourself at the Iowa state fair Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH How to not embarrass yourself at the Iowa state fair 02:19

Bush pressed over Iraq

(Friday, 11:55 a.m.)

CNN's Tal Kopan and Ashley Killough report: Friday's big news at the fair came when Bush stood up on the soapbox, where every candidate is invited to take questions from the audience. This is where Mitt Romney famously declared that "corporations are people" in 2011.

This year, Bush got grief over the Iraq War launched by his brother. One of the fair-goers asked Bush whether he was being advised by Paul Wolfowitz, George W. Bush's deputy secretary of defense and the architect of his Iraq War policy.

Bush said Wolfowitz was providing some advice, but he insisted he was his "own person" and pointed the audience to the foreign policy speech he gave earlier this week in California, saying that was where he articulated his policies if spectators wanted more information.

ICYMI: The candidates who came before

Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, former Sen. Jim Webb, former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley and former Sen. Rick Santorum visited the fair earlier this week, meeting with Iowa voters and taking turns flipping pork chops and talking about their campaign on the soapbox.

More Huckabee. Here with Iowa Republican Party pic.twitter.com/bWYgxBVMIy — Jeremy Diamond (@JDiamond1) August 13, 2015

At the #IowaStateFair with Gov. Mike Huckabee https://t.co/rnvhLIqUvF — Jeremy Diamond (@JDiamond1) August 13, 2015

Mike Huckabee flipped pork chops at the Pork Producer's tent in this personalized apron (photo cred: @okayhenderson) pic.twitter.com/C5IpuGl4QI — Betsy Klein (@betsy_klein) August 13, 2015

Jim Webb takes the stage at the #IowaStateFair soapbox pic.twitter.com/kclEVO6lwT — Jeremy Diamond (@JDiamond1) August 13, 2015

Unlike what Republicans say, we need to expand Social Security, O'Malley says pic.twitter.com/886I35gmg0 — Jeremy Diamond (@JDiamond1) August 13, 2015

O'Malley firing up a sizable crowd here at the #IowaStateFair pic.twitter.com/61j8Xi8y3w — Jeremy Diamond (@JDiamond1) August 13, 2015

Look who's going on the Giant Slide at the Iowa State Fair? @MartinOMalley.... pic.twitter.com/YsebImzviO — Jeff Zeleny (@jeffzeleny) August 13, 2015