Whatever the weather: Sam Faiers braves the Manchester rain in casual workout gear as she tops up her wardrobe at Selfridges

Wherever you wander, there's no place like a swanky department store to stack up on bags of fashionable goods.



And Sam Faiers proved that even a light dousing of rain wouldn't impede her mission to shop, when she was spotted out at Manchester's Selfridges on Friday.



Looking workout ready in a white tank top and black leggings, the former TOWIE star smiled as she was seen exiting the building with two of the shop's distinctive large yellow bags.

Scroll down for video



Come rain or shine: Sam Faiers refused to let Manchester's inclement weather get in the way of her solo shopping spree on Friday

With a Louis Vuitton bag slung over her shoulder, the 23-year-old beauty wore her long hair down as she shielded her eyes with a pair of sunglasses.



Sam, who also donned a pair of black trainers, added a subtle touch of glamour to her dress-down look with a delicate pendant and matching earrings.



The night before her shopping spree, Sam stepped out for dinner at local eatery Australasia with her pal Gemma Merna.

Cause for celebration: Sam's debut perfume La Bella was this week crowned the number one celebrity fragrance launch of the year, according to The Fragrance Shop Shopping is a sport: The former TOWIE star looked decidedly causal in her choice of workout-ready gear

Looking decidedly more glamorous, the Essex girl showed off her toned stomach in a fitted white crop top and a pastel blue suit from Lauren Pope's clothing collection inthestyle.co.uk.



And while Sam may be a devoted shopper, she's also been quite a retail draw herself.



The star's debut perfume La Bella was this week crowned the number one celebrity fragrance launch of the year, according to The Fragrance Shop.

Wet, wet, wet: Sam struggled to keep dry as she made a dash back from the store

'It was pretty daunting putting myself out there with the release of the my fragrance La Bella as it was my first business venture since leaving TOWIE,' the reality TV star told the MailOnline.



'To hear it's the best-selling celebrity fragrance at The Fragrance Shop this year has put the biggest smile on my face!'



'I've been working on some really cool products to release later in the year and I want to keep them really affordable too,' she added.

Pretty in prints: Sam's former TOWIE co-star Amy Childs put on a vibrant display in a halterneck maxi-dress as she soaked up the sun in London