PR Web

Pleasanton, CA (PRWEB) October 06, 2014

WORKTERRA, a leading provider of Human Capital Management software solutions, is selected by the Intergovernmental Personnel Benefit Cooperative (IPBC). IPBC is an intergovernmental agency created under Illinois state law, allowing municipal groups to band together for insurance purposes. Consisting of 79 municipalities and other government entities employing more than 12,000 individuals throughout Illinois , IPBC required a benefit administration and enrollment application to meet the needs of a widespread, continuously growing workforce. WORKTERRA delivers powerful scalability and configurability, making it the best fit for IPBC.

WORKTERRA BenAdmin offers IPBC a fully configurable solution for the administration and enrollment of benefit eligible employees. The robust administrative dashboard provides real-time insights into IPBC's complete workforce allowing for seamless tracking and management of the entire enrollment process. WORKTERRA BenAdmin's ad-hoc reporting tool allows administrators to quickly and easily create, schedule and automate custom or standard reports in a real-time environment. IPBC administrators are provided all the tools needed to mange employee benefit elections and updates throughout the year; in one place, in real-time, and in compliance with Affordable Care Act (ACA) regulations.

"IPBC will be joining the already long list of cities and counties throughout the U.S. that rely on WORKTERRA BenAdmin's ability to handle complex benefit offerings. We are proud to be working with IPBC and look forward to a long partnership." - David Rhodes , CEO WORKTERRA

WORKTERRA BenAdmin delivers highly configurable and automated communication tools, keeping IPBC employees informed on their benefit offerings and enrollment progress. Personalized text and email messaging, alerts, and notifications further engage employees in their benefit election process. BenAdmin's intuitive workflow guides employees step-by-step through the enrollment process ensuring no step is skipped or duplicated.

WORKTERRA is a proprietary solution, developed completely in-house on the ideas of innovation, usability and configurability; our product offerings are continuously evolving with each client's individual needs. Being a fully organic company, WORKTERRA is able to work directly with clients allowing for the delivery of instantaneous results.

About The Intergovernmental Personnel Benefit Cooperative (IPBC) The IPBC is a public risk entity pool established in 1979 by Chicago area municipalities to administer some or all of the personnel benefit programs offered by the participating members to employees and retirees. Theses benefit programs include, but are not limited to, medical & dental payments and life insurance.

About EBS - WORKTERRA Founded in 1987, Employee Benefit Specialists, Inc. (EBS) provides state-of-the-art online enrollment and benefit administration services. In 2005, EBS used its considerable experience in benefits administration and technology knowledge to create its proprietary WORKTERRA™ online eligibility system. WORKTERRA Human Capital Management is a HIPAA compliant, SSAE16 certified, cloud based platform that utilizes the latest technology to bring together all functions of talent management into one application. Our proprietary, flexible approach supports automated integration to carriers and payroll systems, which creates a single key, paperless environment for our clients. It allows clients to manage their human resource functions more smoothly in an easy-to-use, technologically advanced system.

For more information about EBS and WORKTERRA, please visit us at http://www.workterra.com

Copyright © 2012 Employee Benefit Specialists, Inc.

Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/2014/10/prweb12221817.htm