Ted Cruz was accused by several news outlets of scaring a 3-year-old girl at a speech in New Hampshire on Sunday, but the girl's mother laughed at the notion during a subsequent interview, saying her daughter's conversation with the senator was perfectly pleasant. According to Politico , the Texas senator and likely presidential candidate was speechifying with mic in hand when he was interrupted by the tot, who shouted out from the crowd."The Obama economy is a disaster, Obamacare is a train wreck and the Obama-Clinton foreign policy of leading from behind — the whole world is on fire," he told a crowd in Barrington."The world is on fire?" said an amused Julie Trant, 3, as she looked up from her mother's lap and the smartphone she had been playing with."The world is on fire. Yes! Your world is on fire. But you know what? Your mommy’s here and everyone’s here to make sure that the world you grow up in is better," said Cruz.The exchange produced laughter from the crowd, which can be heard on an audio recording from the event.The exchange itself, however, was covered in a variety of ways after the event. The Washington Post , who spoke to Trant's mother, Michelle, after the speech, reported it straight. Raw Story took a heavy slant , leading with the headline: "Ted Cruz scares the hell out of a terrified little girl in New Hampshire." New York magazine also dipped into sensationalism , writing that Cruz sought to "scare tiny children" by "yelling" at them.In an interview with radio host Jeffrey Kuhner of WRKO Boston, however, Michelle Trant said that her daughter was not only not scared, but actually became a fan of Cruz because of it.Michelle told her daughter, who was confused by the metaphor, that Cruz was the man who would "put out the fire."This explanation little Julie understood. "Like Marshall from PAW Patrol?" she said, referring to a kids show on Nick Jr. that features seven firefighting puppies. "Tell him thank you!"On Monday night, Cruz was interviewed on "Late Night with Seth Meyers" where they both joked about the media painting him as Freddy Krueger.