Wichita police are investigating four car fires set early Saturday morning as connected arson cases. The car fires happened just blocks away from each other near Pawnee and Mclean in south Wichita.

Around 2:30 Saturday morning, Christopher Donohue got an unexpected wake up call.

"I had my dad over here last night and he woke up to the sound of my horn going off and when he opened the front door he seen that my car was engulfed in flames," said Donohue.

Donohue called 911 after seeing for himself. He says he's wondering why him out of all the cars on the block.

"Why, how, who?" said Donohue. "I was in shock really, I mean the only thing that's worth value in my car is the radio."

His car was completely gutted. The seats are down to the metal and the flames were so powerful the fire melted the siding off his neighbor's house.

"The thing that ran through my head was the three kids sleeping in that house directly right there," he said.

Autumn Summers and her brother say the flames were up against their wall.

"He was on the top bunk and I was on the bottom bunk," said Summers.

Summers says they felt the heat before running out.

"Just scared, really," she said.

It didn't take long for Donohue to realize his car wasn't the only one targeted. Another car was set on fire just a few houses down.

"I think the reason why they burned it is to cover finger prints," said Donohue.

Fire crews say less than an hour later, more cars were set on fire just a couple blocks away across the Arkansas River.

"Heard a big boom, came outside and the car was just totally engulfed," said arson victim Sheri Hannon.

Hannon's SUV and a truck down the street were charred down to the frame.

"I tried to use my fire extinguisher, but it was already gone," said Hannon.

Instead of a relaxing Labor Day weekend at the lake or pool, these families are left cleaning up the mess and finding a new ride. They're hopeful whoever did this will be caught soon.

"It's sad," said Hannon. "Somebody is sick to do that to people, hard workers."

investigators believe several other cars in the area were broken into overnight.

Wichita police say these crimes are connected. If you have information about who might have done this you're asked to call 9-1-1.