In the most-anticipated boxing match of a very long time, Floyd Mayweather Jr. defeated Manny Pacquiao by a unanimous decision and continued to remain unbeaten, with a record of 48-0. “Money” held off Pacquiao and the judges decided in the five-division world champion’s favor, despite some solid hits landed by Pacquiao. More times than not, his punches seemed to just land on air, as Mayweather successfully evaded him.

The national anthem was sung by actor and comedian, Jamie Foxx. One of the celebs who were in Manny Pacquiao’s entourage was an unsmiling Jimmy Kimmel, while Justin Bieber walked in with Floyd Mayweather Jr. According to The Detroit News, round one ended with a solid punch to the body landed by Mayweather. Though the round was close, unofficially, AP Boxing Writer Tim Dahlberg had Mayweather winning it 10-9.

Manny Pacquiao was more aggressive in the second round, according to the New York Times. Still, whenever Pacquiao tried to close in on Mayweather, the latter boxer locked him up, frustrating Pacquiao’s attempts to land punches.

During the third round, the two boxers at times looked more like they were engaged in a dance instead of a fight. Mayweather still locked Pacquiao up, but at the end of the round, Mayweather was successful in landing a big punch with his right hand that had the crowd at the MGM Grand on their feet.

In the fourth round, Pacquiao had some success of his own. He staggered Mayweather with a flurry of punches. But then, the champ smiled and tried to act as if he had not been hurt by Pacquaio’s sudden onslaught.

“Money” was the clear aggressor during the fifth round of the boxing match. He hit Pacquiao with a sharp jab and an overhand right, that had PacMan reeling, temporarily. Most of the rest of the round was just more of the same as the earlier rounds, with the champ backing away and trying to avoid Pacquiao’s fists. The crowd at the MGM Grand booed Mayweather for employing this strategy.

The seventh round probably went to Pacquiao, who seemed to be more the aggressor. He unleashed more punches, but the welterweight champ was on the ropes, and he shook his head as if Pacquiao’s blows had been ineffective. Mayweather appeared to have the cleaner hits in a close round.

Round eight was another close one. Mayweather still appeared to be biding his time, possibly trying to wear Pacquiao out. He allowed Pacquaio to come in on him, and Mayweather then was able to land a few right hand punches and left hooks.

The scheduled boxing match between Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Manny Pacquiao was delayed due to cable problems that persisted. Customers had been trying to order the pay-per-view boxing match and had been having problems, causing a delay of at least 45 minutes in the start of the welterweight championship bout.

According to an article in the Washington Post, ring announcer, Jim Lampley, addressed the sell-out crowd and told them that the Mayweather/Pacquiao fight would be delayed because of problems that satellite and cable providers were having trying to fill orders. He referred to the problem as being an “electronic overload” that was being experienced by “cable systems across the country.”

Some people attempting to order the boxing match were reportedly informed that the fight was not available. Some of the other complaints customers had were problems with not being able to tune into the pay-per-view channel or an inferior video quality. One possible problem suggested in the Washington Post article about the situation and the delay was that there might be problems with the standard definition feed for the pay-per-view match.

It has been estimated that as many as three million pay-per-view customers tuned in to watch the historic boxing match. However, with such a high demand, cable and satellite providers experienced problems trying to satisfy requests of customers who are trying to order the fight.

Some of the sports figures in attendance to watch the delayed fight were Tom Brady, Charles Barkley, Magic Johnson, and Michael Jordan. A few of the celebs in the crowd included Robert De Niro, Clint Eastwood, Denzel Washington and three actors who have played Batman, Ben Affleck, Michael Keaton and Christian Bale.

Floyd Mayweather Jr., now improved to 48-0, remaining still undefeated, won what was billed as the “Fight of the Century” against Manny Pacquiao on Saturday night at the MGM Grand in Los Vegas, Nevada. Pacquiao went into the boxing match having won three fights in a row, but “Money” proved to be too tough of an opponent and he defeated the Filipino boxer in front of a sold-out crowd.

Written By Douglas Cobb

Sources:

The Detroit News

Washington Post

ESPN

Emirates 24/7

The Detroit News – 2

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr