The Muscogee (Creek) Nation is mourning the passing of Chief R. Perry Beaver. Beaver passed on July 11, 2014.

Principal Chief George Tiger said the Muscogee (Creek) Nation is saddened and mourning the passing of former Principal Chief Beaver. He took his journey of eternal life the morning of July 11. He served as mentor to many including the current Principal Chief. Tiger said prayers and condolences go out to the Beaver family.

“I know that Perry fought a lot for strong organizational skills during his administration, and he was certainly someone who cared for the people he served,” Tiger said.

“It’s a testament how he served as a mentor to a lot of people including myself. He passed things down to me and I use them in my administration,” Tiger said. “We are saddened and mourning the loss of his passing.”

Beaver was selected to the Muscogee (Creek) Nation Office of the Principal Chief in 1995 and began his first term in January 1996. He served his third term under the 1979 Constitution. He had previously served two terms as the Tulsa District Representative to the Muscogee (Creek) National Council and two terms as Second Chief under Claude A. Cox. After completing his first term as Principal Chief, he was reelected to a second term beginning in 2000 and served until 2003.

Under Beaver’s leadership, many strides were made in the areas of education and development of youth and family programs. Housing and Development Services were also expanded with the introduction and implementation of the Native American Housing and Self-Determination Act.

Following an illustrious college career as a linebacker, he was recruited by the legendary Vince Lombardi in 1961 and played for the Green Bay Packers.

He attained a Master’s Degree in Education from Northeastern State University in Tahlequah, Oklahoma and a Bachelor’s Degree in Mathematics from Central State University in Edmond, Oklahoma.

Chief Beaver completed a full career as an educator, administrator, and football coach and retired in 1991 after 25 years. During his career, he became the head football coach of Jenks (OK) High School and accumulated a 109-53 record, eight district titles, seven area championships, and two 6-A state titles. He is a member of the Oklahoma High School Football Coaches Hall of Fame, he was inducted in 1990.