Energy Minister Lily D'Ambrosio. Photo: Angela Milne

Emerging battery technologies that can help households and business better embrace renewable energy will be a focus of the state government's pitch to expand clean power in Victoria.

In an interview with Fairfax Media, Energy Minister Lily D'Ambrosio talked up the potential of batteries to transform the way households and businesses produce, use and consume energy.

"That will mean affordable clean energy," Ms D'Ambrosio said.

Advertisement

"And the jobs that come out of that, and the technologies, are going to be significant."

In recent weeks batteries have been a hot talking point in energy circles following the launch of a lower-cost home system by US company Tesla, which is famous for making electric cars.

In households, battery systems can enable power generated by rooftop solar panels to be used later at night, while energy can be stored from the grid during cheaper times for use in more expensive periods.

Ms D'Ambrosio said battery storage would be an important focus for the government, which is promising detailed plans by later this year for how Victoria will grab a greater share of the renewable energy industry.

The minister said she wanted to encourage storage technologies as one part of a $20 million "new energy jobs fund" the government had established.

In a wide ranging interview on how the state government will try to shape Victoria's energy landscape, Ms D'Ambrosio said the ACT had been a "shining light" on renewables.

The ACT is aiming to have 90 per cent of its power come from renewable energy by 2020. As part of that, it has been holding auctions to buy renewable power, which has so far backed two new windfarms in Victoria, among other projects.

Ms D'Ambrosio would not detail what measures were under consideration to help increase renewable energy in Victoria, whose power industry is dominated by brown coal power plants, but she did say feed-in-tariffs would not be a feature.

On Friday the Andrews government called for the Abbott government to reconsider a legislative ban on state governments having their own renewable energy targets so they had more policy options.

Ms D'Ambrosio said the ultimate ambition was to increase renewable energy's share of the mix. And she said the renewables industry had huge scope to drive investment and new jobs into the state.

She would not rule out further development of state's massive brown coal reserves, but said she would proceed cautiously.

Ms D'Ambrosio was lukewarm about new projects to use brown coal that had been presented to the previous Napthine government via its coal allocation process.

"There are a handful, but very few were actually serious or you would give a second glance to," she said.

Asked if the dangers of climate change meant Latrobe Valley coal should be left in the ground, the minister responded: "We're not ruling out the coal resource in terms of it being able to remain a resource for different types of industry."

On other issues Ms D'Ambrosio said:

* Current bonds paid by the coal industry were not sufficient enough to provide confidence that mine management and rehabilitation would occur in line with the expectations of the community.

* Energy generators could not just sit around and hope for government handouts for closure, and companies had to make up their own minds in a private market where their investment should be and the type of energy production they would be a part of.

*Measures to help save energy across the economy were being considered to work alongside a renewed state energy efficiency target.