Caveness, Christopher Royal

Christopher Royal Caveness, 57, of Roanoke County, Va., passed away on Tuesday, May 24, 2016, after a courageous battle with cancer. Chris was preceded in death by his brother, Mark Caveness; and his parents, Lorine Smith and Charles Gerald Caveness.Surviving is his loving wife of 28 years, Tara Witt Caveness; sons, Tyler Caveness and wife, Jennifer, and Zachary Caveness; daughter, Emma Caveness; and brothers, Gare Caveness, Brant Caveness and Matthew Caveness.Chris was born on April 26, 1959, in Raleigh, N.C. After relocating to Virginia, he attended Floyd County High School, graduating in 1977. Following high school, Chris attended Roanoke College and graduated with a Bachelor's Degree in Business Administration in 1983, followed by a CSSC designation from Notre Dame in 1996.Professionally, Chris worked in the insurance industry for more than 30 years, starting a company based out of Roanoke that insured government contractors across 42 states, which he then sold in 2010. His successful career was made possible by the devoted and loyal employees that he surrounded himself with. Chris was also a past president of Big Brothers, Big Sisters; which during his tenure became the largest Big Brothers, Big Sisters in southwest Virginia.He was a co-founder of the Pi-Lambda Phi fund provided through Roanoke College with the Center for Leadership, Innovation and Entrepreneurship. This fund awards scholarships annually in a business ethics speaker series. Chris was also a first responder to the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995, helping survivors and families deal with the immediate shock of the event.Chris was a historian, with a particular focus on the American Civil War. He was a re-enactor with the 28th VA Regiment and co-founder of the Center for Civil War Living History. This association preserved 2.7 million dollars in historic battlefields across five states, and was the result of a joint effort with Ted Turner Productions in cooperation for producing the movie "Gods and Generals." Chris also enjoyed doing educational school programs on the American Civil War across southwest Virginia.Outside of work and philanthropy, Chris was an avid outdoorsman and musician. He fished, camped, and rafted in Alaska, Montana and Wyoming. He loved sailing the coast of the Carolinas in his beloved boat, "Seabiscuit." In addition, he enjoyed his time locally being outside and improving his mountain home and farm. Through all of his travels, there was always a guitar close by, which he enjoyed to play for his family, friends and strangers just to make them smile.His greatest joy was his family, with whom he cherished creating many wonderful memories. Chris was by all accounts a life-lover, wanderer and adventurer, who will always be remembered as a man who lived life to the fullest.Funeral Services will be held at 11 a.m. on Saturday, May 28, 2016, at Church of the Holy Spirit with Bishop Quigg Lawrence officiating. Interment will follow at East Hill Cemetery. The family will receive friends from 4 until 8 p.m. on Friday, May 27, 2016, at Oakey's South Chapel. Online condolences may be expressed at www.oakeys.com.