Having trouble viewing the video? Try disabling any ad blocking extensions currently running on your browser.

LAYTON — A new Intermountain Healthcare hospital is now under construction to serve a growing Davis County population.

"We are excited to be a part of the rejuvenation of historic downtown Layton and to provide easier access to Intermountain Healthcare services to Davis County residents," said Tim Pehrson, vice president and CEO for the north region of Intermountain Healthcare.

Studies had shown that 60 percent of patients in north Davis County leave the county for hospital services, including about 35 percent for childbirth. The nearest Intermountain hospital to Layton is McKay-Dee Hospital in Ogden, some 12 or more miles away.

The new hospital, located at 201 W. Layton Parkway, west of I-15 and east of Flint Street, is expected to open mid-2018, and an adjacent medical office building will open in the fall of 2017. The 300,000-square-foot building will include 43 beds and four operating rooms, which is bigger than the nonprofit initially anticipated.

Layton Mayor Bob Stevenson said the hospital is an important part of developing the area to better serve the community.

Layton's only other hospital is the IASIS Healthcare-owned Davis Hospital and Medical Center on Antelope Drive, a busy area of town.

"Having an additional hospital located in Layton enhances the quality of life for our residents and the growing population of Davis County," Stevenson said, adding that the new construction project "continues the investment trend" in the area.

Photo: KSL-TV

Intermountain purchased the 70-acre plot of land in 2008 but held off on planning and development due to economic concerns and uncertainty in the health care environment resulting from the Affordable Care Act of 2010.

The facility is aiming to provide surgical services, a special care nursery, labor and delivery, gastrointestinal laboratory, inpatient care, emergency department, imaging services, physical therapy and rehabilitation services, retail pharmacy, infusion services and physicians offices. It will also house additional outpatient and followup services for Primary Children's Hospital.

Jacobsen Construction is heading up the project for Intermountain, with help from HKS Architects and J&J Garden Center.

A recent report by the Kaiser Family Foundation states that Utah is middle-ranked nationally in terms of the number of hospital beds available to the population. With about 47 hospitals throughout the state, 1.8 beds are available to every 1,000 people, according to the report. The national average is 2.5 beds for every 1,000 in population.

Intermountain, based in Salt Lake City, operates 22 hospitals and more than 185 clinics throughout Utah and Idaho.







Photos

0 Pending Comments