Google CEO and co-founder Larry Page has always had the vision of creating the best, most useful products for people, and the company provides some of the most innovative information technology available in today’s market for both personal and business use.

The Dutch-based company is primarily known for their internet services, and they’ve been putting their fingers into a large grab bag of opportunites along the way to making it better. In fact, as mentioned in this Inquisitr article, they’ve even become interested in a bit of aerospace activity.

In this case, it becomes apparent what Google wanted to become involved with Titan Aerospace industry for. After all, if their company intends to launch a fleet of satellites to bring internet to remote areas around the globe as rumors have said, they could definitely use the discount.

Google plans to spend at least a billion dollars creating 180 high-capacity satellites and launching them into low Earth orbit–lower even than some of the “normal” satellites currently orbiting our world.

In the past Google considered both balloons and drones to spread internet, but decided they need to aim a bit higher if they want to reach the most remote customers.

Now Google wants to take an approach modeled after 03b and launch a large swarm of small satellites that each weigh less that 113 kilograms and put them even lower in orbit, using something they call “atmospheric satellites” developed by Titan.

As it turns out, another company we think of as internet based is also interested in spreading internet to unserviced regions. Apparently, Facebook and Google had both announced an intention to use drones to reach those areas not too long ago.

For those of you who are trying to work it out in your head like I was how a satellite that close would not suffer orbital decay and such, here is a video about how all that works to help slow those wheels down in there:

Well, that covers how they stay up there, but you might be interested to know a bit more about how satellites work in general. You may be pleased to discover that you can even launch a satellite of your own if you want to. To find out a bit more about this, go ahead and have a look here: