A driver crashed into a building Saturday morning, hitting a gas meter and igniting a fire.

Firefighters say the driver was long gone by the time they arrived on scene. They were initially responding to the accident; the fire started after they got to the scene.

"We got called [to Circle Drive and Dale Street] about 2 this morning on a traffic accident, possible trapped [occupants in] vehicle versus a building," Lt. Fred Varnell with the Colorado Springs Fire Department said. "What [firefighters] found was an abandoned vehicle that had ran into the old BMW building here. It struck the gas meter.

"After the crews arrived, we did have ignition of that gas source."

More firefighters responded to help extinguish the fire. Varnell said 27 firefighters total were at the scene Saturday morning.

Varnell said the building didn't sustain much damage.

"It's a block building, so that was good. It'd be different if we'd had a wood frame, we would have probably had more building involvement if that would've been the case."

The source of the fire created unique challenges for firefighters, Varnell said.

"Once that gas fire, that gas-driven fire is extinguished, we still have free-flowing gas that's got to go somewhere...it's looking for an ignition source. If it finds it, it's going to light off and it's going to light all the fuel off back to its source. Luckily [firefighters] put the fire out, they were able to get up to the meter itself and clamp that gas line off."

Colorado Springs Utilities also responded and shut the gas off at the street so firefighters wouldn't have anything going past the clamping system they had in place.

"Then we won't have a chance for a rekindle," Varnell explained.

Varnell said the impacted building was the only one expected to be without gas since it had its own gas source.

People living across the street were told to stay in their homes while crews worked to put out the fire.

When asked what goes through firefighters' minds when one call--a traffic accident--changes into a dramatically different one, Varnell said he was grateful to whoever alerted them to the accident.

"Our biggest concern is the explosive hazard. We've seen these in the past, they can blow up with a lot of force and cause a lot of damage really quick with a gas leak like this. Luckily, we were dispatched on the traffic accident--I don't know if a passerby called it in--so we're always grateful for those people driving by that see something, call it in. That got crews out here quickly, and that saved a lot of time. The longer the gas is leaking, the more hazardous it gets, that buildup and how far it travels...can cause a lot more damage if we're not involved sooner."