The senior management of a New Orleans faith-based nonprofit spent more than $130,000 in public funding to lease and buy luxury cars, purchase tickets to sporting and entertainment events, pay for vacations and make college tuition payments, according to a report released Monday (May 25) by the Louisiana Legislative Auditor.

Alternatives Living -- which provides services to people struggling with mental, behavioral, physical and medical issues -- also reported nearly $248,000 in expenses with "little or no documentation to support the business purpose" of the costs, according to the report.

The organization, which didn't immediately respond to a request for comment, describes itself as a "group of experienced professionals who are committed to improving the quality of life of the individuals that we serve." It filed for nonprofit status in 1993 and is headed by executive director Melanie Duplechain, chief financial officer Ricky Roberson and director of programs Ada Craige-Roberson, according to Louisiana Secretary of State records.

The audit also found that Alternatives Living billed the Department of Health and Hospitals Permanent Supportive Housing program for labor costs at the same time it was billing other programs for those same costs. And despite reporting a growing deficit, increasing payroll liabilities and penalties and interest related to those payroll issues, the audit said the nonprofit "continues to borrow from and lend money to officers and employees."

Alternatives Living has been the focus of a number of critical audits. A December 2013 report by the state auditor found that the organization owed nearly $940,000 in state and federal taxes dating to 2009. An audit performed by the New Orleans firm Duplantier, Hrapmann, Hogan and Maher in 2012 said that the nonprofit overstated expenses by more than $29,000. It also noted personal expenses charged to the company for travel, concert and sporting tickets, repairs to personal vehicles and college tuition.

Check back with NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune for more on this story