Photo: Getty Images Employers are continuing to cut employee benefits costs in the wake of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Strategies include implementing consumer-driven plans or self-insuring, as well as launching health savings accounts, enhancing wellness programs and increasing voluntary benefit offerings. According to Benefits Selling's 2015 Employer Survey, 63 percent of respondents said they expected their employees to pick up more of the tab for their own benefits in the coming year, considering that health care and benefits costs have risen since last year. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

“We’ve always had a terrific group health plan, but after the passage of PPACA, we made some changes to our coverages to make sure that our benefits program complied,” Levings said. The firm also offers its employees disability, dental and life voluntary benefits, as well as HSAs and flexible spending plans. “We have banks close to work with good interest rates on the HSAs,” Levings added, “which helps them with the high deductible.”

In the employer survey, 21 percent of respondents said they’ve considered moving their employees onto the public exchanges, compared to 79 percent who said they have not. Jeff Forker, total rewards consultant at SCL Health in Broomfield, Colorado, says that his organization, a nonprofit faith-based health care system, offers its employees a variety of medical plans, but the organization encourages them to opt for the SCL self-insured plan.