Dodger Zack Greinke. Photo: Getty Images

Travelling to Sydney to open the Major League Baseball season is proving too much for the Los Angeles Dodgers, with star pitcher Zack Greinke claiming there is "absolutely zero excitement" for coming to Australia.

The Dodgers are also reportedly considering leaving their No.1 pitching ace Clayton Kershaw back in the United States, with their March 22-23 opening series against the Arizona Diamondbacks in Sydney looking more like a chore for the powerhouse side than a historic chance to spread the baseball gospel.

Greinke is LA's No.2 pitcher behind $US215 million ($A239.06 million) man Kershaw, and would likely start in one of the two matches to be played at the SCG next month.

But the 30-year-old says he'd rather not come.

Advertisement

"I would say there is absolutely zero excitement for it," Greinke told ESPN.

"There just isn't any excitement to it. I can't think of one reason to be excited for it."

Organisers in Sydney are far from thrilled with Greinke's outburst but are holding off on making comment until they've spoken to relevant parties in America.

The opening series at the SCG has been planned in close consultation with the Major League Baseball Players Association and the Dodgers and Diamondbacks clubs, and Australian baseball representatives have now asked for a please explain.

The MLB's landmark move to open the season proper in Australia for the first time means the Dodgers and Diamondbacks are starting their season more than a week before the rest of the league.

Arizona pitchers Brandon McCarthy and Patrick Corbin have spoken of their desire to be a part of history in Sydney, but it seems big brothers the Dodgers may feel the venture is beneath them.

To not bring drawcard Kershaw down under would be a major blow for the concept, given the MLB would be eager to showcase its biggest stars to a new market.

However, the Dodgers are reportedly trying to manage Kershaw's workload and want him on deck to throw in their US opener on March 30 and their home opener in LA on April 4.

Manager Don Mattingly has said they don't want Kershaw to overexert himself too early in the season after pitching a career-high amount of innings last year.

Despite his lack of enthusiasm, Greinke says he would pitch in Australia if required.

AAP