The Affordable Care Act has prompted shifts in health care delivery toward a more patient-centered approach. In California, one of the next such shifts could be prescription labels in the patient’s native language. Forty-four percent of California residents speak a language other than English at home. The state’s board of pharmacy is now considering a proposal to require that pharmacies provide prescription instructions in the dominant other languages.

Difficulty understanding medication instructions contributes to nonadherence and poor outcomes for patients, studies show. Translated labels could be the answer, but the proposal raises big questions for pharmacists.

“Some advocates feel strongly that they want other languages on the bottle, and others are concerned an error in translation can lead to a medication error,” said Virginia Herold, Executive Officer of the California Board of Pharmacy.

In 2011, the California Board of Pharmacy redesigned prescription labels—increasing font size and dedicating 50% of labels to information intended for the patient—to make them more patient-centered. The board opted not to introduce translated labels at that time, instead requiring the availability of oral interpreter services at the pharmacy counter. Last July, the translation proposal was back on the table after a forum on further patient-focused label redesign.

The proposed legislation currently awaits review by the board of pharmacy. A committee met in late September to make a formal recommendation. The proposed statutory requirement currently awaits further work by a board committee before its review by the board of pharmacy in late January.

Pharmacists’ concern

Pharmacists’ main concern with translated labels has been how to ensure the accuracy of the translation and whether pharmacists would be responsible for adverse events associated with translated labels, although many pharmacies do provide translated directions on labels now.

“The first and foremost issue for pharmacists is, ‘If I can’t read what I’m putting on the label, I can’t be certain that I’ve got the right directions for this patient,’” Herold said. “And that is an important and serious obligation of the pharmacist.”

The California Board of Pharmacy’s website already offers translations of the 21 most common medication instructions in Spanish, Chinese, Vietnamese, Korean, and Russian—the five languages after English most commonly spoken in California.

The board created 16 standardized medication instructions and translations of them for the 2011 label redesign. For example, “Take one pill twice daily” became “Take 1 pill in the morning and 1 pill at bedtime.”

When the standardized language was created, a team of researchers had the instructions translated into the five languages and vetted them in communities where those languages are spoken. Pharmacists were not required to use the standardized language, but they were urged to whenever possible.

The committee recommendation on translated labels suggests that the board “empower pharmacists to use [those existing] translations,” Herold said, “which will perhaps mean a waiver of liability in the event someone makes an inadvertent mistake in transferring the information to the label.”

It remains to be seen whether legislation, if passed, would require translations in additional languages and translations of instructions other than the 16 medication instructions currently available on the board’s website.

It’s possible, said Herold, that legislation would require that English instructions appear somewhere on the label as well so that anybody that comes across the label understands how to take it.

Around the country

California would not be the first state to require translated prescription labels. New York passed the Safe Rx Act in 2012, which requires pharmacy chains of eight stores or more to provide oral interpretation at the pharmacy either in person or by phone and translated prescription labels in Chinese, Italian, Russian, or Spanish to non–English-speaking patients.

New York’s legislation ensures that pharmacies are not liable for third-party translation errors. While the mandate only requires labels in four languages, many pharmacies offer additional languages, said a spokesperson for the state board.

Meanwhile, pharmacies around the country, including in California, voluntarily offer prescription labels in the languages their patients speak. Walgreens has offered this service for nearly 15 years. Patients can get prescription instructions in 21 of the languages most commonly spoken in the United States.

“The single most important information patients have to refer to about how to take their medication is that label,” Herold said, “so you want it to be clear, you want it to be consistent, and you want people to be able to read it and understand it.”