NEW YORK — Finnish beauty brand Lumene is kicking off 2014 with a bang, the company said, as it revamps packaging, broadens its portfolio with new formulas and prepares to expand into Rite Aid stores.



To highlight the skin care benefits of vitamin C, Lumene’s Vitamin C+ is now known as Bright Now Vitamin C+. The range, which is targeted to women ages 25 years and older, leverages the power of arctic cloudberry nectar and seed oil and vitamin C to brighten and protect the skin while preventing the first signs of aging.



The 10-SKU collection features a new addition: BB Serum. This new formula is created for those who want the benefits and smoothing effects of a BB cream without the color, as it is a first-of-its-kind serum with an illuminating finish. The lightweight serum is designed to instantly minimize the appearance of pores and gives the skin a boost of radiance and moisture. The retail price is $21.99.

New to the Lumene portfolio is the Time Freeze line with arctic lingonberry extract. This nine-SKU collection is designed for women ages 40 years and older whose skin is starting to lose its firmness and elasticity. Prices range from $14.99 to $24.99.



A hero product within the new Time Freeze line is the Targeted Dark Spot Corrector. The formula is designed to help minimize the appearance of dark spots and improves skin tone and clarity.



To highlight the efficacy of the products and to give the packaging a more clinical look and feel, the beauty brand has revamped all of the product packaging. On the new packaging, consumers can easily find the product benefits (i.e., firming or brightening), ingredients and the suggested age of use.



To further communicate the brand's innovation to consumers, the company has launched a new website. The new site has a modern look and is easier to navigate. It also features an increased level of product information and will offer product reviews.



Lumene products are currently sold at such retailers as CVS, Walgreens and Ulta Beauty and, beginning in early February, will also be sold in about 1,800 Rite Aid locations.