Remember the story about the gay slur that was written on a Whole Foods cake? Turns out it was all a hoax. That story tops this morning's Breakfast Buzz.

Jordan Brown, a gay pastor living in Texas, accused employees at an Austin Whole Foods of writing an anti-gay message on his cake back in April. The picture and the story went viral. Now the 31-year-old is admitting he made the whole thing up. This comes after whole foods released surveillance footage proving employees did not tamper with the cake. The company initially said it would counter-sue the pastor for 100,000 dollars. It later dropped that lawsuit after Brown issued a public apology.

A new study says federal and state governments are missing out on 28-billion dollars by not legalizing marijuana. The study comes from the Tax Foundation, an independent think tank. Experts say most of that revenue would be from tax on pot. Critics worry legalizing marijuana could lead to more drug abuse and addiction. But experts at the tax foundation say people who abuse marijuana do so regardless of whether or not it's legal. According to the national survey on drug use and health, about 12-percent of marijuana users were considered "abusers" of the drug.

The Supreme Court has sent the Affordable Care Act Contraceptive Challenge back to a lower court. The justices, in a unanimous opinion, asked the appeals court to reconsider both parties' arguments and figure out a compromise. Groups that object based on religious beliefs say they should not have to provide contraceptive coverage to their employees. The Obama Administration says a group's religious freedom does not include the right to restrict access to health care for employees.

Two Yellowstone Park tourists who stuck a bison calf in their car to keep it warm, meant well but had a sad ending. A man and his son visiting from another country pulled up to a ranger station with this calf in their car because they apparently thought the wild animal was too cold. That's against the rules. You're supposed to stay at least 25-yards away from all wildlife, and the two were ticketed. Now the sad part, park rangers say they tried repeatedly to reunite the calf with the herd, but all efforts failed. The calf was abandoned, so they euthanized the calf, because they say it was causing a dangerous situation by continually approaching people and cars along the road.

It only took seventeen years, but the International Space Station has orbited the earth one hundred thousand times. NASA announced the milestone Monday. In 1988 a Russian rocket flew up to orbit what would become the first piece of the ISS. Since then, it has traveled 2.9 billion miles, which equals ten round trips to Mars. The nearly one-million-pound space station circles the earth every 90 minutes. And the astronauts inside get a sunrise or sunset every 45 minutes. Experts say the ISS is the key to the next space frontier, putting people on mars.