Editor's Note: The following opinion column was submitted by Alec Salisbury, of Ithaca College, in response to an Ithaca Voice story published on Tuesday.

Submit guest columns to [email protected]

Dear Editor,

I am writing in response to Mayor Myrick’s recent endorsement of Hillary Clinton over Senator Bernie Sanders. Like the mayor, I too believe that President Obama has been a transformational president. However, we differ in the belief that preserving President Obama’s legacy should be a core reason for electing a candidate. Outside of the Affordable Care Act, the presidents' time in office will likely be marked by gridlock and political polarization. We need a president with the ability to bring people together. During the first Democratic debate, Hillary Clinton described the Republicans as her enemy, which is certainly not how we should view others with different viewpoints.

I also agree with Mayor Myrick’s belief that seeing a woman president would be incredibly empowering. But just as having an African-American president didn’t end racism, having a female president wouldn’t end sexism. And sexism is electing someone based on their gender, regardless of whether they have the best ideas or the fairest policies. I want to one day see a woman POTUS. I want to one day see a presidential field where there are as many women candidates as men. I can't wait for the day when voting for a female president is exciting because she isn't just a woman candidate, but because she is a woman who reflects the values I believe in.

I really believe that there are so many women who would make great political leaders, Elizabeth Warren is among one of them. But I have a hard time supporting a candidate who has taken no clear position on The Keystone Pipeline, the TPP, and Glass-Steagall, among other important issues.

When Bernie says he’ll fight for women, or anything else for that matter, I believe him. His extremely consistent record shows that when he says something, he means it. Senator Sanders campaign is also completely financed by the people, which is further proof that he will represent us, not those with the most amount of money.