Please enable Javascript to watch this video

Vying for an Iowa Senate seat, Joni Ernst and Bruce Braley went head-to-head in a debate Saturday, October 11, 2014.

The candidates met at St. Ambrose in Davenport and engaged in a debate covering topics like Obamacare and the environment.

Both candidates also had the opportunity to refute claims made in attack ads and share their opinions about their opponents.

Related: What makes the Ernst-Braley senate race so close

“Senator Ernst is fond of saying things that sound good but when you look at what they mean to Iowans they don’t make Iowans better off,” said Braley, “and this is another example of that. You can’t say that you stand with farmers and say “I’ll vote against the farm bill,” that you’re not a strong supporter of the renewable fuel standard because you don’t agree with it in principal and these are things that have consequences for Iowans.”

“Actions speak louder than words and I have a 100 percent rating when it comes to renewable fuels; that’s from the Iowa Renewable Fuels Association. I will continue to stand up for farmers and rules. Now I think it’s very important to have farmers in the United States Senate. When you talk about your words behind closed doors at a fundraiser in Texas, you poked fun at Senator Grassley for being just a farmer without a law degree.”

Fact Check: What you need to know about the ad linking Joni Ernst to privatizing Social Security

Fact Check: What you need to know about the ad criticizing Braley's attendance record

After the debate, supporters went both ways regarding who won the debate.

“Overall I say Braley did a better job at answering most of the questions and getting to the core issues,” said one attendee.

“Somebody like Joni that has experience, she’s a leader, you don’t get to be a Lieutenant Colonel by being a puppet,” said another attendee.

According to the Des Moines Register, Ernst was ahead of Braley by just one point 47% - 46% on Saturday.

Whichever candidate is elected in November will take over for Senator Tom Harkin who is vacating the seat.