Bloomberg “Affordable” is a debatable term.

Health-insurance costs climbed sharply, according to the latest inflation data released Friday, evidence insurers were able to pass along big premium hikes.

According to the Labor Department, health-insurance costs rose 4.8% in the 12 months ending in January, the fastest rise since April 2013 and much faster than the broader rate of inflation.

Health insurance costs are up 4.8% in the past year. Most since 2013, but far below 14.8% rise in 2012 #CPI pic.twitter.com/K8ndyEu74e — Rex Nutting (@RexNutting) February 19, 2016

The data reflect both rising premiums as well as increased co-payments, according to Richard Moody, chief economist at Regions Financial, in a note to clients.

That said, it’s worth noting the CPI calculation on health insurance is a complex one. The Labor Department says it can’t get reliable data on changes in quality, so it uses the indirect method of looking at changes in the prices of medical-care items covered by health-insurance policies as well as the cost of administering policies.

But the CPI data seems to be reflective of reality.

A number of state regulators had approved big premium increases. In Tennessee, for instance, BlueCross BlueShield hiked average premiums by 36%, and Humana increased rates by 5.8%.

According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, the weighted percentage change in the cost of silver plans offered under the Affordable Care Act this year is 3.6%.

Most people don’t actually get their coverage using the ACA, or Obamacare as it’s commonly known, but the trends appear to be similar for employer-based plans.

The Congressional Budget Office says premiums on employment-based coverage will grow by about 5% each year over the next decade, or roughly 2 percentage points faster than income.

UnitedHealth Group UNH, -0.33% and other insurers have complained that people are gaming Obamacare by using special enrollment periods to get coverage when they need medical care.

The CBO report also points out the lack of competition, not just from insurers but also in the hospitals and physicians they reimburse.

More from MarketWatch