There are plenty of reasons why plan sponsors peering into 2014 might have that deer-in-the-headlights look about them. Between the crazy gyrations of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, and dealing with the fallout of the Supreme Court’s Windsor decision, folks are justifiably anxious. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

3. Defined contribution plans are allowed to select a “qualified default investment” in cases where participants are allowed to direct their own investments. Participants’ assets will be invested in these investment vehicles if no affirmative election is made. The plan sponsor must give notice that describes the qualified default investment. This notice must be given to participants at least 30 days, but not more than 90 days, before the first day of the plan year. (Deadline for calendar-year plans was Dec. 1.) 4. Defined benefit plans are required to provide a funding notice explaining a statement of the plan’s assets and liabilities, its funding status for the previous two years and certain other information and requirements. This notice must be provided to participants within 120 days after the end of the plan year, or if the plan is a small plan that covers fewer than 100 participants, notice must be provided by the due date of the Form 5500. For large (100 or more participants) calendar-year plans, notice must be provided by April 30, 2014.

8. All discretionary amendments to qualified plans must be adopted no later than the end of the plan year in which they are adopted. Therefore, a calendar year plan that has implemented a change to its plan in 2013 will have to be amended by Dec. 31, 2013. Health plans