FORT COLLINS — In his 23 seasons as a head basketball coach, Colorado State’s Larry Eustachy said he hasn’t seen many teams win a game while shooting 32 percent — especially against a talented opponent like New Mexico.

That’s why Eustachy couldn’t be upset after a 68-66 loss Saturday to the Lobos, the defending Mountain West champions. CSU hit just 18-for-56 (.321) from the field.

“It’s hard to play when you’re not making shots,” Eustachy said. “But we took it to the wire. I’m so proud of my guys.”

A Moby Arena crowd of 5,592 held its breath as CSU junior guard Daniel Bejarano took an inbounds pass with 6.1 seconds remaining and the Rams down by two points.

Bejarano, who would finish with a team-best 21 points, dribbled the remaining length of the court and tossed a floater toward the basket with a second to go. But the ball caught the edge of the backboard and bounced away as the buzzer sounded.

“That’s the play we wanted,” Eustachy said.

Despite cold shooting, CSU (12-8, 3-4) traded leads with New Mexico for much of the game by hustling for loose balls and grabbing 12 offensive rebounds.

“It’s very disappointing; we were right there,” Bejarano said.

New Mexico (15-4, 6-1) became the first Lobos team since 1984 to win its first four conference road games. The Lobos were without injured 7-footer Alex Kirk (left leg). But two seniors, 6-4 guard Kendall Williams ( 23 points) and 6-9 forward Cameron Bairstow (19), carried the load. Eustachy predicted all three Lobos stars will play in the NBA.

Williams hit 1-of-2 free throws with 6.1 seconds remaining to make it 68-66.

Eustachy argued that a mistake by the shot clock operator penalized his team. New Mexico got the ball with 40 seconds remaining after a CSU miss. Eustachy shouted at his players not to foul, hoping for a missed shot by the Lobos. But the 35-second shot clock was not reset, and instead became synchronized with the game clock.

The CSU bench frantically ordered the Rams’ players to foul, and Williams made a free throw with 10.1 seconds left for a 67-64 lead. CSU’s Jon Octeus hit two free throws with seven seconds left, but the Rams had to foul Williams again.

“As Coach (Eustachy) says, we can’t let the game come down to officiating or the clock,” CSU guard Joe De Ciman said.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler