This Week in Crain's New York: March 23, 2015 Listen to the Podcast or Download

In most parts of New York City, developers face stiff opposition to constructing taller buildings. But a Brooklyn real estate firm proposing a housing and retail complex on a plot where three diverse neighborhoods converge—Bedford-Stuyvesant, Bushwick and Williamsburg—could have the opposite problem.

Several community groups, along with Brooklyn Deputy Borough President Diane Reyna and City Councilman Antonio Reynoso, have been vocal opponents of a city rezoning that has limited buildings in the area to eight stories.

"You could build 60 stories [at the site]," said Martin Needleman, an attorney working with opposition groups, at a January rally.

Now Simon Dushinsky's Rabsky Group is seeking permission from the city to build a series of 10-story towers with a total of 777 apartments on property straddling Wallabout Street between Union and Harrison streets, according to Department of City Planning documents. The eight-building project is also expected to include 155 affordable apartments, a half-acre park and 30,000 square feet of retail space.

Squabbling over plan

Cue the opposition, right? Not so fast when it comes to the Broadway Triangle—a nearly 30-acre swath of residential, vacant and industrial property bounded by Broadway, and Union and Flushing avenues. There, a collection of community groups determined to foster construction of more affordable housing has long called for bigger buildings, although the organizations have sparred repeatedly over whom those apartments should be designed to serve.

"You could build enough affordable housing to accommodate everybody," said Mr. Needleman, according to the blog Bedford+Bowery.

Today, the triangle is an underutilized mix of one-story industrial buildings, midrise apartment houses in various stages of completion, and fenced-off vacant lots—some used as impromptu parking areas, others resembling miniature nature preserves. The triangle sits in South Williamsburg's Community Board 1, the home of one of the city's largest Hasidic neighborhoods, but it also lies just across the street from Bedford-Stuyvesant's mostly black Community Board 3, and Bushwick's predominantly Hispanic Community Board 4.

Ever since a 2009 rezoning of an eight-block strip near the proposed development site, those three communities have engaged in a heated debate—ignited by charges of racism—centered on exactly what kind of housing belongs there, and for whom it should be designed.

That fractious history means Mr. Dushinsky, who could not be reached for comment, could be in for a unique public-review process as he presses for a rezoning of his two-block property.

Although the city's rezoning nearby was designed to create market-rate and affordable-housing units on both publicly and privately owned sites, critics have argued that the changes discriminate against the area's black and Hispanic neighborhoods and favor a portion of its Hasidic community.

For starters, they objected to a provision that would reserve half the affordable units for Community Board 1 residents. In addition, critics charged that the city selected developers to build on public sites without a bidding process.

But what could prove to be the most relevant sticking point for Mr. Dushinsky's rezoning is the argument that constructing shorter buildings with larger apartments is a bow to the unique needs of Hasidic families.

Many of them have six or more children. What's more, many will not ride in an elevator on the Sabbath, or will only use an elevator that stops on every floor so they don't have to press the buttons, making taller buildings impractical for them.

Charges of anti-Semitism

To block the CB1 plans, opponents took their case to court, a move that touched off charges of anti-Semitism. Throughout the case, which is still ongoing, the city has argued it acted properly. Nonetheless, in 2012 a judge stopped development on three public sites and noted that the city's zoning likely violated the Fair Housing Act.

Back to Mr. Dushinsky. Although his development does not lie within the area covered by the city's contested 2009 rezoning, which allows for buildings as tall as eight stories, it still lies within the Broadway Triangle. That could prove to be a problem.

Shekar Krishnan, another lawyer for the Broadway Triangle Coalition, told Crain's that rezoning the entire triangle for greater density would better align changes there with Mayor Bill de Blasio's goal of building 80,000 affordable apartments by 2024. He also argued that such a broader action could create enough affordable housing for members of all three communities.

"The mayor's affordable-¬housing plan is entirely consistent with what the coalition wants: building high and denser near a transit hub," Mr. Krishnan said.

What ultimately takes place will hinge in large part on the views of Stephen Levin, who represents the Broadway Triangle area on the City Council. The council has to approve the rezoning, and members typically defer to the local representative's wishes. Unlike the coalition, Mr. Levin has long supported the 2009 rezoning.

The councilman could not be reached for comment on the proposed development, but he and others should start weighing in soon. Mr. Dushinsky's application will shortly make its first stop in the ¬public-review process at Brooklyn's Community Board 1.

Charges of anti-Semitism

To block the CB1 plans, opponents took their case to court, a move that touched off charges of anti-Semitism. Throughout the case, which is still ongoing, the city has argued it acted properly. Nonetheless, in 2012 a judge stopped development on three public sites and noted that the city's zoning likely violated the Fair Housing Act.

Back to Mr. Dushinsky. Although his development does not lie within the area covered by the city's contested 2009 rezoning, which allows for buildings as tall as eight stories, it still lies within the Broadway Triangle. That could prove to be a problem.

Shekar Krishnan, another lawyer for the Broadway Triangle Coalition, told Crain's that rezoning the entire triangle for greater density would better align changes there with Mayor Bill de Blasio's goal of building 80,000 affordable apartments by 2024. He also argued that such a broader action could create enough affordable housing for members of all three communities.

"The mayor's affordable-housing plan is entirely consistent with what the coalition wants: building high and denser near a transit hub," Mr. Krishnan said.

What ultimately takes place will hinge in large part on the views of Stephen Levin, who represents the Broadway Triangle area on the City Council. The council has to approve the rezoning, and members typically defer to the local representative's wishes. Unlike the coalition, Mr. Levin has long supported the 2009 rezoning.

The councilman could not be reached for comment on the proposed development, but he and others should start weighing in soon. Mr. Dushinsky's application will shortly make its first stop in the public-review process at Brooklyn's Community Board 1.

Get Crain's Real Estate Daily (RED) Alert Sign up for our FREE daily Real Estate Alert email newsletter. The day's top commercial real estate news, transactions and executive moves. More Newsletters ›

Comments