College student wins second-set tiebreaker on way to win

Staying "mentally strong," Bryan Mehall rallied after losing the first set to defeat Jevgenij Cariov in the men's open singles championship match of the Babolat Boulder Open tennis tournament Sunday.

Mehall quickened his pace in the second set, striking the ball out of Cariov's reach, and went on to win 3-6, 7-6 (4), 6-3 at the Rocky Mountain Tennis Center.

Cariov grew tired as he dived to reach each ball that Mehall hit toward him.

"I just tried to stay relaxed and focus on my technique and hitting good shots and try not to give him too many points and make him earn it," Mehall said.

In the women's championship match, Sammie Watson of Denver defeated Kelli Woodman, also of Denver, 6-1, 7-5.

Bryan Mehall returns a shot in the men's open finals of the Boulder Open at Rocky Mountain Tennis Center. Mehall defeated Jevgenij Cariov in three sets Sunday. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

The men's championship match turned in the second set, when Mehall prevailed in the tiebreaker after he had lost the first set.

"I'm glad I came back mentally in the end," said Mehall, who was seeded sixth in the tournament. "He had a great first set. In the second set I pulled out the tough tiebreak and it just kind of carried me from there."

Originally from Snowmass Colo., Mehall, 21, now plays Division III tennis at Claremont-Mudd-Scripps in California. He defeated top-seeded Richard Johnson 7-5, 6-4 in the quarterfinals en route to the championship match.

On match point Sunday, Mehall returned the ball far from Cariov's reach. Out of breath, both players leaned over the net to shake hands.

Advertisement

Cariov, a 35-year-old from Lithuania who now lives in Boulder, has been the conditioning coach for high-performance players at the Rocky Mountain Tennis Center for the past eight months. Earlier this month he won the Broomfield Open championship.

Cariov, who was seeded eighth, has been playing tennis since he was 6 but has not been actively practicing for seven years.

Cariov's children began to show interest in tennis a year ago, which pulled him back into the game.

"I decided to play some tournaments probably a month and a half ago so I've been out of tennis for seven years. I played in college 15 years ago," said Cariov.

Cariov said Mehall was a solid player and was able to defeat him because "conditions suited him better. The high altitude, he was faster, he delivered the serve," said Cariov.

Mehall rallied in the second set because he "went for more shots, he got confidence, and that carried him to the third set," Cariov said.

In the women's final, Watson continued her strong play a day after ousting No. 1 seed Alex Aiello, a University of Colorado player. Woodman had advanced to the championship match by defeating No. 2 seed Carla Manzi, a former CU player.

Annie Mehl: mehla@dailycamera.com