One-time GOP presidential candidate Carly Fiorina has endorsed Texas Sen. Ted Cruz for president. Fiorina appeared at a rally in Miami on Wednesday to speak in support of the candidate.

Honored to earn @carlyfiorina's endorsement: https://t.co/DQARLNSKMV



Join the #CruzCrew: https://t.co/d6gn8DV1xy pic.twitter.com/IBgCuNG227 — Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) March 9, 2016

“Ted Cruz is a fearless fighter for our constitutional rights. He has spent his life protecting Americans’ God-given liberties, and he has always stood by his word. Unlike the status-quo political class in D.C., Ted Cruz didn’t cower when he got to Washington – he stood unequivocally for the American people. I know Ted, and he’ll do the same as president,” said Carly Fiorina.

In her speech at the rally, Fiorina spoke of Cruz as a "true constitutional conservative."

When Republicans lost the last Presidential election, the Republican establishment thought it knew just what to do. Pass comprehensive immigration reform. Stop talking about "social issues.” Go along and get along. Don’t rock the boat. Rather than fight for real change they stood by as our government grew increasingly incompetent and corrupt. But they didn't count on Ted Cruz. They didn’t predict that against all the odds and most of the predictions, Texas had just elected a Senator who is a true constitutional conservative, a real reformer, and who definitely doesn’t care if the Washington cartel invites him to their cocktail parties. We need a constitutional conservative to unite our Party. Ted has spent his life defending the Constitution. My father was a conservative judge on the very liberal ninth circuit. It takes someone of true principles and convictions like my dad and like Ted Cruz to stick to their guns. Ted has been fighting these fights--whether it’s for religious liberty or our individual right to keep and bear arms or American sovereignty. And he has won.

Fiorina bowed out of the 2016 election on February 10. Her endorsement comes at a rather crucial stage in the election cycle, as Florida votes in a "winner-take-all" primary on March 15.

This post has been updated.