U.S. Rep. John Katko on Monday expressed his most serious concerns to date about a proposed deal to limit Iran's nuclear program, and said he leans toward turning it down when Congress votes on the measure.

Katko, R-Camillus, told the editorial board of syracuse.com/The Post-Standard that he thinks President Barack Obama's administration negotiated a bad deal.

The former organized crime prosecutor said the deal has a fundamental flaw because it requires Iran to be given advance notice before its nuclear facilities could be inspected.

"Here's the fundamental problem with the deal in my mind," Katko said. "To go on a military base, where it's known that Iran has most of their nuclear development capabilities, they're going to need as much as 24 days' notice to go on that base."

He added, "When I was a drug prosecutor, if I gave the bad guys 24 days' notice, or even 24 minutes notice that I was coming to their house – forget it, nothing would be there."

Katko said he is concerned the deal failed to include more requirements for real-time nuclear verification, and that it did not address the fate of four American citizens held as political prisoners in Iran.

"It doesn't address the fact that Iran continues to be the largest state sponsor of terrorism in the world," Katko said.

The congressman said his thinking on the issue was influenced by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who met with Katko and seven other House members for two hours during a May visit to Jerusalem.

On the future of Obamacare

Katko said he is proud of his votes on the Affordable Care Act to repeal the employer mandate and to repeal the 2.3 percent medical device tax on manufacturers such as Welch Allyn of Skaneateles Falls.



The Senate has not yet voted on the medical device tax bill, but if it passes it will take away almost $29 billion in revenue expected over 10 years that would help pay for the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

Katko said Republicans have been working on a short-term plan for revisions to the Affordable Care Act while working on a longer-term solution.

"The short-term gap would be bridged by basically privatizing the insurance, and basically replacing exchanges with substantial tax credits to individuals who bought health insurance," Katko said.

He said Republicans also would like to increase competition among health insurers by allowing companies to sell policies across state lines.

On surprises since taking office

Katko said few things have surprised him about life as a member of Congress since he took office in January.

"I don't think there are a lot of things that I didn't realize," he said. "The one practical thing I didn't realize, I had no idea how much I would have to walk. And all of the floors are marble, like a hard stone, so your knees are killing you until you get the right shoes."

He added, "One thing I didn't appreciate fully, I guess, is the amount of technical rulemaking type of votes...But the overall atmosphere, the overall jockeying for issues and trying to work with your colleagues on both sides of the aisle, it's about what I expected. And sometimes it's better, and sometimes it's worse."

Contact Mark Weiner anytime: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 571-970-3751