The occupants of a car involved in a collision with the late Pineville City Marshal Larry Jeane have filed a civil lawsuit against his estate, the city of Pineville, their insurance companies and others. (Photo: Town Talk file photo)

The occupants of a car involved in a collision with the late Pineville City Marshal Larry Jeane have filed a civil lawsuit against his estate, the city of Pineville, their insurance companies and others.

Jeane was driving a city-owned Ford F-150 pickup truck on Melrose Street just before 1 p.m. on July 18, 2014, when he crossed the center line and hit a 2007 Ford Fusion driven by Sarah Barber. A witness who was driving ahead of Barber had reported seeing Jeane slumped over truck's steering wheel as it crossed into Barber's lane, Pineville Police said while they were investigating the wreck.

Both Jeane and Barber, 37, had to be extricated from their vehicles, and all of the drivers and occupants — Jeane, Barber and three teens — were taken to Rapides Regional Trauma Center. Jeane died two days later.

The lawsuit claims that Barber, her 16-year-old daughter, Abbigail Turner, and two of her nieces, Dana Spivey and Racheal Spivey, suffered serious injuries because of the crash. It seeks unspecified damages related to their medical expenses, mental anguish and other conditions.

Dana Spivey and Racheal Spivey are sisters.

A hearing about adding the Rapides Parish Police Jury and the state of Louisiana to the lawsuit as defendants had been scheduled for Monday, but was postponed. The original lawsuit was filed with the Rapides Parish Clerk of Court's Office in early January. In mid-March, the suit was amended to add the jury and the state as defendants.

Tom Wells, a Rapides Parish assistant district attorney who represents the jury, said the hearing was postponed until sometime this summer. He said he wants the plaintiff's attorney, Derrick G. Earles of the Laborde Earles Law Firm, to show how the jury is responsible in the incident. He said the jury only provides partial funding for the Pineville City Marshal's Office, but has no responsibility for the actions of the separate political entity.

Related story: Pineville City Marshal Larry Jeane dies

Randall Keiser, the attorney representing the city of Pineville, said he had no comment at this time on the lawsuit.

The lawsuit claims that the wreck was solely the fault of Jeane, and it seeks his autopsy report, any traffic citation Jeane received because of the wreck, his driving record, maintenance or driving logs on the Ford truck, the investigative file on the wreck from the Pineville Police Department and more.

Barber, according to the suit, lost consciousness and suffered injuries to her head, neck, jaws, back, pelvis and right ankle. She also had a broken hip socket and had fluid in her stomach. The lawsuit said her injuries required hospitalization and rehabilitation.

Turner, sustained injuries to her head, neck, jaws, back and right shoulder, according to the lawsuit.

The suit lists Racheal Spivey, 18, as suffering injuries to her head, neck, jaws, back and small and large intestines. Her small intestines had to be removed, and she also suffered a brain injury, reads the suit. The lawsuit statest that she required hospitalization and rehabilitation.

Dana Spivey, 19, had to undergo a bowel reconstruction surgery, as well as intestinal surgery. Earles said she was hospitalized for the longest of all four occupants.

Jeane, 68, was in his third term as city marshal for wards 9, 10 and 11 at the time of the wreck. He first was elected in 1997. He also was an adjunct professor at Louisiana College, as well as an avid supporter of the Pineville college's football program.

Read or Share this story: http://www.thetowntalk.com/story/news/local/2015/05/05/civil-lawsuit-filed-wreck-killed-late-marshal-larry-jeane/26943971/