The Longmont Museum's much anticipated Stewart Auditorium opened Sunday to rave reviews at an open house.

The auditorium, a 250-seat performance space, is the centerpiece of an expansion built through a regional $4.45 million fundraising campaign. Along with the auditorium, the expansion includes the Kaiser Permanente education space and the Swan Atrium, which is designed for receptions and dinners.

"It's a transformative space for us," said Longmont Museum director Wes Jessup. "It's just perfect."

Plans for the auditorium include performances by music ensembles and dance troupes, independent film showings on the auditorium's big screen and a Tedx talk. David Ortolano, founder of the Boulder International Fringe Festival, is managing the auditorium.

Nar Rai and 7-month-old Premal check out the Swan Atrium, which is part of the Stewart Auditorium. The Longmont Museum and Cultural Center held a grand opening Sunday for the new Stewart Auditorium. For more photos, go to www.timescall.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Funding for the auditorium began in 2004 when the Bill and Lila J. Stewart, former owners of Longmont radio station KLMO, donated $1 million to the museum anonymously.

In 2012, the family donated another $750,000 and went public. All total the family donated more than half — about $2.5 million — of the $4.45 million price tag for the auditorium.

Lila Stewart took the museum by surprise at Sunday's opening by also donating a Shigeru Kawai piano. She gave the piano in memory of her daughter, Linda, who died in 2009 after open-heart surgery.

While the auditorium is the main attraction, Stewart said, she's most proud of the newly expanded education space with its large windows to bring in light.

Advertisement

"I hope people from the surrounding areas come and see what we have here," she said. "And I hope the auditorium is booked constantly."

Erie's Kathy Howell, a former Longmont Museum curator who came Sunday to see the expansion, said conducting children's program in the small education space was often tricky.

"I'm delighted to see the larger space," she said. "It's wonderful for Longmont."

Heather Mundt, a Longmont resident who grew up in the city, brought her 9-year-old and 7-year-old boys to see the robot exhibit at the museum and check out the new space.

"It's beautiful," she said. "Longmont has come a long way."

Sunday's open house also included a dedication of the restroom art.

Longmont's Art in Public Places Commission put out a call for artists in 2014, and Elena Manferdini, an artist and designer based in California, was chosen from a pool of 130 applicants for the $20,000 project.

Her vinyl pieces, one for each of the 500-square-foot bathrooms, are a barrage of color and patterns and include flowers, vines and insects.

"Our goal was to have the coolest bathrooms in Boulder County," said Lauren Greenfield, the Longmont Art in Public Places coordinator.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa