Those who voted for Obama should look around at the world and America. From the economy to quality of life, to Obama’s countless foreign policy mistakes, and the fact that there has never been a time when America has been less respected by the world, how can one not regret voting for President Barack Obama?

After more than five years of serving as President, Barack Obama has been a complete and utter failure. Will liberals ever admit they were wrong? From the economy, which continues to stagger along, to the continuing raising of taxes and big government, when is enough enough? From the continued expansion of welfare, to the failed stimulus package, arrogant Obama has failed miserably. And let’s not even get started on Obamacare, which has caused more uninsured than ever before and is a colossal failure.

And while domestic policies are surely more important than foreign policy, in a dangerous world a secure America matters.

It is laughable to look back to the 2008 Democratic debate at University of Texas in Austin, when Barack Obama said,

The Bush administration has done so much damage to American foreign relations ... If we think that meeting with the president is a privilege that has to be earned, that reinforces the sense that we stand above the rest of the world at this point in time. It’s important for us in undoing the damage that has been done over the last seven years, for the president to be willing to take that extra step.

There is not one single country on planet Earth that America has better relations with today than under the previous Administration. From destabilizing allies in the Middle East to being emasculated by President Putin, Obama is a spineless and ineffectual leader. Whatever one thinks of him, under Bush, people at least feared and respected America.

Remember, President Obama spoke at the General Assembly of the United Nations and, addressing Iran and Russia, urged them to wake up, as “we are no longer in a Cold War.” He gave an interview on a national TV outlet and said, “And so you know, this is not the Cold War. This is not a contest between the United States and Russia.” Are you so sure, Mr. President? Not a cold war?

This Administration asked the Russians to “reset” relations (although what was handed to Russia actually said "overcharge" on it) – and relations have indeed been “reset.” The pendulum of power has swung towards Russia. Obama mocked Romney for claiming that Russians are our "no. 1 geopolitical foe" and retorted: "The 1980s are now calling to ask for their foreign policy back."

Obama also took an “American Apology Tour.” As Mitt Romney wrote in No Apology,

[N]ever before in American history has its president gone before so many foreign audiences to apologize for so many American misdeeds, both real and imagined. It is his ways of signaling that foreign dislike for America is something he understands and that is, at least in part, understandable. There are anti-American fires burning all across the globe; Obama's words are kindling to them. In his first nine months in office, Obama ... issued apologies and criticism of America in speeches in France, England, Turkey, and Cairo.

When one apologizes, one must realize there are consequences. America is in decline, and American leadership isn’t felt in America, or overseas.

Obama said, “You've got to be clear, both to our allies and our enemies, about where you stand and what you mean.” Unfortunately, they are very clear. Our allies don’t trust us, and our enemies know we are full of hot air. Welcome to Obama’s America. America voted for Obama, as he promised change. From the economy to foreign policy, healthcare to social security, can anyone possibly claim that this Administration has succeeded?

Regardless of where one stands on the political map, it is time to say that choosing Obama was terrible for the American people.

Freedom Center pamphlets now available on Kindle: Click here.

Subscribe to Frontpage's TV show, The Glazov Gang, and LIKE it on Facebook.