Calling someone a killer? That happens for one reason and one reason only: For cynical gain. And it has no place in our politics.

Looking for an easy way to ruin Sunday dinner? Bring up the debate over whether Pennsylvania should take advantage of language in the federal healthcare reform law allowing state officials to add a half-million uninsured citizens to the Medicaid rolls.

Left or right, there’s no shortage of opinion on the issue. It won’t be long before tempers start to flare and the gravy boats start to fly.

But a mass e-mail that the liberal advocacy group Keystone Progress sent out to its followers Tuesday hit a new low, breathlessly claiming that Gov. Tom Corbett “killed 4 people” that day by failing to accept the billions of dollars in federal money Pennsylvania would receive by expanding the joint state and federal entitlement program.

You can disagree with Corbett’s policies. If you’ve met him, you may like him or dislike him.

But calling him a killer? That’s disgusting. And it has no place in our discourse. You don’t need to be liberal or conservative to accept that premise. You mostly just need to have a brain and a heart.

But that’s the state of our politics now. We’ve crossed some line. It’s not enough that you disagree with someone’s policies and want to see them defeated in the marketplace of ideas and at the ballot box.

Now the architect of those ideas also has to be personally destroyed. And I’ll stipulate up front that both the left and the right are guilty of these offenses. It’s not the exclusive province of one party or one ideological camp.

If you’re unfamiliar with the debate, Corbett, a Republican, wants Washington to allow him to move the 500,000 people who would be eligible for coverage under the Medicaid expansion into the private market, where they’d be allowed to purchase health insurance on a sliding scale.

The administration expects to submit its application to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services next month. And in a radio interview last week, Corbett said he’s optimistic about its chances.

The move has angered Democrats who charge that Corbett’s plan, which wouldn’t take effect until Jan. 1, 2015 (assuming Washington approves it), would leave the uninsured without coverage for another year.

They’re also concerned it would still be unaffordable and come with diminished benefits. Another sticking point is a job-search requirement that’s been sought by no other state (Iowa and Arkansas have similar “private option” programs).

There is an undeniable layer of politics to this debate. With approval ratings that barely register in the double-digits, Corbett is widely considered the most vulnerable Republican governor in the country.

His Democratic challengers, quite sensibly, are seeking to exploit any vulnerability they can find as they try to break a decades-old tradition of sitting governors serving the constitutional maximum of two, four-year terms.

In its e-mail, Keystone Progress boss Michael Morrill said the shock tactics were necessary “to call attention to Corbett’s refusal to allow expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.”

The claim was based on research by Harvard University and the City University of New York concluding that up to 1,491 people would die this year because they didn’t have coverage, he wrote.

The e-mail directs supports to a website with a fairly despicable name: “TomCorbettKilled4PeopleToday.com,” where they can sign a letter (with their local lawmaker copied in) urging Corbett to change his mind.

Because there’s nothing quite calling someone a killer to get them to change their ways.

“Why is Corbett turning down federal funding for Medicaid expansion? Because he is playing politics over Obamacare in an election year,” the e-mail charges either blissfully, or more likely deliberately, unaware that it is doing the exact same thing. “He wants to turn Medicaid over to his corporate insurance friends and impose illegal restrictions on those who can be covered.”

Because he got lousy advice for his first three years, Corbett is about as popular as Attilla the Hun in some parts of Pennsylvania. Dodging schoolkids in Philadelphia hasn’t done him any favors either. But as those of us who covered him in 2010 can tell you, there’s an actual human being lurking beneath the Dracula mythology.

On the trail, he got positively misty-eyed talking about how much he was looking forward to being a grandfather.

In periodic meetings in the Linglestown Giant, he and I chatted about grilling and baseball. And gets downright goofy when he talks about his dogs. It was a side of Corbett rarely seen in public and official settings.

And maybe if his handlers had allowed the public to see a little more of that side of Corbett — the one his friends and allies complain has gotten utterly lost — then maybe his numbers wouldn’t be what they are right now. And maybe he wouldn’t be in the fight of his political life this year. But that’s where he is. And that's where his policies have gotten him. So he has to play the hand he’s been dealt.

I disagree with Corbett on matters of policy. That’s no secret. And I think he’s dead wrong on Medicaid. But I still believe now, as I did in 2010, that he’s basically a decent guy who’s trying to do the best job he can based on the principles that guide him. I just think they’re wrongheaded and bad for the state.

But a killer? Only the most heartless — or politically cynical — of people would hurl that kind of charge.

When I e-mailed Morrill to tell him I disagreed with tactics and that effectively accusing Corbett of murder would do nothing to further his cause, he offered the most slender of defenses.

His group, he told me, had poached the idea from former Florida Gov. Charlie Christ, who accused his Republican successor, Rick Scott, of a similar crime.

As if that made it OK.

Then, he added, “When your actions result in the deaths of people, it means you are responsible for their deaths. That is not the same as murder.”

That’s appalling and utterly indefensible. It’s also complete bull.

In case Morrill forgot, here’s what he wrote to his supporters: “Tom Corbett killed 4 people today.”

And his website is called “TomCorbettKilled4PeopleToday.com.”

But that’s not what the study from the Harvard and CUNY researchers says. Not even a little bit.

It doesn’t mention Corbett by name. It accuses him of nothing.

Among the dry recitation of facts, figures and potential economic impacts, it estimates a low of 398 people to a high of 1,491 who might die if the state doesn’t expand its Medicaid rolls.

Again, the numbers, as the chart makes clear, are estimates. That’s nowhere near guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

In interviews, Corbett has said he’s skeptical that Washington will live up to its funding commitments for the expansion. The feds are supposed to initially shoulder 100 percent of the cost, with the states picking up 10 percent of the tab by 2016. Pennsylvania has among the most expensive Medicaid programs in the country.

Corbett has pointed to Washington’s lousy track record on special education funding to buttress his claim.

And you can agree or disagree with that. But calling someone a killer? That happens for one reason and one reason only: For cynical gain.

And it has no place in our politics.

John L. Micek is the Opinion Editor of PennLive and The Patriot-News. Readers may e-mail him at jmicek@pennlive.com or follow him on Twitter @ByJohnLMicek.