Meeting News Coverage Video

SAN DIEGO — The American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology today released the second list of “Five Things Physicians and Patients Should Question,” as part of the American Board of Internal Medicine Foundation’s Choosing Wisely initiative during a press conference here at the Academy’s annual meeting.

“All of these items are evidence-based. They’re meant for our patients and the whole gamut of our physicians, whether you’re in a small practice…or in a large academic setting,” Theodore M. Freeman, MD, FAAAAI, of the San Antonio Asthma and Allergy Clinic in San Antonio, Texas, said during the press conference.

The evidence-based recommendations are designed to trigger conversations between patients and health care providers to develop intelligent decision-making regarding the diagnosis and treatment of patients with allergies, asthma and immunologic diseases.

Linda Cox

“I’m a practicing clinician; I have to say that I’ve found several of these, if not all of these useful in my practice, especially the one about routine allergy testing,” Linda Cox, MD, FAAAAI, AAAAI President and private practitioner at the Allergy & Asthma Center in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, said during the press conference.

Specifically, they have added five points of interest to the existing Choosing Wisely campaign, including:

Don’t rely on antihistamines as first-line treatment in severe allergic reactions

Don’t perform food IgE testing without a history consistent with potential IgE-mediated food allergy

Don’t routinely order low- or iso-osmolar radiocontrast media or pretreat with corticosteroids and antihistamines for patients with a history of seafood allergy, who require radiocontrast media

Don’t routinely avoid influenza vaccination in egg-allergic patients

Don’t overuse non-beta lactam antibiotics in patients with a history of penicillin allergy, without an appropriate evaluation

False or clinically irrelevant positive allergy tests for foods are frequent, according to John Oppenheimer, MD, FAAAAI, of Pulmonary and Allergy Associates, in Denville, NJ.

“Just because a test exists doesn’t mean it’s a useful test,” Oppenheimer said.

According to David M. Lang, MD, FAAAAI, of the Cleveland Clinic in Cleveland, Ohio, the exact mechanism for contrast media reactions is unknown, but there is still no evidence regarding the cause and effect connection with seafood allergy.

“Because somebody has a history of seafood allergy they should not routinely receive pretreatment,” Lang said. – by Samantha Costa

For more information:

Choosing Wisely Campaign for Allergy and Immunology. Presented at the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology annual meeting; Feb. 28-March 4, 2014; San Diego.

Disclosure: Lang reports several organizational financial disclosures and consultancy for Hycor, GlaxoSmithKline and Quest. Cox reports multiple committee and organizational disclosures. She also reports financial ties with Circassia, Medimmune, Merck and Stallergenes. Oppenheimer reports financial ties with medimmune, Novartis, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and Merck. Freeman is an employee of NIH and reports no relevant financial disclosures.