Pin Ben Goldstein/Studio D

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

When Anne Papineau's doctor recommended she try the NuvaRing earlier this year, she was sold—until the pharmacy began charging her $80 every three weeks. "I was excited to make the switch, but as a grad student, I couldn't afford it," says the 24-year-old in Overland Park, Kansas. She was also confused, because it had been more than one year since the Affordable Care Act required insurers to make contraception free.

Most Popular

Why are women like Papineau still being charged? "Plans are working hard to comply with the law," says Susan Pisano, vice president of communications for America's Health Insurance Plans."But when you get into real life, there are dozens of scenarios that nobody envisioned when the law was passed."

WHEN YOUR BRAND ISN'T COVERED

By law, every insurer must cover all FDA-approved, prescription birth-control methods as soon as it updates your benefits, which most already have. But when there's more than one option—there are three kinds of IUDs, for example, and dozens of birth-control pills—your insurance doesn't have to cover all of them. If your plan doesn't cover the brand you love, ask your doctor to submit a claim stating that it's medically necessary for you to be on it. That should convince your insurer to drop the copay.

WHEN YOUR BOSS OBJECTS

Religious institutions, like churches and temples, can exclude birth-control coverage from your benefits. But you can still get no-cost birth control if you work for a religious hospital, school, or nonprofit. Unfortunately, 79 lawsuits have been filed by employers (including the University of Notre Dame and Wheaton College) to avoid providing insurance coverage that includes birth control on the grounds of religious freedom. And many of these employers—including Hobby Lobby, which employs 13,000 workers—have won. The issue appears to be headed to the Supreme Court. Meanwhile, if you work at one of these anti-birth-control companies, you can turn to Planned Parenthood for freebies or discounts.

WHEN YOU'RE USING STUDENT HEALTH

Almost all student health plans now offer free birth control under the new insurance coverage rules. But there are a couple of exceptions: some Catholic universities as well as some university-funded plans that don't outsource claims to an insurance company. If your student plan isn't ponying up, you can opt out of your school's policy and either join your parents' plan (if you are under age 26) or sign up for coverage at HealthCare.gov.

WHEN YOUR PLAN WON'T PAY

Even if your plan covers contraception, you might get charged anyway—insurance companies do that kind of thing. If you think you're getting less than you're entitled to, call your insurer directly to complain. If that doesn't work, the National Women's Law Center (866-PILL-4-US) can help you make your case. Visit their website at NWLC.org for a script detailing exactly what to say to your insurance provider and for help crafting an appeal letter.

That's exactly what Papineau did when she couldn't get her provider to cover her NuvaRing. She wrote letters to the insurance company and the Kansas Insurance Department. Six weeks later? When she picked up her NuvaRing prescription at the pharmacy, her receipt said $0.

Go to Healthcare.gov for a complete list of free services.

Photo Credit: Ben Goldstein/Studio D