Executive Briefing | by Athena Mandros | March 25, 2016

Long-term services and supports (LTSS) have become an increasingly important topic as the American population ages. Currently, about nine million consumers utilize LTSS, the majority of which are over the age of 65. For example, over 84% of individuals in nursing homes and nearly 83% of individuals using home health services are over the age of 65 (see Long-Term Care Providers & Services Users In The United States: Data From The National Study Of Long-Term Care Providers, 2013–2014). And, it is expected that by 2050, 20% of the U.S. population will be over the age of 65 and that of non-institutionalized adults, 34% will need LTSS (see By 2050, 34% Of Adults Age 65+ In Need Of Long-Term Services & Supports). The question – who pays for those services and what do they pay for?

In 2013, spending on LTSS was $282.9 billion and accounted for 9.3% of the $2.9 trillion in national health expenditures. Although spending on LTSS increased steadily between 2008 and 2013 as a percentage of national health spending, LTSS spending has remained fairly stable. Between 2008 and 2013, LTSS spending fluctuated between 9.3% and 10.1% of health care spending, respectively.

Expenditures for LTSS services are the responsibility of a number of different payers. Medicaid is the primary payer of health care services, and in 2013 was responsible for more than half (58%) of health care expenditures. State Medicaid programs are required to provide institutional care and although optional, all states provide home- and community-based (HCBS) services. Additionally, Medicaid is the primary payer for residential care for those in mental health facilities and intermediate care facilities for the intellectually/developmentally disabled (ICF/IDD) (see How Are Medicaid Long-Term Services & Supports (LTSS) Covered & Delivered? and Is Your Organization Ready For The “HCBS Era”?).

After Medicaid, out-of-pocket (OOP) spending by consumers accounted for 19% of spending. The remainder of LTSS funding came from Medicare (12%), private long-term care insurance (7%), and other sources (Department of Veterans Affairs, state programs, etc.) (6%).

What does the future look like for funding LTSS? I think that one thing we will see is the use of managed care models in order to control Medicaid LTSS spending. We reported on this growing trend before – see Where Are We With Managed Long-Term Services & Supports?, Pennsylvania RFP Outlines Plan To Move Medicaid Long-Term Services To Managed Care Starting 2017, and Pennsylvania RFP Outlines Plan To Move Medicaid Long-Term Services To Managed Care Starting 2017. Additionally, states are trying to manage LTSS costs through dual demonstration programs and health homes (see Dual Eligible Demonstrations: Where Are We 4 Years Later?; and Who Is Actually Managing Health Home Services?).

Another trend we are likely to see continue is the growth of OOP spending by consumers. Initial discussions about health care reform included provisions to address this consumer funding challenge, but when the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) became law in 2010, the provision to fund long-term care was scrapped (see Title VIII. Community Living Assistance Services And Supports Act (CLASS Act) and Health Care Reform And The CLASS Act). Long-term care insurance policies could be seen as a solution to high OOP spending, but American’s purchase of long-term care insurance policies is low (less than 100,000 policies were purchased last year) and the long-term care insurance model has largely been unsustainable (see Where Is The Long-Term Care Insurance Industry Headed? and Insurers Lose Big On Long-Term Care Policies).

In both of these developments, there are opportunities for innovation by entrepreneurial provider organizations to meet emerging needs in these system changes. For a more detailed breakdown of payer spending on LTSS, be sure to check out our latest report: What Does The U.S. Spend On Long-Term Services & Supports, By Payer?: An OPEN MINDS Market Intelligence Report. The report answers a number of questions, including:

What Is The Size Of The U.S. LTSS Market? How Is The LTSS Market Funded? What Types Of LTSS Are Covered By Medicaid? What Types Of LTSS Are Covered By Medicare? What Types Of LTSS Are Covered By Private Long-Term Care Insurance & Consumer Self-Pay?

As the number of Americans with disabilities increases (see Nearly 1 in 5 People Have a Disability in the U.S., Census Bureau Reports and Prevalence of Disability and Disability Type Among Adults — United States, 2013) and the life spans of Americans with and without disabilities increases (see Life expectancy in the USA hits a record high and An AgingL Nation: The Older Population in the United States), the relationship of LTSS services to the overall health and human service market will continue to shift – we’ll be there to cover it.