Dwight Tillery (Photo: Provided)

Dwight Tillery is founder and CEO of the Center for Closing the Health Gap.

As I begin to look back on my life, I recall a great deal of discussion over the years about who speaks for the black community. Much of the conversation centered around civil rights leaders, preachers, black politicians and black leaders of social service programs. And, there were always conversations about white people picking certain black individuals to speak for the black community. During the sixties, fewer blacks were in leadership roles than today. But what has been most surprising and troubling is that notwithstanding a plethora of blacks holding positions from the president of these United States to local health commissioners, African Americans still find themselves on the outside looking in.

I'm troubled by what I continue to see in this city. Not withstanding the fact that almost 50 percent of the population is African-American, we are absent from the table of decision making. And what really makes me furious is that whites are making decisions about issues that particularly impact the black community without substantive input and participation from our community. Is this behavior being racist or just plain insensitive? These issues range anywhere from preschool programs to benefit minority children to infant mortality, which disproportionately affects black babies. Yes, you might find some black people on various "advisory boards" but far too many programs are led by whites who make decisions about what's best for the black community.

Just the other day, a board member of mine, who happens to be white and someone who is deeply involved in health and health care in this community, cited another example where a meeting was taking place about health issues in the city and everyone present was white. He has witnessed this phenomenon on more than one occasion. Unfortunately, this behavior continues to be the norm rather than the exception. For over a decade, the center has been ignored or marginalized by a large number of leaders in the health community. When I got started, I heard virtually no one in health care speak about health disparities. Now, because of the Affordable Care Act and the embarrassing infant mortality rate of black babies in our county, there are some who have begun the conversation about health disparities. And here comes the rub: The health care community – which is overwhelmingly white – wants to tell us what's best for our own community without having us at the table to help shape policy and program development. What's even more insulting is that they have created advisory committees as a way of demonstrating that blacks are involved but in reality they are simply there for window dressing.

For well over a century, the federal government has collected data on its citizens and knew that certain minorities bore the burden of sickness and premature death in America. What's worse is that these deaths were and are preventable and neither the government nor health care institutions did anything about it. Research hospitals, universities and public health departments have been awarded billions of dollars to study the health of its citizens; yet when it comes to health disparities, their outcomes have been a complete failure. The health of the black community today is not much better than 100 years ago. However, these institutions continue to get funding while in reality they have no real outcomes to speak of. The primary reason for their failure is that they don't include the very populations that they claim to find solutions for. Furthermore, the World Health Organization has defined health as, among other things, more than the absence of disease. Health is not just about hospitals, doctors and nurses. It is about where people, live, work and play according to Robert Wood Johnson, Kellogg Foundation, the Aetna Foundation and the Centers for Disease Control.

These organizations have taken the position that minorities must not only be at the table but also lead in finding solutions for the health issues affecting their populations. I'm afraid that institutions receiving these grants are approaching the problem of health disparities the same way they have always done and I believe that the outcomes won't be any different. The emphasis has to be on prevention and not sickness. We must recognize the impact that the social determinants have on the health of a community. America can't afford to put a doctor on every corner and a community health care worker in every household. This approach is not only unsustainable but too costly and perhaps even demeaning to the very population they are serving. It is far more productive and sustainable to train the very people themselves how to be healthier and remove those barriers to building a culture of heath. In the final analysis, my greatest fear is that these traditional institutions will get all the money and leave the minority communities without any meaningful outcomes.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1bb5bam