Presentation on 'Amendment 69, ColoradoCare' set for Wednesday

The Fremont County Democrats will host an informational presentation on "Amendment 69, ColoradoCare" at 6:30 p.m. Wednesday at the Quality Inn, 3075 U.S. 50.

Amendment 69 will be on the Nov. 8 ballot. If passed, a "Medicare for All" type of system called "ColoradoCare" will be implemented for all residents of Colorado. The Affordable Care Act, also known as ObamaCare, gives the state a right to opt out of the Affordable Care Act and establish their own system if it covers more people with better care.

ColoradoCare is the health care financing system that would be established by Amendment 69. Everyone would pay premiums through a payroll and income premium tax, and every Colorado resident would be covered. This premium tax will replace current health insurance premiums, deductibles, and co-pays for designated preventive and primary care services. It is a financing system not a delivery system. Medical Care providers could choose to be public, private, for profit, nonprofit, independent, or salaried.

Free, confidential HIV, Hepatitis C and STI testing available Thursday

Children's Hospital Colorado in conjunction with Fremont County Department of Public Health & Environment will offer a free, confidential HIV, Hepatitis C and STI testing day in honor of National Women and Girls HIV/AIDS Awareness Day.

Advertisement

The event will occur from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Thursday at the Public Health building at 201 N. Sixth St. All tests are free with results read in 20 minutes. Receive a $5 gift card for participating. Testing is available for both men and women.

For more information, call 276-7468 or (720) 951-2693 or visit http://ow.ly/YRBNU.

Bell Tower to host concert Saturday

In conjunction with the "All Things Celtic' art exhibit the Bell Tower Cultural Center, 201 E. Second St., in Florence presents the popular 'Willson and McKee' in concert at 7 p.m. Saturday.

This internationally touring duo specializes in traditional Irish, Scottish and original acoustic music. Rocky Mountain Celtic is the combination of their Montana and Colorado roots and gives the audience a distinct musical experience. Original compositions with an ancient sound and traditional pieces are re-dressed in their customized style.

The duo always captivate and involve the audience during their performance. This year they are offering a free jig dancing class before the concert from 4 to 5 p.m.

Tickets are available at the Bell Tower or the Fox Den. $10 / $8 members.

For more information, call 784-2038.

Daily Record Staff