By Gabriella Boston, The Washington Post

People often focus on one fitness format. So what exactly are you getting if you are doing only that one particular routine — and what are you missing out on?

We asked fitness experts to guide us through popular fitness routines — their upsides, their limitations and what you might add to round out your program.

Barre

Using a ballet barre for balance, you perform small ballet-inspired movements and static poses that provide isometric training.

“A barre class offers a nice combination of balance and coordination,” says Anthony Wall, director of professional education for the American Council on Exercise. “It works postural muscles, which improves stability.”

What to add: A barre class is unlikely to improve external-load-bearing strength (as free weights do) or aerobic fitness. “So you might add kayaking or hiking for that aerobic component,” Wall says.

Insanity

A high-intensity interval body-weight class such as Insanity or P90X (both branded products) usually lasts up to 30 minutes and features drills that drive the heart rate into an anaerobic zone — more than 80 percent of maximum heart rate. Gold’s gym uses a version called Grit.

“It’s very efficient and includes agility, speed, dynamic jumping and strength,” says Linda Haupt, regional group fitness director for Gold’s Gym on the East Coast. The post-exercise fat burn is higher and longer than after aerobic exercise.

What to add: You’re not getting much aerobic work with high-intensity intervals, so adding running, cycling or swimming would be a good complement, or some external load bearing, such as free weights.

CrossFit

CrossFit is a brand that features high-intensity intervals but, unlike Insanity, also uses external loading.

“With the high intensity, you are improving your cardiovascular system,” Wall says, and the external load bearing improves strength. Other benefits include weight loss and, maybe most important, the social aspect — the feeling of being part of something larger.

What to add: Haupt suggests incorporating some mobility and stability work, maybe through yoga. Wall recommends adding an aerobic component.

Indoor cycling

Indoor cycling can mean long-distance, steady-state drills, which can be an excellent way to build aerobic capacity. But the most popular format focuses on short, high-intensity intervals — in other words, anaerobic work. Like CrossFit, it helps improve the cardiovascular system and encourages weight loss. It also strengthens the legs.

What to add: Wall suggests adding something like boxing to strengthen the upper body and core as well as to work on rotating the body to complement the static body position on a bike.

Zumba

Like CrossFit, Zumba has a social component that encourages participants to keep coming back. And like any dance-based routine, it improves coordination and balance.

What to add: Haupt suggests adding a strength component, particularly for the upper body, and additional stretching for the lower body, including hips. Yoga or Pilates could fit the bill.