Something must account for the difference. The violent right in America might not be a huge threat to public safety, but it still has a body count.

I'm inclined to believe the answer is written into the DNA of conservative extremism—that deeply conservative people are more politically tribal than others, and more inclined to confront cognitive dissonance by entertaining conspiracy theories and cocooning themselves in communities with like-minded true believers. I'm peddling an incredibly amateur sociology. But if I'm right, it implies that the reactionary nature of the American far right is the cause, not the consequence, of the observable differences in tone and substance between conservative and liberal rhetoric in the U.S.. Or of the vast differences between liberal and conservative American media.

And if that's the case, it probably wouldn't change much if Republican politicians became a bit more measured in their attacks on Democrats, Democratic policies, liberalism and so on. If anything, it's probably more accurate to say that Republicans engage in overheated, apocalyptic rhetoric to remain in good standing with these fixed elements of their political coalition than that they actively engender the underlying beliefs.

But to the extent that they have any control at all over the temperature on the right, the responsible thing to do is turn it down. That we can't accurately attribute any particular hurricane to the warming of the planet likewise doesn't absolve us of our responsibility to emit fewer heat-trapping gases.

And here's where I expect conservatives will respond by pointing out that Democrats have said totally outrageous stuff, too! But I don't think it's bathing the left in glory to say that the basic narrative Democrats propound about the right is far less provocative than the fire-stoking that Republicans engage in.

The basic story Democrats tell voters about Republicans and their donors is that they're plutocrats who don't really care about poor and middle class people, and are deeply beholden to an increasingly aged, increasingly resentful white base.

The GOP's story about Democrats is a bit more diffuse, but it tends toward invocations of tyranny. They'll take your (money/guns/freedoms/lives). Pick your poison.

When Democrats tried to pass an extremely modest gun law in the aftermath of the Newtown massacre, Ted Cruz said the real goal was "a federal list of every gun owner in America." When Democrats more recently proposed a constitutional amendment to effectively reverse the consequences of the Citizens United ruling, he said they were trying to "repeal the First Amendment."

Paul Waldman cited Senator Ron Johnson, who lamented last year that the survival of the Affordable Care Act had denied the country its "last shred of freedom." But you could just as easily cite the "death panel" smear from the beginning of Obama's presidency or the martyrization of Cliven Bundy just a few weeks ago, and a dozen other misbegotten efforts in between. If I bought into all of it, I'd probably take certain paranoid suspicions of the American far right more seriously.

As it happens, Jerad Miller was one of Bundy's avengers, until he was booted for being a convicted felon. A bunch of people have pored through his Facebook page already, to learn more about his political leanings. For whatever reason, I was most interested in seeing what he'd posted just before and after the 2012 election. I learned, among other things, that he was a Ron Paul-ite, who supported libertarian Gary Johnson over Republican Mitt Romney. He bought in to all of the familiar conspiracy theories—the really fringe stuff, but also things like Benghazi, which Republican politicians continue to inflame to this day. He likewise believed that, "[O]bama is forcing hobby lobby to pay for abortions." His wife once worked there. He worried she "may not have a job soon. thanks all who voted for him. idiots, i cant wait for your food stamps to get taken away in major austerity programs that will be affecting you soon."

If you believe that law enforcement and IRS officers are agents of a fascist takeover of the country, then your misapprehensions about Benghazi, or the Affordable Care Act, welfare, and various forms of contraception probably aren't your biggest concern. But your paranoia has been well fed anyhow. And needlessly so.