After over 30 years of providing women's health care, Blacksburg's Planned Parenthood will no longer be offering medical services or accepting patients.

"The world of healthcare delivery in Blacksburg and the larger New River Valley has changed dramatically," said Paige Johnson, senior vice president of External Affairs Planned Parenthood South Atlantic, in a statement released on Feb. 17. "Virginia Tech has expanded their student services to include many reproductive health services and The Community Health Center of the New River Valley offers comprehensive health care, including women's health services, at no or low cost."

Planned Parenthood is not accepting interviews at this time due to high volume.

Janet Harer, Women's Clinic coordinator and adult nurse practitioner at Schiffert Health Center, has seen the New River Valley healthcare change first hand. She has worked at the Women's Clinic since 1992. According to her, the availability for birth control has increased dramatically, causing the need for abortion services to decrease.

"We aren't getting that many pregnancies anymore, and over half of them are desired pregnancies. There is not as much need for services of abortion as there have been in the past. Barriers have been broken down to birth control," Harer said. "Women's healthcare has exploded over the last 20 years, thank goodness. It's important because 50 percent of the population is women, and women always have issues that men don't have. We are really trying to address those."

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is the biggest reason that the barriers are breaking down according to Harer.

Schiffert does not offer abortion services, Nexplanon or intrauterine device (IUD) services and obstetrics. They do offer a wide variety of other women's health services including: STI testing, annual gynocology exams, providing contraceptives and treating vaginal and pelvic infections among many other services. According to Harer, Schiffert is planning an expansion that will include the women's center over the next two years.

Planned Parenthood is referring their patients to their Roanoke location which will accommodate customers with expanded hours. The Roanoke Medical Center for Women will continue to offer abortion services to the valley.

Blacksburg's Planned Parenthood is also referring people to the Community Health Center of the New River Valley, another local women's healthcare provider

The Community Health Center of the New River Valley has been around for many years as a free clinic, but changed two years ago. Located in Christiansburg, they have a Blacksburg Transit bus stop outside of their front door.

"We are an appropriate alternative for women's health care," said Michelle Brauns, CEO of Community Health Center of the New River Valley. "I think that a lot of students aren't really sure where they can go off campus that's appropriate for them, and we really are an appropriate alternative for the student population."

Their clinic provides medical, dental and behavioral health care. Their women's health program provides family planning, contraceptive devices, cervical cancer screenings, treatment of STIs and complete women's exams and tests. They do not provide abortion services.

The Community Health Center of the New River Valley had a referral relationship with the Blacksburg Planned Parenthood.

Schiffert also worked with Planned Parenthood for many years. Harer has know about the Planned Parenthood change for several months.

"We were sad (to hear about Planned Parenthood)," Harer said. "I think that Planned Parenthood has done a wonderful job. The stuff that was in the news about them was unjustified and should have never been something in the news. It is part of the political process and just something that we have to put up with."

Schiffert does not expect to have an increase in patients, but says if there is an increase then they will accommodate.

"This decision was not made lightly," Johnson said. "The community's needs are different today, but we are equally determined to meet them, no matter what."

Planned Parenthood will continue to provide Blacksburg and the New River Valley community with sex education.