By now, it’s common knowledge that 50 is an important number for smaller employers navigating their way around the Affordable Care Act. Fifty is the number that triggers employer shared responsibility requirements under I.R.C. §4980H and “small employer” status in determining group health plan obligations. The question is 50 what?

Employers are not required to provide health insurance. But the employer shared responsibility rule requires “applicable large employers” to make substantial payments to the IRS if any of their full-time employees get subsidized coverage through a public health insurance exchange because the employer does not offer health coverage or offers coverage that is unaffordable or does not provide minimum value. Employers with at least 50 full-time and full-time equivalent employees on business days during the preceding year are applicable large employers. Throwing “equivalent” into the mix means that part-time employees are included the calculation when determining if the “50” threshold is met. Transition relief raised that number to 100 for 2015.

Some insurance market requirements apply to non-grandfathered group health plans of small employers but not large employers. An employer that sponsors a group health plan that does not satisfy its market requirements could be liable under I.R.C. §4980D for an excise tax of $100 per day per violation. For this purpose, a small employer is one that averaged no more than 50 employees on business days during the preceding calendar year. There is no separate treatment for full-time and part-time employees. The Affordable Care Act raised the maximum number of employees for small employers from 50 to 100, but states were allowed to keep the number at 50 for 2014 and 2015. Legislation enacted in the fourth quarter of 2015 (Pub. L. No. 114-60) dropped the maximum number back to 50 but allows states to raise it to 100.

The example below illustrates the application of the employer size rules using preventive care services: