More than 6,000 employees at Boeing’s North Charleston operations will be able to take advantage of a new partnership between the 787 manufacturer and Roper St. Francis Healthcare. File/Brad Nettles/Staff

Roper St. Francis and Boeing announced a new partnership Wednesday aimed at providing better health care for the aircraft manufacturer’s Lowcountry employees and their dependents.

The new “clinically integrated network” will offer Boeing workers same-day or next-day primary care appointments, a nurse who can be reached by phone around-the-clock and an online portal for scheduling office visits and reviewing medical records, among other perks. Prescription drugs and appointment co-payments will also cost less.

Boeing’s existing health care options will remain in place.

“This is the first time a health care system has partnered with a large private employer in the Lowcountry to improve and maintain the health of employees and their family members,” Roper St. Francis said in a written statement.

The model isn’t new, though. It’s based on a design made popular by the federal Affordable Care Act called an “Accountable Care Organization,” or ACO for short. ACOs are intended to lower costs and improve health care quality through increased communication between providers and patients.

The results, so far, are mixed. In some markets, ACOs lowered health care spending. In others, the model didn’t.

In theory, Roper St. Francis will profit financially by keeping Boeing employees well, instead of simply treating them when they show up sick in a doctor’s office. In the long run, Boeing should save money by insuring a healthier workforce — especially if chronic conditions, such as diabetes and hypertension, are managed more effectively.

Roper St. Francis CEO David Dunlap called this new network “patient centered” and “exactly the type of health care that you and I want for our families and for ourselves.”

“We believe that delivering coordinated care to large populations is where the health care industry is headed,” Dunlap said during an event Wednesday at Boeing to announce the plan.

Beverly Wyse, vice president and general manager of Boeing South Carolina, said the partnership is “a new and better approach to health care and how it’s delivered. It is more efficient and more effective.”

Last year, Boeing announced similar partnerships with health care systems in Washington state to provide better coordinated care for some 27,000 employees in the Puget Sound region.

The new partnership between the company and Roper St. Francis will officially launch on Jan. 1 and will be available to more than 6,000 Boeing workers. Although the partnership covers access to health care, Boeing’s workers still will get their health insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of South Carolina.

Hospital leaders say it won’t compromise access afforded to other Roper St. Francis patients in the Lowcountry.

“Our goal is to provide convenient and timely access to all of our patients who are seeking an appointment with a primary care physician or a specialist,” Dunlap said through a hospital spokesman.

For urgent needs, any Roper St. Francis patient should be able to see a primary care provider within 24 hours or a specialist within 72 hours. Non-urgent appointments should be scheduled within 10 days, he said.

“We recognize that this is setting the bar high, and that we are currently not achieving this 100 percent of the time,” Dunlap said. “However, we believe that the fact we are measuring this and reporting it to our physician offices will allow all of us to work even harder to make this the recognized standard of care for every practice.”

Roper spokesman Andy Lyons and Jeff White, Boeing’s director of health care services, would not disclose the financial terms of the new partnership.

The health care system also staffs a 2,300-square-foot clinic at the planemaker’s North Charleston campus for occupational medical needs. The new plan will not affect the on-site clinic.

Reach Lauren Sausser at 937-5598. David Wren of The Post and Courier contributed to this report.