At the end of today’s This Week, Peggy Noonan said something to the effect that Republicans, for all their turmoil, are brimming with new ideas, while Democrats aren’t. And then time was up. Which was too bad, because I really wanted to ask, what new ideas are you talking about?

I mean, think of the Ryan budget. Its basic concept is to slash Medicare spending and turn the program into a voucher system, while cutting tax rates on corporations and the wealthy. I think these are terrible ideas, but more to the point, they are exactly the same ideas Newt Gingrich was pushing in the mid-1990s. Nothing new at all.

Now, you might say that the GOP is full of ferment, with passionate arguments that are very different from the relative placidity of Democrats these days. But you need to be clear about what’s being argued. Mike Konczal points out, for example, that the much-ballyhooed rift between Wall Street and the Tea Party is entirely about tactics, not policies — on the substance, the Tea Party wants to give Wall Street its wish-list, unchanged, it’s just more sanguine about the effectiveness of extortion as a way to get there. Are there any significant factions within the GOP who don’t want to slash social insurance and cut taxes on the rich?

Am I saying, then, that Democrats are the party of new ideas? No, not at all. Democrats are for progressive taxation, a stronger safety net, more effective financial regulation, and more environmental protection — none of it stuff that would have seemed strange or new to someone who somehow missed the past few decades.

But then, why exactly should we expect lots of new ideas in policy? Yes, economic change does sometimes change the ground rules. But this is a very slow process most of the time.

So I really wouldn’t take the fact that these days Republicans spend a lot of time yelling at each other as a sign of vitality. (Strange how nobody said that about Democrats, back when they were less unified.) You might instead argue that the reason they yell at each other so much is that some of them have gone crazy. In fact …