The production of "Henry IV Part 1," above, last year helped set the stage for the Colorado Shakespeare Festival to perform "Henry V" and "Henry VI, Part 1" in 2015. ( Patrick Campbell / University of Colorado )

CSF's 2015 season at a glance Tickets: Season packages go on sale Monday Info: coloradoshakes.org or 303-492-8008 Productions • "Much Ado About Nothing" Mary Rippon Outdoor Theatre, June 5-Aug. 9 Directort: Jim Helsinger. Artistic director: Orlando Shakespeare Festival • "Wittenberg" by David Davalos University Theatre, June 11-Aug. 8 Director: Timothy Orr. • "Othello" Mary Rippon Outdoor Theatre, June 26-Aug. 8 Director: Lisa Wolpe, founder and producing artistic director, Los Angeles Women's Shakespeare Co. • "Henry V" University Theatre, July 16-Aug. 9 Director: Carolyn Howarth, director of CSF's critically acclaimed 2014 production of "Henry IV, Part 1" • "Henry VI, Part 1" (original practices production) University Theatre, Aug. 2 and 5 Director: Vanessa Morosco

William Shakespeare's 38 plays run the gamut from lighthearted comedy to intensive history and range from gut-wrenching tragedy to sublime romance.

The Bard of Avon's astounding artistic scope is part of what has helped his dramatic oeuvre endure for more than four centuries. It also has made for a mighty challenge for any theater company looking to complete Shakespeare's entire canon. It's a rare feat. When the Colorado Shakespeare Festival successfully completed the cycle in 1975, it was only the second festival in America and the seventh festival in the world to claim the honor.

But the creative staff at the CSF isn't content to rest on laurels from 40 years ago. The festival's upcoming 2015 season, which goes on sale Monday, will put the annual showcase on track to make the complete cycle again in time for the organization's 60th birthday in 2017.

"We're always trying to find a balance in selecting Shakespeare's plays while working our way through the entire canon," CSF producing artistic director Timothy Orr told the Camera earlier this year. "We have a very smart audience of Shakespeare lovers."

Having performed "Henry IV, Parts 1-2" last season, the Colorado Shakespeare Festival is on pace to complete two cycles of the Bard's works by 2017. (Patrick Campbell / University of Colorado)

With selections that range from the lighter comedic fare in "Much Ado About Nothing," the indelible tragedy of "Othello" and the in-depth English history of "Henry V," the 2015 season will touch on most of the Bard's main thematic bases and push the company closer to making its way through the entire canon a second time.

That accomplishment would put the Colorado festival in a very elite theatrical category. Along with the Oregon Shakespeare Festival, the CSF would be one of the only organizations in North America to have done so.

In addition to moving the CSF closer to that larger goal, however, the upcoming season will signify a similarly impressive milestone. The CSF's production of "Henry V," directed by Carolyn Howarth and slated to run July 16-Aug. 9, will complete the festival's comprehensive run of the Henriad history cycle, a group of plays that follows a line of English monarchs and stands as one of the most complex and exhaustive of Shakespeare's works. The saga that started with the 2013 production of "Richard II" hints at the festival's commitment to the entirety of Shakespeare's work, a dedication that extends to both crowd-pleasers and more academic milestones.

The CSF's approach to the Henriad in 2015 also will offer audiences a degree of continuity. Howarth, who directed the critically acclaimed 2014 production of "Henry IV Part 1," will return to helm the story of one of England's best-loved kings. What's more, the festival's production of "Henry VI Part 1" will echo the festival's past forays in the "original practices" approach to theater. The actors and crew will approach the text as their Elizabethan forebears did, with very little in the way of sets, lights and rehearsal time.

The Henriad will share the bill with other milestones and prestigious crew members in the upcoming season. The production of "Othello," set to run June 26-Aug. 8, will feature Lisa Wolpe as director. Wolpe is the founder and producing artistic director of the Los Angeles Women's Shakespeare Company, and her production will mark the first time "Othello" has been featured on the Mary Rippon outdoor stage since 1996. Jim Helsinger, artistic director of the Orlando Shakespeare Festival, will direct the outdoor production of "Much Ado About Nothing," scheduled for June 5-Aug. 9.

Finally, the upcoming season will continue the CSF's commitment to including new material, a task that's all the more challenging considering the core creative purpose of the organization. The festival will feature the regional premiere "Wittenberg," a new comedy by Colorado playwright David Davalos. The show focuses on a conflicted university student in the 1600s, a free-thinker torn between the philosophies of Dr. Faustus and Martin Luther.

The setting and underpinnings of Davalos' original work fit the larger mood and mission of a festival intent on making history.