Related Content {{ article.title | removeHtmlTags }} {{ article.publishDate | date: 'MMMM d, yyyy' }}

Investment managers come in many political stripes. But regardless of where an investor falls on the political spectrum, those who specialize in health care have at least one reason to embrace President Barack Obama’s Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), also known as Obamacare. Thanks in part to expansion of health care coverage under the law, the S&P 500 Health Care index has risen some 120 percent between December 2011 and December 2014, versus a 65 percent rise for the Standard & Poor’s 500 index overall.

The health care sector seems likely to slow in 2015, however. Industry analysts and portfolio managers see uncertainties ahead for managed care companies, health insurers and publicly listed hospitals. What had been a perfect moneymaking storm of expanded insurance coverage and an aging population is now priced into the sector. And whereas Obamacare isn’t likely to disappear, in 2015 there will be a Republican majority in the House and Senate and Republican governors in 31 states, thereby opening up the possibility for legislative changes.

“I wouldn’t expect the meteoric rise to continue,” says Michael Gregory, who is the head of health care investing at Highland Capital Management, a Dallas-based hedge fund firm that manages about $19 billion in assets, with some $2.5 billion in health care–related equities, debt and credit, including a long-short health care fund. He sees some winners emerging in the next few years but also some stunting of growth as a result of the November elections — and, therefore, some opportunities to go short.

Steven Halper, a senior vice president of equity research who covers the health care sector for FBR Capital Markets, a subsidiary of FBR & Co. in New York, foresees a somewhat rocky 2015 for the sector but stronger growth in 2016. He anticipates a slowdown next year because of a cut in payment rates to Medicare Advantage Plans, which have presented a delicate political balance. The ACA has always called for reductions to the program on the ground that, in subsidizing private insurers to cover Medicare beneficiaries, it costs taxpayers more than that health care should. But the insurance industry lobby pushed for a higher subsidy in 2015. Ultimately, the Obama administration agreed to a 0.4 percent increase. The insurance industry says, however, that it will in reality see about 3 to 6 percent less money because of other factors such as the cost of delivering benefits. Halper expects rates to improve in 2016, however, which will be reflected in stronger growth among large insurance companies.“I’m not willing to go out more than two years,” he adds. “You’d have to tell me who’s going to be sitting in the White House then.”