State Sen. Napoleon Harris knows his south suburban district, and his district knows him.

That much was obvious last week when the hulking former NFL linebacker walked into a pancake shop in South Holland and immediately was shaking hands with and slapping the backs of diners.

What's less clear is whether the Dixmoor native and pizza shop franchisee, who kept a foot in the community where he was raised even while playing football elsewhere, can leverage his nascent political career to muster a statewide campaign for U.S. Senate.

Harris is one of three Democrats vying to take on Republican Sen. Mark Kirk this fall in one of the nation's most-watched Senate contests. But with less than two weeks to go before the March 15 primary, the time-honored indicators of a candidate's viability — money raised, an advertising strategy and a full docket of public events — are largely not in evidence for Harris.

Democratic candidates for U.S. Senate take on the Affordable Care Act Find out where the Democratic candidates for U.S. Senate stand on the Affordable Care Act. Feb. 8, 2016. (WGN-TV / Chicago Tribune) Find out where the Democratic candidates for U.S. Senate stand on the Affordable Care Act. Feb. 8, 2016. (WGN-TV / Chicago Tribune) See more videos

While Harris put $1 million of his own money into the campaign, so far he has reported no other donors. Harris said he's brought in some donations in recent weeks but couldn't say how much and instead pointed out that he's "the only candidate who has actually put skin in the game." Harris said his campaign is working up radio ads and has hundreds of volunteers working on his behalf.

"I think those things are important to get your name out and get name recognition, but people know who I am in this community. I've been here," Harris said.

Indeed, much of Harris' strategy appears to rely on whatever name recognition he enjoys as a standout athlete at Thornton Township High School and a star football player at Northwestern University who was a first-round draft choice of the Oakland Raiders in 2002.

Harris also wraps his identity in a come-from-behind narrative of a kid born into a poor community who watched his mom struggle to support her family. Harris routinely points out that he could have gone anywhere after he made it in the NFL but chose to return to where he grew up.

The low-key nature of Harris' campaign has led to questions in political circles about whether he was recruited into the Democratic primary to split the key African-American vote with former Chicago Urban League President Andrea Zopp, providing an easier path to the nomination for U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth, the party establishment's preferred candidate.

Asked about that theory, Harris said: "I'm not trying to play spoiler. I'm trying to win. They say two is not a winner and three, nobody remembers. I've been winning all my life. And I've been doubted all my life."

Harris said Zopp knew he was planning to enter the race "long before she got into it."

"As for me, people have come to me, my constituents have come to me, others around the state have come to me" to encourage a run, Harris said. Asked if anyone in Democratic leadership had recruited him, Harris cited the support of Illinois Senate President John Cullerton, who has endorsed his bid, as well as other colleagues in the General Assembly.

Harris' brief career at the state Capitol has been marked as much by his ambition for higher office as by legislative achievements. Even before being sworn in to the Illinois Senate, he launched a bid for Congress for the early 2013 special election to replace Jesse Jackson Jr. Harris quickly abandoned that effort and endorsed the eventual winner, now-U.S. Rep. Robin Kelly of Matteson.

Since then, Harris has kept a relatively low profile at the statehouse, sponsoring and passing about a dozen bills and rarely speaking up on the Senate floor. He was visible last year in the successful push for legislation requiring students who suffer a concussion to get permission from a doctor or athletic trainer before they fully return to class or sports.

Enactment of that law was one of the few bipartisan achievements of the session. But when asked to identify his accomplishments as a state senator, Harris made no mention of the bill, which he co-sponsored.

On the campaign trail Abel Uribe / Chicago Tribune State Sen. Napoleon Harris speaks with Pam Strain, left, and her mother, Silvella James at the Blueberry Fields Pancake House in South Holland on Feb. 26, 2016. State Sen. Napoleon Harris speaks with Pam Strain, left, and her mother, Silvella James at the Blueberry Fields Pancake House in South Holland on Feb. 26, 2016. (Abel Uribe / Chicago Tribune) (Abel Uribe / Chicago Tribune)

Instead, Harris pointed to a 2013 measure known as Rocky's Law requiring school districts to provide catastrophic accident insurance to students who are injured during school-sponsored athletic events.

"That was important to me because, as a former collegiate and high school athlete here at IHSA in Illinois, the issue was personal," Harris said.

Harris also pointed to his votes on spending and infrastructure bills, saying, "I don't have to be the initial sponsor to support an issue."

"I voted on health care issues, I voted on budgets for how we fund education," Harris said. "We vote on a number of different measures that impact the communities all over the state, not just my own."

On one notable occasion, Harris didn't vote at all. That was on legislation in 2013 to legalize same-sex marriage, an issue that Harris says was "polarizing" in his district. Harris voted present — a tactic that essentially amounts to a punt, allowing lawmakers to avoid being recorded as a "yes" or "no" on controversial issues.

Harris now says that his views on the issue have "evolved," and points to President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton as other Democrats who shifted from opposition to support on the issue.

"I believe in marriage equality," Harris said. "It's the law of the land, and I support the law of the land."

Harris' early resistance on gay marriage, and his persona as a business-minded Democrat, left him at odds early on with some in the progressive Senate Democratic caucus. As state Sen. Toi Hutchinson ran for Jackson's congressional seat, her campaign labeled Harris "one of the Democratic Party's most deeply conservative voices."

Hutchinson has since changed her view about Harris' Democratic bona fides, saying he has developed a strong voting record in favor of protecting some of the state's most vulnerable.

"Now that I have gotten to see him as a colleague and now a friend, he is a wonderful person, and his heart is really in the right place," said Hutchinson, D-Olympia Fields.

More recently, Harris voted in favor of legislation backed by gay rights advocates that would ban so-called conversion therapy on minors, a practice aimed at changing a person's sexual orientation or gender identification. He also co-sponsored a resolution recommitting support for the federal Equal Rights Amendment for women and voted for laws expanding voter access. He voted against legalizing medical marijuana in 2013 but co-sponsored legislation to decriminalize possession of small amounts of pot.