Obamacare's tax credits have been upheld, but if younger and higher-income people don't start enrolling in the health exchanges it may not matter, experts say.

The Supreme Court ruled 6-3 Thursday that the federal government can dole out subsidies to states that did not set up their own healthcare exchanges. While the King v. Burwell decision keeps a major part of Obamacare in place, it also doesn't mean the law is without any challenges.

Besides political efforts to repeal the law, which are sure to continue, efforts now turn to who enrolls in the exchanges, according to the research firm Avalere.

"Exchanges need to focus on increasing enrollment and attracting younger, healthier individuals in order to ensure a variety of affordable health plan options participate in the market," according to Caroline Pearson, senior vice president at Avalere.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

Nearly 12 million people enrolled in the marketplaces in 2015, and more than 4.1 million consumers under 35 signed up for coverage.

Getting younger people to enroll isn't the only issue.

About 85 percent of Obamacare enrollees receive some form of subsidy. While those subsidies will now be protected, it means a majority of enrollees in Obamacare are lower income.

That could be a problem as the law needs to expand its enrollment to remain viable. But higher-income residents have not pursued getting coverage through the exchanges.

Avalere found that 40 percent of people who enrolled in healthcare.gov earn up to nearly $18,000 a year and another 25 percent earn nearly $30,000.

Also from the Washington Examiner Clinton email scandal gets super boring codename from State Dept. The State Department gave two public briefings this week on Hillary Clinton's email scandal, and then did as much as it could to downplay the discussion in the transcripts of those briefings. The email scandal exploded Tuesday, when the State Department's Office of Inspector General released a report saying Clinton failed to ask permission to use a private email when she led the department. It also said permission would have been denied even if she asked. Reporters asked dozens of questions about the IG report at the State Department's Wednesday and Thursday briefings. But finding those discussions is a bit of a chore, as the index to each briefing makes no mention of "Clinton" or "email" or "scandal," and doesn't use

On the other hand, only 8 percent of people who earn up to $44,000 a year signed up through healthcare.gov, which covers 37 states, and only 2 percent earned $60,000 or more.

Obamacare enrollment is supposed to grow every year to help make the markets viable. In 2016, 21 million people are supposed to get health insurance coverage, about 10 million more than current enrollment figures.