GUEST COLUMN

After watching the first Democrat Party presidential debate, one can understand why the Democrat National Committee has chosen to limit their presidential debates to just six.

All it took was one debate to see the party I once identified with no longer exists.

It now represents just about everything mainstream Americans do not. The only reason Democrats win elections is they are willing to lie, mislead and steal their way to victory. They offer heaping upon heaping of manure covered with buttercream icing to thunderous applause from the Progressive left.

To the far-left, perception is reality. It’s about making a good impression. They are all about glitz and chasing shiny objects…superficiality…shallowness.

They’ll say anything to further their cause, and their bedfellows in the mainstream media reflexively give them a pass. That’s why Democrats got away with telling lies to pass Obamacare. That’s how IRS leadership got away with targeting conservatives. That’s why Hillary Clinton escaped the Benghazi mess and thus far her classified email debacle.

With common sense and logic abandoned, these radicals live in a made up world where right is wrong and wrong is right.

Consider this recent quote for example: “…Republicans are essentially the party of a monolithic view that is narrow-minded that says, ‘Let’s take this country backwards’,” said the national committee chairperson of the party offering voters a homogenous group of five elderly, ghostly-white presidential contenders with tried and tired ideas that have never worked and never will.

Standing in stark contrast are the remaining GOP candidates, an impressive group of youthful, multi-ethnic presidential candidates with fresh ideas (save a few duds).

Some say liberalism is a mental disorder. I would go a step further to suggest it is a condition of the heart. A sin-sickness.

One cannot live in a perpetual state of denial of the truth of God’s Word and be whole and healthy humans. It’s impossible. That’s why they repeatedly accuse conservatives of the very things of which they themselves are guilty.

They accuse conservatives of imposing their morality on others, yet fail to see the contradiction of their own words and deeds.

With threat of lawsuit or jail time, they vociferously demand conservatives bake their wedding cakes and officiate weddings or fund their birth control and Planned Parenthood abortions. They went bonkers after a clerk in Kentucky who refused to sign same-sex marriage licenses but had no problem whatsoever when a lesbian judge in Texas refused to perform heterosexual marriages.

They think law-abiding Americans can’t be trusted with guns, then somehow manipulate logic to say it’s a good idea to entrust a rogue, blood-thirsty regime like Iran with nukes. They blame a gun when a man is killed with a gun but go stark-raving mad and blame a man when he uses a gun to kill a lion.

They rage against greed yet demand government handouts.

They insist the rich don’t pay their fair share of taxes but overlook rich tax-evading fellow Democrats like Al Sharpton.

They despise capitalism and sing the praises of communism, something which seems to work so remarkably well that people do their best to escape it on a regular basis.

They loathe the filthy rich and say Republicans are selfish capitalists but have raised the filthy and rich Hillary Clinton to be their frontrunner.

Honestly, American politics stinks but it’s the only process we have to make important decisions for millions of people holding diverse and conflicting opinions. America saw politics at its best during the days of the Reagan and Gingrich Revolutions when leaders worked together for the better good.

But somewhere between then and now, the Democrat Party jettisoned its principles and moved so far left they’d have a tough time finding mainstream America even with it standing front-and-center.