Topics: diversity, Facebook, Google, Race, Silicon Valley, tech, Twitter, Yahoo, Innovation News, Technology News, News, Politics News

A bizarre bit of news recently came out of California. A billionaire from Silicon Valley, the elite enclave of the nation’s tech innovators, is gaining traction in his effort to push a ballot initiative that would turn the region into its own state that stretches from Monterey to San Francisco. Should this initiative succeed — an unlikely prospect at this point — the outcome would result in a most un-American tableau: a segregated, heavily white community with perhaps the greatest concentration of wealth in the United States.

Coincidentally or not, the campaign to create a new state of Silicon Valley comes at the very same time that Google, Twitter and other major corporate giants in that exclusive region have come under intense scrutiny amid revelations of troubling hiring patterns that suggest narrow-mindedness – or worse.

News reports in recent weeks have chronicled the dismal record that high-tech companies in Silicon Valley have in employing blacks, Hispanics and women. Take, for example, the hiring practices of Google, a company that is, ironically enough, celebrated around the globe for blazing a path to the future. It employs a staggeringly high rate of Asian and white males, 91 percent combined. Yet at the same time, Google employs only a paltry number of blacks (2 percent), Hispanics (3 percent) and women (30 percent).

Now, there may be some who would be tempted to explain all of this away by arguing that Google’s hiring record simply reflects a difficulty in finding minorities who have the education, training and skills to work in the demanding high-tech industry. But that doesn’t fully explain the situation. Consider this troubling fact: The abysmal hiring patterns at Google, measured in terms of ethnicity, are identical for tech jobs and non-tech jobs alike. This underscores a deeper problem within Google that goes beyond the skill and education of the minority applicant pools.

And Google is hardly the only offender. Facebook, Twitter and Yahoo are every bit as socially detached from the rest of America.

These companies say that they are now owning up to their diversity problems and working to find solutions. But given the tech industry’s history on this issue – including stonewalling — it is hard not to be skeptical about that pledge. More than that, one has to wonder whether Silicon Valley giants like Google would have continued their hiring practices had these companies not been shamed into publicly acknowledging them.