John Featherman

John Featherman is a contributor at Philly.com and writes about politics and consumer-related issues.

Most people describe you as…

Rarely on script and never predictable. And that’s my charm. Never a dull moment.

People would be surprised to know that …

I don’t drink alcohol.

What is your drink of choice?

Water.

Where is your happy place?

Chinatown. Many ancient Chinese secrets here.

What is your biggest regret?

None. I can sleep at night knowing I’ve always done the right thing.

If you could change one thing about yourself, what would it be?

Lose 100 lbs.

What do you consider your greatest achievement?

Writing for Philly.com. Ever since I was a child, I had an infatuation with the Inquirer and the Daily News. Then I was a reader, and now I’m a columnist. It’s my dream come true!

Which trait do you most value in another person?

Ethical behavior trumps everything else.

If you could interview anyone, past or present, who would it be?

You! If you have an unheard but interesting story to tell that will appeal to Philly.com readers, I want to hear from you!

Favorite movie?

Planet of the Apes. The ending still gives me the chills.

What TV show is currently your DVR/On Demand obsession?

You’ll be surprised to know I don’t have TV service.

What is your guilty pleasure?

Pleasure? Try pleasures! Life is too short not to enjoy what you want when you want it.

The worst thing anyone said or did to you is…

I’m a gentleman, and so I’ll let an ex off the hook!

I believe in…

Peanut butter. Do you believe in Peter Pan?

If you could travel back in time, where would you go?

September 10, 2001 and be a hero.

What is your motto or inspiration?

I’m used to overcoming tremendous odds. At age 7, I was thrown from a horse and almost died. As a consequence, I was unable to breathe through my mouth or nose. For 13 years, I had a tracheotomy. Every specialist told me I’d never be able to breathe normally again. I never accepted that sentence. I finally found an otorhinolaryngologist who cured me. What I learned was to never, ever give up. And that’s been my guiding principle throughout life.