Buy Photo Matt Fajardo (left), Lavalette, and Mike Kucharski, Toms River, wore bio-hazard suits to watch the Toms River Halloween Parade Saturday night, oCtober 25, 2014. TOMS RIVER, NJ TRPARADE1025D ASB 1026 Toms River Halloween Parade STAFF PHOTO BY THOMAS P. COSTELLO / ASBURY PARK PRESS (Photo: THOMAS P. COSTELLO)Buy Photo

There was something for everyone at the 76th annual Toms River Halloween Parade, which seemed to produce a slightly larger crowd of onlookers than last year.

This was the second year that the parade has been held on a Saturday, instead of the traditional Halloween night. For almost 75 years, the parade took place on Oct. 31, which almost always fell on a weekday or a school night. Back then, Toms River and its neighboring towns observed Halloween on Oct. 30, so children did not have to choose between going to the parade and trick-or-treating. That is no longer the case.

Organizers bill the event as the second-largest Halloween parade in the world, second only in size to the one in New York City's Greenwich Village. In previous years, tens of thousands of people have either participated or come to watch. In 2012, the parade was canceled in the chaotic aftermath of superstorm Sandy, which devastated the Jersey Shore two days before Halloween and left the rest of the region without power.

Bonnie Dirk, 49, of Toms River, has been coming to the parade every year since she was 5 years old. Today, Dirk still comes with her own family. One of her daughters is a cheerleader from Toms River High School East who marches in the parade with her fellow athletes.

"My parents took us for pizza when I was a kid, a long time ago," Dirk said. "We like to watch everyone in the costumes and all the floats."

Another daughter, Emme, 9, agreed with the last assessment.

"Are the floats your favorite," Dirk asked her.

"Yeah," Emme Dirk answered enthusiastically.

Bagpipers from all over the region kicked off the parade for the milelong journey from the corner of Route 37 East Route 166, moving south on Main Street and turning the corner at Washington Street where the parade ended.

Richard Harvey, a bagpiper with the band St. Brendan the Navigator in Point Pleasant, marched with his daughter MiSun Harvey, 9, who was in the color guard of the band.

"The joke is there are only nine notes, but there is about a thousand combinations (to playing the bagpipe) that can make it a challenging instrument," Harvey said.

Not to mention, a lot of air.

"I'm huffing and puffing at the moment," he said, who explained the parade was a fun venue every year. "Very enjoyable. March is our busy season and of course it's always cold."

Buy Photo Trey Wible, 11 1/2 months, of Little Egg Harbor channels the Stay Puft Marshmallow Man from “Ghostbusters.” (Photo: THOMAS P. COSTELLO/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)

Organizers bill the event as the second-largest Halloween parade in the world, second only in size to the one in New York City's Greenwich Village. In previous years, tens of thousands of people have either participated or come to watch. In 2012, the parade was canceled in the chaotic aftermath of superstorm Sandy, which devastated the Jersey Shore two days before Halloween and left the rest of the region without power.

Toms River Fire Company No. 1 organizes the iconic event each year and there is no cost to participate in the parade, which is open to everyone so as long the costumes and floats are not visibly advocating a particular political candidate or ideology. But the costumes of course can be as fun or as scary as participants wish.

Erik Larsen: 732-557-5709 or elarsen@app.com

Buy Photo Michael Piscopo, 9, Toms River, peeks out from his Minecraft costume in the Toms River Halloween Parade Saturday night, oCtober 25, 2014. TOMS RIVER, NJ TRPARADE1025C ASB 1026 Toms River Halloween Parade STAFF PHOTO BY THOMAS P. COSTELLO / ASBURY PARK PRESS (Photo: THOMAS P. COSTELLO)

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1tUGfvA