Generic messaging on real alternatives to Obamacare is preventing Republican presidential hopefuls from gaining the upper hand in the health care debate and making it one of the essential issues that differentiate the parties in a constructive manner.

Make no mistake; aspirationally, Republicans are on target. Most agree Obamacare must be replaced with conservative reforms that lower costs and with free-market solutions that serve to increase transparency and give control back to consumers. Marco Rubio and Jeb Bush have articulated this in their comprehensive health care plans.

Advertisement

Which brings us to the first problem. On an issue that arguably weighs the heaviest politically for Democrats, most of the GOP candidates are not seizing the opportunity to set forth comprehensive and effective solutions of their own. Instead, they tell us that their plans are forthcoming, which is the equivalent of kicking a flaming can down the road.

The complexities of health care aren’t lost on Americans. But they deserve proposals that show them that Republicans care about changing health care, not just about beating Obamacare.

Effective changes should include a national catastrophic-cover proposal so that no one is financially wiped out by a health event. Too many families are just one major injury away from their lives being completely upended. In fact, 60 percent of people who file for bankruptcy do so because of medical bills.

At the same time, health savings accounts must be a part of the solution, since they bring consumers into the cost aspect of their care. Still, while HSAs enable consumers to pay attention to their health care choices, they don’t change consumer behavior in the kind of meaningful way that’s needed.

In my own state of New Hampshire, there’s an initiative in place that focuses on changing consumer behavior and, as a result, addressing the cost burden of health care. Through an incentive program that uses dollar rewards for patients who make better choices and ultimately save their health plan money, millions of dollars are being saved by redirecting patients to lower-priced, similar-quality care facilities. Along the way, the patients are sharing in those savings with their insurer. For example, the New Hampshire State Employee department, among others, saved nearly $6 million in medical costs in 2014. And consumers in the state pocketed close to $700,000 for doing their part.

Advertisement

These savings indicate consumers will take a high level of interest in their care when with provided the right information and incentives. And while there’s no silver bullet, it represents the kind of pro-business, pro-consumer thinking that can help steer our health care system onto a sustainable path through the creation of a real marketplace for health care. It’s what the Republican candidates should be talking about.