The Eye

Chris Brown Increases Tour Security For Daughter Royalty Just Weeks Before Custody Battle

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images: Ethan Miller) Chris Brown increases security measures for his "One Hell of a Nite" tour after baby mama Nia Guzman implies he's creating an unsafe environment for their daughter, Royalty.

Chris Brown may have been slammed by baby mama Nia Guzman for promoting an unsafe living environment for their 1-year-old daughter, Royalty, but Brown is fighting back against the model's claims by increasing his tour security just weeks ahead of their scheduled custody battle.



According to sources close to Brown, the "Loyal" singer is making a point to avoid any incidents on tour that may prevent him from being awarded joint custody of his daughter, especially since the singer is already being sued by a fan that was shot at one of his club appearances earlier this year.



According to TMZ, Brown has hired five bodyguards for his "One Hell of a Nite" tour that will be responsible for keeping an eye on his money and jewelry at all times.



Similarly, Brown has instructed his team to not allow anyone backstage unless they've been pre-approved by Brown himself.



The site further notes that Guzman is prepared to use "any missteps against him" when they gear up to battle over Royalty's custody agreement in two weeks.



A source close to Brown explains that the "Only" singer wants to ensure that there are no more robberies or violent encounters between now and his court hearing to maximize his chances of obtaining joint custody of his daughter.



The source concludes that Brown has even told his dancers and entourage that they will be sent home if anyone begins to act out during the tour.



The news comes just a few days after Brown slammed Guzman for reportedly being involved with her ex-boyfriend, King Ba, who is currently wanted by authorities in Texas after he alleged committed forgery.



While Guzman has publicly denied being in contact with Ba for "several months," sources close to Brown reveal that the singer is preparing to bring up her former relationship with King Ba during their custody battle.



What do you think of Chris Brown's decision to beef up security for his "One Hell of a Nite" tour?



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.