LaComunidad Hispana in Kennett Square has embraced new technology to make it more convenient for clients. Renovations are expected to be completed in a few weeks. FRAN MAYE — 21st Century Media

NEW GARDEN >> Since it was established 40 years ago, La Comunidad Hispana has been helping low-income residents obtain quality health care and social services. By the end of the month, they will begin to help themselves.

Renovations to La Comunidad that include self-serve kiosks, an additional exam room and the elimination of its waiting room in favor of a gathering area that provides an educational experience will be completed by the end of August.

Alisa Jones, the new president and CEO of La Comunidad, said it will change the way the agency provides care to the community’s underserved.

“We are trying to help people help themselves,” Jones said. “We can help them become better users of technology, because technology is where things are going.”

Advertisement

Jones, originally from southern California, had been in an executive leadership role at LCH for nearly 3 years, and was named CEO two months ago. She has strong focus on public health and community health centers. She was the director of Maternal and Child Health at the Delaware Health Department prior to joining LCH. She said she envisions transforming LCH into a place where clients can help themselves attain long-term goals.

Jones just launched a strategic initiative called 40 Forward.

“It’s 40 years of history and looking forward,” she said. “We want to build on our rich history and continue to move forward helping people create pathways to a better life. Before, we helped people to meet immediate needs. Now, we want to identify what a person’s long-term goal is and create a relationship where we can help them get there.”

Part of the renovations is the installation of a new data system called LCH Centricity. With it, LCH staff can quickly determine all the services a client may need.

“It provides a unique record about the services available to individuals and makes it easier,” Jones said. “We are using technology as a way to improve our services. And with it, we can measure outcomes.”

It means that the nurse giving a patient a flu shot, knows the client’s short- and long-term goals, knows their progress in English-as-Second-Language class, and can provide assistance in other areas. Jones said it helps build a relationship that helps LCH staff better identify with clients.

“Our staff here is amazing,” she said. “They bring the LCH mission to life. And we’re not here just for Latinos. Everyone is welcome. We have high quality health care, mental health services, education workforce development and social services. Last year, we helped 12,000 with the Affordable Care Act. Any low-income person who needs support can come here regardless of race, ethnicity or language spoken.”

The quality of care is so good that last year, LCH placed fifth in the commonwealth for quality health care outcomes. All LCH practitioners dealing with clients are bi-lingual.

Jones said LCH’s annual budget is $4 million, and it gets half of its funding from the federal government. Which leaves $2 million that must come from fundraising.

“It’s only because of the generous people of southern Chester County, and grants that we are here,” she said. We would not be able to serve the underserved without that support. I have been humbled by spirit of community here. People are so generous. We are all stronger as a community when the most vulnerable among us has a safety net.”

Last year, La Comunidad Hispana received a $250,000 award from the federal Health and Human Services department to expand behavioral health services.

“The work we do here changes lives,” Jones said.