Cody, a 10-year-old dachshund, took top place last year in the dog costume contest held at The Promenade Shops at Centerra. His owner, Ken Ferguson of Loveland, made Cody's hot dog vendor costume. This year's Halloween on the Promenade, including a dog costume contest, take place at noon-3 p.m. Sunday, Oct. 27, in front of Rock Bottom Restaurant and Brewery, 6025 Sky Pond Drive. (Reporter-Herald file photo)

There are plenty of Halloween events to look forward to this week: a Halloween festival and a haunted house. And on the day of ghouls, catch a creepy silent film by the master of horror himself, Alfred Hitchcock, with live musical accompaniment. For more Halloween-related events, check out our roundup online at reporterherald.com.

Sunday

People and dogs in costume will enjoy a Promenade day

Halloween on the Promenade will take place at noon-3 p.m. Sunday, Oct. 27, in front of Rock Bottom Restaurant and Brewery, 6025 Sky Pond Drive.

The event will feature free horse-drawn hayrides, a petting zoo, dog costume contest, games, activity stations, good bags for kids in costumes and a pumpkin patch.

The Promenade Shops at Centerra will hold a food drive at the event to benefit Kids Pak, a hunger relief program benefiting children in the Thompson School District. Nonperishable food donations will be accepted.

For details, call The Promenade Shops at Centerra management office at 461-1285.

Tuesday

Friends of Lory State Park to thank volunteer helpers

The Friends of Lory State Park with the support of Odell Brewing will hold a fundraiser and thank volunteers and members, especially those who helped rebuild bridges at Lory after the 2013 Galena fire.

The fundraiser is 7-9 p.m. Tuesday, Oct. 29, at Odell Brewing Co., 800 E. Lincoln Ave.

Advertisement

There is a $10 suggested donation to support the protection, preservation and enhancement of Lory State Park.

For details, visit LoryFriends.org.

Wednesday-Thursday

Haunted house to offer two last nights of scares

The Loveland Haunted House run by Harrington Arts Academy will open for its last two nights of the season.

Hours are 6-9:30 p.m. Wednesday, Oct. 30, and 6-10:30 p.m. Thursday, Oct. 31, at 2400 N. Lincoln Ave., Loveland.

Cost is $10 for ages 14 and older, $7 for ages 10-13 and $5 for ages 9 and under.

For details, call 372-9822.

Thursday

Rialto to screen Alfred Hitchcock's 'The Lodger'

A serial killer known as The Avenger is on the loose in London and murdering blond women. A mysterious man arrives at the house of a beautiful blond model who happens to be seeing one of the detectives assigned to the investigation.

Silent Movies at the Rialto Theater Center presents: Alfred Hitchcock's "The Lodger," with live music by the Mont Alto Motion Picture Orchestra.

The screening is 7 p.m. Thursday, Oct. 31, at The Rialto Theater Center, 228 E. Fourth St., Loveland.

Tickets are $10.

For details or tickets, visit RialtoLoveland.ticketforce.com.

Friday

Photo exhibit shows work of Trees, Water & People

Trees, Water & People will sponsor a photography exhibition, "Illuminating Opportunity: A photo exhibit for social good," at 6-9 p.m. Friday, Nov. 1, at the Community Creative Center, 200 Mathews St.

The show is an exploration of the organization's solar energy program through the eyes of Fort Collins-based photographer Darren Mahuron.

It shows rural Honduras, where TWP works with local communities to distribute small-scale, clean energy technologies such as solar lighting and solar phone chargers.

For details, visit treeswaterpeople.org or summitstyle.com.

Saturday

Learn to homebrew at Weiz Guys event

Homebrewing is easy and fun. Loveland's homebrewing club, the Weiz Guys, will host a Learn to Homebrew Day event at 10 a.m. Saturday, Nov. 2, at Grimm Brother's Brewhouse, 623 Denver Ave.

Members will demonstrate and explain a variety of brewing techniques.

It is free and open to the public.

For details, visit or the events section of HomebrewersAssociation.org.