Unlike what we're told by motivational speakers, hopeful therapists and well-intentioned loved ones, we don't often seize the moment. The moment seizes us.

We're all just a moment away from our lives being profoundly and dramatically changed. This singular moment can serve as a beginning or an end, but it will always be marked as a touchstone in our memory. It's that unforgettable moment in time when everything… just… changes.

Jay Berry's moment came during a routine physical exam to renew his commercial driver's license. A nurse told the 44-year-old Portage carpenter that he had a heart murmur. He was given a referral to his family doctor, who also detected a murmur that apparently was not there at previous exams. Or was it?

Tests were ordered. A second ultrasound requested. A cardiologist determined the results to be "concerning."

Berry, a youth ministry leader at Crossroads Family Church in his city, felt as young as the kids he helps guide. He had no previous health problems and he has lived a very active lifestyle. So, he wondered, what gives?

"I need to show you something," the cardiologist told Berry and his wife, Carla.

He showed them the test results, which looked like gibberish to the couple. His next line, however, grabbed their attention by the throat.

"We need to get your husband into a heart surgeon right away," the cardiologist said flatly.

The Berry's were in disbelief.

"That is just about the time our world changed," Carla said.

While still in a fog of confusion, the doctor used a video monitor to show the dumbfounded couple how Jay's heart dangerously pumps blood. Even to them it was obvious that something was wrong.

The official diagnosis: dilated cardiomyopathy with moderate to severe mitral valve regurgitation.

"This means the valve that controls blood flow from the left side of the heart to the body isn't working," said Carla, who immediately researched it online.

According to the American Heart Association, dilated cardiomyopathy is the most common type of the disease. It affects the heart's ventricles and atria, the lower and upper chambers of the heart, respectively.

The disease typically starts in the left ventricle, the heart's main pumping chamber. It begins to dilate (stretch and become thinner), causing the inside of the chamber to enlarge. Jay's heart is already enlarged.

The problem often spreads to the right ventricle and then to the atria as the disease gets worse, according to the AHA. When the heart chambers dilate, the heart muscle doesn't contract normally. Over time, the heart becomes weaker and heart failure can occur.

"It is supposed to close tightly to prevent the backflow of blood back into the heart," Carla explained. "Nothing should flow backwards. It's a one way street."

All this led to another unforgettable moment for the couple.

"Jay needs open heart surgery. It makes absolutely no sense," Carla told me as Jay silently shook his head.

Two weeks later and he's still in disbelief. In that short span of time, he's already felt anger, confusion, grief and, finally, a divine resolve of some kind.

"It's in God's hands now," he said.

"We believe God is in control, and we have already witnessed some of His handy work in these last few days," Carla wrote on a Compassionate Crowdfunding webpage that a friend created for the couple.

Some of that handiwork may include the fact that Jay went in for a routine physical at this time of his life. Without it, he could still be walking around (and running or playing sports) with a ticking time bomb in his chest.

"We are extremely grateful that it was caught now and didn't become a fatal surprise," Carla wrote.

Since the initial shock, the couple has been navigating Jay's surgery and treatment options with their limited health insurance. Earlier this year, Jay was laid off from the Indiana Department of Transportation. He's had a couple of jobs since, currently as a carpenter at the Service Doctor Remodeling and Design in Merrillville.

"We continue to navigate the very confusing and costly options of healthcare," Carla said. "It seems like a million-piece puzzle, trying to make sure each doctor and surgeon that we need to consider as an option are 'in network' to comparing benefits and deductibles. It is all a bit exhausting."

The bottom line is that Jay's heart surgery will likely cost hundreds of thousands of dollars, far beyond what they can afford or what their insurance covers. They earn too little to afford it and too much to receive help from the Affordable Care Act.

On Friday, the couple traveled to Indianapolis to meet with a specialist, Dr. David Heimansohn, chief of cardiothoracic surgery at the St. Vincent Heart Center of Indiana. As I write this, they are still waiting to find out how serious Jay's surgery will be.

Another moment that matters.

In the meantime, the couple's church has started two online fundraising campaigns to help defray costs of the surgery and related medical costs. The first can be found here: https://www.youcaring.com/jay-berry-463958#.Vj1YxXfiDeR.facebook. The second, here: www.agape-partners.org.

It's a strange situation for the Berrys, who typically are the ones helping others. This all changed the moment that nurse detected a murmur in Jay's heart.

"We're stuck," Carla said.

Stuck in a moment.

Before that, everything was normal. Now it's anything but. A new normal has taken over. As the couple has learned, all it takes is one moment to change our lives in a heartbeat – literally, in Jay's case.

jdavich@post-trib.com

Twitter @jdavich