If you consider Tylenol an integral part of your hangover cure, you may want to consider a different option like a healthy breakfast or sports drinks packed with electrolytes. Research presented at the 141st annual American Public Health Association (APHA) meeting held from Nov. 2 through Nov. 6, in Boston, found that daily doses of acetaminophen combined with moderate levels of alcohol nearly doubled the risk of developing kidney disease.

"Pain is the most common symptom among the general public and is also most frequently self-treated with acetaminophens," lead researcher, Harrison Ndetan from Parker University in Texas told MedicalNewsToday. "Where this becomes a greater concern is among young adults, who have a higher prevalence of alcohol consumption. These findings highlight a serious concern among health professionals who deal frequently with pain patients, particularly those with mild pain who are more susceptible to consuming both."

Dr. Ndetan and his colleagues tracked the health status of 10,000 individuals participating in the 2003/04 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Researchers analyzed each participant’s acetaminophen intake (1,200 mg each day), alcohol consumption (1 drink each day for women), and adverse health conditions — in this case, kidney disease. Around half of the participants who admitted to a daily acetaminophen intake of 1,200mg and at least one daily alcoholic drink also suffered from kidney failure.

According to the Food and Drug Administration, acetaminophen is the most commonly used medication in the United States. Reports of acetaminophen overdoses are rare; however, people who take more than the recommended amount are left susceptible to liver failure. This pain-relieving analgesic is taken to treat a headache, reduce fevers, and sooth arthritis symptoms.

Don’t worry, there are plenty of effective hangover cures lying around your house:

Water/Sports Drink/Vitamins

Dehydration is considered the main cause of hangover symptoms. Drink water before, during, and after a night of drinking to prevent that pounding headache that stops you from getting out of bed on Sunday morning. Sports drinks also supply your body with electrolytes that are lost during the hours of heavy alcohol consumption (aka Friday and Saturday night).

Healthy Food

Soaking up the alcohol in your stomach with greasy, fat, and calorie-filled meals has always been deemed a helpful hangover remedy, but science suggests the complete opposite. Potassium-filled fruit like bananas and breakfast staples like eggs can lessen alcohol’s effect on the body and improve liver function.

Exercise/Sauna

Staying hydrated and sweating it out to cure a hangover may seem like an oxymoron, but a quick workout can help move alcohol toxins in the blood out of the liver and kidneys. Just remember, replace the amount of sweat that pours out of your body with an adequate amount of water.