AUSTIN — Greg Abbott doesn’t want to talk about the Koch brothers.

The attorney general and GOP candidate for governor apparently was a guest at a private gathering of big-dollar donors at a New Mexico resort in August.

Several Republican officeholders and corporate leaders were flown in for briefings about the billionaires’ political agenda.

The Kochs — Kansas-based industrialists Charles and David — have become among the most influential forces in the country.

They’ve helped create a multimillion-dollar network of interest groups to oppose pollution control, Obamacare and government regulation of business.

Critics say Abbott’s record has largely paralleled the Koch agenda.

“It’s clear that Abbott’s litigation is directly in line with what the Kochs would want done,” said Andrew Wheat of Texans for Public Justice, a left-leaning nonprofit group that tracks campaign money.

Abbott repeatedly has sued the Environmental Protection Agency to stop regulation of greenhouse gases and other pollutants. He has joined other Republicans fighting the health care law.

And he has lamented delays in the Keystone XL pipeline from Canada to Texas. A Koch subsidiary has intervened in the project, which opponents describe as a pollution risk.

The invitation-only gathering in August offered wealthy donors a chance to meet and mingle with GOP elected officials and leaders of conservative groups linked to the Kochs.

Amid tight security, traffic was blocked on the road into the secluded luxury site near Albuquerque at the base of the Sandia Mountains.

The Kochs typically have imposed secrecy around their events. Abbott declined to talk about it. His spokesman did not return a call or answer emails seeking comment. A Koch Industries spokeswoman did not respond.

In his latest campaign report, Abbott listed $7,500 from Koch Industries for the use of an airplane in early August, the week of the gathering.

A few days after the event, Abbott held a news conference in Austin. He pledged to “never stop fighting” against the Affordable Care Act. Joining him were members of Americans for Prosperity, a group the Kochs helped create.

The Kochs operate oil refineries, control pipelines and own chemical and manufacturing interests.

They’ve been instrumental in creating foundations, think tanks and political groups. That network has spent millions opposing politicians and issues that run counter to the Koch agenda.

Abbott has received more than $50,000 from the Koch political committee and more than $400,000 from the Republican State Leadership Committee. Its major contributors include Koch Industries.

In the Texas governor’s race, Koch interests are expected to weigh in against likely Democratic nominee Wendy Davis. Abbott allies already have labeled her anti-business. She has called Abbott too cozy with Capitol interests and his financial backers.

Republicans also have chided her for something else — traveling to posh spots outside Texas to meet with deep-pocket donors who have a political agenda and money they hope will put a friend in the Governor’s Mansion.

Follow Wayne Slater on Twitter at @wayneslater.

wslater@dallasnews.com