LANSING, MI -- Health insurance on the federally-run health exchange will be more expensive for Michiganders this year, but the state's increase is still below the national average.

The 2009 Affordable Care Act, sometimes referred to as "Obamacare," established state or federal exchanges. Michigan plans are available on the federal healthcare.gov site.

There are a wide variety of plans available on the marketplace, ranging from platinum coverage that covers about 90 percent of health care expensive to just catastrophic coverage.

To benchmark the rate increases, the federal government looked at the cost of every state's second least expensive silver plan, near the middle of the possible range. Josh Fangmeier, senior health policy analyst with the Center for Healthcare Research & Transformation, said 70 percent of people using the exchange chose silver plans.

In Michigan, that benchmark plan went up by 1.2 percent. Nationally for plans on healthcare.gov the average increase among states was 7.5 percent. The highest price increase was in Oklahoma at 35.7 percent. The biggest price decrease was in Indiana at -12.6 percent.

But there are a few hurdles in comparing Michigan's increase to that in other states.

"There's just so many factors. One is that in some of these states there's just a lot less plan competition," Fangmeier said.

He said that Michigan has a relatively large number of insurers and plans on the marketplace, making the state's market more competitive.

There's also the fact that Michigan's insurers are still fine-tuning the rate setting on these plans. This will be the third year the exchange is open.

"Insurers have had varying experiences when it comes to setting the premiums for this population," Fangmeier said.

The cost for plans changes by county, and that data is not yet available. However, the department did estimate the benchmark plan's cost change in major metropolitan areas, and in the Detroit area it's expected to decline by 1 percent.

In an analysis of last year's numbers CHRT found a large variability between what coverage cost in different counties, especially on the west side of the state.

Open Enrollment in the Health Insurance Marketplace starts on Nov. 1, 2015 and runs through Jan. 31, 2016.

Emily Lawler is a Capitol/Business reporter for MLive. You can reach her at elawler@mlive.com, subscribe to her on Facebook or follow her on Twitter: @emilyjanelawler.