Under the Affordable Care Act, the U.S. made great strides in extending health coverage to millions of people who previously had none. Nevertheless, for many people who struggle with chronic illnesses, paying for medical care is a challenge.

In recent months, the media has put a spotlight on these access issues, causing a wave of finger pointing among pharmaceutical companies and health insurers. The drug industry argues that high deductibles and co-pays are a barrier for people with limited means; They don’t fill their prescriptions and their health deteriorates. Insurers counter that the problem lies in the high cost of medications.

ADVERTISEMENT

Patients, physicians and other healthcare stakeholders are getting tired of this blame game. Most people feel it is time for pharmaceutical companies and insurers to bury their differences and collaborate on behalf of patients.

I strongly agree. We must start to put more of our energies into building partnerships that can deliver high-quality care for everyone. Those efforts could take the form of disease awareness and education campaigns and patient assistance programs. They may require becoming more transparent about the cost and availability of health care products and services. Whatever the vehicle, we need to adopt a more collaborative spirit.

I understand this will require compromise and concessions. Why do I believe it’s possible? Because the process has already begun.

One place where we are seeing results is in the area of community outreach. Pharmaceutical companies and payers have started working together on a variety of diabetes education programs. The goal: to identify people at risk so that we can prevent the downward spiral to disease.

Our most ambitious program is called Cities Changing Diabetes, which we launched in the U.S. in November in partnership with the city of Houston. Participants will analyze key factors driving the global epidemic and use that knowledge to find solutions. There is a golden irony here, which highlights the idea of compromise. To the extent that the Cities program succeeds, we will ensure that whole swaths of the population never develop an illness that would require them to use our products.

Once our Cities partnership is in gear, we hope to work closely with the Houston business community, including leading health insurers such as United Healthcare, Blue Cross Blue Shield, Aetna and Cigna, to tackle the issue of urban diabetes. Naturally, they will embrace the irony I mentioned: The Cities program will never double as a framework for insurers to recruit new plan members. All of the payers’ resources will be used to gather knowledge and execute strategies to fight the epidemic.

With some of our insurance partners, we have already tested these ground rules in smaller local alliances. The first, launched in Chicago in 2011, was a sponsorship program for the Chicago Fire Soccer Club, which we designed as a partnership with Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois and the American Diabetes Association. Now in our fourth year, we operate out of shared booths at popular pre-game street fairs known as FireFests.

At the booths, we distribute literature on diabetes prevention and awareness. Blue Cross and Novo Nordisk also co-sponsor Chicago Fire soccer practices where fans mingle with players. Last year, we kicked off a similar program with Independence Blue Cross (IBC) in Philadelphia, and we have plans for other cities.

In indirect ways, these community programs burnish the brands for corporate sponsors. But the greatest reward comes when sports fans start to connect some important dots in their own lives. The fans feel inspired by the athletic feats and the glow of good health on the playing field. Our message is simple: Take that inspiration and convert it to a lifetime stance against illness.

I realize collaboration between payers and pharma companies will necessitate deeper levels of compromise. Consider just one area of disagreement: transparency. Pharma companies are under pressure from payers, policymakers, physicians and patient advocates to be more forthcoming about drug prices. Our critics understand that we need to cover the costs of innovation, research and development, but they seek greater clarity about marketing and administrative costs. Maybe we shouldn’t be so quick to dismiss the request.

What could the insurers do, in return? For one thing, the exchange websites they run could be more helpful to patients. I’d like to see these sites include out-of-pocket calculators, formulary search tools, plus links to coverage summaries, updated formularies and provider directories.

Compromises take time. But collaborative efforts such as Cities Changing Diabetes set an important precedent. As we raise the ante, it’s good to remember that the ground is broken and the foundations are laid.

Høiland is president of Novo Nordisk Inc. From 2004 to 2012, Høiland led the global company’s International Operations, during which time he tripled pharmaceutical sales to more than $1.8 billion.