Nebraska Medical Center on Wednesday said it's ending the practice of sharing trauma service responsibility with Alegent Creighton Health Creighton University Medical Center.

The announcement that the Nebraska Medical Center is expanding its trauma services to seven days a week was made at a news conference Wednesday afternoon.

Since 1993, the Nebraska Medical Center has worked with Alegent Creighton Health Creighton University Medical Center in a combined trauma system. The arrangement, two part-time trauma centers, meant the system could not be recognized by the American College of Surgeons.

Reviewers recommended last year that the Nebraska Medical Center should explore the option of operating trauma independently.

Officials said a nationally-recognized trauma center will better meet the needs of Omaha residents and surrounding communities.

"Although the trauma system we've used for the last 20 years is functional, we think we have an obligation to provide something more," said P.J. Schenarts, MD, trauma medical director at the Nebraska Medical Center.

Alegent Creighton Health, which was notified of the plan Wednesday morning, said it also plans to create a full-time trauma center at its hospital at 30th and California streets.

That means, should everything go according to plan, there will be two full-time trauma centers in Omaha starting on Aug. 1.

For the Nebraska Medical Center, a certification process will be performed by the American College of Surgeons in order for the Nebraska Medical Center to achieve official Level 1 trauma center verification status.

Further details of Alegent Creighton Health's plan have not been released.

Mayor Jean Stothert, Fire Chief Bernie Kanger and Police Chief Todd Schmaderer released a joint statement Wednesday.

"The decision by NMC to have a 24/7 Level 1 Trauma Center is a positive step that will benefit the entire city. Since the current agreement between UNMC and Alegent Creighton will be in effect until August 1, 2014, there will be no changes in how the Omaha Fire Department delivers EMS services at this time."