ONTARIO >> Stellar employment growth, expansion of the logistics industry and e-commerce in the Inland Empire, and local control of the Ontario airport are key highlights for the regional economy, Inland Empire economist John Husing said at his annual keynote speech.

Speaking at the Doubletree Hotel in Ontario, Husing on Thursday provided an overview of regional economic trends and challenges to a crowd of business and local leaders at his annual state-of-the-Inland Empire speech: Job growth is impressive, even while wages aren’t keeping pace.

Husing said he expects the Inland Empire to reach a 5 percent unemployment rate this year, which is considered “full employment” for the local economy.

“Major employers, the education community, the nonprofit community, we’re all focused on building the best economy for our region, and I think the numbers are telling us what we’ve all known,” said Paul Granillo, president and CEO of the Inland Empire Economic Partnership.

Total local jobs, he said, is expected to increase to 1.4 million for the Inland Empire when his projection of 48,700 jobs are created this year.

“It’s the highest in history, and it puts us 104,758 higher than we were before the recession,” Husing said.

A major key takeaway from Husing’s address — hosted by the Inland Empire Economic Partnership business advocacy group, for which Husing serves as chief economist — was that the Inland Empire had become a key job growth center in the entire state, coming second only to Los Angeles County.

“What this means is that businesses and people in the Inland Empire should be feeling a lot better about the economy because of the way it’s growing,” Husing said. “If I’m a company interested in a very large market, adding jobs at a fast rate, I should be looking at the Inland Empire as a place to do business and create more jobs.”

Construction, Husing said, represented the second highest job growth sector for the region but commercial and industrial projects, not residential. Most of the housing business in the region is in the rental sector, according to experts, and people are not moving to the Inland Empire from outside areas.

The logistics sector, which includes warehousing and trucking goods, will continue to grow in the Inland Empire thanks to cheaper land and available space, the increase of goods being shipped and handled at the ports of Long Beach and Los Angeles, the growth of online shopping, and the strong dollar encouraging more imports.

Advertisement

In addition, the return of local control of the Los Angeles/Ontario International Airport is expected to help spur additional economic growth for the region, with plans for new logistics-based development around the airport.

Jay Prag, professor of economics and finance at the Drucker School of Management at Claremont Graduate University, said that while employment is booming, wage numbers are not quite as good.

“The logistics jobs that replaced the construction jobs, don’t pay nearly as well as construction,” Prag said. “The logistics jobs are a lot less permanent because we are highly dependent on goods trade commitments with China and other exporter/importers.”

The strong dollar, while helping logistics, is hurting manufacturing, which has experienced tepid growth in the region, according to industry watchers.

“Because the value of the dollar is so strong, it means that if I’m an exporter, my products cost more to my customers worldwide,” Husing said.

Husing also said the health care sector is expected to create more jobs because of the Affordable Care Act, which has increased the number of people seeking healthcare.

“Many more people are covered and therefore there is the need for many more people to work in that sector,” he said.