The federal government must delay skyrocketing increases on flood insurance premiums, lawmakers demanded Thursday.

Sen. Chuck Schumer joined other pols in calling for Congress to delay parts of the Biggert-Water Flood Insurance Reform Act, which ends federal flood insurance subsidies and, opponents fear, will send property values crashing.

Most residents of waterfront areas are required to have flood insurance to prop up their mortgages in the event of disaster.

But the cost of that insurance could go rise to $30,000 a year once the federal government draws new flood zone maps — and Schumer wants to figure out a way to do something about it.

“I’m actively conferring with many of my colleagues in search of a legislative solution ... to keep flood insurance premiums affordable,” he said in a statement.

Homeowner groups said the hikes could severely affect their communities.

“It’s going to be a tremendous hardship,” said Hank Iori, president of the Belle Harbor Property Owners Association, which represents families in the Rockaway peninsula community.

“All the homeowners are addressing repairs and trying to get back to where they were [before Sandy],” he said. “But in a year or a year and a half, you could end up opening a letter that says your flood insurance increased $10,000 [or] $15,000.

The new premiums are expected to lead to a steep drop in property values, said

“The exorbitant rise in flood insurance premiums is going to have a massive negative impact on the housing market,” said George Kasimos, founder of Stop FEMA Now, which is trying to halt the rate jump. “It is going to make the 2007 housing bubble look like a walk in the park.”

Once the new maps are drawn, about 9,500 Queens homeowners are expected to be placed in a flood zone for the first time. And about 23,500 borough families are expected to be affected by the higher premiums.

They’ll all feel the pain.

“Most families don’t have any additional income in their budgets to handle an outrageous increase,” said Dan Mundy Jr., president of the Broad Channel Civic Association, which represents about 2,000 families. “Some families will walk away from their homes.”

FEMA officials couldn’t comment due to the government shutdown. Ironically, the government is closed in part because Republicans in the House want to delay a different federal act, the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare.

ctrapasso@nydailynews.com