Dental care for Michigan kids in low-income families, seniors and pregnant women are among the gaps identified in a new report. (Photo: Getty Images)

It’s not just about having a winning smile.

Michigan’s kids in families with low incomes, seniors and pregnant women are not getting the dental care they need to stay healthy, a new report concludes.

Troubled chompers can lead to other serious problems.

Kids with dental pain miss more school and have poorer grades. Pregnant women can pass along bacteria responsible for dental cavities to their infants during birth. Worse, poor oral health has been linked to preterm births.

“What’s clear is that oral health disparities still exist despite efforts to combat this problem,” said Karlene Ketola, executive director of the Michigan Oral Health Coalition, which helped release the report, “Oral Health in Michigan.”

The report found that despite more people with dental insurance and an improving economy, problems persist. It was conducted by the University at Albany, State University of New York, for the Michigan Council for Maternal and Child Health.

For example, nearly two out of three children insured by Medicaid did not have dental care in 2013, despite qualifying for the service. Three out of four new mothers did not receive any care during their most recent pregnancy in 2008. Additionally, nearly half of seniors living in long-term care facilities in 2010 had not seen a dentist in the prior year.

The Capital area is lucky enough to have strong “safety net” clinics for the uninsured, including a clinic at the Ingham County Health Department and clinics in Charlotte and St. Johns opened in 2010 and 2011, said Kim Singh, director of community and governmental affairs for the Michigan Community Dental Clinic, which operates the Charlotte and St. Johns clinics.

That’s helped expand care for the uninsured, especially for adults in recent years.

Still, not all are being served, Singh said.

“I think the more we can highlight this the better,” Singh said. “The mouth is the gateway to the body. We’re finding out more and more just how important access to a dentist and dental home is.”

It’s harder for families struggling with transportation to get appointments and Singh said that adults with access to the dentist are more likely to make sure their kids get to the dentist.

The state has also invested in a Healthy Kids Dental program, which offers additional payments to private dentists to accept kids on Medicaid. Only Wayne, Oakland and Kent counties do not have it, though the budget year that starts Oct. 1 budget will expand the program for kids up to age 12 in those counties. Ingham County was added at the end of 2013.

Michigan also has two dental schools (University of Michigan and University of Detroit Mercy) and 10 dental hygienist schools, including one Lansing Community College. Those produce a steady stream of dental health professionals.

And the Healthy Michigan Plan, the expanded Medicaid plan passed as part of the federal Affordable Care Act, included dental services.

Despite those advantages, the report will be used by the Michigan Council on Maternal and Child Health to start a discussion on what can be done to close the identified gaps, said Amy Zaagman, the group’s executive director.

“We will be engaging stakeholders over the coming months to identify the key policy changes to impact the access picture as well as educating and raising awareness about the need to take action,” Zaagman said.

Immediate takeaways? Don’t skip your dental visits, especially if you are pregnant. Call your health department to find out how to get your kids to a dentist if they aren’t going. Ask about dental care for your loved one in a long-term care facility.

For lawmakers and Gov. Rick Snyder, pat yourselves on the back for including dental in the Healthy Michigan Plan and for expanding Healthy Kids Dental to all 83 counties (though teens in the final three counties deserve coverage, too), but don’t let up.

There’s more that just a smile at stake.

Find the report online at www.mcmch.org

Read or Share this story: http://on.lsj.com/1MfPzif