CNBC’s media bias in Boulder, Colorado, last Wednesday night may have allowed Florida Sen. Marco Rubio to “lie” his way out of his financial past.

The Orlando Sentinel seconded the opinion of MSNBC’s Joe Scarborough, who said, “Marco just flat-out lied to the American people,” about his financial past. Both contend moderator Becky Quick’s questioning of the Republican candidate’s previous cash problems was legitimate.

“Senator Rubio, you yourself have said that you’ve had issues. You have a lack of bookkeeping skills. You accidentally intermingled campaign money with your personal money. You faced foreclosure on a second home that you bought. And just last year you liquidated a sixty-eight-thousand-dollar retirement fund,” Quick said. “That’s something that cost you thousands of dollars in taxes and penalties. In terms of all of that, it raises the question whether you have the maturity and wisdom to lead this seventeen-trillion-dollar economy. What do you say?”

Rubio said the question was born out of a “litany of discredited attacks” by Democrats and political opponents. He then spoke on his need to take out student loans as a young man and the expensive nature of raising a family in 2015.

“I was stunned that the moderators didn’t stop there and go, ‘Wait a second, these are court records. What are you talking about?'” Scarborough said on “Morning Joe” Oct. 29, Mediaite reported.

The Sentinel echoed that sentiment Saturday, saying, “Rubio has a string of financial messes, personal and political. And anyone who watched his record in Florida knows it. He was mired in debt, even while living a life of limo rides and travel and telling others to live within their means. Don’t take it from me. Take it from court documents. And investigative reports.”

Who do you love? Get your favorite presidential bumper sticker here! Check out WND Superstore’s mind-blowing and hilarious selection

The newspaper said Rubio double-billed taxpayers and the GOP for the same airfare, foreclosed on a house he bought with a friend, and unsuccessfully tried to insert a $800,000 state budget rider for artificial turf at his former flag-football team’s field.

“Rubio has admitted most of this, repaying improper expenditures and expressing regret for what he called mistakes. But last week facts became ‘discredited attacks.’ Listen, people can forgive financial pitfalls. But they don’t like dishonesty,” the newspaper reported.

CNBC’s line of questioning was gleaned in part by a June 9 investigative report by the New York Times titled, “Marco Rubio’s Career Bedeviled by Financial Struggles.”

“The New York Times today attacked Marco because he could not afford to pay for college, arrogantly describing his student loan debt as ‘a deep financial hole of his own making.’ The attack from the Times is just the latest in their continued hits against Marco and his family,” Rubio Communications Director Alex Conant said in response to the piece, Fox News Latino reported.

Get the hottest, most important news stories on the Internet – delivered FREE to your inbox as soon as they break! Take just 30 seconds and sign up for WND’s Email News Alerts!

CNBC’s handling of last week’s debate prompted Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus to end its partnership with NBC News. The decision puts a Feb. 26, 2016, Houston, Texas, debate in limbo, WND reported.

“The CNBC network is one of your media properties, and its handling of the debate was conducted in bad faith. We understand that NBC does not exercise full editorial control over CNBC’s journalistic approach. However, the network is an arm of your organization, and we need to ensure there is not a repeat performance,” Priebus said in a statement released last Friday. “While debates are meant to include tough questions and contrast candidates’ visions and policies for the future of America, CNBC’s moderators engaged in a series of ‘gotcha’ questions, petty and mean-spirited in tone, and designed to embarrass our candidates. What took place Wednesday night was not an attempt to give the American people a greater understanding of our candidates’ policies and ideas.”

The RNC left open the possibility of negotiating new debate rules with the network.