People with solar panels on their roofs often get a pretty good price break on their energy bills.

Too good, some utilities say.

Now, utilities in several states—including the country's sunniest, California and Arizona—are trying to do something about it.

Here's the issue: For most homes, solar panels don't generate all the power the residents use. At night and on cloudy days, and sometimes even on sunny days, these homes draw power from the grid that serves all a utility's customers. But at other times, the panels generate more power than the home is using, and that surplus power flows into the grid.

Under state rules known as net metering, customers are credited on their bills for any power that flows from their homes to the grid, usually at the same rate they pay when they draw power from the grid.

So, customers with solar panels not only are buying less electricity from their utilities, but also are able to offset much of the cost of what they do buy.

ENLARGE Solar panels being installed in California, the biggest battleground over solar customers' bills. Bloomberg News

The utilities say solar customers are paying so little that they don't cover their share of the cost of maintaining the grid, which they still rely on. That drives up costs for nonsolar customers, utilities say, and they warn that the burden will grow as the number of solar customers continues to swell.

Solar companies and their customers deny that people with solar panels aren't paying their share of utility costs, and argue that rooftop solar systems benefit utility grids by relieving demand and providing extra power. Cutting incentives would reduce the appeal of solar energy, they say, depriving the grid of some of that additional power, blunting the environmental benefits of solar power and hurting the young, fast-growing industry.

The Price of Growth

One change utilities have proposed is to credit solar customers for the power they feed into the grid at the wholesale rate, which is much lower than the retail rate—or at least to credit them at some rate in between the two. Another would be to charge all customers a monthly fee to cover utilities' fixed costs.

ENLARGE

As things stand, Arizona Public Service Co. estimates that its roughly one million residential nonsolar customers pay about $18 a year each to subsidize the utility's 18,000 solar customers. "Everyone who's using the grid ought to pay their fair share of the grid," says Jim McDonald, a spokesman for the utility.

Arizona Public Service has proposed two alternatives to the current net-metering rules. Both would reduce the value of the power solar customers feed to the grid, by different amounts; one would also include charging customers a monthly fee for grid costs. Either option would boost the average solar customer's monthly bill by an estimated $50 to $100, the utility says.

A Middle Ground?

Solar proponents dispute the utilities' subsidy estimates. A study earlier this year by a solar advocacy group called the Vote Solar Initiative concluded that the cost of net metering to utilities is outweighed by the value of the electricity solar panels feed to the grid. "The data supports net-metered solar," says Edward Fenster, chief executive of solar developer Sunrun Inc.

California lawmakers passed a bill this month that allows regulators to trim solar incentives and change net-metering rules, as well as cut the state's highest retail power rates, a move utilities say they could make if costs can be spread more broadly. The bill also removes limits on the number of customers eligible for net metering.

It remains to be seen what changes will result, if any. Regulators act in part on input from utilities, the solar industry and consumer advocates. California's utilities and the solar industry remain far apart on this issue, but at least some consumer advocates acknowledge the need to find a middle ground.

"If you move from a few customers having solar to 10% or 20%, you can't sustain that within the current tariffs," says Matthew Freedman, a lawyer with the Utility Reform Network, a consumer group. "There will be sizable cost shifts, and then you're dealing with a situation where you have the haves and the have-nots."

Ms. Sweet is a Wall Street Journal staff reporter in San Francisco. She can be reached at cassandra.sweet@wsj.com.