Adam Edelen is Kentucky's Auditor of Public Accounts. (Photo: Provided)

HEBRON, Ky. – In what sounded like a kickoff of a 2019 challenge to Matt Bevin, former Democratic state Auditor Adam Edelen blasted the current governor during a speech to Northern Kentucky Democrats on Thursday.

“If you want to know how far Kentucky is retreating on the progress that we have made in the last couple of generations, I have three words for you: Governor. Matt. Bevin,” Edelen told the crowd.

“Never in the history of Kentucky, has a governor made so many bad decisions in such a short period of time,” said Edelen, of Lexington.

Edelen lost his re-election bid in November as Bevin and the Republicans swept to victory, taking all but two of Kentucky’s statewide offices. Despite outraising his opponent, former state Rep. Mike Harmon, by a 20-1 margin, he lost to Harmon by 36,320 votes.

“Make no mistake,” Edelen told the group of about 65 people. “I am coming back.”

Bevin's spokeswoman, Jessica Ditto, didn't respond to an email sent to her Thursday evening or a text message on Friday.

But state Rep. Jerry Miller, R-Middletown, defended Bevin, saying that he is trying to solve Kentucky's pension crisis, which he said was caused by Edelen's Democrats.

"Gov. Bevin was elected to fix this, and he is acting boldly to do something about it," he said.

He added that Edelen's criticism "fits into the narrative that we've heard since the election."

Miller discounted Edelen's threat as a potential threat to Bevin in 2019, saying, "Adam Edelen couldn’t even win a race against one of our least-funded candidates - Mike Harmon, who has a heart of gold but he is not a smooth political operator like Adam. I don’t know what he’s doing, and I’m not sure he does either."

Speaking at the event, Edelen said Bevin’s election was a “tragedy.”

“We have a governor who wants to convince us that we can take a short-cut to prosperity by reducing workers’ wages and protections, by kicking people off health care who work for a living, by raising the cost of college tuition,” he said.

“Folks, that is not a vision for a new Kentucky. It is the agenda for a very old Mississippi,” he said.

In the 28-minute speech, Edelen also trained his sights on the Democratic Party and – without mentioning him by name – former Attorney General Jack Conway, who was the Democratic nominee for governor in 2015.

“We ran an idealess, people-less campaign, in the last governor’s race out of Frankfort. We literally ran a campaign that encouraged people not to vote. We all know what happens in elections when Democrats don’t vote. Democrats don’t win,” he said.

He called on the Democratic Party to reinvent itself, to reach out to independents and disaffected voters and to give them the opportunity to have a say in the issues the party champions.

“What we have got to do is build something different, build it around a set of values,” he said. “We have to find ways to reach out to people who may not be full-fledged Democrats but who share our values.”

He called for running campaigns based on ideas rather than those based on opposition to Republican ideas and candidates.

“The lesson of the last election is that bad ideas trump no ideas,” he said in an interview.

Reporter Joseph Gerth can be reached at (502) 875-5136 or jgerth@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1MXofKW