COLORADO SPRINGS, COLO. -- Hunter Fejes scored twice, including an unassisted game-winning goal midway through the third period, to lead Colorado College to a 4-3 upset victory over No. 7 Nebraska Omaha Friday night at The Broadmoor World Arena. The Tigers captured their first win in the National Collegiate Hockey Conference this season and improved to 5-13-1 overall and 1-8-1 in league play. The Mavericks fell to 14-6-3 overall and 8-4-1 in the NCHC but remained in first place in the league standings.

Fejes scored his first goal of the game to even the game at 2-apiece at the 7:27 mark of the second period when he took a centering pass from Jaccob Slavin and sent a one-timer past Omaha goalie Kirk Thompson. That goal came just 82 seconds after Omaha’s Tyler Vesel scored to give the Mavericks their only lead of the contest at 2-1.

Slavin picked up his second assist of the game 53 seconds into the third period when Sam Rothstein knocked home a power-play goal to give CC the lead for good at 3-2. Slavin won a battle along the boards and found Scott Wamsganz at the side of the net. Wamsganz tried to redirect the puck past Thompson but it slid across the front of the net to Rothstein, who put it in the open net.

Fejes made it 4-2 with an impressive individual play at the 10:20 mark of the final period. He stole the puck at his own blue line, carried it along the boards and beat Thompson top shelf from the left circle for his second-career two-goal game.

The Tigers withstood a furious Omaha comeback in the final minutes, but not before UNO’s Jake Guentzel cut the lead to 4-3 with a power-play goal with 3:31 remaining after CC’s Zach Aman was called for tripping and with Thompson on the bench in favor of an extra attacker. Then, just over a minute later, the Tigers’ Alex Roos was called for hooking but his team killed that power-play opportunity, also with Thompson (20 saves) on the bench.

“This was a huge win for us tonight,” said CC head coach Mike Haviland. “We have really matured as a group.”

Slavin, who posted three points for the second consecutive game, opened the scoring with a wrister from the slot on the power play that beat Thompson at 6:05 of the opening frame. UNO’s Brian O’Roarke was called for a 5-minute major for interference 30 seconds earlier after a shot to the head of CC’s Michael King. King did not return to the game. Rothstein and Bradley (two points each) assisted on Slavin’s goal.

“Slavin was outstanding tonight,” said Haviland. “We have talked about simplifying our power play and getting pucks on the net and that’s what he did.”

Ian Brady tied the game at 1-all at the 16:03 mark of the first period, beating CC’s Tyler Marble on a 5-on-3 rush after two CC players collided and fell behind the Omaha net. Marble, who had 23 saves in CC’s 4-1 victory over UConn on Jan. 6, finished Friday’s game with 26 saves for his fourth win of the season.

The same two teams will battle Saturday, Jan. 17, beginning at 7:07 p.m.