Boulder's Wild Eyez produces shields that can attach to bicycle helmets, as seen in this promotional photo. ( Courtesy photo )

Hill (Courtesy photo)

Graham Hill started Boulder-based 21 Wheels in 1997 as a means of developing avenues for alternative transportation. Since that time, Hill also has sought to launch functional products he thought could fill voids in the bicycle industry.

One of those efforts led to the creation of Wide Eyez, a bike helmet shield suited to affix to the existing helmets on the market. The shieldwould help to provide protection from the elements and other issues such as insects.

Hill spoke with the Daily Camera last week about Wide Eyez.

The following has been edited for clarity and space.

1.) How long has the shield been in development?

For about a year. The product just came out a few weeks ago. It was my love for bicycle fairings (windshields used to reduce drag or protect cyclists). I used to sell recumbent bicycles ... (including those) with a windshield right in front of you.

Then I had this used bicycle helmet that I picked up at a garage sale and it had a shield on it. I thought that if I made one a little bit differently and made it more of a universal application, maybe that would work out.

2.) What traction — in sales and pick-ups by stores — has the product gained since its launch?

I'm getting into some stores and already have some online presence.

There are a number of verticals in the bicycle markets: cyclocross to road bikers to mountain bikers to commuters ... the list goes on. I think I've really fallen into the adventure cycling, the mountain biking and commuting (segments).

This is not a high-end product, necessarily, yet it is a functional product (that can be used) for events such as Ride the Rockies or commuters biking long distances. I think Wide Eyez is appropriate for that. If you wear sunglasses for a long period of time, you can get sore. This product (can) flip up like a visor on a motorcycle helmet.

I think it's appropriate for long-distance riding, those who commute year-round.

3.) What hitches did you encounter when you were developing Wide Eyez?

First and foremost, I wanted to brand it as a Colorado and Made in the U.S.A. product.

Certainly, I could've introduced this product by sending my specs and my CADs offshore somewhere. But anybody could do that.

Cycling is becoming more U.S.-branded. We wear more bike helmets in this country than most places around the world. ... Because of that, I really wanted to have a product that was universal in its application.

For liability issues, I could not drill into a helmet. I wanted to come up with something that makes sense and was at least stylish enough that it could be applied for the daytime user as well as the nighttime user.

It's a clear shield designed so that there is room to wear optical glasses or sunglasses underneath. I don't tout the UV in my shields, but there is some UV (protection) in there.

4.) Do you continue to be involved with 21 Wheels?

I wanted to differentiate the two (companies). 21 Wheels is not necessarily all bicycles. It's concepts, it's projects, it's consulting.

5.) What are your next steps for Wide Eyez?

Mostly to really penetrate those verticals. And personally, I do know a number of people in the bike industry. I will continue to work with those contacts, but also personally go to the more viable bicycling communities (such as) Minneapolis; Portland, Ore.; Seattle; Austin, Texas; Washington, D.C.; Chicago. Those are my visits for sure that I will have.

I probably will visit most of those places before the end of May, while, of course, building Boulder, Denver and Colorado.

If I could crack into three or four markets, I think I've got a pretty good shot to make this a pretty sound business.

— Alicia Wallace