After more than 30 years of spirited debate, it turns out that judging a hospital's outcomes based on for-profit (FP) or not-for profit (NFP) status is a little like judging a book by its cover: you may or may not like what you see, but it has little bearing on what happens inside.

For many, this certainly does not come as breaking news. Yet, the general argument is that for-profit entities' goal is to provide a return (dollars) to their owners while not-for-profits can focus entirely on providing excellent care to their patients. This implied that for-profit institutions provided care of lower quality. Numerous studies have undermined this myth.

In the past year, Harvard researchers have showed that among 237 hospitals that converted to FP status between 2003 and 2010, there were, as expected, improvements in margins but no differences in quality or mortality rates or with the proportion of poor or minority patients receiving care. In addition, a survey in California in 2010 showed that the 196 hospitals surveyed received $3.3 billion state and federal tax exemptions and spent only $1.4 billion on charity care -- a gap of $1.9 billion. Three-quarters of the hospitals got more dollars in tax breaks than they spent on charity care. Half spent less than 2.46% of their operating expenses on charity care.

Consider the dead horse sufficiently kicked. It is an antiquated dispute that is sucking our collective attention -- and that of our lawmakers -- away from addressing issues that truly impact patient outcomes.

Certainly, as our healthcare system slowly progresses to one that values quality of care over quantity, it's time to shift efforts toward truly measuring results, rather than financial makeup. Being able to do this will mean developing a framework that fairly measures outcomes in NFP and FP settings -- adjusting for a number of previously neglected variables that affect care.

It is an achievable task, as evidenced by what regulatory bodies have already done.

For example, for more than 20 years, the United States Renal Data System (USRDS) has collected data on end-stage renal disease in the U.S. -- and examined whether there is a difference in hospitalizations and mortality between FP and NFP dialysis facilities. While utilizing traditional indicators -- which only adjust for age, race, sex, and time on dialysis -- it appeared that NFP facilities performed significantly better than FP facilities. However, a 2014 analysis of USRDS data showed that when the data are properly adjusted using geography as measured by ESRD network, facility length of ownership, type of first access (fistula versus graft versus catheter), and most importantly pre-dialysis nephrology care, there is no difference in either hospitalizations or mortality. As a nephrologist, the findings only reinforced my intuitions -- traditional statistics on the financial divide between healthcare providers didn't accurately represent the quality of care nephrologists were providing each day. Importantly, none of the additional adjusters are under the control of the facility whether NFP or FP.

Increasingly, it is recognized that socioeconomic status can affect healthcare outcomes both directly and indirectly (areas of low socioeconomic status may have a smaller number of practitioners, less access to care, lack of affordable public transportation, and poorer insurance -- especially under insurance). Using Medicare and Census Bureau data, Almachraki and colleagues showed that FP dialysis facilities are disproportionately located in areas of poverty. FP providers owned an overwhelming majority of clinics (metropolitan, 84%; micropolitan [10,000-50,000 population], 85%; rural, 90%) in poverty areas. While in areas of extreme poverty, FP providers owned 87% of the clinics. Nationwide, FPs own 82% of all dialysis facilities, giving them a disproportionate share of facilities in areas of poverty and extreme poverty.

Quality is king in today's healthcare environment, and it's time we give it due respect. It's time for us all to focus less on the financial organization of care than on the outcomes of that care.

Quality is not only king, but it is the future -- particularly after passage of the Affordable Care Act. Dialysis care -- the first and only form of care in Medicare based wholly on a prospective payment system -- is also the only form of care that has a pay-for-performance component based on validated quality measures. And while it is clearly an evolving methodology, it is unlikely that Medicare will reverse course.

In our new quality-driven era, shouldn't policymakers be considering new ways to judge clinical outcomes, and focusing on crafting representative quality measures that include meaningful data?

To be successful, we need to develop a framework that fairly measures outcomes and adjusts for those variables that affect care. In nephrology, this will require the government, dialysis providers, physicians, and researchers to work together to mine data and perhaps improve existing databases to develop a new understanding of the determinants and barriers influencing outcomes.

As complex as this process may appear, cooperation and collaboration can make for a better, more efficient healthcare system in the future. And more importantly, establishing such a process can help contribute to better patient outcomes not only for dialysis patients, but for all Americans.

Robert J. Rubin, MD, is a Distinguished Professor of Medicine at Georgetown University. He joined the Nephrology faculty in 1981 as a visiting professor while he served as Assistant Surgeon General and an Assistant Secretary at the US Department of Health and Human Services. He currently sees patients with a wide variety of nephrology problems with an emphasis on hypertension. In addition he is an associate editor of the Clinical Journal of The American Society of Nephrology. He is an expert on pharmacoeconomics, public policy and clinical epidemiology and frequently advises medical specialty societies, government, and industry on these matters.