UPDATE 10/17/15 9:16 A.M.

The two people that were arrested in connection with a body found Thursday morning made their first appearance in court Saturday.

Thomas Hutchinson, has been charged with an open count of murder. He was also charged with tampering with a blue crab trap, and he has a pending aggravated battery charge from back in February. No bond was set for Hutchinson.

Meanwhile, Mary King has been charged with one count of murder. The judge did not set a bond for her either. Both will have their arraignment on November 17 at 9 a.m. in Bay County.

------------------------------

Two people have been arrested in connection with a body found Thursday morning.

The Bay County Sheriff's Office discovered the body of 46-year-old Timothy Morrell floating in shallow water near the old Marifarms shrimp-farm of North Bay.

According to officials, injuries to Morrell were consistent with foul play. They say he was stabbed multiple times with a Flounder gig and beaten, but an autopsy report says the cause of death was drowning.

Bay County Sheriff's Officials tell us they responded to a call late Tuesday night from boaters who were taking on water. They say 36 year old Mary King, the girlfriend of Morrell, and 18 year old Thomas Hutchinson were on the boat. They claimed Morrell was with them but didn't get back in the boat when they were towed to shore.

Officials say drugs and alcohol were involved, and King and Hutchinson have been charged with an open count of murder.

"The individual was left there knowing that he was injured. If he had not been injured, the water he was in was quite shallow and we do not believe he would have died without the other injuries," Sheriff Frank McKeithen said.

"It was his fault that the boat was taking on water and the female and Mr. Hutchinson blamed him for that and took their aggression out on him," Captain Jimmy Stanford said.

An FWC investigation found the three were allegedly involved with stealing blue crab traps when their boat began to take on water.