Topics: 2016 Elections, Democratic Party, Lincoln Chafee, Republican Party, rhode island, News, Politics News

I recently walked away from a lengthy interview with former Rhode Island Governor Lincoln Chafee with a clear idea of how he sees himself.

Chafee used the words “ethical” and “competent” repeatedly to describe his governing style, and, toward the end of our conversation, he rang off “five basic tenets” that haven’t changed during a political career that includes stints as a Republican, Independent and Democrat; and time as a city councilor, mayor and U.S. senator. Chafee believes in standing up for clean air and water, fiscal responsibility and staunchly defending personal liberties. (“If you’re gonna tap our phones, go get a warrant,” he told me.) He believes government can be a force for good in people’s lives, and he is “very averse to foreign entanglements and quagmires.”

That, in a paragraph, is how Lincoln Chafee — one of the newest entrants to the 2016 presidential race (although, technically, he’s just “considering” a run) — describes his political brand. But, as a Rhode Island journalist with a front-row seat to Chafee’s last few years, I feel compelled to add a few more words: This guy is weird.

Chafee isn’t demographically weird, of course. He’s an enormously rich, 62-year-old, Andover-educated white guy who likes to sail. The Chafees were among Rhode Island’s founding families, and as Mother Jones pointed out — in a post titled “Finally, a Candidate for People Who Think Jeb Bush Isn’t WASPy Enough” — his “father, great-great grandfather and great-great uncle all previously served as governor.” Travel around Rhode Island and you’ll see Chafee Hall at the University of Rhode Island, the John H. Chafee Center for International Business at Bryant University, the Pell Chafee Performance Center in Providence and the John H. Chafee Fitness Center at the Newport naval station.

But none of this precludes Lincoln Chafee from being a strange bird. And I’d wager that his utter quirkiness was the reason a number of folks took his April 9 presidential-candidacy announcement as a belated April Fool’s joke.

Chafee is so bereft of polish and charisma that, depending on your viewpoint, he’s either an endearing political Mr. Rogers, or, as Rhody talk-radio shock jock John DePetro tweeted after the announcement, an “incompetent buffoon.” I recently heard one local political consultant compare Chafee’s trademark facial expression to that of a guy telling you that he just ran over your dog. And when things go sour — as they frequently did during Chafee’s gubernatorial term, which included a hurricane, abysmal employment stats and the collapse of former Red Sox pitcher Curt Schilling’s Providence-based video-game company, 38 Studios, which the state had lent $75 million – this affect can start to grate. Perhaps there are politicians who can get away with saying “Don’t trust your dealer right now” during a conversation about a fatal overdose crisis. But Chafee isn’t one of them.

But this is all surface-level, subjective stuff. Let’s talk facts – which, in Chafee’s case, are fittingly eclectic. He was a professional farrier (someone who shoes horses) for years before entering politics. He’s admitted to tooting a bit of cocaine in college. He was an early advocate of legalizing same-sex marriage in Rhode Island, long before he was able sign the bill making it a reality, in 2013. His approval rating hovered in the 20s during his time in office.

Rhode Island recently unveiled Chafee’s official gubernatorial portrait, which features an unusual, midnight-dark background. At the time, the Providence Journal wrote, “Lincoln Chafee may best be known as the party-switching politician who stubbornly blazed his own trail whether it landed him in thorns or not. Soon, his image of nonconformity will hang in the State House in perpetuity.”