Topics: Cities, Dream City, Editor's Picks, Music, Sound, Urban design, urban planning, Innovation News, Sustainability News, Life News

If you grew up in Calgary in the 1980s, you probably heard the city’s unofficial theme song. “Hello Calgary,” a vague but peppy ode to the Canadian prairie city, struck certain denizens as a hometown anthem.

But with slightly altered lyrics, the tune was simultaneously serving as a promotional tool in the U.S., in Atlanta, Knoxville, Rochester, Milwaukee, Tulsa, Nashville, and Phoenix. To this day, it resonates in those cities with residents of a certain age who don’t realize that its civic authenticity is on par with that of the local Hard Rock Café.

The story is a lesson in the power and peril of branding, and in particular, of sonic branding — associating sounds and music with products, companies, organizations and ideas. Global brands have sonic strategies, says Joel Beckerman, the founder of Man Made Music and composer of jingles for AT&T, CBS and others. So why not cities?

By strategy, Beckerman is referring to a much wider range of sonic interventions than tourist outreach of the “Hello Calgary” type. There are foreground sounds like subway announcements, and background sounds like ambient music. Cities have a lot of “sonic trash,” he says, and not enough “sonic feng shui.”

Beckerman has a new book out, “The Sonic Boom,” about his life as a professional soundsmith. But, he insists — as if the goal were more modest — he’s less interested in selling books than in starting a movement.

Bad sound, according to Beckerman, is “as detrimental to quality of life as bad streetlights or poor sidewalks.” (Like the high hat in a pop song, once you hear it, it can’t be unheard.) He wants to urge us toward a “sonic humanism”: an awareness of our sonic environment, and a cognizance that we can change it if we want to.

The artists Bruce Odland and Sam Auinger have called these spaces — from streets to parks to airports — the “sonic commons,” where citizens “are submerged in a sea of shared sound.” It’s telling that discussion of city noise requires hitching common terms to the word “sonic.” The field is young and frequently forced to piggyback on the ancient lexicon of architecture and visual arts. R. Murray Schafer, the father of acoustic ecology and author of “The Tuning of the World,” coined both “soundscape” and “earmark,” alterations of their land-based equivalents. Shafer also suggested citizens try a “soundwalk,” a dérive for the aurally inclined, “a form of active participation in the soundscape.”

Generally, advocates, artists and professionals like Beckerman tend to feel society has given sound short shrift. “The majority of architects do not make sound a primary consideration in the viability of the space,” he told me.

“All infrastructure is designed,” Osland and Auinger write, “Our ears were simply not part of the design brief.”

This has practical consequences. Sound cues relieve your overworked eyes by sharing the burden of daily stimuli between the senses. Most pedestrians, whether they realize it or not, take their daytime jaywalking cues from sound as much as from sight. Drivers with standard transmissions hear and feel the engine telling them to switch gears.