People Moves of the Week: Ziegler, JMI Equity, Carl Marks

Ziegler sets up PE segment with Contemporary Healthcare Capital co-founder Eric Smith; JMI Equity shakes up roster; Carl Marks promotes three

Abris Capital Partners — Cezar Scarlat has been promoted to partner. He was previously a managing director at the Warsaw, Poland-based firm. The new position comes after Scarlat’s success expanding Abris’ footprint in Romania and Bulgaria where he will continue to oversee deal sourcing, something he's done since 2012. Cezar will also continue to hold his roles as chair in Cargus and Urgent Courier. Before Abris, Cezar was with several other firms, including Bridgepoint Capital, Nomura Investment Bank, Arthur Andersen and PwC UK.

Atlantic Street Capital — The Stamford, Connecticut-based private equity firm has promoted Brian Cooper to partner. Cooper, who joined Atlantic Street in 2013, serves on the boards of Uniguest Inc. and Z Wireless. Prior to joining Atlantic Street, he worked at GB Merchant Partners, Gordon Brother’s private equity affiliate, as well as boutique investment bank Financo.

Arent Fox LLP — The New York law office has once again tapped litigator and compliance counsel M. Scott Peeler to be a part of its ranks. Peeler is a former prosecutor under Robert Morgenthau in the New York District Attorney’s office. Peeler was previously a managing director and head of compliance consulting for investigations firm Stroz Friedberg, a global risk management provider. He originally joined Arent Fox in 2000, where he would remain for a decade, before leaving for Chadbourne & Parke LLP.

Carl Marks Advisors— The New York investment bank has called up several advisers to higher posts. Keith Daniels,Jonathan KillionandRob Shapiro were each promoted. Daniels, who joined Carl Marks in 2009, is now a partner. Most recently, he led the restructuring team that advised the sale of Associated Wholesalers Inc. to C&S Wholesale Grocers. Killion, who ran a recapitalization of DayMen Group in 2014, is now a director. Shapiro, who joined in 2012 as a consultant on loan restructurings and Chapter 11 bankruptcies, is now an associate.

JMI Equity — The private equity firm announced several role changes within its roster. David Greenberg, Bob Nye and Matt Emery were each named general partner. Greenberg, based in JMI's Baltimore headquarters, worked on the Businessolver, Lytx, SiriusDecisions and the Search Agency deals. Prior to joining JMI, Greenberg was an associate at Cascadia Capital and an analyst at Houlihan Lokey. Nye, also based in Baltimore, worked on the Dean Evans & Associates, DoubleVerify, Paradigm and Undertone transactions. Prior to joining JMI in 2005, Nye was a consultant with Bates White, an economic consulting firm focused on econometric and statistical modeling. Emery, like Greenberg, joined JMI in 2006. Since then, he has worked on several of deals, including the purchases of AtTask, Capsule Tech, PointClickCare and WhiteHat Security. Before he joined JMI, Emery was an analyst in the technology investment banking group at Thomas Weisel Partners. Separately, JMI announced that general partner Bob Smith will transition to a new role as a venture partner at JMI. In this capacity, he will continue to help manage current portfolio investments. He will remain a member of the boards of directors at JMI portfolio companies Compusearch and Paradigm.

Madison Street Capital — The Chicago investment bank has recently expanded into eastern and northeastern India. The overseas presence will be led by Abhishek Misra as regional head, and Tapas Mitra as assistant regional head. The office will focus on helping businesses form joint ventures, raise capital and restructure, and gives Madison Street a presence in one of India’s largest business and commerce centers.

Sail Capital Partners Ltd. — The Irvine, California-based merchant bank has set up shop in London. Eric Warner will be in charge of the office as managing director. The announcement comes on the heels of a newly formed partnership with consultancy firm Frost & Sullivan. Sail's U.K. presence will be used to source new investment opportunities abroad, specifically in the energy sector. Prior to joining Sail, Warner was co-CEO at Altius Associates and European head of PE at Mercer. He has also held several positions at various investment banks, including Société Générale, NatWest Capital Markets and Security Pacific Hoare Govett Ltd.

Sideman & Bancroft LLP — The San Francisco-based law firm has made three new hires. Attorneys Kathryn McCall, Maria Garrett and Ryan Fox have each joined the firm. McCall has agreed to take on the role of partner within Sideman’s business group. Meanwhile Garrett and Ryan join the roster as associates within the family law segment and intellectual property practice, respectively.

Ziegler Cos.— The Chicago investment bank and broker-dealer launched a private equity practice specializing in health care. Eric Smith, Chris Claps and Dan Contardi each jumped over from Contemporary Healthcare Capital LLC. Smith joins as a managing director, Claps as a senior vice president and Contardi as a vice president. Smith has clocked in more than 20 years managing principal investments in long-term care, including senior housing and other health care services. He has served as a partner for the formation and management of seven healthcare investment funds, and was a partner of Contemporary Healthcare Capital, which he co-founded in 2006. Before that, he was a partner in former Ziegler affiliate Ziegler Healthcare Capital. Claps, a 14-year veteran, and Contardi, a seven-year veteran, have both worked in a similar capacity. Previously, Claps was a senior vice president at Contemporary Healthcare, while Contardi was vice president. They each served as a portfolio managers for five healthcare investment funds and advised over 150 transactions, representing approximately $500 million in senior debt, mezzanine debt and preferred equity fund investments within the long-term care, senior housing and health care services industries.

For last week's column, see People Moves of the Week: D.A. Davidson, Ropes & Gray, William Blair.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: