Coal power is declining in most places around the globe, except Japan. Jeff Swensen/Getty Images

It’s hard to imagine a more unfortunate, uncomfortable moment for Japan’s leaders at a critical juncture in the worldwide energy transition.

Just as world leaders in China, the United States, Europe and elsewhere are mobilizing to face the global climate threat with a large commitment to carbon emission cuts and renewable energy investments on an unprecedented scale, Japan has chosen to become the world’s largest financier of coal plants that contribute most to the carbon pollution threat.

Japan’s decision to champion coal hasn’t gone unnoticed by others, and was a sore topic at the just-concluded G-7 summit. It will continue to be a point of contention throughout the course of ongoing G-7 economic discussions.

Until now, Japan’s leadership in coal financing on a global basis has managed to remain largely hidden behind a wall of other, private financing for the industry.



[READ: Climate Change Is Happening, Here and Now]

No more. As private coal financing becomes tighter, public financing for the beleaguered industry has come into sharper focus. And Japan’s role as the world leader in public financing of coal has taken center stage.

In a new report from campaign groups NRDC, WWF and Oil Change International that pulls together public financing of the coal industry in one place for the first time, Japan stands out. Its financing of coal dwarfs all others.

What’s worse, say the authors of the report, Japan is leading efforts at OECD and elsewhere to stop public financing of coal, and rallying other countries to its side to oppose limits on coal finance in global economic meetings.

“This (coal) funding is being provided by a handful of countries that continue to resist pressure to end this public financing,” said the report authors. “Japan provided the largest amount of coal financing of any country, with over $20 billion of finance from 2007 to 2014. In the OECD, Korea and Germany were the next largest sources of funding for coal. Japan, Korea and Australia are leading the opposition to limits on coal finance in international discussions.”



[ALSO: Wal-Mart, IBM and Coke Among Companies Addressing Climate Change]

The backdrop for Japan’s decision to be coal’s financier on the world stage is stark. Over the last eight years, as the scope of the climate crisis has deepened, developed nations – particularly of the G-20 and G-7 – have made clear commitments to both fight climate change and end fossil fuel subsidies.

What’s more, these G-7 and G-20 nations have all made commitments to limit global temperature rise to 2°C (3.6°F). And yet, billions of dollars’ worth of government support continues to flow toward fossil fuels and, incredibly, toward coal.

This government financing for coal – largely in the form of export support, but also as development aid and general finance – is perpetuating coal use and exacerbating climate change.

Japan is leading that effort.

The latest report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) demonstrates clearly that at least 75 percent of existing fossil fuel reserves must stay in the ground to have a good chance at limiting global warming to 2 degrees.



[LINK: G7 Reaffirms 2 Degree Global Warming Target]

And because coal makes up two-thirds of the carbon content of known global fossil fuel reserves, coal poses a serious threat to the climate. It’s basic math, which Japan’s leaders have so far not acknowledged by deciding to become the world leader in subsidizing coal power plants, mining, and infrastructure development in a carbon-constrained world.

The full extent of government financing for coal overseas is not well known. Neither is Japan’s role as coal’s financier. But the truth is that public finance has played a significant role in supporting coal projects over the last 8 years. Between 2007 and 2014, more than $73 billion – or more than $9 billion a year – in public finance was approved for coal. Japan represented nearly a third of that effort.

This funding has largely gone unnoticed as it is often hidden from view inside a web of public finance moved through largely unknown and opaque institutions. In general, Export Credit Agencies, which are the major actors in this space, are so secretive that even their official multilateral coordinating body, the OECD Export Credit Group, does not have access to adequate data.

Governments of the world are literally hiding their ongoing support for fossil fuels, and for coal in particular. And Japan is leading that effort.