PHOENIX — The New England Patriots will deflate the Seattle Seahawks 28-21 on Sunday, and 2 billion quarts of guacamole will be consumed worldwide. But enough about Super Bowl XLIX.

Wait for it … Super Bowl 50 in Santa Clara, Calif. — The Denver Broncos circa 1998 vs. The Broncsters of the Midway (duh Bears), John Elway vs. John Fox, Peyton Manning vs. Jay Cutler, Gary Kubiak vs. Adam Gase, Jeff Rodgers’ special teams against Joe DeCamillis’ special teams et al.

Wouldn’t that be unique?

Well, er, not so.

Super Bowl 33 in South Florida — John Elway and Mike Shanahan vs. Dan Reeves and his son-in-law, special-teams coach Joe DeCamillis.

As Katy Perry would sing, the Broncos are coming “like a dark horse” back to the Super Bowl a year from now. Atonement time.

In case you haven’t noticed, the Broncos and the Bears meet in the 2015 regular season in Denver. Could they remeet (copyright pending) in the Super Bowl?

Imagine if you’re Rip Van Winkle and just awakened from an extremely long sleep and turned on “The Sports Show”: “John Elway is the chief football executive of the Broncos, and Gary Kubiak is the coach, and Rick Dennison is the offensive coordinator, and Wade Phillips is the defensive coordinator, and Peyton Manning is the quarterback, and John Fox is the coach of the Bears, and his offensive coordinator is Adam Gase, and Jay Cutler is the quarterback?”

You’re dreaming, Rip Van.

It is well to remember that Manning’s only Super Bowl victory was over … wait for it … the Bears.

There are a couple of issues, though, before we all make airline, hotel and restaurant reservations in San Francisco for the epic game.

The Bears have about as much chance of reaching the Super Bowl with Cutler as I do of winning Powerball. And I don’t buy tickets.

What a great Super Bowl story — “Jay Cutler: from Santa Claus, Ind., to Santa Clara, Calif.”

I don’t believe in Santa Claus, or Cutler. And when Fox and Gase spend five weeks with him, they will believe more in St. Nick or Nick Foles.

How about the Broncos making it to No. 50 (no Roman numerals, the NFL has decreed)?

You gotta believe. They were in seven of the first 49 — one-seventh. I like those odds, especially with Peyton coming back (and he sounded like a man eager to play again Friday morning, and there was no limp in his gait, or hesitation in his speech) and the reunion of Elway, Kubiak, Dennison and Phillips. I didn’t have a warm and cozy feeling about Doug Marrone as Broncos coach, or Vance Joseph as defensive coordinator or “Bronco Brocko” Osweiler at quarterback.

“I really like Brock,” said a Broncos defensive player who I won’t reveal, but his initials are T.J.W. “He has a cannon for an arm, and he’s good in practice, but we haven’t seen him in a game under fire.”

Marrone was a nice coach with Buffalo, and Joseph was a good backup quarterback at Colorado. No way, though.

Give me a healthy Peyton, a Kubiak-Dennison combo running the offense (running!) and Phillips, one of the most brilliant defensive coordinators in the game. He will switch the Broncos back to a 3-4 scheme (the Orange Crush was 3-4).

Oh, you say, Peyton is too old at 39, and Wade is too old at 67. How did you like Josh McDaniels when he was 32? Ronald Reagan was sworn in as president when he was just shy of 70. Frank Lloyd Wright built a famous house in Scottsdale, Ariz., when he was 70. Elway was in his late 30s when he won a couple of Super Bowls with a running game.

A bunch of Broncos have relaxed in Arizona the past couple of weeks. They were playing in the Pro Bowl and/or hanging out at Ocean Club in Scottsdale. Ocean? They are here as individuals. Last year the Broncos were there in New York as a team, and that’s what all of them want in Santa Clara as a team.

If the Broncos add a few free agents with their salary cap space, and they bring back their important free agents, they definitely will be a major factor again next season.

They get New England in Denver, not in Foxborough, Mass.

This Super Bowl belongs to the Patriots and the Seahawks, and America is pulling against the Patriots. However, Bill Beli- chick and Tom Brady will have their way.

But 50 is the big number for the Broncos. As in 50-7 over the Seahawks.

Can’t wait.

Woody Paige: woody@woodypaige.com or twitter.com/woodypaige