“To everything there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven,” observed King Solomon nearly three millennia past, “A time to be born, and a time to die.”

He was right. There is no avoiding it. With a terminal disease, there is time to fight and a time to make peace. For some people, hearing the words “Have you considered hospice?” evokes a sense of capitulation. It need not. Choosing hospice at the end of life does not mean giving up but choosing to live as fully as possible in the time left.

My dad fought cancer valiantly but when the treatments were no longer working, our family determined to get the most out of the remaining days with the support of Denver Hospice. When Dad was able go out to dinner or movies, we did that. Hospice provided the walker and wheelchair. Once housebound, we played cards. Hospice ensured that Dad’s pain was controlled without dimming his mind. He could still play a mean hand of gin rummy.

In the final weeks, hospice gave us everything we needed for dad to remain home. I remember sitting by his beside as he slept and listening to the sounds of summer streaming through the open window and the murmuring voices of family friends down the hall who’d come to say goodbye. Dying is hard, but it does not have to be divorced from life or love.

The support did not end after Dad’s death. Hospice recognizes that, “There is a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance.” Mom joined a hospice grief group for spouses. The counseling and community helped her heal.

November is Hospice and Palliative Care month, and it is worth celebrating. Most Americans, when polled, say they would prefer to die at home with care that keeps them free of pain. Colorado’s 54 hospices enable patients to be at home or at a hospice facility where they receive palliative care and symptom control, and other physical, mental, and spiritual support services according to their needs and desires.

When patients accept that the end is near, they can more fully embrace opportunities for reconciliation and reminiscence. They can also cast off restraints that no longer make sense. Want to eat bacon for lunch every day? Snuggle with your dog? Smoke a cigar? Where hospitals must say “no,” hospice can say “yes.”

While half of all Coloradans receive hospice support during end of life, some Coloradans still do not know what hospice can do for them and their family. Hospice and Palliative Care month is an opportunity to share information and break down misconceptions. Even before one is diagnosed with a terminal disease, it is empowering to know about one’s options regarding not only hospice, but also advance care directives, medical power of attorney, and organ donation.

In January, Medicare will begin reimbursing doctors for time spent with patients discussing end of life care. These conversations are not the “death panels” they were falsely portrayed as six years ago. Discussions are voluntary, and in Colorado, patients are protected from euthanasia and assisted suicide. End of life care conversations are about living life to the fullest along an inevitable journey, not cutting that journey short.

Death is unavoidable. Knowing one’s options, including the availability of hospice and palliative care, is essential to living well. To everything there is a season.

Krista Kafer (tokrista@ msn.com) is co-host of “Kelley and Kafer” airing 1 to 4 p.m on 710 KNUS and a fellow with the Centennial Institute.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.