NEW DELHI: The incidence of paralysis and stroke in India is increasing significantly by almost 50% every year, mainly in the younger generation between 30-50 years in age, data shows. Doctors and medical experts say excessive intake of refined carbohydrates which causes obesity, is the primary reason for atrial fibrillation or heart rhythm disorder leading to stroke and paralysis. Early detection and treatment of the disease is imperative to contain the emerging scourge."Paralysis is increasing significantly in the younger generation in India, mainly in the absence of timely detection and prevention," said Dr K K Aggarwal, president of the Heart Care Foundation of India and the secretary-general elect of the Indian Medical Association.According to a registry, recently released by the Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society, the number of atrial fibrillation patients in India have increased from 67 lakh in 2011 to 1.27 crore in 2013. However, according to the data, there are only 20 centres for detection and treatment of atrial fibrillation.Taking cognizance of the disease, IMA is soon going to start a national campaign to check atrial fibrillation. The association has formed a panel of experts, headed by Dr Balbir Singh, a prominent cardiologist with Medanta. In the first phase of the campaign, the group will create awareness among families as well as physicians for early detection and treatment of atrial fibrillation. The awareness programme will also include lessons on controlling risk factors so that heart rhythm disorders do not occur.Paralysis is increasing significantly in the younger generation in India, mainly in the absence of timely detection and prevention: Dr K K Aggarwal, president of the Heart Care Foundation of India.The campaign will also focus on sensitizing the government and the industry to make blood thinners affordable. Blood thinners are used for preventing stroke."Medically, all patients with atrial fibrillation need sequential echocardiography and permanent blood thinners unless contraindicated. In the absence of a reversible cause, atrial fibrillation is always recurrent. If not treated, it can lead to paralysis, an increased heart rate linked low pumping action of the heart and distressing symptoms," Dr Aggarwal said.