SAN DIEGO — There were big plans to get Demaryius Thomas going Sunday.

Then his quarterback got pummeled by something called the flu.

Luckily for Thomas, he is a rare elite receiver who has been trained in patience. He played at Georgia Tech, where coach Paul Johnson’s offense was a flex-bone running attack.

Thomas played early in his NFL career with Tim Tebow as his quarterback.

And despite seven consecutive, 100-yard receiving games earlier this season, Thomas was pushed aside by the Broncos’ newfound focus on building a running game.

For three consecutive games Thomas went without a 100-yard receiving game. Last week, he made only two catches for 11 yards.

He snapped his production slump Sunday with six catches for 123 yards in a 22-10 victory against San Diego.

“It feels great,” Thomas said. “I didn’t even know I had what I had until I got in the locker room. It’s a long season, guys beat up. It was a nice win.”

Thomas was among those feeling the pain of victory. He received treatment after the game and dressed slowly, as if putting on his shirt took every sore muscle in his body.

He might have had an even bigger game against the Chargers but the Broncos modified their game plan in light of Manning’s illness. Did Thomas think throughout the week he was going to be featured?

PHOTOS: Denver Broncos vs. San Diego Chargers, Dec. 14, 2014

“I feel like that every week,” Thomas said. “But they got it to me early, trying to get me started early.”

Thomas caught a crossing route then ran for 36 yards in the first quarter to set up a field goal. He beat Chargers’ star cornerback Brandon Flowers for a 29-yard reception down the right sideline to set up another field goal in the second quarter. In the third, Thomas worked with Manning to beat Flowers on a back-shoulder play down the right side that resulted in a 28-yard touchdown.

It was the Broncos’ only touchdown and it gave them a 16-3 lead.

“Peyton’s been doing that for a long time,” Thomas said. “We kept going to the sideline and saying they’re playing high on the fade, give me a chance to back-shoulder. He did and it worked. It was a touchdown we needed at the time because it felt like they were getting momentum.”

BRONCOS MAILBAG: Pose a question for Mike Klis

Thomas is putting the finishing catches on a remarkable three-year run. He had 94 catches for 1,434 yards and 10 touchdowns in 2012.

Last season he made 92 catches for 1,430 yards and 14 touchdowns.

With two games remaining, he has a career-best 96 receptions for 1,389 yards and 11 touchdowns. His eight, 100-yard games ties the team record set by Rod Smith in the 2000 season.