PARSIPPANY, N.J.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Beginning today, more than 40,000 Jackson Hewitt® tax preparers are ready to work hard for Walmart customers. In addition to its guarantee to get clients the biggest tax refunds, Jackson Hewitt is thanking its customers with a free $50 Walmart eGift Card*. Available instantly when taxes are e-filed with Jackson Hewitt, the Walmart eGift Card will be offered until March 31, 2015, and can be used on anything from groceries to tires, in stores or online.

As an added benefit to Jackson Hewitt clients, each tax filing consultation at a participating Walmart store will include free tax assistance identifying eligible health care options under the Affordable Care Act. This assistance complements Walmart’s Healthcare Begins Here program, which is designed to educate customers on health insurance options.

“Over the past 15 years Jackson Hewitt has worked with Walmart to provide value to customers,” said David Prokupek, CEO of Jackson Hewitt. “This program is one more way Jackson Hewitt is delivering on our consumer promise to work hard for the hardest working Americans. It’s our gift to them for letting us do their taxes.”

The Walmart eGift Card will be available in more than 6,300 Jackson Hewitt locations – including nearly 3,000 Walmart stores, up 300 from last year – as well as the recently announced $200 0% interest, no fee refund advance, available for eligible clients who file their taxes with Jackson Hewitt*.

“We appreciate Jackson Hewitt for bringing this incredible value to our customers,” said Daniel Eckert, senior vice president of services for Walmart U.S. “From low-cost check cashing to helping our customers understand the complexity of health insurance, we’re happy to offer access to services that not only cost less, but also provide fantastic value.”

Clients who choose to file their taxes using Jackson Hewitt’s online tax software program will also get a $20 eGift Card from Jackson Hewitt*. To file taxes online and to receive more information, please visit jacksonhewittonline.com.

*Terms and conditions apply for all offers. Visit Jacksonhewitt.com for details.

About Jackson Hewitt Tax Service Inc.

Jackson Hewitt Tax Service Inc. is a leading full service multi-channel tax preparation company with approximately 6,300 franchised and company-owned locations including nearly 3,000 locations in Walmart stores throughout the United States. Jackson Hewitt also provides a full suite of online and mobile tax filing solutions for the “do-it-yourself” marketplace at www.jacksonhewittonline.com. We hold our ~40,000 professional and certified tax preparers to the highest standards in the industry and stand behind our work with our Biggest Refund and 100% Accuracy Guarantees. For more information, product/offer details, or to locate your neighborhood Jackson Hewitt office, visit www.jacksonhewitt.com or call 1-800.234.1040.