U.S. CONGRESS, DISTRICT 6

DAVID COX BIO

In Florida’s Congressional District 6, we don’t need another politician.

David Cox is an educator, not a politician, and David is a candidate for Florida’s 6th Congressional District. It’s his experience in the classrooms of Florida that gives him the skills required to tackle the complicated problems of Washington with common sense answers Floridians can benefit from.

Born to a working class family in Buffalo, NY, David was raised to value opportunity for all people, has a strong work ethic, and believes people should give back their community.

After graduating from The State University of New York at Oswego with a degree in Technology Education, David relocated to central Florida to begin teaching in the Polk and Osceloa county school systems.

While educating our next generation, David returned to school to continue his own education, receiving his Masters Degree in Community Counseling from Webster University.

David currently serves as the Director of Resources at Bethune Cookman University, advocating on behalf of students and helping them navigate their first year of college by providing a network of resources that will prepare these students for successful undergraduate experiences.

In addition to his educational advocacy work, David has provided service through numerous community outreach initiatives in the greater Daytona Beach community.

QUESTIONNAIRE

1. Do you support the Simpson-Bowles budget plan or something similar to rein in the deficit? Describe what you do support.

I would support any budget plan that would rain in and reduce the deficit.

2. Do you support the Affordable Care Act? If not, what would you replace it with?

I support an opportunity for all Americans to get affordable health care, not just a wealthy few. The Affordable care act allows all Americans the access to quality health care at an affordable price. Since its implementation in 2013 more than 8 million Americans (nearly 1 million Floridians) have gained access to quality health care.

3. Do you support deepening the St. Johns River for the port? Describe your environmental concerns related to the deepening.

While I support the expansion of commerce and economic development for the St. Johns River and communities surrounding the waterway, I do not support the negative impacts it could have on our environment and the waterways of Florida. More research and impact studies must be done to ensure that there are no negative impact on our environment before the project moves forward.

4. Washington has been described as in partisan gridlock. What would you do to change that? If you disagree, explain why.

Change must come to Washington in 2015! The partisan gridlock cause by the Tea Party and my opponent must come to an end in November. We must work together across the aisle to better our communities, Florida, and our Nation.

RON DESANTIS BIO

On January 3, 2013, Ron DeSantis was sworn in as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives as the federal representative for Florida’s sixth congressional district, which encompasses St. Johns and Flagler counties, as well as large portions of Volusia and Putnam counties.

A native Floridian with blue collar roots, Ron worked his way through Yale University, where he earned a bachelor of arts, magna cum laude, and was the captain of the varsity baseball team. He also graduated with honors from Harvard Law School.

While at Harvard, Ron earned a commission in the United States Navy as a JAG officer. During his active duty service, he served as a military prosecutor, supported operations at the terrorist detention center in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba and deployed to Iraq during the 2007 troop surge as an advisor to a U.S. Navy SEAL commander in support of the SEAL mission in Iraq. His military awards include the Bronze Star Medal (meritorious service) and the Iraq Campaign Medal.

He has also served as a federal prosecutor, prosecuting a wide range of cases involving offenses such as child exploitation, fraud, and interference with military air navigation.

He has written on constitutional first principles in various outlets and in his book, Dreams From Our Founding Fathers: First Principles in the Age of Obama.

Ron lives in Ponte Vedra Beach, FL with his wife, Casey Black DeSantis, an Emmy award-winning television host. He is currently an officer in the U.S. Navy reserve.

QUESTIONNAIRE

What is your major accomplishment in public life? Earning the trust of my constituents



Have you ever been sued, arrested or filed bankruptcy? No



What endorsements have you received? National Federation of Independent Business, U.S. Chamber of Commerce, FreedomWorks



1. Do you support the Simpson-Bowles budget plan or something similar to rein in the deficit? Describe what you do support.

The problem with long-term budget deals is that future Congresses cannot be bound by them, which is why spending caps are almost always breached. Hence, the attempt by Simpson-Bowles to slow the growth of discretionary spending by using budget caps is unlikely to be effective. Moreover, Simpson-Bowles assumes the continuation of ObamaCare, but, given its $2 trillion price tag and consistent unpopularity, it makes little sense that ObamaCare would be off-limits. Finally, the revenue target for Simpson-Bowles is 21% of GDP, which is significantly higher than the historical average and would require massive tax increases, thereby undercutting economic growth.

To restore fiscal responsibility, Congress needs to dispense with budget gimmickry, scrap the “10-year budget window” and stop building in spending increases into the budget forecast. Congress has to work every year to reduce spending during the budget and appropriation process; it cannot simply claim that spending will be reduced 9 or 10 years down the road and count that as “cutting” spending.

Fiscal reforms that can avert a debt crisis include limiting the growth of non-defense discretionary spending to the rate of inflation (as well as cutting and eliminating failed and extraneous programs), reforming all means-tested welfare programs to require work for able-bodied adults, replacing ObamaCare with a patient-centered alternative, aligning entitlement programs to reflect the demographics of the country, block granting Medicaid to the states and reforming the Social Security disability insurance program.



2. Do you support the Affordable Care Act? If not, what would you replace it with?

No. The Obama health law was rammed through Congress based on false representations that people would keep their plans, maintain access to their preferred doctors, and save $2500 per year for health insurance. All of these representations are false – something that those who made these claims knew, or should have known, at the time they made them.

ObamaCare should be replaced with a series of reforms designed to lower costs for families and to save taxpayer money, such as by creating a refundable universal tax credit for health insurance purchases, using high risk pools to provide coverage options for individuals with preexisting conditions, allowing individuals to choose health insurance plans absent government coercion, barring the use of taxpayer funds to bail out insurance companies, and block granting Medicaid to the states.



3. Do you support deepening the St. Johns River for the port? Describe your environmental concerns related to the deepening.

Yes. I believe this can be done in an environmentally sensitive manner.



4. Washington has been described as in partisan gridlock. What would you do to change that? If you disagree, explain why.

The country is divided politically and that is reflected in Congress. The House has passed more than 350 bills – including many with strong Democrat support – but Harry Reid has refused to entertain, let alone vote, on them. The Senate is under no obligation to accept House-passed bills, but it would be helpful if the Reid at least allowed members to debate the bills. This way, the Senate could amend the bills as they see fit and then send them back to the House or conduct a House-Senate conference, which is what happened with the VA reforms. I am optimistic that Harry Reid will be displaced as Senate Majority Leader; this will pave the way for a more productive legislative process. At the same time, I will continue to facilitate pro-growth policies and and limited government reforms while also protecting my constituents from harmful policies by serving as a check against President Barack Obama.