As president Obama takes to the airwaves to spin the April 2016 unemployment rate, claiming the economy has and continues to improve few agree. It's a point of view that remains largely unsupported by the data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) on May 6, 2016. At this moment, according to BLS records, 94 million Americans remain outside the workforce - that's 59% of the civilian labor force and 37% of the civilian population.

On this day, in 2008 according to US Debt Clock, the national debt stood at $10.1 trillion. There were 145 million people in the workforce and 13 million unemployed. The number of Americans not counted in the labor force were 79.7 million. The population was 304 million people of which 38.2 million were in poverty.

By this day in 2012, after the recovery due to the Obama Stimulus, the national debt had risen to $15.5 trillion - an increase of 53.4%. The total population had risen to 312 million (up 2.6%), with 46.3 million in poverty (up 21.2%). The labor force was 141 million Americans (down 3%) with 23 million unemployed (up 77%) and 87.5 million not counted (up 10%).

Today these same figures now stand at $19.3 trillion in debt (an increase of 91% since 2008). The population stands at 323 million (up 6.2% since 2008), with 15.5 million unemployed (up 19.2%) and 93.5 million not counted (up 17.3%). A total of 46.8 million live in poverty (increased by 22.5%) with 152 million in the work force (an additional 5%).

No matter what the political spin attempted, the numbers cannot lie. Empirically the Obama Administration, and the Democrats that have backed it (with a strong helping hand from Republican leadership), have failed the US economy. After 2 presidential terms, under both Democrat and Republican control of Congress, nothing done has improved the reality average Americans live. Even if all other figures are discounted, the growth in the work force has lagged the growth in population - a negative indication for the economy.

Perhaps the only way that the US economy can be viewed as any form of positive is if the comparison is made only to the 2012 results. But that still fails as it is after the self-proclaimed "Summer of Recovery" of the Obama Administration in 2010, when the message was, "...you might think that the Recovery Act’s greatest impact is behind us. But it’s not." The failure has been so massive virtually no Democrat has used the term recovery in any context since 2011.

The TARP, Obama Stimulus, shovel-ready jobs, Cash for Clunkers, Obamacare, each and every program a categorical failure. Many of which were predicted by Conservatives and independent analysis to set the stage for long-term economic impoverishment. Yet, purely for partisan political agenda benefit, President Obama is using his eloquent delivery to claim,

"We have to do everything we can to strengthen the good trends, and guard against the more dangerous trends in the world economy."

The question that must be asked from an empirical standing is - what good trends? Yes, president Obama claims that there is a trend of job growth, some 14.6 million jobs. Which is true, IF the data is cherry-picked and only reviewed from the lowest levels of the recession. But economic policies of the Obama Administration have been in force for the better part of a decade. The recovery was long ago proclaimed and the path of improvement was declared underway. President Obama and Democrats can't try to say everything is rosy when nothing points to that.

There remains 41 million without health care insurance, even after all the promises and requirements of Obamacare. Over 161.6 million Americans are receiving some form of Government aid - 6.3% more of the nation than the entire work force. Again the question must be asked - what positive trend?

In 2012, President Obama blamed the negativity in the US economy on President Bush, 3 full years after that Administration ended. Now even though President Bush is still the whipping dog of the Democrat in this presidential election, reality still seeps in. As former-President Bill Clinton stated, on behalf of his wife Hillary,

"If you believe we can rise together, if you believe we’ve finally come to the point where we can put the awful legacy of the last eight years behind us and the seven years before that, where we were practicing trickle-down economics, then you should vote for her."

Ignoring for the moment that Hillary Clinton served and aided the first term of the Obama Administration's greatest impact on the American economy, the reality is that even Democrats cannot ignore the lack of real positive trends. Sen. Bernie Sanders, even before he was incapable of winning the Democrat nomination (without the support of an FBI investigation), offered the same critique. So why is President Obama persisting in spinning the reality the numbers provide?

Legacy and hopes for the 2016 elections. Not only at the presidential level, but elections for Senate, the House, and lower local elections. President Obama has long been known for his desire to enter history books as a great president. A legacy that is promised to be undone with swiftness if a Republican follows him into the White House (let alone Congress). This selfish partisan goal seems to be the only credible reason.

But such self-delusion and self-aggrandizement provides no benefit to the American people. Democrats may hide behind a headline of 5% unemployment, but once even a glance is made to the underlying facts the failure cannot be obscured. It's a lesson that whomever is elected President in 2016 should learn.

America cannot be made great through selective editing of facts or cheerful political spin on data. A real plan, with the honest evaluation and willingness to correct errors rather than double down on abject defeat, is the only answer for the nation. Whether that will happen remains to be seen.