WR makes eight grabs, including 31-, 86-yard TDs

Denver Broncos wide receiver Demaryius Thomas tries to avoid Arizona Cardinals free safety Rashad Johnson during the first half on Sunday in Denver. ( David Zalubowski / Associated Press )

Demaryius Thomas first started busting his slump during the bye week.

It was the Monday after the Broncos' loss at Seattle, where Thomas again inexplicably struggled with two more drops. All the players had to endure the postgame cleanse, or conditioning that sweats out the bumps and bruises, on Monday.

Thomas showed up at Dove Valley before most of the others and caught ball after ball off the Jugs machine.

"I had to do something," Thomas said. "I was dropping them."

Droppin' Demaryius is gone. Demaryius the Destroyer of cornerbacks is back.

"All that talk is done now, right?" said Emmanuel Sanders, who went from the NFL's leading pass catcher after the Broncos' third game, to the Broncos' "other" receiver after Game 4.

"We weren't worried," said Broncos slot receiver Wes Welker. "When he's on, he's uncoverable."

Doesn't Antonio Cromartie know it. Thomas entered play Sunday against Arizona with a disappointing 13 catches for 141 yards and one touchdown through the Broncos' first three games.

Against the Cards, Thomas had the most productive receiving day in Broncos history. Thomas made eight catches for a team-record 226 yards, including touchdowns of 31 and 86 yards that were heavy on his specialty — yards after the catch.

"There were opportunities when I fell," said Cromartie, who was charged with trying to cover Thomas one-on-one most of the day. "Playing against a receiver like him, you can't get into situations where you fall."

Advertisement

Cromartie was either exaggerating Thomas' performance, or understating it, depending on the stat sheet or his memory. Just because a chop-block penalty took away a 77-yard touchdown catch by Thomas in the third quarter doesn't mean that play wasn't branded in Cromartie's conscience.

With 6:40 left and the Broncos up 34-20, Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning completed a 20-yard pass to Thomas. At that point, Thomas had seven catches for 213 yards. The Broncos' single-game team record was 214 yards, set by tight end Shannon Sharpe in a 2002 overtime game at Kansas City.

When the Broncos got the ball back with 3:28 left, the right people were made aware Thomas was 2 yards away from breaking Sharpe's record. Manning started the series with a 13-yard completion to Thomas. That gave him 226 receiving yards and the record. And to think about that 77-yard touchdown play in the third quarter that didn't count.

"I don't know about getting Demaryius going — he got himself going," Manning said as he finished dressing at his locker. "He challenged himself. It wasn't anything the coaches had to say. A great player like Demaryius, he knew."

There were a couple reasons Thomas suddenly developed a bad case of the drops through his first three games. Replacing the then-suspended Welker in the slot for the season opener against Indianapolis threw Thomas off his rhythm. While he was worried about his new position, he dropped one. Then he started worrying about the one he dropped.

"I knew if it was like third-and-5, Peyton always went to Welker and I knew if I'm not open, he's going to be on me," Thomas said. "The first one I dropped, I let it get in my head, 'I'm letting down Peyton, I'm letting down my team.' ''