In the latest television commercial in support of his re-election campaign, Alabama Sen. Richard Shelby is touting his record on opposing the Wall Street bailout in 2008 as the top Republican on the Senate Banking Committee.

"Bailouts reward failure and punish taxpayers. You know that, Sen. Shelby knows that. Then why is Washington so stupid?" Birmingham business owner Shannon Riley says in the ad, which first hit the airwaves Monday. "When the big Wall Street banks came with their hand out, Shelby said, 'No way,' stood firm. Was the lead Republican voice against them. He refused to put hardworking taxpayers on the hook. Shelby's my kind of conservative."

At the time, Shelby was the ranking member on the Banking Committee and was in the room for closed-door meetings with outgoing President George W. Bush, President-Elect Barack Obama and then-Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson, who told Congress that the U.S. was headed for economic collapse if the bailout wasn't approved. Shelby, who was one of 25 senators to vote against the bailout and eventually left the negotiations in disgust, said he opposed the economic rescue package because Treasury officials couldn't assure him that it would completely prevent a worldwide crisis and because it gave little relief to the homeowners who had subprime mortgages.

The senator had sounded the alarm on trouble ahead for the banking system a few years before the economic downturn, but the Democratic-led Senate thwarted his efforts for reform.

"We did not get to where we are today by accident, it was a path we chose," Shelby said shortly after the bailout, also known as the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP, was passed. "My warnings about the risk of basing credit decisions on well-intended social mandates rather than sound, fact-based underwriting were dismissed. My concerns about the inadequacy of the regulatory structure put in place in the financial modernization legislation went unacknowledged. My efforts to ensure that bank capital standards were designed to ensure safety and soundness, rather than industry concerns, were conducted largely alone."

Meanwhile, former Marine Capt. Jonathan McConnell, one of Shelby's four challengers in the March 1 Republican primary, said the senator's ad was a half-truth because he voted to bail out bail out mortgage lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

"Richard Shelby simply isn't telling the truth. His record is littered with bailout votes that benefit some of his biggest donors—Wall Street bankers," said McConnell campaign spokeswoman Liz BeShears in a statement. "No wonder he won't debate Jonathan McConnell, his record is absolutely indefensible. Alabamians deserve conservative leaders who will make the tough decisions to finally balance our budget, not pick winners and losers."

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are government-sponsored enterprises, meaning they are backed by the United States and would have received a bailout even if the Senate didn't pass a $300 million rescue package.

Still, Shelby voted for the bill because it contained language that raised capital requirements and created a stronger regulator for Fannie and Freddie, which the senator had pushed for years before the crisis.

His campaign pointed out that his record on Fannie and Freddie was praised by the CATO Institute, a conservative think tank, and the Wall Street Journal.

"Credible conservatives on economic matters have long known that nobody fought harder than Sen. Shelby - years before the financial crisis - to rein in Fannie and Freddie and protect taxpayers from the government guarantee that the mortgage giants already had," campaign spokeswoman Katie Britt said in a statement.