Just how accessible is our world? Duluth struggles with issues of housing, snow and more

On the 25th anniversary of the Americans with Disabilities Act, or ADA, Amy Burke of Hermantown faces challenges all too familiar. She works part time, so she makes too much money to qualify for accessible subsidized housing. But she doesn’t make enough money to rent an accessible home at market-rate prices. So, for now, she’s living in a pop-up tent trailer. (Clint Austin / caustin@duluthnews.com)

Just how accessible is our world? Duluth struggles with issues of housing, snow and more

Just how accessible is our world? Duluth struggles with issues of housing, snow and more

The wheelchair struggled forward only as far as Amy Burke could turn its wheels. She bent over, leaning into Duluth’s notoriously steep hillside, her outstretched muscular arms straining, and then quickly straightened up again to grab the wheels at the tops of their rotations, keeping them from rolling backward. She worked the chair this way again and again, gaining inches of real estate each time.

“Hills are horrible,” the Hermantown woman said last week.

There’s not much that can be done about steep sidewalks in downtown Duluth, but 25 years after the Americans with Disabilities Act became federal law, plenty has been done here and elsewhere for people in wheelchairs or who are living every day with accessibility challenges. Once-unheard of things such as curb cuts, automatic doors and bigger bathroom stalls have become so commonplace, just seemingly natural stitches in the fabric of our lives, that they go largely unnoticed.

But more can be done, and that’s especially true in Duluth, where the aforementioned hillside, heavy dumps of sidewalk-blocking snow, a tight housing market, the slowly changing and outdated attitudes of some, persistent disrespect for handicapped parking spaces and more continue to put up barriers.

“Duluth is doing OK,” said Roberta Cich, executive director of Arc Northland, an organization in Duluth that advocates for people with disabilities and their families. “It’s really exciting to see the changes that have happened (as long as we) keep in mind how far we still need to go.”

For Burke, no issue is more critical at this moment than accessible housing. That’s because she’s living in a pop-up tent trailer in an RV park behind a liquor store. It’s sweltering in the daytime and, because of its screened sides, freezing at night. And at the end of summer, the RV park will close. Burke, who sleeps in her car during particularly cold nights, isn’t sure where she’ll go then.

She used to live in an accessible apartment in Duluth. She gave it up, though, to go in with family on a house. When that didn’t work out and the house had to be sold, she found herself with few choices. Because she has a service dog, a black lab named Beemer, her options are limited even more.

“What housing there is in Duluth, not much of it is accessible,” Burke said. “There are six buildings built from the ground up where every unit is accessible. But every one of them you have to income-qualify. So people who are over-income, there is no choice. I have looked at everything.”

Burke works part-time as an administrative assistant for Duluth Builders Exchange. She posts specs and plans online for contractors to access. She earns about $1,000 a month. That’s not enough to afford an accessible apartment at the going open-market rates. At the same time, with Social Security added in, she makes about $4,000 a year too much to qualify for an accessible government-subsidized apartment.

“I was told, ‘Quit your job,’ but I don’t want to do that if I can work. I’m just stuck in that gap. I have nowhere to go,” she said. “If I quit my job, I can get housing. Otherwise, I can keep my job, keep my medical and lose housing. Either way, it’s no good. It’s not a choice anybody should have to make, especially somebody with a disability.”

Burke, 39, has used a wheelchair for about 15 years. She has reflex sympathetic dystrophy, which affects her nervous system. The condition stems from an undetected and untreated bone chip in her ankle that started floating around before touching a nerve while she was still in high school at Hermantown.

A year ago, she became a member of the city of Duluth’s Commission on Disabilities, the group’s very existence evidence of a community taking as seriously as Burke does accessibility challenges.

Duluth is doing well with issues related to the federal law, also known as ADA, so well, said the city’s ADA coordinator, Bob Grytdahl, that the commission actually is marketing Duluth as a tourist destination for travelers with disabilities. In addition, commission members make regular visits to Duluth businesses to work on further improvements.

“It’s the width of doorways and, inside, if you’ve got moveable items, things that can be moved out of the way, the gumball machine, the podium where the person stands to greet you, things like that,” Grytdahl said. “Restrooms are a big deal. A lot of older buildings still haven’t updated their restrooms. … Lighting is another issue, being able to read the menu.”

Such considerations are only going to become more pressing with an estimated 10,000 baby boomers a day turning 65 through 2030.

“The wise entrepreneur, the wise business person is figuring out right now how to make their business accessible,” Grytdahl said. “In Duluth, we want to be ahead of the law. The law is just the minimum standard. We want to do better here.”

“It’s always important to keep awareness on access at the forefront,” Cich said. “That’s why it’s exciting that the 25th anniversary is this summer. There’s always more we can do. You can always go above and beyond.

“The ADA is a civil rights law. It was the law that finally said, ‘You can’t discriminate against me because I have a disability,’ ” Cich said. “The civil rights movement was in the 1960s. The ADA was 1990. It has taken a little bit longer for people with disabilities.”

But we’re getting there. We’re making progress. And we make a little more progress every time a business owner shovels from the sidewalk to the street, every time a homeowner doesn’t block the sidewalk with a garbage can, every time a broken automatic door gets fixed and every time someone who doesn’t need it passes up a handicapped parking spot.

Another moment of progress, a major one for her, will come when Burke finds a place to live that’s accessible and affordable — and she’s able to do so without having to quit her job. She’s on a waiting list for a partially accessible place. But it could be months. Well into winter. Well after the RV park closes for the season.

“We don’t have enough housing for anybody in Duluth, period,” she said. “But things are starting to change here. We’re starting to get a better attitude. People are starting to understand.

“I’m hoping that (the ADA’s 25th anniversary) brings awareness to the community that issues do exist and they need to be addressed,” she said. “The disability community is no longer tucked off in a corner and forgotten about. We’re being integrated with society, and we’re contributing to society.”