STILWELL, Okla. -- Since the death of Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia there has been much discussion on the future of the court and our nation.

Justice Scalia was one of the most conservative justices on the court; he did not interpret our constitution as being some kind of living document that could change over time. Too many people have a bad tendency to want to change the rules as the game is played.

Unlike those people I have the belief that there are absolutes in right and wrong, when God gave the Ten Commandments to Moses on Mount Sinai I am sure that he never meant to them to be simply suggestions that could be changed by the whims of individuals in the future. I am very sure that the supreme commander of the universe would take offense to anyone who tried to water down the intent of his commandments. Likewise I take offense to anyone who intends to water down our freedoms and our Constitution.

Over the past couple of years I have become very disappointed with the actions of the Supreme Court; the decisions made concerning the Affordable Care Act is a case in point. In my opinion Justice Roberts ignored the principles of our constitution and quite frankly legislated from the bench; he and the other liberal judges allowed an unconstitutional act to be imposed on the American people that has done nothing but drive up healthcare cost for the average working person in this nation. There have been some decisions by the court that have upheld our constitutional freedoms but even those have been won by only one vote, this one fact should drive home the point of the importance of who we select as president of our nation because the president nominates any replacement judges to the court.

Because of the advanced age of the Justices there are 5 vacancies that will likely come up over the next 4-8 years. The next President will have the power to potentially create a 7-2 Supreme Court.

If the next President appoints 5 young justices, it will guarantee control of the Supreme Court for an entire generation. If those judges are of the liberal persuasion we will witness more and more of our freedoms being taken away, too many liberals view our Constitution as a living document that must change over the years. I have the belief that the concept of freedom and liberty never changes through the years; any justification to reduce our freedom is totally bogus.

When our Republican candidates decide to stop shooting each other in the foot they need to put some emphasis on the fact that Hillary Clinton’s actions in the past shows her lack of respect for the Second Amendment and others. I understand that Republicans are passionate in their support for their candidate but we need to remember that there can only be one nominee. For the sake of our country get behind the eventual nominee, we must not allow a bunch of liberal judges to be placed in the Supreme Court who have the misguided opinion that our Constitution is a living document and subject to change.