Hospitals Game Medicare for Money

Ready to leave the hospital? Maybe so, but your doctor might keep you a little longer — or discharge you sooner — so the hospital can hit its numbers.

The practice is completely legal, says a Wall Street Journal study, which means big money for hospitals.

However, does it make patients any healthier?

That’s a completely different question — and it’s one that no one seems to be asking.

***

Today’s Wall Street Journal has a front-page story that must have taken them months of research: Hospital Discharges Rise at Lucrative Times.

Reporters Christopher Weaver, Anna Wilde Mathews and Tom McGinty dug into Medicare billing data to uncover a suspicious pattern. They found that hospitals tend to discharge patients during a narrow window when Medicare rules let the facility collect more money without providing any additional care.

You’ll need a WSJ subscription to read the full story with illustrations, but MSN has a free version. Here is the lead.

A Kindred Healthcare Inc. hospital in Houston discharged 79-year-old Ronald Beard to a nursing home after 23 days of treatment for complications of knee surgery. The timing of his release didn’t appear to correspond with any improvement in his condition, according to family members. But it did boost how much money the hospital got. Kindred collected $35,887.79 from the federal Medicare agency for his stay, according to a billing document, the maximum amount it could earn for treating most patients with Mr. Beard’s condition. If he had left just one day earlier, Kindred would have received only about $20,000 under Medicare rules. If he had stayed longer than the 23 days, the hospital likely wouldn’t have received any additional Medicare money. Kindred declined to answer questions about Mr. Beard’s case, but said it seeks to provide quality care and comply with all laws and regulations. Under Medicare rules, long-term acute-care hospitals like Kindred’s typically receive smaller payments for what is considered a short stay, until a patient hits a threshold. After that threshold, payment jumps to a lump sum meant to cover the full course of long-term treatment. That leaves a narrow window of maximum profitability in caring for patients at the nation’s about 435 long-term hospitals, which specialize in treating people with serious conditions who require prolonged care. General hospitals are paid under different rules. A Wall Street Journal analysis found that many long-term-hospital companies discharge a disproportionate share of patients during that window when hospitals stand to make the most, a sign that financial incentives in the Medicare system may shape patient care. [Read more at MSN]

Surprised? I’m not. I think we all knew the U.S. health care system is far more money-driven than its leaders will admit.

Private hospitals are in business to make a profit. It should surprise no one that their executives figure out ways to maximize revenue and minimize expenses. That’s what smart business people do.

On the other hand, hospitals aren’t just peddling trinkets. Their business practices involve human life. At some point, they have to put life ahead of profit.

You might think charity hospitals are better in that regard. Not true. The WSJ study found the same pattern applies at non-profit hospitals, though not quite as strongly.

For-profit companies such as Kindred and Select were more likely to discharge patients during the most-lucrative window than nonprofit competitors, the Journal’s analysis shows. Nonprofits discharged 16% of people during the window, compared with 27% at for-profits. Some nonprofits, such as the New Britain, Conn., Hospital for Special Care, released more patients during the three days before they reached the thresholds than during the three days after. “We’re never going to let the medical staff or the therapists know what the best financial day for discharge is,” says John Votto, the hospital’s CEO. “I don’t want to run a place where I have to worry that someone got discharged inappropriately.”

Kudos to Mr. Votto. His hospital sounds like one with the right balance. Medical staff should make medical decisions, e.g. when a patient is ready to go home. The financial considerations ought to be secondary.

***

The WSJ study looked specifically at patients with traditional Medicare — not Medicare Advantage or private insurance. The loophole hospitals seem to be exploiting is a quirk in Medicare rules.

It’s been there for a long time. The WSJ study went back to 2008. We can’t blame this one on ObamaCare — though it is fair to ask the Obama administration why it lets such practices continue.

The story does note that Medicare is tightening some of its criteria this year. That could help, but I’m sure the rules will still have plenty of room for exploitation.

I know we have “senior readers” who use Medicare. Have you had any suspicious experiences like WSJ uncovered? Do you ever feel like financial considerations are driving your care? I’d love to hear your stories and share some with other readers.

You can leave a comment on our website or send me an e-mail.

***

The two for-profit hospitals chains mentioned in the WSJ story are Kindred Healthcare (KND) and Select Medical Holdings (SEM). Both stocks did well in recent years, but they fell today. KND was off 4.5% and SEM down 0.3%.

***

U.S. stocks stayed mostly in the red today. That’s not so bad, considering yesterday’s all-time high in the S&P 500, but it also suggests some bulls are not ready to buy back in.

Greece is still a big factor. The Syriza government said it would submit a request Thursday to extend its loan agreement for up to six months.

What Greece will offer about the current austerity measures (if anything) is unclear. Agreeing to continue austerity would be a huge surrender by the Greek side. However, European officials still say they will accept nothing less.

In other news…

• This afternoon, the Federal Reserve released the minutes of its Jan. 27-28 monetary policy meeting, showing the Fed was in no rush to raise interest rates. • The Fed news helped stocks and Treasury bonds, but had little effect on gold or oil prices. The U.S. dollar retreated against other major currencies. • Newly-released regulatory filings show Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway (BRK.A) sharply reduced its energy stock holdings as oil prices fell last quarter. • Berkshire exited from a large ExxonMobil (XOM) position and sold its ConocoPhillips (COP) holdings. Buffett apparently likes farm equipment, though, as he added Deere & Co (DE) to his portfolio. • In economic news, the U.S. Producer Price Index dropped 0.8% in January, more than the consensus forecast, and was down 0.1% versus a year ago. • Energy prices accounted for most of the PPI decline. Service prices were up, indicating tightness in at least parts of the labor market. • Housing starts declined in January but are up sharply since a year ago. Single-family starts are up 16.3% while multi-family starts rose 23.2%.

Good Luck and Happy Investing,

Brad Hoppmann

Publisher

Uncommon Wisdom Daily