Hanahan High School appears to be a new emerging power in area high school tennis.

This is no joke. Hanahan has the looks of being for real.

At least, the Hawks have won a pair of matches in the SCHSL Class AAA state playoffs. And the future appears to be rosy.

Veteran league tennis player/Collins Park head pro Glenn Cobb has grown a competitive team in his four years as the Hanahan boys tennis coach. The Hawks are 8-4, and headed to Florence on Monday to take on Wilson for a berth in the Lower State final.

Wilson can’t be overlooked after posting a 4-2 win over Beaufort in the second round. Hanahan competes in Region 8-AAA, which includes perennially strong Hilton Head High as well as Beaufort. Hanahan’s four losses were split among those two league rivals.

“Hopefully, next year we’ll be able to compete with them (Hilton Head and Beaufort),” Cobb said about his young team that is expecting to add a couple more solid players for next season. “Plus, my seventh-graders are small, and if they grow a little that will help us.”

Hanahan even played the first two rounds without its No. 2 player, eighth-grader Mark Jones, who was out of town. But on Thursday, junior Nick Briggs and seventh-grader J.T. Ramey moved up a notch from their Nos. 3 an 4 singles positions to join with freshman No. 1 Karim Hyatt to post a 4-3 win over No. 1 seed Brookland-Cayce as Hyatt and Briggs also teamed up to win the decisive No. 1 doubles.

Hyatt and Jones are year-around tennis players. They train three days a week at Family Circle Tennis Center’s MWTennis Academy.

Jones will be back in the lineup on Monday at No. 2, while seventh-grader Campbell Crusman returns to No. 5.

How did Cobb end up as the Hanahan tennis coach? When Hanahan athletic director Dawn Smith asked Cobb if he knew someone with a strong tennis background who might be interested in taking over the tennis program, Cobb thought about it awhile. “I used to coach my daughter, so I told her (Smith) I would take the job.”

Just like that, Hanahan started on the road to respect in high school tennis.

Kiawah tops world

Kiawah Island is back on top of the world in the view of tennisresortsonline.com.

Longtime Kiawah tennis director Roy Barth has done his work well. Along with having a great product to promote, he has helped lift Kiawah Island Golf Resort from its 2014 No. 2 perch back into its customary top spot. This is the eighth time in the last 10 years that readers of the online Web site have selected Kiawah as the No. 1 tennis resort on the planet.

The Isle of Palms’ Wild Dunes Resort isn’t far behind, as it holds down the third spot. Rancho Valencia, Calif., is second.

The rest of the top 10 (in order) are: JW Marriott Desert Springs (California) Resort & Spa; Omni Amelia Island (Florida) Plantation Resort; Sea Island (Georgia); La Quinta (California) Resort & Club/A Waldorf Astoria Resort; Punta Mita (Mexico); Mauna Kea Beach (Hawaii) Hotel; and Four Seasons Resort Nevis (West Indies).

Local Notes

Two Lowcountry Tennis Association teams won titles in last weekend’s 55-and-over state tournament at Hilton Head Island. St. Andrew’s 3.5 men defeated Maybank Tennis Center in the semifinals, then won the title, while the Mount Pleasant Rec’s 4.0 women also were crowned champions. Also, the 3.0 men’s 70 team from Seabrook Island took state honors.

Shelby Rogers lost in the first round last week of the $100,000 tournament in Cagnes-sur-Mer, France. She is scheduled to compete this coming week in Rome.

MWTennis touring pros Jessie Pegula and Samantha Crawford both suffered three-set losses in the second round last week in the $50,000 ITF event in Indian Harbor Beach, Fla., to end their chances of capturing the USTA’s clay court pro circuit wild card berth into the main draw of the French Open.

Creekside Tennis and Swim is engaged in a Tennis 101 adult beginner series on Mondays from 6-7 p.m. through May 25. Contact the tennis club (884-6111).

Family Circle Tennis Center will hold a a Grand Slam Series of adult singles/doubles tournaments, beginning with a Wimbledon event June 11-14. Play will be held on Thursday and Friday nights, and weekends. Contact FCTC (849-5300).

Reach James Beck at jamesbecktennis@gmail.com.