Topics: Apple, David Rose, google glass, innovation, Internet Culture, Internet of Things, iPhone, sustainability, Innovation News, Sustainability News, Technology News

We spend an overwhelming amount of time doting on our electronics: recharging them, updating their software, responding to their every beep and buzz. The direction of this nurturing must be reversed. It’s time our gadgets took care of us.

Consider the relatively mature technology of the automobile. Recent models care for us in many invisible ways. They adjust the heater or air-conditioner to maintain 66 degrees; auto wipers adjust their speed to keep pace with the rain; the radio’s volume decreases when the phone rings; and the brakes quickly pulse 100 times a second to shorten stopping distance. All of these functions happen passively so we can concentrate on driving. Recent models can even parallel park themselves, stop for pedestrians, calculate and maintain a safe distance behind the next car, and reroute to avoid traffic. On a recent visit to the Apple store, I even found a new device called Automatic, which plugs into my car’s dataport, the one meant for mechanics, and talks to my iPhone to rate my driving and interpret the (intentionally) vague check-engine light.

For some time now, the tech world has been buzzing about the potential for the Internet of Things, where connected technology is embedded into hundreds of everyday objects we already use: our cars, wallets, umbrellas, even our trash cans. With products like Google Glass and Samsung’s Gear Watch, this vision is now becoming inevitable reality. However, I want the Internet of Things to be like anti-lock brakes: benign, passive, continuously acting on my behalf without so much as a swipe or glance from me. The Internet of Things should not make me wear stupid, heavy, recharging glasses, constantly download and learn apps, or make silly gestures in front of a screen, “Minority Report”-style. It should remove hassles, distractions and drudgery from my life.

Objects that care for us

One tangible example of a smart, simple and Internet-connected object that cares for us is the GlowCap, a pill bottle cap I designed a decade ago. The GlowCap can remind you with a text message to take your important medication and automatically refill itself before you run out. The caps are now used by Express Scripts, Walgreens and CVS to help people with chronic ailments take critical medications every day.

The NEST thermostat is another great innovation. The company was acquired in April by Google for $3.2 billion, along with a slew of robotics start-ups. The NEST saves you money by noticing when you aren’t home and turning the heat down a few degrees. The technology learns you, and painlessly makes one facet of your life a little easier. Once installed it works silently, reducing your energy bill and helping the planet.

Like curb-cuts, Velcro, polarized sunglasses, shock absorbers, noise-reducing headphones, Gore-Tex and Siri, the interface difference isn’t dramatic, but, taken together, innovations like the GlowCap and NEST will transform your day.

Last year I installed another passive technology in my home, enchanted window shades, which are surprisingly delightful in their automation. I live in an apartment in Boston with three kitchen windows that look across an alley into another set of windows, about 15 feet away. For years my family used cheap, stick-on blinds, which we rarely raised. When we remodeled the kitchen, I installed electric blinds that talk wirelessly to a small white Internet-connected box by Lutron. Instead of programming the blinds to lower and raise at a specific time each day, I decided to program them to raise with sunrise and lower with sunset. The daily experience is better than I anticipated. If I happen to be in the kitchen at dusk, the slow lowering of the blinds gives me a gentle ambient cue — a transition to a new period of the day. Of course I can go to an app and adjust the shades ad hoc, but after the first day, I never bothered. Automagic is better.