What do you think can be done to stop corporate inversions? Sign in and comment below.

WASHINGTON, D.C. – When Ohio-based Steris Corp. announced that it is joining the parade of companies such as Eaton Corp. and merging with a smaller foreign competitor, its defenders said one thing might have stopped the transfer to a new, offshore headquarters: lower corporate income taxes.

Steris, like Eaton, another Northeast Ohio company, has decided to invert, creating a corporate entity that will be based in Great Britain – even though its "operational" headquarters and top executives will remain in the Cleveland suburb of Mentor. The new Eaton, which announced its merger with an Irish firm in 2012, operates out of Beachwood but has a Dublin corporate headquarters.

The companies have other business reasons for doing this, including the instant international expansion they get by buying smaller foreign firms. But Steris, like Eaton, will pay lower taxes in its new corporate country once its deal is complete. Lost tax revenue from recent mergers like this, called "inversions," could cost the United States government $19.5 billion from 2015 through 2024, according to one set of projections, from the congressional Joint Committee on Taxation.

As a share of the U.S. corporate tax base, that's tiny -- 0.4 percent, according to the Tax Foundation -- but it's still troubling to policy makers and many members of Congress. So what can Washington do about this trend, which President Barack Obama has described as unpatriotic and other Democrats say is a tax dodge?

Policy analysts tick off a host of current proposals – including recent Treasury Department rules that are prompting the Chicago-based drug company AbbVie Inc, to reconsider its merger with a London company, Shire. Abbvie announced late Tuesday that its board will meet Oct. 20 to decide.

The Treasury rules, however, should not affect plans by Steris to acquire British-based Synergy Health PLC. A Steris spokesman on Monday said, "This transaction is not in conflict with any current or proposed rules from the U.S. Treasury."

Walgreen Co. recently called off an international deal that would have moved its corporate headquarters abroad, facing public pressure and a possible consumer backlash. But Walgreen, and now AbbVie, may be exceptions. Forty-five companies have completed inversions since 1982, with a handful this year, and eight more including Steris are pending, according to Bloomberg News tracking of what it calls "tax runaways."

The companies that go overseas, including Steris, generally say they are doing so for new foreign business opportunities, and teaming with a former foreign competitor provides just that. But they have choices as to where to put their combined headquarters, and taxes are a motivating factor.

"We are watching corporate America voting with its feet," said Edward "Ned" Hill, dean of the Levin College of Urban Affairs and a professor of economic development at Cleveland State University. "They've given up on the notion that Congress will fix the corporate tax structure. They're fixing it themselves. Or their accountants and lawyers are."

The problem, says Hill and others, is the 35 percent top federal income tax rate for corporations, one of the highest in the industrialized world.

Democrats, the White House and others say that few companies actually pay that rate because of numerous deductions and credits in the tax code. Still, multinational companies say it factors into their decisions of whether to keep foreign earnings abroad rather than return them to the United States and put them to use here. As long as the money is kept or reinvested overseas, it is not taxed in the United States.

U.S. Sen. Rob Portman, an Ohio Republican, said at a recent Christian Science Monitor breakfast, "The obvious answer it to fix the code. And if we don't do that, we'll continue to have American companies taking jobs and investment abroad, and you'll continue to see more and more American companies being taken over by foreign companies."

Corporate tax reform would require reducing the top rate. But as envisioned by most proponents, it also would require cutting or ending special tax credits and deductions – the very tax breaks that now help companies avoid paying the 35 percent rate.

Steris, in fact, is not paying the top rate. Steris reported an overall tax rate – including state, local and foreign taxes – of 31.3 percent in 2013, according to its last annual filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Companies generally do not make their precise U.S. tax payments public, but the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy examined the last three years of Steris financial filings and found the company faced an annual U.S. tax rate for those years averaging 16.3 percent.

Steris said when announcing its plans to acquire Synergy Health that the deal was based on business factors, such as a desire for international expansion. But Steris acknowledged it would see tax savings from moving its headquarters to England.

This reality – that few companies pay the top tax rate – does not dampen the political desire for tax reform. From Obama to Portman, officials agree that it makes poor sense for businesses to base their decisions on where and how to operate on tax factors.

This is despite the fact that the Treasury Department and White House noted in a position paper in 2012 that the 35 percent figure can be misleading. A number of developed counties have lower corporate tax rates but charge companies in other ways, such as with higher property taxes. This has a way of equalizing the overall tax load, the Obama administration said.

Yet "this is not an argument against reform," the paper said. "In fact, it is an argument and motivation for reform. The trade-off of a higher statutory tax rate in exchange for a narrower tax base with numerous loopholes and subsidies is a poor one."

So there is broad agreement – but don't count on corporate tax reform, say people who have studied the issue for years.

Martin Sullivan, chief economist at Tax Analysts, a publication that covers taxes in detail, said in an interview that he puts the odds at 1 in 100 that Congress will pass tax reform.

The problem, he says, lies in the number of tax deductions, credits, exemptions and exclusions in the tax code. They affect different companies and industries differently. Even if congressional leaders agreed to take up tax reform, "you'd have to tick off every special interest group in Washington" to get it done, Sullivan said.

Congress could at least start the discussion late this year or early in 2015, as a number of lawmakers including Portman want. But "enough House Republicans won't go along with it to pass a bill," Sullivan said. "And if they do go along with it, it would be something that Obama wouldn't go along with."

John Ams, senior vice president of the National Society of Accountants, explained why.

"Everybody seems to be for tax reform, but everybody is for a different form of tax reform," he said.

Different forms of corporations – S corporations, partnerships, sole proprietorships, C corporations –get different tax treatment. A company that uses debt to finance its expansion gets a tax advantage that another company does not. The variations are so wide that in 2008, utilities paid an effective corporate rate – the rate actually paid after deductions, credits and exemptions -- of 14 percent while several other industries paid twice that, according to the Treasury Department.

But even those rates may have been inflated.

When the group Citizens for Tax Justice examined 288 companies of the Fortune 500 from 2008 to 2012, it found an average effective rate of 19.4 percent. Some companies were able to whittle their tax obligations to nothing.

No one has come up with a way so far to lower the rate, cut the breaks, keep all companies and industries happy and persuade their CEOs and boards of directors to maintain their headquarters in the United States. The global economy has made this even trickier because, Ams said, other countries structure their tax systems and subsidies differently. Multinational companies factor those rates and subsidies, which in turn can affect the cost of materials, into their tax and business decisions in the United States.

Short of passing tax reform, Congress could try a different approach to stop the wave of inversions.

Democratic proposals this year have included restrictions on using overseas corporate revenues or interest deductions on loans from the foreign entities to complete inversions. Other bills would make it harder for companies that invert to win U.S. government contracts.

A Plain Dealer review of a federal contracting database shows that since 2010, Steris has won more than $101 million in U.S. government contracts for sterilization products and services, many involving the Department of Veterans Affairs and Defense Department. Eaton Corp had more than $137 million in federal contracts in 2013.

Democratic bills to make this harder, however, were considered dead on arrival in the Republican-led House, where lower corporate taxes are the preferred solution. Senate Republicans prefer lower taxes, too. But Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah, the top Republican on the Senate Finance Committee, offered an opening in July by saying he could consider a bill to make inversions harder if it was not retroactive, didn't increase taxes and was a step toward tax reform, according to Bloomberg News.

If Republicans win Senate control in next month's elections, Hatch could be the top Senate Republican on the matter come January.

Yet companies that invert or get federal contracts, including Steris and Eaton, spend heavily on lobbying Congress and make political contributions to get their voices heard. Steris lobbyists include former U.S. Rep. Steve LaTourette, a Republican whose Northeast Ohio district included Mentor. Analysts say an anti-inversion law or package of laws is still a longshot.

That leaves at least one other option: direct action by the Obama administration. The Treasury Department issued new rules on Sept. 22 specifically "to reduce the tax benefits of — and when possible, stop — corporate tax inversions." The department said in its announcement that this "will significantly diminish the ability of inverted companies to escape U.S. taxation. For some companies considering mergers, today's action will mean that inversions no longer make economic sense."

That appears to be what's happening with AbbVie, although the company's board will not decide until at least next week.

The rules make it harder for a U.S. company to get hold of a foreign division's earnings while avoiding taxes. In the past, companies found ways around this by structuring the money as a loan from the new, offshore corporate parent. These were called "hopscotch" loans, and Treasury described them as tax-avoidance shams that now are explicitly forbidden.

Treasury has signaled that it is not done. It is soliciting ideas from the public to, as it says, "make inversion deals less economically appealing."

But business leaders say the way to make inversions less appealing is already apparent: through tax reform.

Referring to the Steris inversion, Tom Waltermire, chief executive officer of Team NEO, the regional business attraction agency in Northeast Ohio, said, "It looks like a smart business deal. From tax standpoint, the inversion does make sense. It's just a further indication that the U.S. has an uncompetitive corporate tax structure."

Furthermore, it's not as if Northeast Ohio has lost an employer. Steris, like Eaton, will still largely run its operations from the Cleveland suburbs. That's why despite the apparent loss of a headquarters in name – a loss for civic pride -- local leaders show few signs of being glum.

"We would still say they're headquartered here," Waltermire said. "What matters is where the jobs are, where the management is. Management's here."

Plain Dealer reporter Robert L. Smith contributed to this article.