Trump supporter Deann D’Lean, of Victorville, shows off one of her homemade signs as the Redlands chapter of Stump for Trump holds a rally at Mill Creek Cattle Co. in Mentone Tuesday. JENNIFER CAPPUCCIO MAHER — STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER

REDLANDS >> Local supporters of presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump on Tuesday rallied for jobs, national security and making America great again.

The rally, hosted by the Redlands chapter of Stump for Trump at the Mill Creek Cattle Co. in Mentone, drew a full house of supporters, including members of the Redlands Tea Party Patriots as well as Republican congressional candidates Tim Donnelly and Paul Chabot.

“Donald Trump is a very unique person and he is a problem solver and a deal maker,” Don Nydam, event organizer, said by phone earlier Tuesday. “He knows how to make things happen and one of the things that really impresses me is he’s going to be thinking 24/7 about jobs.”

The event was held the same day Democratic presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders visited the Inland Empire hoping to drum up support by the June 7 primary.

Trump did not make an appearance in Mentone Tuesday, but is expected to make two stops in California this week — 2 p.m. today at the Anaheim Convention Center and 2 p.m. Friday at the San Diego Convention Center. Tickets to the appearances are available online at www.donaldjtrump.com.

• Photos: Stump for Trump Redlands Chapter holds rally

Speakers Tuesday evening took turns discussing topics in Trump’s platform: Nydam spoke on having a president who supports Christianity; Randy Trau, who helped found the group with Nydam, addressed jobs and fair trade; Jim Lotito, owner of the Mill Creek Cattle Co., spoke on hope for the future; and Joe Henehan discussed the Affordable Care Act and insurance.

“The only way to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act is if Donald Trump is president,” Henehan said.

Chabot, who is running against Rep. Pete Aguilar, D-San Bernardino, for the 31st Congressional District, addressed national security and terrorism.

“The world is on fire,” he said. “Our enemies do not fear us. Our allies do not trust us and we lay that at the feet of the progressives who have destroyed the moral fabric and strength of this nation. What we need is our president to defend and protect this great nation.”

Donnelly, who is running against Rep. Paul Cook, R-Yucca Valley, in the 8th District, spoke on the Second Amendment.

“When a powerful government becomes the threat to your rights, the only stop back is the Second Amendment,” he said. “It wasn’t put there for hunting or sports shooting or any of those wonderful, desirable activities. It was put there to defend freedom from tyranny and the Founders knew that tyranny was on its way even if it took over 200 years to arrive.”

Advertisement

John Berry, a Redlands Tea Party Patriots cabinet member who supported former GOP presidential candidate Ted Cruz, urged Republicans to unify in support of the party’s nominee.

“This election is about saving our country,” Berry said. “This election is not about me. This election is about saving our country for our children, fighting Islamic terrorism, building a wall, appointing conservative Supreme Court justices, reversing a $19 trillion debt, creating opportunities for my son — in other words it’s everything Donald Trump says. It’s making America great again.”

Nydam and his wife, Ruth Ann Nydam, formed Stump for Trump with fellow Trump supporters Trau and Nancy Karr.

Nydam asked attendees to contact 10 people in the next few days to tell them why they are voting for Trump.

“There’s a lot of reaction to Donald Trump,” Nydam said earlier Tuesday. “He’ll tell you like it is and a lot of people don’t like that, but you’ve got to say the man is a dynamic leader.”