POLITICO Playbook, presented by Chevron – 2 DAYS TO DEM DEBATE – SANDERS v. press – CRUZ’s ‘base plus’ strategy – WHAT LANNY DAVIS meant – MULHAUSER-CARSCADEN wedding

By Mike Allen (@mikeallen; mallen@politico.com) and Daniel Lippman (@dlippman; dlippman@politico.com)

SUNDAY BEST – CHUCK TODD to Bernie Sanders on “Meet the Press”: “Are you a capitalist?” SANDERS: “No. I’m a Democratic Socialist.” Video http://nbcnews.to/1K1FqCA

Story Continued Below

THE CONVERSATION – “Guess who’s polling on Hillary? Mark Penn,” by Annie Karni: “The controversial consigliere of Clinton’s first presidential campaign, ... who also served as Bill Clinton’s longtime pollster, ... is teaching a graduate course at George Washington University, ‘Interpreting and Strategizing with Polls,’ where he currently has his students crafting polls and memos addressing the question of how Clinton should position herself in what so far is shaping up to be an outsider’s election.

“With his class, Penn is testing a few hypotheses -- first, that the country is not only ready but willing to elect a president who emphasizes women’s rights. It’s a premise that runs counter to how he ran Clinton’s 2008 race, where he pushed for presenting her as a strong leader and downplaying any focus on gender. The class is also polling the idea that despite the current state of the race ... voters still want a leader with experience. ‘You want to play into the fact that's she's not an outsider,’ Penn advised.

“Standing at the head of the class, he scrolled through two more hypotheses lit up on an overhead projector in front of the room: ‘Hillary’s greatest weakness is lack of compassion and reliability, she has less warmth, but has competency and experience,’ he read off the screen, and ‘though the email scandal has damaged trustworthiness, her perceived ability to do the job remains intact.’ ...

“Penn so far has refrained from weighing in on the 2016 race. ... But Penn has maintained the trust of the Clintons, who still value his advice and have a decades-long relationship with him -- a contrast to Clinton’s current pollster Joel Benenson, who came to the campaign from President Obama’s orbit. Penn has even popped up in Clinton’s released emails, dispensing advice she appears to listen to and pass on to aides.” http://politi.co/1jX1YzD

**SUBSCRIBE to Playbook: http://politi.co/1M75UbX

INSIDE THE CAMPAIGNS -- “Rand Paul’s all-too-familiar campaign: The Kentucky senator was supposed to create a new GOP coalition. Instead, he’s running a campaign that looks a lot like his father’s,” by Daniel Strauss: “Paul’s campaign is buried in the polls, unable to break single digits, and subject to calls that it’s time for him to leave the race. While he’s raking in dollars from small donors, he’s not raising nearly enough to compete with the top tier candidates. What’s worse, Paul’s map is contracting, not expanding – his best prospects for victory appear to be in low-turnout caucus states where a small core of committed supporters can carry the day.” http://politi.co/1PnYMc4

JACK SHAFER, “Bernie Sanders vs. the Lamestream Media: The 2016 candidate’s criticism of the press is central to the way the socialist sees the world”: “Tuesday’s first-of-the-season Democratic debate is unlikely to be what Bernie Sanders thinks it should be ... [T]hat’s because the media is running the debate—and the media’s chief goal, he believes, is to create a ‘nation of morons.’ ... In his view, the media tends to trivialize the important issues if it covers them at all. It wants to cover campaign fights, not campaign debates. It over-relies on entertaining soundbites. Its news agenda is about generating profits, not producing quality journalism that will ‘educate’ the voters.” http://politi.co/1PnYYIw

REVISE AND EXTEND: Lanny Davis phones with “an apology and an explanation” for his remarks on 2016 Dems that were overhead on Amtrak by The Daily Beast’s Betsy Woodruff and quoted in Playbook: “This was a private conversation, with snippets taken out of context. I was very chagrined, and am in agony because of this. I have the greatest respect for Senator Sanders, and he’s entitled to change his positions. I say on TV all that time that I have the greatest respect for Senator Sanders.

“I would never criticize someone for changing their positions: God knows we all have changed positions. I didn’t call him ‘a flip-flopper’ – I may have said that’s a term people use when you change positions.

“I never called Vice President Biden ‘a buffoon’ – I may have said other people sometimes say that, because of his gaffes. What I said has nothing to do with the Hillary campaign. I’m just a friend. Please say I emphasized that: I’m a friend, not part of the campaign. I’m completely on my own as a supporter and longtime friend.”

BREAKING – “Iran says verdict reached on Washington Post correspondent,” by WashPost’s Carol Morello: “An Iranian judiciary spokesman said Sunday that a verdict has been reached in the espionage case of Washington Post reporter Jason Rezaian, though he offered no details and it was uncertain what the verdict is and whether there is a sentence. ... His closed-door trial on espionage and related charges ended two months ago.” http://wapo.st/1VM2UaZ

LATE-NIGHT BEST: “Saturday Night Live” cold open takes on “Fox & Friends,” Debbie Wasserman Schultz http://bit.ly/1LdMJsA

MOOD MUSIC -- AP’s Stephen Ohlemacher, for Monday papers: “For just the third time in 40 years, millions of Social Security recipients, disabled veterans and federal retirees can expect no increase in benefits next year, unwelcome news for more than one-fifth of the nation’s population. They can blame low gas prices, which are dragging down inflation, the measurement used for the cost-of-living adjustment.” http://bit.ly/1WUX44a

** Presented by Chevron: Doers in Washington, D.C., help make this nation great -- and all of that doing deserves distinction. Chevron congratulates the Service to America Medal honorees, whose commitment to doing inspires us all. http://tinyurl.com/qylupnb **

GEORGE WILL in Dallas, “Cruz’s calculations”: “Cruz’s audacious ‘base plus’ strategy ... aims to leaven the electorate with people who, disappointed by economic stagnation and discouraging cultural trends for which Republican nominees seemed to have no answers, have been dormant during recent cycles. ... Whites without college experience include disproportionate numbers of nonvoters whose abstention in 2012 ... produced Obama’s Electoral College victory.

“The Cruz campaign’s substantial investment in data scientists serves what [Cruz chief strategist Jason] Johnson calls ‘behavioral micro-targeting,’ changing behavior as well as gathering opinions. If a person drives a Ford F-150 and subscribes to Guns & Ammo, he probably is conservative. The challenge is to make him a voter by directing to him a package of three- or four-issue appeals tailored to him.” http://wapo.st/1LAeOcY

--WashPost A5, “As Paul struggles in polls, Cruz moves to pick up libertarians: But for some, the Texan’s religious zeal is cause for caution,” by Katie Zezima in Nashua, N.H.: “Cruz tailored his speech ... in New Hampshire [libertarian] voters. He took a less hawkish tone when discussing foreign policy ... Cruz praised the liberty movement as an ‘amazing thing’ and ... promoted a bill he co-sponsored to end the bulk collection of phone metadata ...

“Paul gave an animated speech here and appeared to be in his comfort zone, ... labeling a just-passed bill that temporarily funds the government ‘a bunch of crap’ and the body itself ‘impotent and inconsequential.’ ‘I’m embarrassed that I’m even a part of it,’ said Paul, sporting a bright-blue belt with the University of Kentucky’s logo on it. Paul played down the threat from Cruz. ‘Both here and Iowa, we know where our support is and where my dad’s support was, and we feel comfortable that the overwhelming majority of it is with us.’” http://wapo.st/1R5w8e6

2016 PLAYERS: Nathaniel Meyersohn starts Thursday as South Carolina deputy comms director for Bernie Sanders’ campaign. He’s a recent graduate of Emory University, with a focus on Southern political history, and worked over the summer as Alexandra Pelosi’s research assistant at HBO.

INBOX -- From Hillary campaign: “Katy Perry to Rally Clinton Supporters Before Iowa JJ Dinner,” Oct. 24. http://hrc.io/KatyPerryDSM

DAN BALZ Sunday Take column on WashPost A2, dateline Manchester, “Bringing up the rear, Chris Christie did not envision this as his campaign”: “New Hampshire is his principal target, although he said in [an] interview that he plans to compete hard in Iowa. On Friday, ... he held his 29th town-hall ... in New Hampshire. The town halls are among the best shows in New Hampshire this fall ... He is ... blunt, humorous and often windy ... answers are long, discursive and sometimes repetitive. The town-hall meetings can last up to two hours. But they play to good reviews.” http://wapo.st/1VM5lFj

--WashPost A25 today, “For Rubio, goal is to be the momentum candidate, at right moment: Republicans are beginning to give the senator from Florida a serious look,” by Phil Rucker in Vegas: “On the stump in October, Rubio gives nearly the same speech he gave in downtown Miami when he first announced his presidential campaign in April. One might call this boring or robotic, but the Rubio team sees it as consistent and disciplined. He is trying not to peak now.” http://wapo.st/1Ou9jSd

WEEKEND WEDDINGS: Courtney Cohen and Jeremy Flantzer, yesterday at the Four Seasons in Georgetown. Courtney, who runs a namesake P.R. firm, worked for George Stephanopoulos at ABC News. Jeremy works for Booz Allen. Pic http://bit.ly/1NySNSr

--SPOTTED on the dance floor: bridesmaids Annie VanMeter, Nikki Schwab and Genna Rosen; Olivia Petersen, Neil Grace, Elizabeth Thorp, Jonathan Greenberger, Ilana Drimmer, Janet Donovan, Mary Bruce, Shira and Eli Center, Judy Kurtz, Karen Travers, Emily Lenzner.

WEDDING TODAY: Kara Carscaden, Scott Mulhauser – NYT p. 21 of Sunday Styles: “Kara Nicole Carscaden and Scott Howard Mulhauser are to be married ... in Scottsdale, Ariz. Rabbi Evan T. Schultz is to officiate at the Barn at Desert Foothills, an events space. Ms. Carscaden, 35, ... is a senior public affairs consultant in Beijing for Ogilvy & Mather. She was a deputy national press secretary for President Obama during his 2012 re-election campaign. She graduated from Wellesley and received a master’s degree in political management from George Washington. ...

“Mulhauser, 40, is the chief of staff at the American Embassy in Beijing for Ambassador Max Baucus, and during the 2012 campaign was the deputy chief of staff to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. The groom graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Georgetown. ... The couple met in 2009, during the drafting and passage of the Affordable Care Act. They began dating in 2012, while both were working on the administration’s re-election campaign.” With pic http://nyti.ms/1jizxvM

BIRTHDAYS: Two members of the Boehnerland press team: Katie Boyd and Maura Gillespie (h/ts Emily Schillinger) ... Veronica Walsh (h/t Brian) ... Sen. Patty Murray (D-Wash.) is 65 ... former Defense Secretary William Perry is 88 ... Lauren Culbertson, founder of Millennial Bridge Consulting and a Story Partners and Isakson alum (h/ts Lauren French and Suzanne Kianpour) … Joel Riethmiller, VP of APCO Worldwide, former deputy chief of staff for Rep. Baron Hill and the pride of Fort Wayne, Ind. (h/t Adrienne Watson) ... Trey Bohn … Bruce Bartlett, the pride of Waldwick, N.J., is 64 … Wendy Riemann, Gov. Scott Walker’s D.C. office director and former Jeb Bush speechwriter (h/t Kristy Campbell) ... Cooper Allen, USA Today politics editor (h/t Seung Min Kim) ... Mike Riggs … Joan Warshaw is 9-0, celebrating in Boston with her family. She’s a diehard Dem, starting with the first election she voted in, for FDR’s 4th term (h/t Sarah Coopersmith) ... BuzzFeed’s Tarini Parti is 2-5 …

... Politico’s circulation director, John Lipp … Ben Mendelson … Kristina L. Costa of the White House ... Bill Triplett … Bruce DePuyt … John Robinson, a Gore and Edwards alum … Publishers Weekly’s Rachel Deahl ... Center for Public Integrity’s Talia Buford ... Karen Sommer Shalett, senior manager for external relations and comms at Population Services International and an Aspen Institute and Modern Luxury magazine alum ... Politico’s Meaghan Gilmore … Margaret “Maggie” Fly, daughter of Jamie … Jessica Lerner … Amanda Cooper ... Alice Berman … Marcus Veazey of Redfish Consulting ... Ken Danieli ... Sandra Klassen ... Mary Burows ... Frank Lucician ... Mike Wolfe ... Daryl Hall (Hall and Oates) is 69 ... Pro and College Football Hall of Famer Steve Young is 54 ... Joan Cusack is 53 ... Luke Perry is 49 ... golfer Michelle Wie is 26 (h/ts AP)

** Presented by Chevron: Doers in Washington, D.C., help make this nation great -- and all of that doing deserves distinction. Chevron congratulates the Service to America Medal honorees, whose commitment to doing inspires us all. http://tinyurl.com/pt24hsx **

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC ... New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://bit.ly/1Emvt6C

** A message from BP: Safety is never being satisfied – and always working to be better. That’s why at BP, we’re working every day to improve our training, our technology, our culture. See real examples of our progress: on.bp.com/safety **