Severe storms threatened several areas of Colorado on Monday night after Denver area experienced its hottest temperatures of 2014.

Severe thunderstorm warnings started getting issued just after 7:30 p.m. in northern Colorado and then spread south and to the east. After that, a flash flood warning began at at 9:12 p.m. for Arapahoe and Elbert counties until 12:15 a.m. Tuesday.

An intense lightning storm moved over downtown Denver at about 8:45 p.m. and put the Colorado Rockies’ game at Coors Field into a weather delay just before 9 p.m. The game results at 9:50 p.m.

The Denver International Airport reported the storm impacted flights and asked passengers to check with individual airlines about altered flight times.

Xcel Energy’s website showed spotty outages around the Denver Metro area with the largest cluster around Lakewood with more than 100 outages reported.

The National Weather Service reported winds up to 60 mph and Ping Pong ball-size hail in a storm near Limon. Arapahoe and Lincoln counties were added to that warning area, which last until 9 p.m.

Also, a severe storm warning was issued for northeastern Boulder and south central Larimer counties at 8 p.m. Winds up to 50 mph and quarter-sized hail were expected.

Another storm moved into the northwest metro area, and a severe thunderstorm warning was issued at 8:05 p.m. for southeast Boulder, Broomfield, northeastern Jefferson, northwestern Denver and northwestern Adams counties. It was extended to 9 p.m. with hail and 60-mph wind gusts.

Weather in Colorado was hot again Monday, with a high temperature in Denver reaching 100 degrees, according to the National Weather Service.

Stormy weather in northeastern Colorado should taper off as the night progresses, thinning out about midnight.

Monday night in Denver skies should be mostly cloudy with a 30 percent chance of chance of showers and thunderstorms before 11 p.m., the weather service said. The low temperature should be about 61 degrees and winds could gust up to 20 mph.

On Tuesday in Denver partly cloudy skies will bring a 30 percent chance of afternoon showers and thunderstorms as the weather cools down with a high temperature of 81 degrees, the weather service reports. Locally heavy rains will be possible.

On Wednesday seasonal temperatures should rise in northeastern Colorado with highs in the upper 80’s to lower 90’s through the rest of the week. A moist air mass is expected to remain in place, triggering late-day thunderstorms in the mountains with showers and brief heavy rains on the plains.

Kieran Nicholson: 303-954-1822, knicholson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kierannicholson