Sgt. Glen Martinez was killed six years ago in Iraq, but his big grin is all over the small potato-farming community of Monte Vista. Around Memorial Day for each of the past five years, Martinez smiles from store-window posters advertising the Glen Martinez Memorial Walk/Run and the Veterans Golf Tournament. The grin that an old friend fondly describes as “the biggest, cheesiest, most inviting ever” is on hundreds of T-shirts worn by runners, golfers and volunteers who come out to raise money for scholarships given out in Martinez’s name every spring. Monte Vista is not about to let a favorite son and hometown hero fade from memory.

“It’s the whole community that does this. Everyone was a friend of Glen’s,” said his father, Ron Martinez, who has relished the hard work of this Memorial Day weekend event for the past five years.

Martinez was a 31-year-old Marine sergeant when he died in a roadside bomb blast in Fallujah in the spring of 2008.

That alone would have made him a hero in the San Luis Valley, where deeply entrenched generations of the predominantly Latino population have proudly served their country. Martinez’s grandparents served in World War II. Ron Martinez served during the Vietnam War.

But Glen Martinez was an everyday hero before he ever went to war. He was beloved for what he did in life as much as for giving that life for his country.

He was “the star of the town,” as local businessman Bob Carlucci put it.

Martinez was the quarterback for the Pirates football team. He was the champion wrestler and the ace baseball player. He was the honors student, the prom king.

He was related to hundreds of residents in a town of 4,400. Those who weren’t related by blood were linked to him by respect.

Family and friends in Monte Vista say he didn’t just profess to believe that you should do unto others as you would have them do unto you.

“He really believed it. He really lived it,” said his mother, Carol Martinez, a longtime nurse at the Colorado State Veterans Center at Homelake.

Martinez was buried in the Homelake Cemetery after a funeral that people still talk about with awe. The high school overflowed with an estimated 2,000 people, including the governor, a senator, a congressman, a Catholic archbishop and a cadre of Marine officers.

More importantly, Monte Vista’s streets were lined with people holding flags, saluting, crying. They included potato farmers, miners, schoolchildren, waitresses, janitors — many who had been touched by his small acts of kindness.

John Allen was Martinez’s college roommate and best friend. He said he saw that same side of Martinez through their college years, but he was still stunned by the outpouring of affection and grief in Monte Vista when he traveled there from Richmond, Va., for his funeral.

“It was the most amazing thing I’ve ever seen,” said Allen, who travels to Monte Vista every other year for the memorial run.

After Martinez was buried, a pavilion at a local park was dedicated in his name. His parents like to go there to sit and feel his presence. They also go several times a week to his grave to chat with him. They tell him about local goings-on. They update him on their work with the fund-raiser. They tell him about the students who will go off to college with scholarships issued in his name.

Martinez will soon have another very visible marble plaque at the entrance to a new park being built by a very patriotic city — the Faith Hinkley Memorial and Veterans Park.

Hinkley was another bright star of a young person from Monte Vista who died in 2010 in Iraq.

But for the Memorial Day weekend fundraiser, the focus is on Martinez and on keeping his legacy alive.

Those students who receive the $1,000 scholarships may not remember Martinez because some of them were barely out of grade school when he went off to war. But before they head off to college, they learn why they shouldn’t forget him.

The winners go to the Martinez home at their invitation. The students view Glen Martinez’s service medals laid out in a glass case. They see his sports trophies. They examine his dress blues.

They look in the eyes of his still grieving parents.

Ron Martinez said it is important they know what kind of man his son was.

“Glen was always on track to be the best that he could be. He was just a plain good person,” he said. “People do not forget that.”