Northeast Ohio's tech sector is a lot bigger than it was four years ago, judging by a survey conducted by OHTec.



The number of local tech companies with more than 50 employees more than doubled. Same goes for the number of companies with more than $5 million in revenue.



Those are some huge increases. So what's going on here? The survey may not be perfect, but there are plenty of reasons to believe that the local tech industry really did grow substantially between 2010 and 2014, according to Brad Nellis, president of OHTec, which used to be called the Northeast Ohio Software Association.



For one, more than 100 software companies and information technology service providers responded during both years. And the results clearly weren't influenced by two or three companies, since so many categories and questions suggested that companies are getting larger.



For instance, the percentage of respondents with between one and five employees plummeted from 32% to 20% (or 53% to 34% if you include solo entrepreneurs with no employees) between 2010 and 2014. By contrast, the percentage of companies with 26-100 employees nearly tripled, jumping from 8% to 22%. And 9% of respondents said they had more than 100 employees, up from 4%.



The numbers make sense to Nellis for a few reasons.





#ThanksObama

One, the first survey was taken only a few years after the real estate bubble burst, causing the economy to collapse. Since then the overall economy has been on the upswing. Plus, the tech sector is hot — and Apple and Google aren't the only companies doing well. For instance, OHTec conducted separate quarterly surveys of local IT companies throughout the recession and the years that followed.Those numbers suggest that they started shaking off the doldrums in 2011. For instance, in the fourth quarter of 2009, 54% of respondents reported that they were “not hiring.” That figure had dropped to 26% by the first quarter of 2011, and it fell into the teens several times over the next few years. The list of local software developers that Crain's publishes every year also shows consistent growth since 2010.Then there's anecdotal evidence. Tech companies are constantly telling Nellis that they're growing.“We knew that virtually everybody was hiring,” he said.But the survey may not be a perfect reflection of reality. For instance, two factors may have driven some of the smallest companies out of OHTec since 2010.Back then, the group had 930 members. It had roughly 700 members as of February of this year.Nellis believes the recession could have put some smaller companies out of business. OHTec also could have lost some of its smallest members because of The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which was passed in 2010.

What does Obamacare have to do with OHTec? The organization is part of the Council of Smaller Enterprises, so its members can buy health insurance through COSE.



That benefit is no longer as compelling as it used to be, because Obamacare gave small businesses other ways to buy insurance. Plus, businesses with just one employee can no longer legally buy group coverage through COSE, president Steve Millard said. Thus, COSE's overall membership declined after the law went into effect.



The average size of companies belonging to COSE has increased, “but it has not been dramatic,” Millard added. For a moment, though, let's assume that most of the growth described in OHTec's survey is real. That scenario does pose a luxurious problem: Local tech companies, especially software developers, constantly talk about how hard it is to find talent. The problem is not isolated to Greater Cleveland, but the region's tech industry still mainly consists of small businesses that often have a tough time recruiting against larger tech companies in other regions — and major corporations that have large tech departments right here in Northeast Ohio.



Those local corporations are hiring, too. For instance, last month, at OHTec's annual CIO Symposium, Nellis asked an audience of 150-or-so IT executives to raise their hands if they didn't have any open positions.



“One guy raised his hand. Literally, everybody in that room is hiring,” he said.

Related Links