Joyce Meis, left, gives a 10-minute massage last week to Loveland resident Barb Mohr at the Chilson Recreation Center. Meis gives the quick massages on the second and fourth Tuesdays of the month. ( Shelley Widhalm )

Every other Tuesday, Loveland resident Barb Mohr has to get her 10-minute massage fix.

A volunteer in the Chilson Senior Center, Mohr makes sure she signs up for a time slot with Joyce Meis, certified massage therapist, to relieve stress and to feel relieved.

"I tend to have arthritis in my neck. I'm so much better afterward," Mohr said on Tuesday, Feb. 11, about her massage at the Chilson Recreation Center lobby. "The more you have it, the better you sleep."

Massages at spas, salons, physical therapy offices and elsewhere typically last 30, 60 or 90 minutes, but Meis -- who also offers the longer massages -- provides quick-hit, chair massages to relieve stress, hit the sore spots and relax muscles.

Meis gives short massages on the second and fourth Tuesday of the month -- a service she started four years ago at the Chilson Senior Center and moved to the Recreation Center lobby a year later for better visibility. She can take as many 19 clients in three hours and averages 17, she said.

If You Go What: Chair Massage with Joyce Meis. When: 9 a.m.-noon second and fourth Tuesday of the month. Where: Chilson Recreation Center lobby. Cost: $5 for 10 minutes, $1 for each additional minute. Info: Call Joyce Meis at 691-3441.

"That's what a 10-minute massage does is quick relief of the trouble spots that you have," Meis said. "It helps with your state of mind. It helps relieve some of that sharp pain, so you can keep going."

Massage improves circulation, joint flexibility, energy flow and the function of the immune system.

Along with drinking water, massage helps flush out toxins from stress, food and the environment, preventing toxins from settling in the muscle fibers.

And it helps loosen and relieve trigger points that can cause pain and headaches.

Meis's 10-minute massages give clients a taste of what this form of therapy is like without committing to a half-hour or full-hour massage, she said.

Meis, who's been doing massage since January 2000, asks a few questions to find out her client's problem areas, aiming to get to the core of the issue and work it out, she said.

"She makes it very personal. She listens to the client," Mohr said. "If there's a specific area for me, that's what she concentrates on."

Jan Whelan of Loveland has been getting chair massages from Meis for three to four years.

"I already feel more energy," Whelan said after she got a 10-minute massage on Feb. 11. "I feel good all the way around. I have chronic back pain. I feel relief from that."

Whelan also finds the short massages to be relaxing.

"After two minutes, all these worries and stresses are worked out -- the magic of therapeutic hands," she said.

Meis notices that her clients stand up straighter and seem more positive after their 10-minute massages, she said.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.