The Brazilian wax, I’m here to tell you, is finally dying.

My local shopping-mall beauty parlours only do a few a week these days, as opposed to a dozen every day for most of the past two decades.

This has been predicted before, but I’m seeing a genuine climate change: 2014 is shaping up as the hairiest year since records commenced.

Sydney used to throng with tiny, brutal Thai women with strong wrists and python reflexes who specialised in intimate deforestation. Now they’ll have to find other cruelties to inflict.

They’ve been predicting the demise of Sydney’s favourite hairstyle for quite a few years now, long before it actually came true.

Nobody’s getting vajazzled any more. Vatooing hasn’t been heard of since 2011.

The once-ubiquitous landing strip cannot be discerned by approaching pilots, now it is indistinguishable from surrounding bushland.

The lady-shave giants Gillette and Schick have even started selling hair-trimming attachments for their disposable razors.

Old-school feminists will rejoice, proclaiming a new generation of women are rediscovering the beauties of natural upholstery, and are no longer playing into the fantasies of blokes.

They’ve been predicting the demise of Sydney’s favourite hairstyle for quite a few years now, long before it actually came true.

So I’m here to speak up in favour of the full monty.

It’s a kind of feminine badge of honour, I reckon. Forget doing an iron-man for personal challenge and hardship. If a woman can maintain her sense of humour and a civil tongue in her head while having every strand ripped from her body, she is truly a lady to be reckoned with.

This has been predicted before, but I’m seeing a genuine climate change: 2014 is shaping up as the hairiest year since records commenced.

One of the first, most shocking revelations about Brazilians, when they emerged in Australian suburbia in the mid-1990s, was that schoolgirls as young as 14 were having them done.

Back then, there was a period of feminist soul-searching: if barely pubescent girls are racing to the salon to get nude, there’s a serious problem with the culture of premature sexualisation, they said.

Still today you’ll hear some women argue Brazilians are unnecessary, that they cause ingrown hairs, are too painful, are informed by porn culture, and are something men like, as opposed to something women actually want to do.

To all of which I say: rubbish.

For a start, it’s only painful if you try to do it sober. Men and porn-fans might like it, but I’m yet to meet a single woman who gets a Brazilian because her boyfriend wants her to.

The mundane truth is this: Brazilians are just a fashion. They’ve got nothing to do with gender relations or women’s liberation.

Women do it because they find it feels nice, and because it keeps everything tidy in the swimsuit department.

They’re as much interested in looking neat and tidy in the gym change room - in case any other women glance sideways - as they are in what some dude might think.

And you know what? They’re kind of harmless - even on a 14-year-old.

Anyone who’s surprised that teenage girls are into Brazilians doesn’t know many teenage girls very well.

If a woman can maintain her sense of humour and a civil tongue in her head while having every strand ripped from her body, she is truly a lady to be reckoned with.

One of the great markers of womanhood, for the average teenage girl, is the arrival - and then the removal - of bodily hair.

Little ladies spend a lot of time in their late-girlhood anticipating (and worrying about) the arrival of puberty, and all the new bumps and growths it will bring.

The notion of shaving one’s legs with an orange plastic throwaway razor, even when I was at school, was an act absolutely laden with adult sophistication.

It seemed, in prospect, almost as elegant and classy as smoking with a long, tapered cigarette-holder like Holly Golightly in Breakfast at Tiffany’s, or having hot-pink acrylic fingernails like Hope Williams Brady in Days of Our Lives.

None of those activities have anything to with impressing teenage boys.

And nor, I think, do Brazilians. If you consider the scope of ‘dangerous things girls can do to themselves in the name of sophistication’, Brazilians are pretty mild.

I’d rather young women inflicted pain on themselves with strips of calico than raided mum’s prescription meds, or racked up thousands on a credit card, or chatted online with strangers, or developed eating disorders.

I think a lot of contemporary ‘feminism’ fundamentally misunderstands modern young women.

Girls naturally reach out for the accoutrements of womanhood, from the first time a six-year-old drapes herself in mum’s plastic pearls and clops around the house in a pair of gigantic high heels. They like feminine things. They enjoy acts of adulthood.

And adult women enjoy grooming and preening themselves for reasons entirely unconnected with the desire to attract men.

We do it because it feels good. And if you’re really a feminist, that should be more than reason enough for a woman to do whatever the hell she wants, hairy or not.