BEAMSVILLE It's been a long time in the making, but Mike Weir Wines finally has a home to call its own — and what a home it is.

Situated on the Beamsville Bench, on a clear day you can see straight across the lake and take in the Toronto skyline from the Locust Lane winery. That view is easy to take in from floor-to-ceiling windows surrounding the retail and hospitality centre.

"It was worth waiting for," said Barry Katzman, president of Mike Weir Wines about the winery and its location. "Look at this view, you can't beat it."

While he's probably best known for his accomplishments on the PGA tour, Canadian golfer Mike Weir first entered the wine business in 2005. Growing up, the Brights Grove native spent a lot of time with his grandparents in Niagara Falls, watching as his grandfather make homemade batches of wine in the basement.

"There were occasions, like on Christmas, where we'd get to taste it," recalled Weir.

When he was approached about entering the wine business, Weir jumped at the chance. Not only was it a way to honour those cherished family traditions, it also offered him an opportunity to raise funds for his personal charity, the Mike Weir Foundation that funds various children charities.

"It's interesting for us, because we're opening the doors here and feel like a new winery but we've been at it for nine years," said Katzman.

With a focus on varieties like Chardonnay, Sauvignon Blanc, Pinot Noir and more, his label has become one of the top selling VQA brands at the LCBO and is sold in every province in the country. Katzman admits they sort of approached things backwards compared to other wineries, focusing on building their brand and getting a stronghold in the LCBO for the wines before setting up a retail location where people can come out to taste and purchase in person. Plans for a winery have been in the works for a long time, with a one-time goal of having a partnership with the Niagara Parks Commission for a location at Whirlpool Golf Course, but when that fell through they decided to start fresh.

"It has been a long process, but we wanted to make it right. Not just open something just for the sake of getting it open and have retail space available," said Weir. "We wanted to make it the right retail space and get through all of that planning with architects and the loopholes to jump through to finally get it done, it feels good to finally be here now and to have it open. It's so different and so unique compared to any other place that's in the region, with the open space and the great views we have here. I'm really proud of that."

The new property allows them to make their wine on site, with winemaker Jeff Hundertmark at the helm.

The Mike Weir Retail & Hospitality Centre hosted a private opening ceremony on June 21. With family and friends in attendance, Weir opened the doors on his new facility, and the accompanying Mike Weir Gallery that will act as the only display of his personal collection of memorabilia from his career in golf. The gallery will be open to the public, but also serve as a private tasting room for functions at the winery.

Mike Weir Winery is located at 4041 Locust Lane in Beamsville. For more information, visit the website at www.mikeweirwine.com or call 905-563-1919.