Conservatives want House tax reform vote

With help from Elena Chiriboga, Toby Eckert and Josh Gerstein

TAKE ME TO VOTE: Here we thought that House Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady’s goal of having a committee vote on international tax reform this year was ambitious. Turns out that House conservatives want to go so much further.

Story Continued Below

Lauren French, who formerly owned this space, and Bloomberg’s Billy House both hit at the same theme Wednesday — that members of the conservative House Freedom Caucus believe Speaker Paul Ryan’s plan of using 2016 to lay out an agenda for the future is too timid, and that they want to see the full House act on big-ticket issues this year. Lauren, in fact, writes that “the group is agitating for tax reform legislation.” And Rep. Raul Labrador specifically mentioned a tax overhaul to Bloomberg as something he wants to see on the House floor. Lauren’s piece: http://politi.co/1P21ki0 Bloomberg: http://bloom.bg/1TUvOk9

Rep. Mark Meadows, another Freedom Caucus member, told Morning Tax he’d like floor votes “maybe not on the comprehensive package, but pieces of that to at least set the stage for what may or may not be different when someone else is at 1600 Pennsylvania Ave.” Asked about taking tough votes on matters that are unlikely to become law this year, Meadows said, "I think it’s important that the House work its will, even though the expectation is that the Senate’s going to move on so few items.”

REMINDERS: Congressional Republicans have been talking about tax reform for more than five years now. But there are good reasons why lawmakers have had trouble translating tax reform principles into tax reform proposals — it’s hard, and for a variety of reasons, including that a lot of tax breaks are really popular.

And while Meadows said he’s not necessarily expecting a vote on a comprehensive tax reform bill, it’s also worth remembering what Republicans thought when they were in a similar spot two years ago. More than a few GOP lawmakers — rank-and-file ones, too — found themselves worried when former House Ways and Means Chairman Dave Camp released his draft tax overhaul early in 2014. Those Republicans feared Camp’s proposal could be a political headache for them that fall, even though it was always unlikely to receive a House vote.

HEY, EVERYONE: IT’S THURSDAY. We don’t want to be melodramatic, but tonight’s GOP debate could have one of the biggest fights about a value-added tax in the U.S.’s 240-year history.

While you wait, send us tips, ideas and/or constructive criticism. Email: bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com, bfaler@politico.com, kodonnell@politico.com. Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

CASH (FLOW) MONEY: After six years of work and multiple drafts, Rep. Devin Nunes officially released his American Business Competitiveness Act (H.R. 4377) on Wednesday. And you’ve got to give Nunes this: He’s not tinkering at the edges. His “cash flow” plan would put a 25 percent tax on the difference between business income and expenses (minus interest) — replacing the current 35 percent corporate rate and 39.6 percent rate for pass-through businesses. It would also implement full, immediate expensing, a territorial system and basically get rid of all the other business tax incentives. More, from me, here: http://politico.pro/1SOVTTl

As the WSJ points out, the GOP orthodoxy on business taxes has moved toward Nunes in recent years. Among presidential candidates, Sen. Marco Rubio and former Gov. Jeb Bush have similar plans, while Sen. Ted Cruz and Sen. Rand Paul tax business consumption in a different manner — with a VAT. http://on.wsj.com/1l6LBAd

Nunes told reporters on Wednesday that he spoke with Brady about holding hearings on his bill, and that he thought the measure would play a constructive role as Brady tries to pass international tax reform this year. Still, it’s far from certain that Nunes’ radical revamp will catch fire or find broad support — the California Republican said, for instance, that he didn’t even bother reaching out to Democrats to see if they wanted to become co-sponsors, and proposals like scrapping the interest deduction will certainly spark opposition.

Plus, there are some questions about how Nunes’ bill would fit in with Brady’s efforts. It relies solely on the 25 percent rate and territorial system to prevent base erosion and offshore gaming, while international tax reform frameworks have generally called for tougher protections.

GETTING CHIPPY: If you needed another sign that the Democratic race is tightening, then here you are. Hillary Clinton’s camp has gone on the offensive the past few days about Bernie Sanders’ single-payer health care plan. Pro Health Care’s Nancy Cook has more: “The Clinton campaign claims that Sanders’ single-payer proposal would cost $15 trillion and amount to a 9 percent tax on middle-class families, though it did not define the threshold for the ‘middle-class.’”

As Nancy notes, this specific line of attack has surprised some on the left, who believe it sounds suspiciously like a conservative’s criticism. Brian Fallon, a Clinton spokesman, said that the former secretary of State respects the liberals who want to go single-payer. But he added that the time for debate over the best health care system has passed, and “our task now is to defend the Affordable Care Act.”

Sanders said this week that he would release the tax estimate for his plan before the Iowa caucuses, now just 18 days away. The numbers matter because while single-payer would mean higher taxes on a broad swath of taxpayers, it would also lower health care costs for consumers. Nancy’s story: http://politico.pro/1l822fN

GAO SAYS: As Pro Tax’s Katy O’Donnell reports, House Republicans jumped on two new Government Accountability Office reports that said a couple of IRS divisions — small business and wage and investment — were using flawed methods for audit selection. http://politico.pro/1Sjs0ew

They weren’t alone: Grover Norquist’s Americans for Tax Reform published a post titled “IRS May Still Be Targeting Conservative Groups,” a nod to the 2013 tea party controversy that has hamstrung the tax agency for almost three years now.

But as Katy notes, there’s no smoking gun here — in other words, GAO said the IRS is at risk for making audit choices for biased reasons, but there was no evidence it's actually done so. (The watchdog came to a similar conclusion about the IRS’s tax exempt division last year.) http://bit.ly/1JgWlFV

The IRS emphasized similar points in its response: “Politics play no factor in audit selection. There is nothing in the GAO reports that contradict that statement. GAO did not identify any instances where the selection of a case was considered inappropriate or unfair.” The agency did generally agree with the GAO recommendations, and will seek to implement them.

IF AT FIRST YOU DON’T SUCCEED: Public Citizen filed suit in federal court to get its hands on a memo that Ingersoll-Rand, a former U.S. company that moved its official address first to Bermuda and then to Ireland, sent to the Homeland Security Department to make the case that inverted companies are still eligible for government contracts, despite a 2002 law to the contrary.

Bloomberg got the memo from Ingersoll-Rand last year, on the condition that it not publish it and drop its own freedom of information suit with DHS. “The company argued in part that U.S. trade agreements with foreign governments invalidated the law that would prohibit it from winning federal contracts,” Bloomberg’s Zachary Mider wrote. Top congressional Democrats have fought to make it harder for companies to move their legal address abroad, and to get federal contracts once they do, with little success so far. http://bloom.bg/1H6B5wT

CHAMBER’S TIME OF YEAR: Tom Donohue, the chief executive of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, is expected to cover a wide range of topics — including taxes and the current presidential race — in his yearly address on the state of U.S. business today. “The state of American business in 2016 is filled with uncertainty, risks, and challenges,” Donohue will say, according to excerpts released by the Chamber. “It’s not just the federal government that concerns the business community. State and local governments are piling new mandates, taxes, and costs onto the backs of the private sector.”

STATE UPDATE —

AND THE WINNER OF THE POWERBALL JACKPOT IS … The 44 states that participate in Powerball — plus whoever hits the magic numbers. The Tax Foundation’s Jared Walczak notes that “only about half of Powerball ticket revenue is returned in the form of prizes.” The rest — minus administrative costs — goes to state coffers. “And in all likelihood, at least one state is going to win big twice. That’s because lottery winnings are generally taxed as ordinary income at both the federal and state (and, where applicable, local) level.” http://bit.ly/1KdERar

Over at the Rockefeller Institute, Lucy Dadayan and Donald J. Boyd argue that the windfall probably won’t be that big. “Every bit helps, but net revenues from lottery sales are not big in the scheme of state budgets,” they concluded. “Gross lottery sales are substantial — about $70.2 billion in fiscal year 2014, according to the North American Association of State and Provincial Lotteries. But net revenues for state budgets after payment of prizes, administrative costs, and other expenses were only around $18.1 billion, or 26 percent of sales.” http://bit.ly/1ZkWbRI

CHRISTIE VETOES FILM TAX CREDIT INCENTIVE PROGRAM: New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has vetoed new attempts to reinstate incentives for film production in the state, NJ Advance Media reports. Recently, the Legislature urged the revival of the expired tax credit program, but the governor said in his veto statement that "the state Legislature had chosen to advance "an expensive bill that offers a dubious return for the state in the form of jobs and economic impact." The state’s program pitched “a 20 percent tax credit on production expenses, but was capped at $10 million annually — limiting the total funding available to producers each year.” http://bit.ly/1l76co4

LOWER OIL PRICES CAUSING DECLINE IN STATE TAX REVENUE: A review of federal data found that lower crude oil prices are putting a dent in revenues for some of the top producers in the country, UPI reports. Tax revenues from energy have diminished about 50 percent year-on-year for Texas, one of the U.S.’s top oil producers, according to a review of state data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration. “North Dakota is the No. 2 oil producer in the nation behind Texas and, even though its production volumes were relatively stable in 2015, tax revenues dropped 43 percent to $2 billion as a result of lower crude oil prices. For the first five months of the 2015-2017 budget, revenues were off nearly 9 percent.http://bit.ly/200Tw1V

QUICK LINKS

— GE’s Boston move has some tax benefits. http://reut.rs/1PcmkMS

— Sanders says Clinton should be with him on Social Security. http://politico.pro/1nk0xgi

— Tax season is a hassle for small businesses. http://abcn.ws/1JKxU5R

— ICYMI: Clinton’s estate tax plan wouldn’t hit some of her own tax planning. http://bloom.bg/1TWCQVA

DID YOU KNOW? In 1954, Gov. Robert Meyner of New Jersey vetoed a bill to have “The Garden State” added to car license plates, saying, “I do not believe that the average citizen of New Jersey regards his state as more peculiarly identifiable with gardening for farming than any of its other industries or occupations.” (The veto was eventually overridden.)