Patient engagement is often seen as the key to preventative care, effective chronic disease management, and cost containment. Despite the spread of accountable care arrangements and risk-sharing financial contracts that demand a higher level of participation from the patient population in order for providers to see monetary rewards, the healthcare industry has largely struggled to leverage patient engagement technologies to achieve their goals.

Patient portals, health management apps, and mobile technologies that encourage communication and care coordination might be increasingly popular, but how do physicians view these tools – and how are their views affecting consumer adoption?

To answer those questions, Booz Allen Hamilton teamed up with Ipsos Public Affairs to field a survey examining physician attitudes towards the rise of patient engagement, the expectations that accountable care place upon them, and the way that healthcare professionals perceive the future of their rapidly changing industry.

The results centered largely on a single word: anxiety. Physicians are unsettled by reforms that are revolutionizing the way healthcare is delivered, and are questioning the viability of small or solo practices in a quickly consolidating industry. Patients are experiencing similar uncertainty as they navigate the intricacies of the Affordable Care Act, and they worry that they will not be able to access their physicians or the high level of quality care they have experienced in the past. Only one third of patients believe the healthcare system is “on the right track,” the survey found, and that number drops significantly to a quarter of primary care physicians and just a tenth of specialists.

“Physicians, especially the older ones and the specialists, have to move into a whole new world, and they are concerned that it’s making their life a lot more complicated than it used to be,” said Nicolas Boyon, Senior Vice President at Ipsos Public Affairs, who directed the study. “It is partly generational. The average age of practicing physicians in the US is actually slightly over 50, and specialists tend to be even older. A lot of physicians started practicing when the world was very different. They view their role, first and foremost, as caring for patients, and technology was not necessarily what they specialized in or learned a lot about in medical school.”

“It’s curious to see the level of anxiety out there,” added Grant McLaughlin, Vice President at Booz Allen, in an interview with HealthITAnalytics. “When you look at behavior change, anxiety is often lessened when there is a path. We’re in a time of uncertainty as Affordable Care Act is being rolled out and new care models are being tested. We may not necessarily have an endpoint clearly in view, and I think that causes anxiety.”

Patient engagement may be part of the antidote for this pervasive insecurity. Not only are engaged patients more likely to be healthier and incur fewer costs, but patients are more likely to rate their physicians’ EHR use as a positive development when they can use mobile tools and internet technologies to communicate effectively with their providers.

“Patients now have an expectation for technology to be used by primary healthcare professionals,” Boyon said. “They want their physicians to use mobile technologies to interact with them. We see that the most common usage of technology right now is appointment scheduling and access to medical records, but it’s far from universal. What we expect is that over the next few years, this is going to become standard. So there will probably be a push on the part of patients for physicians to deliver on that.”

“It is really going to be consumer driven,” agrees McLaughlin. “The expectation is, ‘Well, if I can get it in the rest of my life, why can’t I get it here too?’ I think consumers are really going to be pushing for this.”

And providers have a number of incentives to respond to the call. Not only is patient engagement a flagship feature of Stage 2 meaningful use, but the current emphasis on patient-centered care, coupled with the financial transformation of the healthcare industry to an outcomes-driven system, may be vital to ensure profitability, viability, and continued independence for private practices.

Yet physicians are generally skeptical about how effective patient engagement technologies, telehealth, risk sharing, and other major features of the federal health IT roadmaps can be for them. The majority agree that health management apps need to be very carefully reviewed before being used by consumers, and seventy percent believe patient engagement apps “have a long way to go” before they are truly useful, and before their data can be effectively integrated into the EHR.

“With EHRs and analytics, the technology has a long way to go before the value is really realized,” Boyon said. “So there is the sense that yes, we’re moving towards a world where technology plays a bigger role, but there is also a lot of concern that we’re not quite there yet.”

“Once you actually find an app that you can use, and you use it every day to help you do something, and you find the value in it, then it has become invaluable to you. You absolutely cannot live without it,” McLaughlin said. “That’s what we’re struggling with. We’re seeing lots of technological inventions, but how do we add value in the context between the consumer and the provider? If we can get to the crux of how to make the conversation between consumers and providers more valuable, and if technology can enable that, then I think we’ve struck gold.”

Many physicians do see the potential for mobile technologies and other health IT to become that valuable, but aren’t fully committed to bringing that cautious optimism into the consult room. Only twenty percent of patients report that they have used a mobile application or web portal to monitor or manage their health status within the past six months, and just four out of every ten of those users said that the technology was recommended to them by their provider. Providers are more likely to offer administrative apps for paying bills, making appointments, or viewing prescription information than technologies that allow patients to manage their chronic diseases or monitor their weight and blood pressure.

Boyon believes that winning over providers to the notion of technology-supported patient engagement will be critical for everyone’s success. “Getting the buy in from physicians is going to be essential, because consumers are going to push for more technology that it makes their life easier,” he said. “They want more control over their healthcare. A lot of it is probably a matter of increasing convenience, but there is also a cost control aspect to it. But at the same time, we see that patients really take their cues from their doctors. If physicians have mixed feelings towards technologies that encourage patient engagement, this is passed on to consumers.”

“Consumers would like their physicians to use more technology, but they still rely on their physician’s opinion,” he continued. “So until they feel that their physician is fully ready to recommend something, I think they may still have some concerns.”

That might not be a bad thing, for the moment, as the industry still struggles to cope with the overwhelming glut of healthcare apps that are available to the public through popular purchasing outlets. Few of these apps are reviewed by physician societies or other healthcare professionals, and fewer still can provide data that is of measurable clinical value to a patient’s care. Until the patient engagement app ecosystem evolves to allow smoother, more manageable connections to EHRs without drowning physicians in useless data, providers may look elsewhere for effective places to spend their hard-earned dollars as larger administrative concerns consume their attention.

“Physicians might have the general understanding that technology is playing a bigger role, but I don’t think that the need to become more technologically savvy is their number one concern,” Boyon said. “I think they are much more concerned by the consolidation of the sector, the networks that they are participating in, and whether or not they’re going to have to take part in risk sharing and all these other major reforms.”

“They are aware that they have to meet all the new standards and all the new regulations when it comes to electronic medical records and so forth, but I don’t think they look to technology as really the key to making all that happen,” he added. “It might not be the most urgent issue for them.”

Still, the survey results indicate a sense that patient engagement, supported by mobile technologies and financial reforms, is here to stay. If anxiety can only be sated by forging a clear path forward into the future, then healthcare organizations must take the time to make some hard decisions. Providers can choose to encourage patients to participate by promoting apps they might favor and offering engagement tools of their own, or they can ignore the consumer thirst for tools that can help them manage their own health, shoulder the vast expenses of chronic disease and the burden of an aging population, and take the financial hit on the chin.

Ultimately, however, those physicians that believe their primary function is to take care of patients may find that they will have no patients left without embracing the technological tools they currently fear as choosy consumers flock instead to providers that offer them convenience, care coordination, and round-the-clock connections that suit the internet-enabled lifestyle to which they have become accustomed.