Texas politicos love to brag about besting California on jobs and corporate relocations. But guess who’s the big loser on Obamacare.

In Texas, insurers lost a combined $377 million in the first year of HealthCare.gov, according to claims in a federal risk-sharing program. In California, insurers contributed over $180 million in profit to the same program.

It’s still early days for the Affordable Care Act, and about two-thirds of insurers lost money in 2014.

California is an outlier, generating half the total profits nationwide. But Texas is an outlier, too, just in the other direction. And the divergence is no accident, because the nation’s two biggest states took much different approaches.

While Texas leaders fought Obamacare and railed against it at every turn, the Golden State embraced the law and created its own exchange, Covered California.

It opted to become an “active purchaser,” negotiating with carriers, standardizing benefits and picking plans for the exchange. California also required policyholders to move into the new marketplace even though many resisted.

When HealthCare.gov had its disastrous kickoff two years ago, President Barack Obama said people could keep their existing plans rather than buy new ones on the exchange. That affected insurers, because it didn’t force everyone — healthy and sick — into the same pool.

Consumers facing expensive claims could sign up for plans with better benefits and bigger networks. If they were healthy, they could stay with their skinny plan and pay less. In 35 states, including Texas, many re-upped before the end of 2013 to take advantage.

California rejected Obama’s proposal and took some heat. But that “short-term political sacrifice” produced long-term market stability, researchers for Covered California wrote in the Health Affairs blog.

That decision helped create a more diverse mix of customers. And “California had the healthiest risk pool of all 50 states,” an actuary for Blue Shield of California told the Los Angeles Times this month.

Loss claims top profits

The California Blue contributed $107 million into the temporary risk corridors program. That program collects insurer profits above a certain threshold and pays out to carriers with excessive losses.

For 2014, loss claims topped profits by $2.5 billion, and Texas insurers accounted for 15 percent of them. Consumers may not shed any tears for money-losing insurance companies, but it’s one sign the market is shaky.

And you know what comes next. For 2016, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, the state’s largest insurer, dropped its individual PPO and offered only a more limited HMO — with premiums rising an average of 19 percent.

Scott & White increased exchange premiums by over 32 percent. Humana’s up 21 percent, and Cigna and UnitedHealth, over 16 percent.

Higher rates affect about 1 million Texans who buy coverage on HealthCare.gov and also increase federal subsidies that offset the costs.

In California, exchange premiums are increasing by a weighted average of 4 percent next year. California has also been a leader in reducing the uninsured, extending coverage to many more people than Texas.

Several key trends improved in California in 2015, researchers wrote, indicating the exchange “has enrolled enough people, and enough healthy people, to stabilize premiums.”

Understanding Texas

In Texas, many factors led to insurance losses. Start with pent-up demand after millions of residents went without insurance for years — or with plans so skimpy they didn’t dare go to the doctor.

Once they got affordable coverage in 2014, many flocked to providers for everything from routine physicals to costly knee replacements, dialysis and transplants.

Texas politicians didn’t help the situation. They put up hurdles for federal navigators who helped customers select plans, and they’ve never encouraged enrollment. Not surprisingly, fewer Texans get coverage on the exchange: just 31 percent of those eligible compared with 47 percent in California, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

If Texas matched the participation rate in California, over half a million more residents would buy insurance. That wouldn’t fix everything, but it would be a start.

“The problem has been getting healthy people in,” said Sabrina Corlette, project director for the Center on Health Insurance Reforms at Georgetown University.

In Texas, insurers are raising premiums, restricting prescriptions, narrowing provider networks and eliminating most out-of-network benefits. Will that lead to a sustainable market?

The parent company of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas is projected to be profitable again in 2016, according to Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services. Yet the ratings agency still has a negative outlook on the company.

Two risk-protection programs, including risk corridors, expire after 2016. That implies the industry will have reached a steady state with Obamacare, but the results tell another story.

“We believe it is increasingly likely that it will take more than three years for the market to stabilize,” S&P wrote.

Unlike California, Texas won’t be ahead of the curve.

On Twitter:

@MitchSchnurman