Though most contemporary Americans are likely unfamiliar with Lajos Kossuth, the founder of Hungarian democracy had close ties to the Americans of his day.

Kossuth was a famed freedom fighter of the mid-1800’s and led a Hungarian democratic revolution for independence that was crushed by Austrian and Russian forces. In 1851, exiled in defeat, Kossuth embarked on a seven-month tour of America to champion his democratic causes. He found a warm reception in the young democratic nation of the United States, where he gave more than 600 speeches while traveling throughout the country. Newspapers at the time took note of the 100-gun salute to honor his entrance into New York City harbor and he was described as the ‘Washington of Hungary.’ After the Marquis de Lafayette, Kossuth was the second foreign dignitary in history to address a joint meeting of the United States Congress. Kossuth also met with Abraham Lincoln, then an attorney in Springfield, Illinois, and his address to the Ohio Legislature in 1852 articulated visions of democracy similar to those echoed later by President Lincoln in his Gettysburg Address.

ADVERTISEMENT

More than 165 years later, America has since become home to the largest population of Hungarians outside of Hungary. Kossuth’s shared values with that of America continue to be found in individuals of Magyar heritage, who by now include Hungarian-American Nobel Prize laureates, artists, athletes, musicians and businesspeople. Countless Hungarian-Americans have contributed to a rich exchange of culture, ideas, education, technology and mutual respect that defines the relationship between peoples of both nations.

The history that Kossuth has come to represent remains a vivid example of the power of cultural exchange. In the years since his American tour, tributes to Kossuth have emerged around the country. His namesake inspired that of a county in Iowa, and towns in Mississippi, Ohio and Indiana. Tall and striking full-body bronze figures still stand in Cleveland and New York City. Another Kossuth monument is found in a rotunda on the House side of the U.S. Capitol, under an arch-shaped alcove. This six-foot-tall bust of Kossuth sits adjacent to British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and Czech President Vaclav Havel; whose monuments are also on display in the small chamber known as “Freedom Foyer.” The statue serves as the site of annual commemorations of Hungary’s 1848 War of Independence.

Later this month, not far from Kossuth’s bust in the U.S. Capitol, current and former lawmakers, diplomats, academics and honorary guests will meet to honor the life of Kossuth as part of a series of events celebrating the 60th anniversary of the Hungary’s 1956 anti-Soviet revolution and freedom fight. Through a grant from the Government of Hungary, the Magyar Foundation of North America is working with leading scholars at Pepperdine University’s School of Public Policy to further explore the relationship between modern Hungary and the U.S., including bi-lateral relations during the Reagan presidency, the immediate post-Soviet era, and on the contemporary issues our countries face today.

Kossuth will always hold a special place in the hearts of Hungarian-Americans for his work establishing international bonds. His example is a reminder of the far-reaching influence of cross-cultural collaboration, shared historical perspectives and democratic ideals.

Barnhart is executive director of the Magyar Foundation of North America, a nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting Magyar heritage, history, and pride through educational, social, and cultural programs.