The Soweto Gospel Choir of South Africa will perform a special holiday program for CU Presents on Dec. 11. ( Courtesy photo )

Learn more To order tickets or for more information, including dates for the Takács Quartet series on Sunday afternoons and Monday evenings, call 303-492-8008 or visit cupresents.org.

CU Presents, the performing arts event series affiliated with the University of Colorado's College of Music, is planning a typical diverse Artist Series for 2015-16 that includes a jazz program featuring the music of Michael Jackson.

Tickets go on sale Monday, March 30, for the series, which has been expanded to nine events (up from last year's eight) and brings world-class guest performers to Macky Auditorium. In addition to the Artist Series, the three-production CU Opera season was announced.

Joan McLean Braun, executive director of CU Presents, told the Camera that three widely divergent dance programs will be balanced by three world-class classical events and an unusually audience friendly jazz program with a fresh take on Jackson's popular songs.

The Artist Series' marquee dates include another pop collaboration for the University Symphony Orchestra with a high-profile guest and a fourth consecutive holiday program with a magnificent ensemble. All Artist Series events begin at 7:30 p.m.

The series opens Sunday, Sept. 27, with the first visit to Boulder since 1979 of the legendary Twyla Tharp Dance as part of the choreographer's 50th anniversary tour.

"The dance world owes a tremendous sense of legacy to Twyla Tharp in the evolution of dance style," Braun said. Although the performance will include new works, Braun said the program will be retrospective in nature.

On Friday, Oct. 9, Boulder will experience a unique performance that destroys jazz concert stereotypes. The San Francisco-based SF Jazz Collective plays a set of originals and arrangements celebrating Michael Jackson.

Twyla Tharp celebrates the 50th anniversary of her dance troupe by visiting Boulder for the first time since 1979. (Courtesy photo)

"I really like these projects that they do," Braun said. "In their current season, they did something similar for Stevie Wonder."

The executive director said the music is accessible for the audience but still are jazz arrangements.

"It takes some time before you recognize the song," she said, adding that "every member of the ensemble is a giant in the jazz world."

The Artist Series' first classical program is set for Friday, Nov. 6, and it will be the hugely anticipated Irish Chamber Orchestra. The group, whose 2011 appearance was one of the greatest CU Presents concerts in recent memory, returns by popular demand.

Braun said the group's performance of Beethoven had her on the edge of her seat. The orchestra's appearance has a special Boulder connection, as it will be conducted by founding Takács String Quartet member Gábor Tákacs-Nagy.

"The current quartet is thrilled about his return," Braun said. The orchestra is joined by cellist Istvan Vardai.

This season's special holiday program, on Friday, Dec. 11, will be given by South Africa's 24-voice Soweto Gospel Choir.

"The popularity of this event has been a surprise for me," Braun said, noting it has not taken audience away from the ever-popular Holiday Festival (which this year is Dec. 4-6). "For this concert, I'm always looking for something that provides a different experience from typical holiday fare and from the festival. This group fills the heart with respect and awe."

On Thursday, Jan. 21, the Diavolo Dance Co. brings its amazingly physical choreography to Macky.

"It's got a really gymnastic element, and they use all sorts of apparatus," Braun said. "They like to call it 'architecture in motion.' It's really a 'don't try this at home' sort of thing, like Cirque de Soleil."

The third and final dance program is Sunday, Feb. 14 with Los Angeles-based Bodytraffic.

"Their West Coast sensibility brings completely new elements," Braun said. "It's like a cultural shift from the east to the west."

Noting that Bodytraffic has a female choreographer, Braun said that if the Twyla Tharp program takes a look back, this performance looks into the future.

The Indigo Girls will be backed by the University Symphony Orchestra on March 31. (Courtesy photo)

On Tuesday, March 1, in the second classical program, the Metropolitan Opera brings its "Rising Stars" program to Macky, presenting opera's future big names at the beginning of their careers.

"There is a tie-in with our opera program, and they'll be doing some residency work," Braun said. The singers will perform arias and ensembles with piano accompaniment.

On Thursday, March 31, the University Symphony Orchestra will again be joined by a major pop act. Following up on Thursday's sold-out 2014-15 Artist Series finale with Natalie Merchant, the student musicians will back up the Indigo Girls. The duo of Amy Ray and Emily Saliers has been performing for a quarter-century with such hits as "Closer to Fine" and "Land of Canaan."

"It really is a great opportunity for our students to do these pops programs with very little rehearsal time," Braun said. "It's a different kind of playing from their usual classical programs and something they will definitely encounter later in their careers if they join professional orchestras."

The Artist Series closes Friday, April 15, with composer-pianist Pablo Ziegler and classical violinist Lara St. John, who will re-create the famous 1987 Central Park concert by tango master Astor Piazzolla. St. John, who played in Boulder with the Colorado Music Festival in 2013, is an engaging, approachable artist with broad musical tastes.

"It's bound to be something special when an artist like Lara joins a great tango master like Ziegler," Braun said.

CU's Eklund Opera Program season opens Oct. 23-25 with Rossini's "La Cenerentola." Francis Poulenc's "Dialogues of the Carmelites" is scheduled for March 11-13. Unlike previous performances of this opera, it will be sung in French instead of English. The chamber opera in the Imig Music Theater on April 22-24 will be Aaron Copland's "The Tender Land."

The six-concert Takács Quartet series at Grusin Music Hall includes a guest appearance by the Attacca Quartet.

"The Takács loves to introduce young, up-and-coming musicians to their audience," Braun said of the guest quartet appearance, which is now a regular feature of the Takács season.