Paul Rudd poses for photographers upon arrival at the premiere of the film Ant Man in London, Wednesday, July 8, 2015. (Photo by Vianney Le Caer/Invision/AP) Associated Press

It’s hard to say how private equity professionals would welcome the superpowers possessed by the fictional Scott Lang, also known as Ant Man. One of Marvel’s lesser known superheroes, Ant Man is finally getting his spot in the sun, thanks to the eponymous Walt Disney film that debuted at the box office earlier this month.

However, at least a few private equity professionals have at one time waxed nostalgic over other superpowers that they would like to possess.

In the latest installment of our Private Equity Pop Quiz series, we culled responses from The Private Equity Analyst’s popular Private Word column to find out what superpowers private equity professionals would want most.

See if you can match the private equity professional to his desired superpower. You will find the answers in Monday’s Morning Leverage blog post.

If you could have one superpower what would you choose and why?

1) The ability to fly – it has to be the most fun, plus no more airport security.

2) I would like to be able to slow down time to enable me to more fully appreciate all the beautiful people and experiences that I am privileged to have in my life.

3) I would want the ability to spend a single day with various people and at various places in the past – Agincourt before the battle, my hometown on a regular day in say 1820 – to see what it was really like. And for people from American history – say Washington and Joseph Plum Martin, who was a regular soldier in the Revolution and wrote about his experiences – to spend a day with me and see how the country came along.

4) I wish I didn’t sleep! There are so many things I still want to learn and needing seven hours of sleep a night is an impediment to getting to all of them.

5) Wolverine. As I get older, the years of wear and tear are accumulating. If I could heal anything in only a few seconds, it would be incredible. Of course, I would not want the metal claws – those are way too dangerous.

Private equity professionals:



A) John Toomey Jr., managing director, HarbourVest Partners (March 2014)

B) John LeClaire, co-chair of the private equity practice at Goodwin Procter (April 2011)

C) Deven Parekh, managing director, Insight Venture Partners (April 2014)

D) Chris Hoehn-Saric, co-founder and senior managing director, Sterling Partners (May 2013)

E) Marc der Kinderen, co-founder and managing partner, 747 Capital (August 2011)