After a brisk start to the game, Memorial turned on the jets in a 33-6 victory over Kearny at Joseph N. Coviello Field yesterday.

The Tigers (3-4) stalled out on their first offensive drive and turned the ball over twice in the first half, but none of it slowed down the West New York school on its way to an impressive offensive performance against Kearny (0-7).

Senior quarterback Bobby Bailey and classmate Jorge Ortiz were the leaders of the attack, accounting for all of the Tigers’ scores and most of their yardage.

Bailey made plays throughout the night with his arm and his legs, recording a total of 307 yards and five scores, while Ortiz hauled in seven catches for 185 yards and three touchdowns.

The senior wide receiver was unstoppable in the second half, running routes from the perimeter and from the slot, where Ortiz beat the Kardinals with slants, go routes and perfectly executed double moves.

The majority of that production came after the Tigers had issues holding onto the ball in the second quarter though. Limited by two fumbles in its own territory, Memorial had the ball for a mere four minutes in the second quarter, but in that short time the Tigers managed to score 14 points.

On the first score, Ortiz beat his man on an out-and-up down the right sideline for a 51-yard touchdown pass from Bailey, who ran in the other score from three yards out. That touchdown was set up by defensive back Steven Cosme, who had two interceptions in the game.

Meanwhile, Kearny only mustered six points on a short touchdown run by quarterback Tim Soto during the second quarter – a score that capped a unique sequence.

After a bad snap on the Kardinals’ second field goal attempt of the night, Soto, who doubles as the holder, snatched up the ball and took off on an eight-yard down to the two-yard line. Two plays later, he tied the game at 6-6.

Coming out of halftime with a 14-7 lead, Memorial opened the second half with yet another score, converting twice on third downs along the way. The second of those conversions went for a 30-yard touchdown pass from Bailey to Ortiz.

Kearny’s Richard Diaz, who ran for over 100 yards, had the Kardinals moving on the following possession, breaking runs of 22 and 23 yards. But an interception by Memorial’s Christian Ramirez stopped that drive cold.

The Tigers would put the Kardinals to bed shortly after with their final touchdown – a nine-yard run by Bailey.

Kearny (0-6) 0 6 0 0 — 6

Memorial (2-4) 6 14 13 0 — 33

(M): Jorge Ortiz 6 pass from Bobby Bailey (kick failed).

(K): Tim Soto 1 run (kick failed).

(M): Jorge Ortiz 51 pass from Bobby Bailey (Jorge Ortiz kick).

(M): Bobby Bailey 3 run (Jorge Ortiz kick).

(M): Jorge Ortiz 30 pass from Bobby Bailey (pass failed).

(M): Bobby Bailey 9 run (Jorge Ortiz kick).