Paying more for health care is a cost-saving idea popular with a lot of insurance providers.

If consumers are spending someone else’s money, they have little reason to seek more affordable care. But if they are paying for it, they might opt for an urgent care clinic instead of a hospital emergency room.

In practice, consumers aren’t getting the right signals. Some of them are avoiding doctors, skipping medications and setting themselves up for much bigger and more expensive health issues in the future.

Dr. Eric Bricker, chief medical officer of Compass Professional Health Services in Dallas, says these plans are fumbling because they don’t have the incentives right.

“Misaligned incentives, historically, have been the Achilles’ heel of health care,” Bricker said.

Skipping medications is particularly worrisome. A new paper by a team of physicians and economists for the National Bureau of Economic Research found that employees with high-deductible plans covering pharmaceuticals responded by taking less of the daily medicines needed to control high cholesterol, high blood pressure and diabetes.

These are chronic conditions that, left untreated, can lead to heart attacks, strokes, blindness and other maladies. The drugs available to treat them, even in cheaper generic forms, are generally effective in keeping the diseases under control.

Consumer behavior

Peter Huckfeldt of the University of Minnesota’s School of Public Health was the lead author of the new paper. He looked at two big firms of more than 1,000 employees each to see how new high-deductible plans affected consumer behavior.

People responded by moving to cheaper generic drugs and stockpiling drug purchases once their deductibles had been met. But the largest change in behavior was taking less medicine.

Ninety percent of those taking cholesterol drugs curbed use to save money; 93 percent of the high-blood-pressure consumers did as well. With diabetes, it was 58 percent.

“High costs for drugs that control chronic diseases may be a disincentive to use them, and may not be a good thing,” Huckfeldt said.

In high-deductible health plans, the first dollars spent on health care are the consumer’s dollars. Amounts vary, but a high-deductible policy covering an individual generally starts at $1,300. A high-deductible family policy usually starts at $2,600.

These starting points are set under laws that allow consumers to set money aside in a tax-free savings account to pay for medical care. Many employers who offer high-deductible insurance policies put some of their own money into these accounts.

The employees studied by Huckfeldt’s group had access to these savings accounts and used them. But it wasn’t enough to keep them from shortchanging their own health.

What went wrong?

John Goodman, a Dallas health economist, is generally credited with inventing the health savings account that is paired with high-deductible health plans. He’s dismayed with how high-deductible plans are causing people to skip care.

“What’s happening is terrible,” he wrote in an email. “For young healthy people with limited incomes, having $5,000 or $6,000 deductible plans is little better than having no insurance at all. … And in some cases, insurers are forcing people with expensive-to-treat problems to pay thousands of dollars for their drugs.”

Goodman blames the Affordable Care Act’s requirements that every health insurance policy cover a minimum set of health issues, ranging from hospitalization to pregnancy care to mental health. That drives up insurance costs. He also blames insurers for using high drug deductibles to weed out people with chronic conditions while attracting healthier people.

Goodman notes that individual insurance plans offered through public exchanges under the Affordable Care Act don’t offer those tax-free health savings accounts that are more common in employer-sponsored insurance.

Bricker, Huckfeldt and Goodman all agree that high-deductible insurance policies have to get the incentives right to be successful.

Getting consumers to take their medications — an issue known as medication adherence — is difficult even without raising their cost.

“There has to be a lower cost for adherence,” Bricker said. “You need to offer lower premiums, or gift cards and the like, for people to take their medicine.”

Follow Jim Landers on Twitter at @landersjim.