Towns, hospitals taking wait-and-see stance on implications of ruling in state tax court

Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick. (Photo: ~File photo) Story Highlights Judge rules that hospitals have "evolved into labyrinthine corporate structures"

Kraska: Ruling could "provide needed relief to the taxpaying citizens of Somerville"

"The broader impact to other nonprofit hospitals is unknown"

A recent state Tax Court decision saying that hospitals may not qualify for property tax exemptions has Central Jersey municipalities speculating whether they can expect thousands of new tax dollars to roll into their bank accounts.

The 88-page decision by Judge Vito Bianco denied Atlantic Health System's challenge to Morristown's decision to deny a municipal property tax exemption to Morristown Medical Center.

The property tax exemption for New Jersey hospitals dates to 1851 when the facilities were considered nonprofit, charitable institutions.

However, Bianco noted that hospitals have "changed significantly" since that time and are now "sophisticated centers of medical care" that have "evolved into labyrinthine corporate structures, intertwined with both nonprofit and for-profit subsidiaries and unaffiliated corporate entities."

Bianco concluded that "clearly the operation and function of modern nonprofit hospitals do not meet the current criteria for a property tax exemption."

That was enough for Somerville Borough Councilman Jason Kraska to recommend that the borough "immediately" obtain a legal opinion whether the borough can start assessing Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Somerset.

"I believe that Judge Bianco's ruling will provide needed relief to the taxpaying citizens of Somerville," Kraska said at Monday's council meeting.

The 13.59-acre site on Rehill Avenue is assessed at $129 million.

The borough does collect $450,166 in property taxes from Health Care REIT, the owner of the Steeplechase Cancer Care Center next to the hospital.

The tax court ruling could potentially have a major impact on other Central Jersey municipalities.

In New Brunswick, the 8.1-acre site of Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital is assessed at $103 million. While the hospital does not pay taxes on its main facility, property taxes are paid on a cell tower and the Walgreen's on the campus.

"Robert Wood Johnson (RWJ) Health System's commitment to extending its mission beyond hospital walls is underscored by the fact that system hospitals and partner institutions provided more than $1 billion in added benefits in 2013 to our communities," Peter Haigney, director of public relations for Robert Wood Johnson Health Systems, said in a statement. "All RWJ Health System hospitals are not-for-profit hospitals that do not have shareholders. Any revenue generated through our programs and services is used to pay current expenses or is invested back into our hospital to further serve our community and enhance the services we provide."

Haigney emphasized that the state and federal governments "recognize our charitable mission and have granted our hospitals tax-exempt status."

Haigney also noted that many of the system's partners, like RWJ New Brunswick, currently pay taxes on properties that do not meet the state criteria for tax-exempt status.

City spokeswoman Jennifer Bradshaw said Tuesday afternoon that New Brunswick's financial administrators were not available for comment.

Hunterdon Medical Center. (Photo: ~File photo)

In Raritan Township, home to Hunterdon Medical Center, Township Administrator Jerry Giaimis said that township officials are aware of the judge's decision but have not yet discussed it. Giaimis said township officials will review the decision in the future.

Hunterdon Medical Center does not pay taxes on its main facility assessed at $54.9 million, but does pay more than $100,000 in taxes on other properties that it owns.

Hunterdon Medical Office Associates, the owner of the office building next to the hospital that houses doctors' offices, pays $274,565 in taxes.

Bianco's decision, which ultimately calls on the state legislature to review the law and draft new standards for property tax exemptions, could have implications throughout the state.

David Wolfe, a property tax attorney in Livingston who teaches a course on property tax exemptions for the New Jersey Institute of Continuing Legal Education, said Bianco's decision on its own may not change the landscape for nonprofit hospitals in New Jersey, but likely will when it "inevitably" reaches the state Appeals Court and Supreme Court.

"It could eviscerate the property-tax exemption for hospitals," Wolfe said.

Municipalities and hospitals are adopting a wait-and-see attitude.

JFK Medical Center in Edison. (Photo: ~File)

"While this is just one local case, the broader impact to other nonprofit hospitals is unknown," Steven Weiss, corporate director of public relations and marketing for JFK Medical in Edison, said in a statement. "We are concerned about any additional pressures that potentially can affect our ability to provide cost-effective and accessible health services. Until this situation plays out legally and legislatively, JFK will continue with our mission, providing healthcare services to all who need them."

JFK's 37-acre main campus on James Street in Edison is assessed at $39.18 million, while its Muhlenburg site in Plainfield is assessed at more than $36 million.

Edison and Plainfield officials were not available Tuesday for comment.

Raritan Bay Medical Center's Perth Amboy campus on New Brunswick Avenue is assessed at $6.7 million. In Old Bridge, Raritan Bay pays more than $300,000 in taxes for three properties on Hospital Plaza, while it pays no taxes on two Ferry Road tracts assessed at $8.6 million.

Raritan Bay Medical Center in Old Bridge. (Photo: ~File photo)

Atlantic Health, the owner of Morristown Medical Center, has yet to announce whether it will appeal Bianco's decision.

"(The) decision by Judge Bianco regarding property taxes is disappointing and has serious consequences for both Morristown Medical Center as well as other health-care systems in the state," Atlantic Health representatives wrote in an email response. "After reviewing the decision in greater depth, we will evaluate our options and make a decision that is in the best long-term interest of the hospital, the patients we serve and the greater community. This decision is limited to the issue of property tax, and does not call into question the charitable status of the hospital. We remain a not-for-profit organization."

Contributing: Staff Writer William Westhoven.

Staff Writer Mike Deak: 908-243-6607; mdeak@mycentraljersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1McBJxd