Topics: Chuck Schumer, Congress, Democratic Party, Editor's Picks, Elizabeth Warren, Hillary Clinton, Ted Cruz, Tom Cotton, Politics News

Say what you will of Congress but it’s been busy lately. In the Senate, Bob Menendez is busy being indicted. Harry Reid is busy retiring. Chuck Schumer is busy being promoted, and also beheading his old pal Dick Durbin. Some Republicans are busy running for president; all are busy not confirming Loretta Lynch, not passing a sex trafficking bill, and pretending to pass a budget (but not really doing that, either).

The House is always busy investigating Benghazi, repealing Obamacare and not reforming immigration. Not writing a real budget frees up members to write letters urging senators not to vote on executive nominations. If there’s a lull in the action they can invite a foreign leader in to help the president manage our foreign policy. The point is to stay busy, an idle mind being the devil’s workshop.

How does a do-nothing Congress manage to do so many things people hate? The Washington crowd blames the system and they’re partly right. When politics is all fundraising and performance art, Congress fills up with people who don’t want it to work. Because Ted Cruz and Tom Cotton don’t want to pass any bills, Mitch McConnell has nothing to hold over them. McConnell vowed to make the Senate work again, but his grip on the GOP caucus seems no tighter than John Boehner’s.

A far worse problem for Republicans is their agenda. You’d think a party that just pretends to do stuff would pretend to do stuff people like. Not so. The Bibi stunt and the Iran letter were meant to blow up a nuclear weapons deal two-thirds of Americans already favor. As Indiana and Arkansas Republicans made fools of themselves in the name of ‘religious freedom,’ CBS News asked voters about same-sex marriage. Sixty-two percent of the unaffiliated are for it; as are 70 percent of Democrats and 43 percent of Republicans. Last month McConnell urged governors to block EPA rules on carbon emissions that voters also back by two-to-one margins. See a pattern?

The same is true of nearly the whole Republican agenda. No one wanted Homeland Security shut down and hardly anyone wants the GOP immigration policy. In a recent Pew poll, over 60 percent of respondents backed every part of Obama’s immigration plan, even after knowing he was for it. There’s a lot people don’t like about Obamacare, but only 30 percent want the outright repeal Republicans scream for every day. Almost as many—23 percent in a recent poll—want to expand it. The Republicans are in even deeper trouble with their budget, or will be if anyone finds out what’s in it. In most polls 60 percent or more say big corporations and the rich pay too little in taxes. Absolutely no one wants the deep cuts Republicans secretly seek in Medicare and Social Security. Over 70 percent of Americans supported Obama’s safe gun proposals.

Republicans are afraid to show their hand and thus unable to govern. Ahead are fights over the debt ceiling, budget, Pacific Trade Partnership and maybe Obama’s all-too-quiet request for authority to send troops against ISIS. Not even the wily McConnell knows what to do, so he waits on courts and writes letters asking others to lead.

Things don’t look a lot better for Republicans outside Congress. Once they could count on their governors to be safe and bland, but the far right has its mitts into state houses now, so Indiana may not be their last state-sponsored fiasco. Then there’s the presidential race. In Jeb Bush and John Kasich they have two real contenders. That may be one more than Democrats produce. But the din arising from the rest of their insane clown posse—Cruz, Trump, Ben Carson et al–may drown them out.

If anyone told me in 2010 that in 2015 the Tea Party would have Congress in a chokehold, I wouldn’t have believed it. At the least I’d have thought Democrats would be on the cusp of throwing them out. They aren’t. Even assuming Hillary Clinton emerges from the primaries victorious, Democrats will likely find themselves fighting in 2016 only for a share of a divided government.

How could it be? How could Republicans make such a sad spectacle of Congress, lose every issue in every poll by such huge margins, yet run so close in the race for president — and hold the upper hand in the battle to control Congress? Some blame the system’s corruption by big money. Others blame voters for being lazy, gullible, ignorant or reactionary. The money is awful and we’re all flawed but we can only hope these analyses are false, as they lead nowhere. If you want to know why Democrats are in a dead heat with a gaggle of extremists, look at what they’ve been up to lately.

It used to be Republicans rose quietly and by consensus, or at least seemed to, while Democrats squabbled over every party perch. Now Republican presidential races are brawls and fights for their House leadership posts are truly vicious. That Democrats can’t even decide whether to have a contest for their 2016 presidential nomination testifies both to Hillary Clinton’s strength and the party’s weakness.

When Harry Reid announced that he’d retire from the Senate in 2016, the race to succeed him lasted at most a few hours and was held entirely in the mind of Sen. Dick Durbin. In the wee hours of the next morning, he conceded to Schumer. For the second time in four months, Democrats picked a Senate leader without a fight — or even a discussion. In December, after suffering an historic loss, Democrats in both houses reelected all their leaders by voice vote and without opposition. Whatever they may disagree on, Democrats in Congress stand united in the conviction that their leaders are all doing a terrific job.

Schumer’s elevation was a big hit around town, as can be seen in a piece by the Washington Post’s Dana Milbank with the actual title of ‘Why Harry Reid’s likely successor Chuck Schumer is exactly who Democrats need.’ Milbank calls Schumer’s rise “a welcome development for a Democratic Party sorely in need of a competent strategist…” Milbank scolds the White House for “felony message bungling” and lauds Schumer for setting up a “campaign-style war room’’ after the Democrats 2010 defeat, to coordinate message and “find themes that would unify the caucus.”