Denver Mayor Michael Hancock will be looking beyond the next year when he takes the stage Monday in the Denver Art Museum’s Ponti Hall.

His annual State of the City address, while extolling what he sees as his administration’s third-year accomplishments, will lay out his agenda for the next year. And he’ll outline a vision for what he hopes will be a second term, including ensuring that Denver’s prosperity doesn’t leave some residents behind.

“This is not a speech with a lot of big announcements,” Hancock said last week during a meeting with journalists at The Denver Post. “It really is a speech about reflecting what we’ve accomplished and looking forward to the next four years of things we’ve got to focus on.”

But so far, with the May 5 municipal election less than 10 months away, Hancock’s likely re-election bid is missing just one thing: an opponent.

Candidacies are piling up

for City Council and other offices, but nobody else has filed initial paperwork to run for mayor.

Political observers and insiders say most potentially serious challengers, including his competitors from the 2011 election, have bowed out.

“Someone will run. I believe that,” Hancock said.

In the meantime, his campaign has geared up in a bare-bones way, with an emphasis on fundraising.

Hancock’s campaign raised nearly $374,000 last year, his most active since taking office in 2011, and started this year with $258,180 in the bank.

More fundraisers are planned, including a 45th birthday bash on July 30

.

In Monday’s speech, Hancock said to expect a renewal of focus on several dominant issues: affordable housing, investments in neighborhoods, help for the homeless, reform of the police and sheriff’s departments, and the restoration of services during the economic recovery.

He also will make a pitch for an expected ballot measure in November to renew Denver’s tax-supported preschool-assistance program, including an increase in the 0.12 percent tax by 0.03 percentage points to pay for an expansion.

One planned announcement, Hancock said, is aimed at building on recent efforts in west Denver, which have included directing federal money to a new park and an early-childhood education center. In coming months, the city will help support nonprofit developer Revision International’s plans for a community-owned “food hub,” including a neighborhood grocery store, along Morrison Road in the Westwood neighborhood.

Plans call for a commercial kitchen and other businesses that would provide fresh food to residents in the neighborhood, considered a food desert.

Derek Woodbury, the spokesman for the city’s Office of Economic Development, said it will seek council approval to direct federal community development grant money, likely between $500,000 and $2 million, to the project.

Jon Murray: 303-954-1405, jmurray@denverpost.com or twitter.com/JonMurray

If you go

Denver Mayor Michael Hancock’s State of the City address is set to begin at 11 a.m. in the Denver Art Museum’s Ponti Hall, 100 W. 14th Ave. It is open to the public.