A handful of Valley cities — including Peoria, Goodyear and Buckeye — will spend millions of dollars this fall counting their populations. They’re betting the investment will reap benefits well beyond the expense.

While the count is still a few months away, municipal officials are busy recruiting the personnel for the job. Anyone can apply. Arizona municipalities were required to apply for inclusion in the U.S. Census Bureau’s 2015 Mid-Decade Special Census, and for cities opting to take part, there’s a potential pot at the end of the data rainbow in the form of more state shared revenues — monies raised through Arizona’s income tax, transaction privilege tax, or sales tax, and highway user revenue funds, commonly known as the gas tax.

Other Arizona cities that have been accepted include Chandler, Gilbert, Queen Creek and Prescott Valley, according to Michael Hall, chief of the Special Census Program.

“Considering the participation cost, we did see a gain (in revenues) over a five-year period,” said Chandler Planning Administrator Jeff Kurtz. “We know we’ve added population units with an expectation of increased proportion, so it was important for us to participate.”

‘One big pie’

Since these monies are disbursed based on population, cities whose growth has risen substantially since the 2010 census stand to gain significant dollars over the next five years.

Perhaps just as important, increases for some towns mean less aid for others. Since the state’s shared revenues amount to a finite figure, a rise in population for one city means a proportionate drop for all other cities.

“There’s one big pie; somebody’s going to be getting more, and somebody’s going to get less,” said Peoria Mayor Cathy Carlat.

The federal government began conducting mid-decade counts in 1915. Arizona allows its municipalities and counties to take part. Maricopa County conducted a regional mid-decade count in 1985, 1995 and 2005, according to Maricopa Association of Governments spokeswoman Kelly Taft. This year, individual municipalities will handle the task, according to Taft.

The cities will pay the Census Bureau, which in turn will reimburse the counters, or enumerators. Municipalities also will pay for training and the bureau’s data processing.

Operational costs vary depending upon a city’s size. For example, Chandler expects to pay just over $4 million, according to David De la Torre, the city’s principal planner. Peoria’s bill will be $2.9 million, according to Deputy City Manager Susan Daluddung.

The offset

Local officials believe those expenses will more than be offset by the additional revenue.

Daluddung said Peoria expects to take in an additional $1.5 million a year over the next five years, based on current sales-tax and income-tax distributions — the two larger portions of state shared revenues.

“State shared revenue distributions make up approximately 31 percent of the city’s general fund revenues; that’s sizable,” Daluddung told the City Council at its March 17 meeting.

“That’s money that could be used for any general government purpose — police, fire, parks, planning, building services and engineering.”

Chandler officials estimate their potential annual take to be between $3.9 million and $7.5 million over the five-year period until the next regularly scheduled census in 2020. Meanwhile, sitting out the mid-decade tabulation could cost the city anywhere from $2.8 to $6.2 million over five years, De La Torre stated in a letter to City Council prior to approval of the program.

Budget benefits

Gilbert management-support analyst Justine Bruno said town officials began as early as early 2014 considering the program. She said staff peg additional revenues at a total of nearly $18 million for the entire five years through the end of fiscal 2020, compared with a one-time expense of nearly $4 million for conducting the count.

What would extra, unplanned money mean to these cities?

Bruno said Gilbert likely would bolster services.

“More planning and building, infrastructure repair and replacing infrastructure. We have a lot of ongoing capital projects,” she said.

Not every city or town experiencing growth has opted in.

Mesa, the state’s third-largest city, has grown since the recession, but city officials believe that expansion doesn’t justify the expense or trouble of carrying out a special census, said Director of Government Relations Scott Butler.

Unlike the 10-year count, the federal government does not hire and oversee the enumerators who conduct the mid-decade tabulation. That falls to the cities and counties. Butler said Mesa’s decision to pass this year is based in part on its experience during the 2005 mid-decade regional count overseen by MAG.

“It’s a very in-depth process. It turned into a lot of work. We ran into some methodology issues – understanding why one sample wasn’t duplicated (in wider counting.) Sure, there have been a lot of improvements, technology, etcetera. It was just not something we were interested in pursuing again. We just didn’t believe the cost benefit was there for the city,” he said.

‘A little work’

Participating cities with current populations above 5,000 are responsible for recruiting, hiring and overseeing the census takers, according to the bureau, which would do the job for smaller cities because of their limited resources. Unlike the 10-year count, this mid-decade effort will be carried out almost entirely through in-person interviews by enumerators. Individuals will be tasked with going door-to-door, conducting the survey, and recording the data, which will then be sent to the bureau, where it will be compiled.

Clerical and supervisory staff will be hired as well.

“It’s a great opportunity for residents who are passionate about their community, or just want to see their community get their fair share of tax dollars,” said Gilbert’s Bruno, whose municipality is preparing to begin recruitment of between 400-600 workers.

Bruno said the city will use a variety of platforms to promote the hiring, including its website.

Enumerators will be paid during the 2015 Special Census at a rate of $16.25 an hour, according to Michael Hall, chief of the Special Census Program. Supervisors will earn $17.75 an hour, while clerical personnel will earn $12.25 an hour. Those traveling into the community will need a vehicle but will be reimbursed for mileage.

The task will require a 45-day commitment from Oct. 1 through mid-November and will include a roughly two-week training period in September. Training will take place in Arizona.

Danny Oliver performed the work during both the 2000 and 2010 census and said an enumerator can break up his or her day in order to catch people at home.

“It’s going to take a little work. If you can place people in an area they’re familiar with, do it quicker and more comfortable,” said Oliver, a Sun City resident.

Counting is scheduled to begin Oct. 1 with final figures released in March 2016, meaning updated shared-revenue figures will be in effect by July 1, 2016, the start of the 2016-17 fiscal year, according to Hall.

• Contact reporter Jeff Grant at 623-876-2514 or jgrant@yourwestvalley.com.