By Randy Tucker

Staff Writer

Bill Duncan, a partner in the accounting firm Thorn Lewis & Duncan, refers to the Affordable Care Act as the “Accountants Crying Act” because of the additional tax forms required for clients who received government subsidies for health insurance under the law.

“It’s just an added complication at the busiest time of the year for us because it’s just one more thing you have to ask your clients that accountants never had to ask before,” Duncan said.

Duncan and other tax preparers who helped people eligible for Obamacare file their 2014 tax returns will breathe a sigh of relief today as the tax deadline looms.

In Ohio, more than 234,500 people — including more than 30,000 in the Miami Valley residents — either re-enrolled or signed up for health coverage for the first time this year under the health reform law.

More than 80 percent of Ohio enrollees qualified for income-based tax credit subsidies to help cover the cost of premiums and deductibles. And those who received subsidies were required to fill out new forms, answer a slew of additional questions and do some complicated math.

Duncan said the extra paper work hasn’t been as burdensome for his firm as some others because most of his clients have insurance through their employers. But the Obamacare subsidies have had a dramatic impact on some of his clients’ tax returns, he said.

“We had one case in our office where a woman, who was not working at the time she received a subsidy, later found out that she had a bunch of investment income that put her over the income limit for a subsidy,” Duncan said. “She had to give back close to $5,000 in subsidies.”

The subsidies — available to most adults earning up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level who were not eligible for Medicaid or employee-sponsored insurance — are based on taxpayers’ estimated income during 2014.

But because most filers earned more or less than they originally estimated, some filers will have to pay part of their subsidy back while others will receive an additional refund.

A recent study from the Kaiser Family Foundation found that half of all filers will have to pay some money back — about $794 on average.

In addition, taxpayers who went without coverage last year will be subject to a tax penalty of $95 or 1 percent of their income, whichever is greater.

And most taxpayers subject to the penalty appear to be paying more than the $95 flat fee, based on a recent analysis of tax returns by H&R Block, which found the average tax penalty for not having insurance was $172.

But it’s not too late to sign up for coverage and avoid the tax penalty for some.

Open enrollment for Obamacare ended in February, but the government is allowing a special enrollment period for people who were uninformed or unaware of the tax penalty or who received incorrect tax information after signing up for coverage under the law.

About 800,000 Americans who received Obamacare subsidies received incorrect tax information, according to the Obama administration.

Joel Veldt, a tax preparer at Ladd & Carter Tax Service in Dayton, said many of his clients were completely unaware of the law’s so-called individual mandate, which requires most Americans to obtain health coverage or pay a fine.

And while some of his clients simply decided to pay the penalty, the decision was more complicated than they expected.

“The clients who knew about the tax penalty and decided to take it figured paying the penalty would be a whole lot cheaper than buying insurance,” Veldt said. “But they didn’t count on all this extra paperwork. It’s a lot of work. It has even got some of us thinking about quitting the business.”

The fee for people who don’t have coverage increases in 2015 to $325 per person or 2 percent of your household income – whichever is greater.