Senior paces No. 12 Rams to tourney title

Colorado State's Adrianna Culbert sets the ball during Saturday morning's match against UC Davis. Culbert finished with a triple-double of 10 kills, 20 assists and 12 digs in the three-game sweep. ( Michael Bettis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

FORT COLLINS — When tossing around the idea of instituting a 6-2 offense at Colorado State, one of the positives coach Tom Hilbert came up with was the system would display the wide range of assets in Adrianna Culbert's game, a skill set that made the senior from Delton, Mich., a two-time honorable mention All-American and the preseason pick for player of the year in the Mountain West.

The senior brought them all out in a Saturday morning match with UC Davis, posting a triple-double of 10 kills, 20 assists and 12 digs in a 25-21, 25-19, 25-17 sweep at Moby Arena to move the No. 12 Rams to 2-0 on the season.

Roughly seven hours later, she almost had another, finishing one kill shy in a 25-19, 25-16, 25-18 sweep of Northern Iowa to give CSU the Rams Volleyball Classic title.

Culbert waited until the end of the opener to put the final touches on her feat, dropping her 10th kill to set up match point at 24-17 in the final set. Alex Reid ended the affair with a kill, also her 10th in the match.

Culbert said she knew about triple-doubles because of LeBron James — and she stressed she was in no way comparing herself to him — but she etched her placed in CSU history by becoming just the 10th Ram to hit the marks. Her's was the 16th in program history, the first since Oct. 20, 2007 when Ashley Fornstrom did it in a win over Utah.

She didn't have any idea she'd done it when first asked after the match, but you can tell this is an offense that suits her.

Advertisement

"I mean, I don't really care if I set or hit, I like 'em both, pretty much equally," Culbert said. "Whichever one helps the team the best is what I like to do. I just like to win, really."

While the Rams's middles weren't as big a factor as the night before — UC Davis crashed in on Alexandra Poletto (six kills) and Acacia Andrews (four) wasn't set as much as Hilbert would like — there were better connections on the pins.

It showed in her's and Reid's totals, but Jasmine Hanna finished the match with nine as the Rams hit .279 for the match.

"We connected a little more in today's match than last night," Reid said. "Jasmine was killing balls like crazy. I think the more we can just connect with our setters, we'll do really well."

Midway through the second match Hilbert inserted freshman Julia Cubbedge into the lineup in place of Sanja Cizmic, and she made an immediate impact. Her first swing led to her first kill, and her first block came when she was left solo. In all, she finished with four kills (hitting .300) and led the team with four blocks, two of them solo.

"It was great. You have those freshman nerves," Cubbedge said. "It was great to get in there and get those nerves out."

At the time, UC Davis was also attacking Culbert when she was in the setter's spot in the back row, and Cubbedge's setting background helped the offense keep pace.

"In the transition game, Julia is a lot better. It helped," Hilbert said. "It helps in a whole lot of ways. Primarily I did it for blocking, but she also makes plays. Julia is a really good volleyball player. She's typical Southern Cali. They know how to play the game, and she has a great deal of composure for her age."

The Rams only trailed once in the match, that coming in the second set, the first point on the road back a kill from Cubbedge.

Defensively, the Rams finished with 53 digs as Jaime Colaizzi had 12, and the Rams were strong at the service line with Reid nailing two of the team's five aces against just two errors.

While UC Davis only hit .139 in the match, the one item that frustrated Hilbert was the 14 kills from Kaylin Squyres, a Rams' pregame target. In the nightcap, the Rams limited the UNI to just .039 hitting, with the back row play and the blocking up front combining to give the Panthers fits.

Andrews, who had seven kills in the second match, led the team with five blocks. Poletto had four and Cubbedge three as the Rams finished with nine as a team.

Offensively, Culbert and Reid both tallied nine kills,w ith six different Rams contributing at least five. It's the type of offense where Hilbert feels on any given night with the matchups in their favor, any one of his hitters can have a big night.

Against UNI, he felt it would be the opposite hitters (Culbert and Cubbedge), and to a point, he was right. But he also knows the Rams are far from a finished product despite three sweeps on their home floor in two days.

"We offensively on this team can get significantly better than where we are right now," he said. "I was worried about the middles when we started training camp, and now those guys are good. I'm worried about consistency and stuff on the outsides."

Reid, a senior transfer from Long Beach State, brings experience to the program, but she's also new to the way the Rams work. She progressed in each match, showing a little more comfort each time out.

"I think these matches were really important," Reid said. "I've progressively gotten better each match and just finding the chemistry with the team, connecting with the setters and the rest of the players. I think if I just keep working hard on finding that flow, then we'll get better and better."

Overall, Colorado State felt it made immediate adjustments from the match before.

"I think we worked a lot better as a team and just knowing everyone's tendencies and stuff," Culbert said. "We have a bunch of girls that we've practiced together, but we really haven't been in a game situation. So, to be able to work out those kinks and be able to know what people's strengths are in the match, I think we're getting a lot better."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard