The health care sector is hot. No stock market segment looks more adrenaline-pumped than medical-device makers.

The Medical-Systems/Equipment group is ranked No. 7 among IBD’s 197 industry groups. Medical-Biomed/Biotech and Medical-Hospitals are ranked higher — Nos. 2 and 3. But no group has climbed as fast for investors as the device makers, which are up from No. 104 four weeks ago.

Natus Medical (BABY), one of the strongest in the group, was owned by 312 mutual funds and ETFs as of Sept. 30. That was at least the third quarter in a row with increased sponsorship.

Natus is up 47% this year and is extended well past a 29.65 flat base buy point. It exceeded consensus expectations for revenue and earnings in its Q3 report last week.

Natus makes treatments for ailments in newborns. A warming economy and the Affordable Care Act have made hospitals more willing to spend for Natus products, says Ken Farsalas, co-manager of $8.1 million Oberweis Small Cap Opportunities Fund .

But the stock’s continued appeal depends on the success of cost cutting and streamlining by Natus’ new chief financial officer, Farsalas says.

Dexcom (DXCM) is up 22% this year and has carved out a cup-with-handle basing pattern. Recently, the FDA approved Dexcom Share, which provides continuous glucose monitoring data transmitted to smartphones.

Sweet Talk

The system, which transmits information from a patient’s implantable device, makes it much easier for diabetic patients to check sugar levels and respond with insulin. While Dexcom’s transmitter cradle is new, the system faces potential threats from competitors like Medtronic (MDT), Farsalas says.

Samuel Isaly, lead manager of $1.5 billion Eaton Vance Worldwide Health Sciences Fund , likes several names in the Medical- Products group, whose rank of No. 35 is up from 54 four weeks ago. Three are Tornier, Wright Medical and Nuvasive (NUVA).

Of the three, only Nuvasive is turning profits. But Islay says he still likes all for their fundamental prospects amid the recovering economy, which will make their products more affordable to patients. And ObamaCare expands coverage for procedures using products from those companies.

Their stocks are either basing, just breaking out or trending higher.

Tornier makes shoulder replacement products. Sales hit $311 million in ’13. On Tuesday, Tornier (TRNX) gapped up 12%, retaking a cup-with-handle buy point of 24.08 on news that the Dutch company agreed to merge with Wright. Three weeks ago Tornier fell 7% below the buy point, triggering a sell rule.

Wright (WMGI) makes reconstructive parts for ankles and feet. Sales in 2013 were up 13% from the previous year, but down 53% from 2010. Its stock was down 4% Wednesday.

Nuvasive makes products for treatment of spinal disorders. Analysts see profit down 9% this year.

Device makers stand to lose one of their attractions after this year. ObamaCare hits the group with a 2.3% tax. The levy began in 2013, so comparable results have been easier to match or beat in 2014, says S&P Capital IQ analyst Jeffrey Loo. Those easier comps will generally disappear next year.

Some lawmakers friendly to the group seek to end or trim the tax, Isaly says.