ENLARGE Valerie Benoit-Charbonneau performs in 'Queen of the Night.' Adrienne Grunwald for The Wall Street Journal

Handstands, back flips and other acrobatics come naturally to Valerie Benoit-Charbonneau, one of the lead actor-performers in "Queen of the Night," an immersive theater production showing at the Paramount Hotel's Diamond Horseshoe nightclub.

What took some getting used to was looking at the audience. Every night, she makes direct, engaging eye contact with people seated just an arm's length away.

"There is one table that is almost on stage," Ms. Benoit-Charbonneau said. "At first, it was intense, having people look at you that close."

This compact, bubbly 24-year-old exemplifies a new breed of performer, one whose multidisciplinary background makes such genre-defying stage shows, increasingly common in New York, possible. As Pamina, the virginal figure for whom a wild debutante ball has been given, she is a central part of the story line.

In addition to being flipped through the air by her partner Mason Ames, Ms. Benoit-Charbonneau improvises with audience members, locking eyes with receptive ones as she walks from one edge of the stage to the other. In one-on-one backstage exchanges, she plays therapist, asking an audience member soul-searching questions while she sits in a bathtub filled with coconut milk and lets him attempt to shave her legs.

"There are a lot of people," she said, "who come and say, 'Thank you for listening to me.'"

"Queen of the Night," a mother-daughter drama inspired by Mozart's "The Magic Flute," is the latest project by Randy Weiner, who also produced the popular and similarly immersive "Sleep No More." For the 30 or so "Queen" performers, what raises the stakes is the degree of direct exchange with the audience, which Director Christine Jones said can be even more demanding than traditional acting.

"You're pouring a lot of your spirit out," she said. "This kind of work is an opportunity to experiment with your own sense of self and boundary."

ENLARGE Valerie Benoit-Charbonneau rehearses with partner Mason Ames before a 'Queen of the Night' performance. TK

Staying in character and fleshing out her emotional life are relatively new for Ms. Benoit-Charbonneau. Raised in Quebec, she was captivated by the circus after seeing a show as a 12-year-old with her aunt. A year later, she auditioned for and was accepted at Montreal's National Circus School.

She completed high school and college there, studying dance, singing and anatomy as well as aerial work and clowning.

Since then, she has performed with Cirque du Soleil, the Montreal-based troupe Cirque Eloize and Les 7 Doigts de la Main, another Montreal company whose participants have gone on to such productions as the recent "Pippin" revival as well as "Queen of the Night."

Ms. Benoit-Charbonneau spent four years on tour with "Traces," a Les 7 Doigts show that blended circus, dance and theater. There, the action stayed on stage, with audience members sitting politely in their seats—nothing like "Queen of the Night," where the stage is nearly surrounded by tables at which about 220 guests dine and drink copiously throughout.

"Things can get very rowdy," said Ms. Jones.

Guests are encouraged to mill about and interact with people at other tables. The wait staff is also in character and can invite guests to backstage rooms for interactions with the cast.

Unlike most theaters, where "there is a line," said Ms. Benoit-Charbonneau, "there are people everywhere. They can touch you. You can touch them."

While performing in this mayhem requires concentration, cast members must also be able to think on their feet and respond to audience interaction. One night, as she was making her way to the stage for a climactic scene, Ms. Benoit-Charbonneau's arm was tugged by a woman saying: "Don't go!"

"It's OK," Ms. Benoit-Charbonneau said in a comforting voice, gently prying herself free. "I have to go."

The creators of "Queen of the Night" live for these exchanges. "You want to grab people by their hearts and guts and keep it connected," said Shana Carroll, a co-founder of Les 7 Doigts and one of the creators of "Queen of the Night."

In developing the show, which took place in Montreal and New York, she sought to spark "micro moments of creativity" that range from flirtatious glances to brief conversations. She conducted improvisation exercises with the cast to heighten their responsiveness and sense of play.

Once in New York, Ms. Jones brought to rehearsals a dominatrix, who gave the performers insight on creating "reciprocal energy," especially through casual physical contact like a hand on a shoulder.

While the show's subject matter is racy, the audience participation isn't: Inappropriate behavior is dealt with by the house, and guests who feel uncomfortable can step away at any time.

"We're all there for mutual enjoyment, but we do call the shots," said Ms. Jones.

Once Ms. Benoit-Charbonneau moved to Brooklyn's Williamsburg neighborhood, she gained a new appreciation for the impact of eye contact.

"Here in New York, everyone is doing their own thing, and you don't really take time to look someone in the eyes," she said. "In this show, people really connect."

Write to Pia Catton at pia.catton@wsj.com