The 13th Congressional District race is one of the most hotly contested and most crowded.Brendan Boyle, a Democratic state lawmaker from Northeast Philadelphia is running a strong campaign in the primary to replace longtime Congresswoman Allyson Schwartz. Schwartz is running for governor.At 37, Boyle defines himself as an unabashed Democrat."I fully support President Obama. Especially what he was up against coming in, I think he's going to be better remembered by history for the way he dealt with the 2008-2009 collapse when this country's economy was really on the brink,"Can Marjorie Margolies pull off the comeback of the year?It has been 20 years since she lost her congressional seat after casting the key vote for President Bill Clinton's 1993 budget. She is now Chelsea Clinton's mother-in-law. Sensing she and Boyle are running neck and neck she attacks him as anti-choice."He voted for a piece of legislation, it was called Act 122, which has successfully closed down six Planned Parenthood clinics in Pennsylvania," Margolies said.State Representative Daylin Leach proudly calls himself the liberal lion.He says Boyle is anti-choice and Margolies is less than a liberal purist. He led the fight in Harrisburg against Governor Tom Corbett and the GOP's now defunct voter ID laws."It was a way of wiping out hundreds of thousands of democratic votes. People fought and died in this country for the right to vote, to try to take it away from people for political gain, it made my head want to explode.Dr. Valerie Arkoosh is the fourth Democrat battling for the nomination.She is a physician and activist who focuses on women's issues. She says Washington needs a new cast of lawmakers on everything from education to tougher gun laws."I hold very progressive values, but I'm also very committed to making sure that we actually get some things done. I believe we can do that. I did it during the Affordable Care Act. I worked with a huge coalition of organizations," Arkoosh said.The 13th District of today is far from the suburban landscape it was for decades. It is now split between Northeast Philadelphia and Montgomery County.On the Republican side there are two contenders for the nomination.Businessman Dee Adcock is making his second run for congress.He says he is anti-big government, anti-big banks, and wants to see the Keystone Pipeline built to spur jobs and the economy. He says it is too late to repeal President Obama's Affordable Care Act."But once you've crack an egg and made an omelet, we need to figure out what we're going to do and how we're going to make it work," Adcock said.Beverly Plosa-Bowser is a newcomer to politics.She is a retired Air Force colonel, a combat veteran who received a Bronze Star for her service in Baghdad.She was in the first class of women appointed to the Air Force Academy. If elected, her number one priority is energizing a stagnant economy."If we can get small businesses moving again, hiring again, if we can reduce the taxes on small businesses, if we can reduce some of the regulations that they must abide by, then our nation will be better off," Plosa-Bowser said.Once a Republican bastion, the 13th District has changed a dramatically since the Reagan 1980s. Now 62% of the registered voters in the district are Democrats.