One thing that throws doctors off schedule is patients who come in with surprise complaints. (Photo: Getty Images/Ivary)

What is the relationship between high-deductible health plans and wait times in doctors' offices?

My guess is they are related. I'm not sure how to prove my theory, but it's a hypothesis that deserves study.

Several doctors responded to a blog about wait times, which chastised physicians who seem to take pride in running behind, saying, "All my patients know I run late."

These doctors provided several reasons for getting knocked off schedule. One common theme was patients who present a long list of problems, even though the appointment was made to address what at the time seemed to be a relatively minor issue.

I say high-deductibles are to blame.

In the copays days, it cost maybe $25 to see the doctor. Not free, but far less than the $80, $100 or $200 you may pay toward your deductible.

So why not try to get your money's worth and load up the appointment?

Two reasons that won't work.

The first is time. Say the appointment is for a sore throat. Based on experience, assessing that complaint takes X amount of time. But when you add two or three other issues, that takes far longer and if the scheduler didn't budget for those extra minutes and that happens back to back, you start getting patients stacked up like airplanes over O'Hare Airport.

The other reason is money. Unlike the copay days, where you were charged a flat rate that was based on whether you saw a primary care doctor or a specialist, when you have a high-deductible plant the fee you pay for the office depends on what was done.

Look at the form you get upon checking out at your next visit. It's full of the possible procedures. There's also a block, usually on the left side, that lists the level of office visit: one through five. The more complex, the higher the level. The higher the level, the more it costs. So you may think that by jamming the sore throat, the backache, the GERD and the questions about your blood pressure into one visit, you're getting something for nothing. Unlikely. You may have taken your visit from level one that costs less than $100 to something into three figures.

You may think that double or triple dipping on a visit for preventive care would give you a freebie. Not so. If the doctor is asked to do something that is not preventive but instead diagnostic, that could be billed. I had a doctor, now retired, who would inform patients of her pride in running on schedule, and if patients, particularly at their annual checkup, had a list of other concerns, they may be asked to schedule a separate appointment. That served two purposes. It kept her train on the track. It also prevented patients from getting a surprise bill for what they thought was strictly a preventive visit.

High-deductibles have become more popular with the advent of the Affordable Care Act. But the issue of wait times relative to Obamacare has been about how long it take to make an appointment now that more people are eligible for care, not how long you sit waiting for the doctor to come into the room.

Your wait may be a function of how many more people the doctor sees in a day. But I think it has more to do with how much the doctor has to deal with in any given appointment, including people double-dipping in those scant minutes to avoid making, and paying for, a repeat appointment.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1NDyW0H