POMONA >> Proposed legislation to encourage more physicians to set up shop in underserved areas may help ease a physician shortage that numbers more than 3,000 in the combined San Bernardino and Riverside county region.

“The Affordable Care Act is going to put increasing pressure on the already short physician supply,” said Dr. John Testerman, chairman of the Department of Family Medicine at the Loma Linda University School of Medicine.

Physician shortages are more commonly associated with rural areas, but throughout the Inland Empire, the problem is both urban and rural.

The legislation sponsored by state Sen. Norma Torres, D-Chino, will more than triple the revenue available for the Steven M. Thompson Physician Corps Loan Repayment Program, which was created in 2003 to increase the accessibility of healthcare and promote the longevity of primary care physicians in medically underserved areas of California.

Physicians can receive up to $105,000 in exchange for providing direct patient care in a medically underserved area for a minimum of three years.

The average primary care physician finishes their schooling with about $180,000 in debt, Testerman said.

Currently, the program is funded with a $25 slice of the $820 fee that California physicians pay for their state license, which is renewed every two years, Testerman said.

Under the Torres proposal, SB 1116, the deduction for the Thompson loan repayment program would increase by $75,and the physician license fee would increase to $895, Testerman said.

In the fiscal year 2012, the program received $1.8 million in revenues from physician license renewal fees. With the additional $75 more in licensing fees, that number would have increased to $5,475,951, said Alex Barrios, spokesman for Torres.

“While we haven’t taken a formal position on this bill yet, we have long supported and advocated for the Steve Thompson Loan Repayment program and look forward to working with the author on the issue,” said Molly Weedn California Medical Association spokeswoman.

During the current fiscal year, the program presented just over $9 million to 85 applicant. The loan repayment program has funding sources other than physician license fees. These include donations and grants, state Department of Managed Healthcare fines and penalties and surplus investment funds.