Full book of wins: Greg Ryan, pictured in 2011 on Pimpala Secret. Photo: Simon Alekna

Greg Ryan has been around racing long enough to know success can be fleeting. But the star Dubbo jockey allowed himself to celebrate a rare feat on Saturday after he rode all five winners at Mudgee's non-TAB meeting.

Ryan's quintet of winners came for five different trainers with only one thing in common: they started favourites.

One of the winners was Excitable Miss, trained by his former boss, Garry McCarney, at Wellington.

"I actually pulled into Goolma pub on the way home and had a beer with Garry, which was nice," Ryan said. "Then I got home and had a drink with [my wife] Pauline and went to bed. It's a nice achievement but you don't get too long to celebrate these kinds of things."

Advertisement

Saturday was the second time the champion hoop has ridden every winner on a program, an achievement he first accomplished at Parkes in 2006.

He had a one in 27,200 chance of performing the feat but admitted yesterday he had had a good book of rides.

"I went there thinking that a couple of them looked good things on paper but you only need a bit of luck to go against you and it doesn't happen," Ryan said.

"Fortior Ito looked a good thing in the first but only just fell in. In the end, the one I thought was my best chance of the day was the one that came closest to getting beat."

Trained by Jeff Brasch at Orange, Fortior Ito started a $1.50 favourite before winning the Mudgee Florist Maiden Plate (1100m) by a head from Lipstick Miss ($8.00, Leanne Henry).

Ryan combined with Scone trainer Luke Griffith to take out the second race with Oh Ay Bee ($3.00 favourite), and it was only after this win that the jockey gave himself a chance of riding the card.

"Oh Ay Bee was probably the question mark horse I had going into the meeting but when she won I had Excitable Miss, Also A Star and Doctor Oh left and I thought they were all in suitable races.

"I was lucky with Oh Ay Bee because I was originally supposed to ride her stablemate (Emperor's Folly) and when it scratched I was 1kg over for Oh Ay Bee but the stewards let me ride her anyway."

It's now history that Excitable Miss ($2.80 favourite) went on to break her maiden status in good style and Also A Star ($2.50 favourite) cruised home, which left Doctor Oh to round out the day.

Sent out a $1.70 elect by punters, the six-year-old backed up a good run when fourth behind Cool Ice at Wellington late last month with a narrow but decisive victory.

"I'm too seasoned to feel much pressure before the race because getting too emotional or worked up about things can bring you unstuck," Ryan said.

"I don't feel pressure much any more, and I do that intentionally because there is always a job to be done.

"Once that last race was done I did enjoy it. There was a good crowd and there was a bit of buzz around which was nice."It was also good because I rode for five different trainers. I've had a bit to do with all of them over the years and they're all good trainers and great to ride for."

Ryan will now turn his attention to Monday's meeting at Muswellbrook, where he has a full book of seven rides.