“Denver’s Inclusionary Housing Ordinance has failed,” announced Mayor Michael Hancock a year ago in his 2013 State of the City address. “We need a more balanced approach that looks at the realities of the market.”

In an effort to create more workforce housing, Denver’s 2002 IHO required developers of 30 or more residences, to include 10 percent for those earning 60 to 80 percent of Denver’s annual median income, which is now at $49,000. Developers could either build the units — collecting a $5,500 per-unit subsidy — or opt out by paying 50 percent of the cost of the affordable units to Denver’s housing fund.

Denver’s IHO has yielded 447 workforce residences since 2011.

More than a year ago, the city fixed two of the biggest flaws in the original ordinance. IHO buyers could not rent their units, and when the housing market collapsed (and it will again), buyers were stuck with properties they could not sell. In addition, IHO covenants were incompatible with FHA lending requirements, making a bad situation worse. The city rectified both issues. However, more fundamental problems with Denver’s inclusionary policies will persist in any new ordinance, unless the developer subsidy equals the cost of building the unit; density and parking incentives are added; Colorado’s construction defects law goes away; and multifamily rentals are included.

Developers add the costs of producing IHO’s to market-rate units, thereby increasing the price of market housing. As the demand for owner-occupied condominiums escalates, developers are finding ways to insure around Colorado’s lopsided construction-defects law. Cost estimates are between $5,000 and $25,000 per unit, depending on size, location and market value.

Thanks to the 1980 Colorado Supreme Court decision Telluride vs. Lot 34 Venture, rent control cannot be imposed through local ordinance. Though the law was amended in 2010, allowing municipalities to negotiate — not require — rent-controlled set-asides, neither the old nor a new inclusionary ordinance can address Denver’s dearth of affordable rentals.

Finally, it’s not fair for developers and condominium buyers to assume the full burden of supply. An investor who demolishes a small bungalow in Platt Park or Sloan Lake, replacing it with a duplex selling for $700,000 per unit, adds to Denver’s shrinking inventory of affordable housing. Redevelopment and upgrading of obsolete property and condo conversions also contribute.

The benefits and responsibilities of assuring the city has a full range of housing options belongs to all of us.

Councilwoman Robin Kniech opened the door to assess the flawed policy. Instead of rushing to approve the wrong answer to more complex problem, the city should use the opportunity to have a bigger, more inclusive conversation. The goal must be to identify a stable, robust and equitable source of funding.

Consider identifying an informed, neutral professional or organization to work with the city and a diverse group of stakeholders. Examine creative strategies to produce affordable, for-sale and for-rent housing.

• Micro units, attached to existing building stock: the convention center; parking structures, diverse building types in mixed-use districts;

• Accessory alley units;

• Equity sharing subsidies – investors lend down-payment to buyer who selects property. At time of sale, appreciation shared between investor and Investor and homeowner, depending on percentage of down payment assistance. No deed restrictions, creates wealth and mobility.

• Land trusts — Colorado Community Land Trust (formerly Lowry) and the Urban Land Conservancy both produce stable affordable stock using long-term ground leases and tax credits.

More carrots, more sticks and greater flexibility in an unsound and ineffective policy is not progress. It’s Einstein’s definition of insanity: doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results.

Susan Barnes-Gelt (BarnesGelt@gmail.com) co-sponsored Denver’s 2002 Inclusionary Housing Ordinance during her tenure on the Denver City Council.