Kristin Hopkins got to stand on a new prosthetic leg Friday, more than a month after both her feet were amputated.

But the feeling was frustrating, she said, as only one of the two prosthetic legs was available Friday.

The second one, coming from California, may take another day.

“It feels very, very different,” Hopkins said. “When I have the two, I’m sure it will also be different.”

Hopkins remembers little about the accident on U.S. 285, or the six to eight days she spent trapped in her wrecked, upside-down car.

Hopkins doesn’t recall driving on that road far from her home in Douglas County, and she can’t imagine where she might have been going.

In and out of consciousness, Hopkins tried but was unable to get out of the car. At some point during the week, she scribbled some notes on an umbrella that she was able to push out of the car and open for people to see.

PHOTOS: View more images of Kristin Hopkins standing on her new prosthetic leg

Hikers eventually found the car May 4 about 140 feet off U.S. 285 at Red Hill Pass, northwest of Fairplay. Rescuers didn’t realize initially that Hopkins was still alive inside.

Her organs were shutting down, and her temperature was 77 degrees, but Hopkins survived, although doctors had to amputate her feet.

On Friday, therapists at Hallmark Nursing Center in Denver showed her how to put on her prosthesis and helped her try on her shoes on the rubber foot.

“I can’t imagine putting a red shoe on that foot, but it will happen,” she said, with her parents nearby.

Now, about seven weeks after being rescued, Hopkins has made leaps in her recovery and expects to go home in about a week.

“I’m excited,” Hopkins said. “Nervous, too. That means I’m on my own.”

Therapists will work with Hopkins to get her comfortable first on the parallel bars, then moving her to use a walker and finally a cane.

When she first leaves, Hopkins will move in with her parents, but their wheelchair-inaccessible home is providing more motivation.

As she puts it, “I have to be on my feet.”

Yesenia Robles: 303-954-1372, yrobles@denverpost.com or twitter.com/yeseniarobles