VALLEY VIEW, Ohio - Sen. Marco Rubio held a town hall in Valley View Friday to an overflow crowd of around 200, his second event in the greater Cleveland area this month.

Rubio was introduced by Ohio Treasurer Josh Mandel, who endorsed the Florida senator in his bid for president.

His introduction to this crowd was smoother than his Aug. 5 event on West 25th Street, when he told the crowd he came to Cleveland to try to convince LeBron to go back to Miami.

This time, Rubio diplomatically danced around the question of whether Ohio State would repeat its victory, instead sharing his admiration for Buckeyes Coach Urban Meyer who won two National Championships at Florida.

Rubio quickly reminded the crowd of one of those victories was over Ohio State. “There are some things that are above politics,” he joked of his sports allegiances. “My anti-Tom Brady position is not helping me in New Hampshire.”

Rubio telling the crowd this is a generational moment for this country highlighting the changes America has seen in the last decade and the changes needed in Washington for the U.S. to remain competitive in the world.

“I want this to continue to be a country where people can continue to do for their children what my parents did for me,” Rubio said, the son of Cuban immigrants, said.

“The real thing that’s happening here is a transformation in our economy. Our economy is dramatically different than what it used to be. One of the largest retailers in the world is Amazon and they don’t own a single store. One of the largest transportation companies in America is Uber and they don’t own cars,” he said.

“This is a very different economy from the one I grew up in. It’s a very different economy than the one we had five or ten years ago.”

He talked about the push for a balanced budget amendment and education reforms that focused on graduating students into skilled jobs and repealing and replacing the Affordable Care Act.

“So what is Obamacare? It’s increased prices, reduced choice in quality and it discourages businesses from hiring people. Other than that, it sounds like a good idea,” Rubio quipped.

The Florida senator did not mention any of the 16 other Republican hopefuls by name, alluding to Donald Trump at one point. “There is someone running for president who likes to say he's going to make America great and I understand what he's trying to say. America is great that's not the issue."

He did take at least one jab though at the Democratic front-runner.

"Hillary Clinton recently came out with her college affordability plan, which almost was not released by the way because it was stored in her server which had been wiped," Rubio joked.

Rubio tied for third with Ted Cruz in Ohio in a Quinnipiac University poll released Thursday with 7seven percent of the vote. Governor John Kasich led the poll with 27 percent followed by Donald Trump with 21 percent.

Ohio’s primary is March 15, 2016, and it is a winner-take-all primary.

---

Follow John Kosich on Facebook and Twitter

Follow @KosichJohn

Download the newsnet5 app: