Photo

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• Long-awaited torture report.

The Senate Intelligence Committee has issued a sweeping indictment of the C.I.A. interrogation program carried out in secret prisons after the Sept. 11 attacks. The report took five years to produce.

Many Republicans have questioned the wisdom of making it public, and former President George W. Bush and former Vice President Dick Cheney have been disputing the report’s conclusions that the agency relied on extensive, if not brutal, interrogation methods.

• Hagel in Baghdad.

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel is in Baghdad today as the United States expands its presence in the fight against the Islamic State.

Elsewhere in the region, the U.S. and NATO formally ended combat operations in Afghanistan. More than 10,000 troops will remain in Afghanistan over the next few months.

• Urgency at climate change conference.

Philippine negotiators, fresh from another typhoon that killed 27 people, are in Peru to urge other countries at the U.N. climate change conference to cut emissions.

Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox. Monday – Friday.

Separately, sources said Secretary of State John Kerry will fly to the negotiations in Lima this week to push for an agreement.

• Testimony on health care.

Jonathan Gruber, an economist who worked on Obamacare and Romneycare — and who has gained notoriety after making several harsh comments about the Affordable Care Act — is scheduled to testify today before the House Oversight Committee.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Gruber was criticized for calling voters “stupid” and saying that President Obama’s health care bill passed only because the legislation hid negative aspects in legalese.

• Immigration reform on the road.

President Obama gives a speech today in Nashville on his executive action. Tennessee is home to one of the fastest-growing immigrant populations in the country.

Tonight, he speaks with members of senior leadership of the federal work force in Washington.

• Progress against malaria.

Deaths from malaria have fallen by half since 2000, a report from the World Health Organization said today.

• Gain for Palestine.

Palestinians are now observers at the International Criminal Court, but they are still not under the court’s jurisdiction.

MARKETS

• Wall Street stock futures are falling this morning, as investors liquidate holdings across the board. Asian markets closed down and European indexes are trending downward as well.

• Greek shares are taking a drubbing, with the main index off 11 percent, and yields on bonds soared today after the government set an early presidential vote for next week.

• The five-month rally that pushed up mainland China’s stock markets by 50 percent showed its first hint of unraveling today: The main Shanghai share index plummeted more than 5 percent.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Most other Asian stock indexes also ended sharply lower.

• The United Auto Workers’ certification to represent 45 percent of the workers at Volkswagen’s plant in Chattanooga, Tenn., could help unionization at other automakers in the South, experts say.

• Shares of Tesco, Britain’s biggest retailer, plunged 12 percent today after it scaled down its profit expectations.

• McDonald’s plans to combat slumping sales by expanding a test that lets customers build their burgers by tapping a touch screen to pick their bread, cheese and toppings.

NOTEWORTHY

• Painkiller problems.

A report today says that nearly half the patients who took narcotic painkillers for 30 days were still using them three years later.

More than 60 percent were also taking muscle relaxants or anti-anxiety medications too, which can cause dangerous reactions.

• Literary history.

A recently discovered Dylan Thomas notebook is auctioned today at Sotheby’s in London. The notebook, which includes handwritten poems, is expected to sell for more than $200,000.

The auction also includes a second edition of the collected plays of William Shakespeare, published in 1632, and a first edition of Charles Darwin’s “On the Origin of Species.”

• Sting on Broadway.

Sting joins the cast of the musical “The Last Ship” on Broadway today, which tells the story of his early life in a shipbuilding town with music written by the man himself.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The play has been suffering financially, and Sting’s run is expected to help ticket sales.

• New Smashing Pumpkins album.

The Smashing Pumpkins release a new album today, “Monuments to an Elegy,” though all of the band’s original members except Billy Corgan have left the group.

The Guardian says the album sounds “as morose as their best early work,” if you like that sort of thing.

• Football finalists.

Receiver Amari Cooper of Alabama and running back Melvin Gordon of Wisconsin join quarterback Marcus Mariota of Oregon, considered the front-runner, as finalists for the Heisman Trophy, to be awarded on Saturday.

• Chokehold fallout.

LeBron James and other N.B.A. players wore black “I Can’t Breathe” T-shirts during warm-ups before Cleveland’s game with the Nets on Monday night in Brooklyn, while protests took place outside the arena.

Separately, Columbia Law School is allowing students to postpone final exams if they feel unnerved by the recent grand jury decisions not to indict police officers in the deaths of unarmed black men.

BACK STORY

It’s hard to believe how funny Richard Pryor could make the experience of black America in the 1970s — and how relevant much of his material remains today amid police chokeholds, disputed shootings and everyday racism.

“Becoming Richard Pryor,” a biography of the comedian that comes out today, focuses on his roots in the underclass of Peoria, Ill., and the explosion of comic genius that rocketed him to superstardom.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The wild ride ended in a long decline, thanks to drugs, self-destruction and multiple sclerosis. He died in 2005.

What one critic called his “lyrical obscenity” would hardly raise eyebrows now.

But the racially mixed audiences Richard Pryor drew in his heyday found his matter-of-fact use of expletives and racial epithets shocking and liberating.

And his evocation of police abuses was validating to blacks and revelatory to whites.

His 1979 film “Live in Concert,” which features a bit on a police chokehold, shows him at his height.

Victoria Shannon and Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.

Want to get the briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.