By Scott Perry

In two weeks, the U.S. Dept. of Homeland Security (DHS) runs out of funding. A month ago, the U.S. House passed legislation (H.R. 240) to fund DHS for the remainder of the fiscal year, yet Democrats refuse even to allow this bill to come up for debate in the Senate.

Their reasons clearly have nothing to do with protecting our homeland, since H.R. 240 funds Customs and Border Protection, the Transportation Security Administration, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, cybersecurity efforts, the Secret Service and all other agencies that lead the DHS mission to secure our nation from threats.

The real reason is simple: H.R. 240 bars the use of any funds to implement or enforce President Barack Obama's unconstitutional action on immigration - and Senate Democrats have made a priority of protecting President Obama's executive action.

I'm the proud grandson of a woman who legally immigrated from Colombia in search of greater freedom and opportunity for her family. I'm also a proud American who less than two months ago took the Oath of Office to uphold the Constitution.

Let's be clear: we wouldn't be having this DHS funding argument if President Obama hadn't taken his unilateral executive action.

He picked this unnecessary fight - no one else. Prior to taking this action last year, the President said, "...the notion that I can just suspend deportations through executive order, that's just not the case." He reiterated variations of that argument more than 20 times.

The idea that President Obama was forced into acting because Congress wouldn't pass an immigration bill is absurd.

For years, Republicans in Congress have been fighting to control government spending and get our debt crisis under control. President Obama has never produced a balanced budget.

By this logic, Republicans should have the right to override the President and unilaterally start cutting wasteful government programs. But that's not how the Constitution works.

Part of the oath I took a few weeks ago reaffirmed our commitment to a government founded on a system of checks and balances.

Yet when Congress didn't send him a bill that met his specific demands, President Obama enacted his goals by edict.

The argument that other Presidents took similar actions also holds no water. The Washington Post, not particularly the bastion of conservatism, said, "...it is increasingly clear that the sweeping magnitude of Mr. Obama's order is unprecedented" and "...the scale of Mr. Obama's move goes far beyond anything his predecessors attempted."

On no issue before Congress is there a greater divide between the people we serve and the political and media elite than illegal immigration. My office receives more calls on this than any other issue.

The people who voice their concerns to me aren't anti-immigration; they ask legitimate questions about how unchecked illegal immigration impacts jobs, schools, hospitals and national security, and they're routinely and unfairly mocked and/or have their character and motives questioned.

Clear examples of unfairness exist here. Both parties admit that under the President's executive action, undocumented immigrants could get Social Security cards, tax credits and driver's licenses - despite their temporary, quasi-legal status in the country.

Here's an example: although undocumented workers are ineligible for federal benefits, an IRS report concluded that federal law is ambiguous on whether these workers qualify for a tax break called the Additional Child Tax Credit; the IRS says it has no authority to disallow the claims.

According to the IRS, undocumented workers collected about $4.2 billion in refundable tax credits in 2010. So now the IRS offers a financial bonus for breaking our laws. Great.

We've all seen this movie before with the unveiling of the Affordable Care Act. In a rushed effort to implement the President's executive actions, there undoubtedly will be confusion and mistakes as the massive new regulations and bureaucracy of this program are rolled out.

How many more billions will be spent? Please explain that to hardworking people who barely are scraping by - and to those trying to come to the United States legally.

Amnesty is blatantly unfair to the millions of people who waited - often for many years - to come here legally.

Dozens of businesses and families have invited me to see how our current system forces them to confront a bloated bureaucracy that's almost impossible to navigate. H.R. 240 pushes the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services to focus its efforts on improving services for immigrants who seek to come to the United States legally.

Our immigration system clearly is broken and I want to fix it - but unilateral action by the President is not the right answer.

Our Constitution clearly states that Congress writes the law, the President executes the law, and the Judiciary interprets the law. The President is not authorized to make law.

H.R. 240 will start reforming our immigration system. It strengthens our homeland security by providing the largest customs and border protection force levels in history, includes around-the-clock surveillance of our border, bolsters cybersecurity, fully funds disaster relief efforts, and enhances efforts to combat human trafficking and drug smuggling.

The first step in any reform effort must be to secure our borders. Once we've made significant progress on border security, we can work towards real, long-term solutions that strengthen and modernize the rest of our immigration system.

If Senate Democrats are concerned about funding for homeland security, they should at least vote on H.R. 240 - or whatever it is with which they agree. If they think it's more important to defend the President's executive actions, they need to explain that to the American people.

U.S. Rep. Scott Perry, a Republican, represents the 4th Congressional District, which includes parts of the Midstate.