Buy Photo The existing timber bridge over the Double Creek on East Bay Avenue in Barnegat was built in 1955 and designed to last for 50 years at the time of its construction. Sixty years later, it has been deemed “structurally deficient.” (Photo: Erik Larsen, staff photo)Buy Photo

After 60 years spanning the Double Creek on East Bay Avenue, the picturesque wooden bridge here is to be replaced starting in August, at a cost of $2.2 million, according to Ocean County officials.

"We have been keeping it in good repair but it has definitely been showing signs of age and it has actually turned structurally deficient," said Frank S. Scarantino, county engineer.

The new bridge, which will take 15 months to build, will be slightly bigger and include steel beams and piers that will give it a life expectancy of at least a century before it has to be replaced again, Scarantino said.

The existing timber bridge was built in 1955 and had a life span of about 50 years at the time. The Double Creek is in environmentally protected marshland that's part of the Edwin B. Forsythe National Wildlife Refuge. The creek itself serves marine traffic, limited to private boats, for Barnegat residents living on lagoons in a nearby residential neighborhood.

The Ocean County Board of Freeholders has approved construction of a $2.2 million new bridge over the Double Creek on East Bay Avenue in Barnegat. (Photo: Google Maps)

In planning the new bridge, the county has sought approvals from the Coast Guard and Army Corps of Engineers to include navigational lights on the underside of the span, which will have a clearance height of just more than 11 feet — still impossible for sailboats to get through. A drawbridge at that location is impractical as it would cost six times the current construction estimate, Scarantino said.

Moreover, raising the bridge to a taller, permanent height would require that the county use eminent domain to purchase adjacent private property to do so, he said.

The county will use $1 million in state aid to offset the building cost of the new bridge.

During construction, one lane of traffic will be maintained. The bridge will be built one half at a time, the engineer said.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Gfnbuw