The waiting is almost over for the Southern Miss football team.

The Golden Eagles spent their Christmas morning with a final practice here Friday morning at Highland Park High School in advance of the program's first bowl game in four seasons and the 11th in the last 15 years.

Southern Miss, which enters the game with a 9-4 record and as Conference USA West Division champions, plays a Washington squad that finished 6-6 in the Pac-12 North and 4-5 in league play. The Huskies come into the contest having won their last two games, including a 45-10 shellacking of in-state rival Washington State.

"Washington played a very difficult schedule," said Southern Miss third-year coach Todd Monken. "I mean, this year arguably, the Pac-12 was the deepest conference with 10 bowl teams. They played Utah State, played Boise, so really a challenge (for us). And when you play a lot of really good teams, it's hard to win them all."

Under Monken, the Golden Eagles helped improve the team's win total in each season in his tenure and the squad won six-straight games to end the regular before falling to WKU in the C-USA championship game.

Offensively, Southern Miss scored 40.6 points per contest over its first 13 games which is on pace to set a single-season school record for scoring average per game. The Golden Eagles also have set the school mark for total offense, having registered 6,758 yards this year.

The Golden Eagles play a team that ranked atop the Pac-12 in scoring defense (17.8), three full points ahead of No. 2 Stanford, and also in total defense (349.9).

"I was thinking, there is no way they will be the same, and they are better," said Monken, on the Huskies after comparing them to last year's squad that graduated three players to the NFL. "They're better defensively than they were last year."

When Southern Miss meets Washington, it will be the team's 23rd all-time bowl game and fourth in the state of Texas.

The game, which pits C-USA and the Pac-12 together for the first time in a bowl game, marks the first trip for the program to the historic Cotton Bowl and also the team's first game on natural grass since playing at Alabama last season (Sept. 13, 2014).

Game time is set for 1:20 p.m. (CT), Saturday, from the historic Cotton Bowl and will be televised on ESPN. The game can also be heard on one of the affiliates of the Southern Miss IMG Sports Network.