Sometimes you know you’re on the right path when you’re met with more and more resistance.

That can be said in the case of more than 200,000 former inmates in Virginia whose voting rights were restored April 22 by Gov. Terry McAuliffe.

The Democratic governor’s bold and courageous step is taking Virginia far beyond the empty rhetoric other politicians have espoused about wanting to re-integrate formerly incarcerated individuals into society. Allowing people who have completed their prison sentences and their supervised probation and parole to be re-engaged in the most basic and fundamental right of a democracy — the right to vote — goes a long way in getting someone to believe they have a stake in what happens in their life. Casting a ballot for the candidate of his or her choice can bring a renewed sense of self and acceptance into the community.

We recall the sad history of Virginia politicians who, at the turn of the 20th century, building into law measures to disenfranchise as many African-Americans as possible.

Now turn-back-the-clock Republicans in this state are determined to block those individuals with newly restored rights from participating in the democratic process. Why? Because those GOP members believe in endless punishment? Because they want to continue to stigmatize people who have been in prison?

Or because they are afraid of what change could be brought about by 200,000 new voters whose perspective on life and justice may have been adjusted by spending time in prison?

Republicans in this state are so afraid of what felons with ballots might do that they are spending thousands of dollars to hire Charles J. Cooper to try to block Gov. McAuliffe’s actions. He’s the same lawyer who defended California’s ban on gay marriage before the U.S. Supreme Court in 2013. He lost.

What signal would such a lawsuit to block people from voting send?

If nothing else, this should be a call to action for the 200,000-plus people who now have their rights restored. The call: To head to the nearest registrar’s office and sign up to vote.

This weekend, a host of groups will be canvassing Richmond area neighborhoods to help inform and register such people. The next election is Tuesday, June 14 — Democratic and Republican primary elections to choose party candidates to run for the 4th Congressional District seat in November.

The deadline to register to vote in the June 14 primary is Monday, May 23.

President Obama, in his address last Saturday at Howard University’s commencement, urged people to consider what he could have accomplished as president if he’d been working with a Congress less intent to block his every move.

Looking toward the November election when a new president and members of Congress will be elected, Republicans continue to vow to obliterate the federal Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, under which millions of Americans are now covered by health insurance.

Such are the issues that can be impacted only by people who are registered to vote — and who actually turn out to cast ballots. The November presidential election and congressional elections are critical ones, as are City Council races and the contest for Richmond’s next mayor.

The fight starts now. And it starts with you.

Register today to vote. And then go to the polls on Tuesday, June 14, and cast your ballot.