After starting slowly last season and never recovering, the Avalanche, from coach Patrick Roy through his roster, emphasized avoiding that in 2015-16.

Yet a little over two weeks into the season, Colorado hit rock bottom Saturday night, falling 4-3 to the woebegone and previously winless Columbus Blue Jackets at the Pepsi Center.

It isn’t so much that the Avalanche’s 2-4-1 record is dreadful. It isn’t. The 1-3-1 home record is, though. And this was a reeling opponent that previously this season had succeeded at only one thing — getting its coach, Todd Richards, fired.

Yes, already.

The Blue Jackets on Saturday finally cracked the win column in their second game under fiery new coach John Tortorella, and for Colorado, the embarrassing defeat also was a lost opportunity to collect two points before playing 15 of its next 20 on the road.

Plus, the Avalanche is solidly lodged in seventh and last place in the Central Division, and at this point, it’s little consolation that the division is likely to get five teams into the Western Conference playoff field.

Did this anger or embarrass Roy?

“Not at all,” Roy said. “That’s a good hockey team. They’re the ones who were embarrassed to be 0-8. But at the same time for us, it’s a matter of us playing our game. It had nothing to do with our preparation tonight. We prepared ourselves to play against a very good team.”

The Avalanche took a 3-2 lead on consecutive second-period goals from Jarome Iginla and Nathan MacKinnon and seemed to have awakened in time to avoid ignominy in front of a big Saturday night crowd.

But the Blue Jackets’ Ryan Murray and Brandon Dubinsky beat Semyon Varlamov for goals 2:47 apart early in the third to put Columbus up 4-3.

Then, even with a brief power play and a 6-on-4 advantage with goalie Semyon Varlamov on the bench in the final seconds, the Avalanche couldn’t get the tying goal.

With that, Colorado finished the mini-homestand with a 0-1-1 record against two of the league’s worst.

The loss came on the heels of a 1-0 overtime defeat at the hands of the Carolina Hurricanes on Wednesday. At least in that one, Varlamov was back at the top of his game, and that wasn’t the case against the Blue Jackets. The Russian veteran was busy again, facing 36 shots, but didn’t make enough big saves to bail out his teammates.

“There’s not much to say,” Iginla said. “We have to find a way to close that out. We let a very good opportunity slip away again. We’ve let it slip away a couple of times already this year … We respect them, we know they’re a hardworking team, but we don’t want to be a team’s first win of the season after a tough time, for sure.

“But to be honest, it was more about us. We’re trying to get ourselves up and going and trying to get back to .500, get over .500, so it’s not so much about not being their first win, it was about us trying to put something together and get some consistency and get back on the winning side.”

Avalanche fourth-line winger Jack Skille opened the scoring only 2:21 into the game, but Boone Jenner’s consecutive goals for the Blue Jackets put Columbus up 2-1 after the first period.

At 1:43 of the second, Iginla beat Columbus goalie Sergei Bobrovsky off a rush from the right-wing circle for his third goal of the season, tying it up.

Then with the Avalanche on a 4-on-3 power play — it was a 5-on-3 for only three seconds before Gabe Landeskog went off for interference — Iginla’s pass across the slot set up Nathan MacKinnon for the shot from the lower edge of the left circle that gave Colorado a 3-2 lead at 17:12.

It was downhill from there for the Avalanche, which now heads on the road for games at Florida on Tuesday, Tampa Bay on Thursday and Carolina on Friday.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei