WASHINGTON, April 6, 2014 – For Barack Obama, one night in Brussels ain’t free either. Well, actually it was free. For Barack Obama. For the American taxpayer, his twenty four hour jaunt to Belgium cost a cool three million dollars. To paraphrase Michelle Obama, “All of this for a damn speech!”

In the era of budgets and deficits measured in the trillions, that is not even a blip on the radar. But that is the problem. It should be.

Obama went to Brussels to give a speech to a European Union summit. America isn’t a part of the European Union begging the question, why was Obama there?

Obama’s team took up 387 rooms at a building called “The Hotel.” That bill alone was $1.5 million. 387 rooms! Was the third assistant undersecretary for boll weevil eradication at the Department of Agriculture the only guy they didn’t take to Brussels?

That wasn’t the only hotel occupied by the Obama Regime. The Regime also spent $396,000 for rooms at the Crowne Plaza. Seriously, was anyone left at the White House besides Joe Biden and the janitor?

Granted we aren’t going to ask Tom Bodett to leave the light on at a Motel 6 for the President but seriously, why does he and his staff need hundreds of rooms at a cost of almost two million dollars? To move these staffers around, the White House rented 143 rental cars at $1.05 million dollars. That translates out to over $7300 per vehicle. Over $7300 per vehicle for less than a week’s rent? Enterprise has better rates and they will come to you.

The obvious question is, what kind of cars were these that were rented? Were they stretched, pimped out Hummer limos?

Perhaps the greater question is, when is someone in Washington going to start acting like a grown up. Barack Obama and his team act like 18 year olds heading off to college with their parent’s credit card for “emergencies.” Emergencies for 18 year olds and the Obama Regime are beer and pizza.

Last year, the Obamas took a $100 million dollar vacation to Africa. This year, not only have they had multi-million dollar vacations to Hawaii, they’ve also been to Colorado, Barack Obama has been on golf vacations and most recently Michelle Obama’s vacation to China with mom and ‘the girls.’

The Obamas act more like royalty than they do public servants. Every time a Republican speaks, they talk about fiscal responsibility. Perhaps real Americans need to start asking when the GOP is going to impose fiscal responsibility on the Obama travel budget.

Republican House Speaker John Boehner and Republican Senate Leader Mitch McConnell don’t want to shut the government down over Obamacare. How about shutting it down over Obama’s $100 million dollar vacations? Barack Obama acts as if the public treasury is his private piggy bank and the Republicans go around trying to schedule another symbolic vote to repeal Obamacare.

The left loves to talk about “shared sacrifice.” Millions of real Americans are sacrificing. Millions of real Americans are out of work. Millions of real Americans have lost their homes. Millions of real Americans have lost their health insurance.

Isn’t it time the Obamas shared the sacrifice by losing their travel budget?