Click here to learn how to advertise on this site and for ad rates.

(HealthNewsDigest.com) - You may not think scientific breakthroughs are changing the face of hair transplants; but think again. Utilizing up-to-the minute medical research and innovative techniques , today's hair transplants have become faster, more efficient, and safer than ever before. Here is a look at a few cutting-edge techniques in hair transplants that you may or may not be aware of; but all of them are sure to affect your future hair restoration procedure.





Robotic Systems:

Robotics in hair restoration may seem like a futuristic science fiction movie, but it is already being used to increase speed and efficiency. It can take hours for a surgeon to manually perform the meticulous process of Follicular Unit Extraction. With the help of robotics, this time can be cut in half. The surgeon will design the patient's new hairline with a computer, and the computer will go to work.





Stem Cell Hair Loss Therapy

Stem cells are being used to replenish tissues in all fields of medicine. The latest research is showing that Stem Cells can also stimulate hair growth. In theory, stem cell rich plasma is removed from the patient' s blood. Once processed, the plasma is injected into the targeted area of the scalp, and encouraging new hair growth.





Ethnic Hair Transplants:

Patients of African American, Islander, and Hispanic backgrounds present unique challenges during a hair transplant. Their thick, curly, course hair can make successfully restoring thinning, balding places difficult. Over the years, hair transplant specialists have developed techniques to achieve excellent coverage and regrowth in the ethnic patients. Today, problems such as the high hairline and alopecia can be dramatically improved.





Hairline Advancement:

Years ago, natural looking improvement for a congenitally high hairline was almost impossible. Modern hairline advancement procedures are now available that can lower the ridge of the hairline, balancing its proportion to the face. By making an incision in the scalp, hair follicles are buried into the area, allowing new, healthy hair to fill in. With an 80-85% chance for re-growth - results of hairline advancement are excellent.





Tissue expansion

Tissue expansion allows surgeons to utilize a patient's healthy portion of scalp to rejuvenate areas with poor hair growth. A tissue expander, much like a slowly inflating silicone balloon, is placed under the scalp for several weeks. As the balloon is filled with saline, the healthy scalp will expand. When the scalp is large enough, a surgical procedure will remove the expander, excise unwanted skin, and suture the healthy tissue along the hairline.





Megasessions

For those patients who do not want to schedule multiple hair replacement appointments, a megasession may be the answer. During this mammoth procedure, a surgeon can place 3,000 or more Follicular Units. While this sounds great, the megasession is not for everybody. The surgery can take eight or more hours, be physically taxing, and will require a dense donor area of hair. For a few people, however, the benefits are well worth the investment.





Hair cloning

At the moment, patients receiving a hair transplant are limited by the amount of donor hair they can provide. Imagine if there were an infinite amount of hair, ready to be added at anytime. That is exactly what hair cloning can do. Using cells from healthy follicles, new hair can be grown in a tissue culture, apart from the body. The hair cloning process is not yet available for patients, but it will be on the market in the near future.





Dr. Kyle S. Choe is a Board Certified Facial Plastic Surgeon with more than ten years of experience in hair restoration. If you are interested in finding out more about the choices in hair transplant procedures, or would like to schedule a complimentary consultation with Dr. Choe in his Virginia Beach office, contact the Choe Center for Facial Plastic Surgery at 757.389.5850.

###

For advertising/promotion contact Mike McCurdy at 877-634-9180 or email at: [email protected] - We have over 7,000 journalists as subscribers.