The phrase “Cherry Creek Sneak weather” used to conjure up an image of April snow flurries because that was such a common occurrence for the first big event of the Colorado running season.

This year it meant rain — sometimes coming in drenching downpours — as last year’s winners in the five-mile main event repeated.

Scott Dahlberg, an assistant track and cross country coach at Colorado State, won in 24 minutes, 43 seconds. Brandon Johnson of Denver finished a close second in 25:02.

“He’s a beast,” Johnson said.

Dahlberg, who was an All-American at Western State, said he and Johnson “rolled together” for the first couple of miles before Dahlberg began to pull away. Johnson finished about 100 meters behind on streets riddled with puddles.

“On a day like today, you just get out and run hard,” said Dahlberg, 30. “It’s not really necessarily about the time, just trying to get in a hard effort and competing. Brandon and I battled for a while and he never let up. It was a fun day, regardless of the rain and wind. It was nice to get out here.”

Nell Rojas won the women’s five-miler in 29:48. Her father, Ric, won the first Bolder Boulder in 1979, when he was one of America’s top road racers. She spent much of 2014 pursuing elite triathlon as a career, but gave that up two weeks ago to concentrate on running.

“It’s a lot of time, a lot of money, and I didn’t have that need to do it anymore,” said Rojas, 27. “I wanted to enjoy life a little bit. I did have success, and I’m very confident that I could be really great, but in five years. That’s a long time and a lot of sacrifice.”

Taylor Garrett of Denver won the men’s 10-miler in 56:52 on his 26th birthday. It was a little bittersweet because he will soon leave the thriving Front Range running scene to take a job for a nonprofit in New York City.

“This is like my last hurrah,” Garrett said. “I’m going to miss it.”

Kristin Louderback of Highlands Ranch won the women’s 10-miler in 1:03:55, edging Nicole Chyr of Englewood by 14 seconds in the closest race of the day.

Andy Rinne and Alexis Wilbert, both of Colorado Springs, were the winners in the 5K. Rinne finished in 17:14, Wilbert in 18:20.

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer