By Michael D. Pitman

Staff Writer

A government shutdown Oct. 1 could immediately suspend or delay food stamp payments to some of the more than 44,000 Butler County residents who receive the food aid.

The Agriculture Department said Tuesday that it will stop providing benefits at the beginning of October if Congress does not pass legislation to keep government agencies open.

Republican leaders in Congress are racing to avert a government shutdown next week when the budget year ends and a temporary funding bill is required to keep agencies operating. The process has been complicated because of a battle over federal funding for Planned Parenthood and the group’s involvement in the practice of procuring tissue from aborted fetuses for research purposes.

“SNAP is the first line of defense against hunger in our country. It is a lifeline for the poorest among us,” said Lisa Hamler-Fugitt, executive director of Ohio Association of Foodbanks, which consists of 12 foodbanks including Shared Harvest in Fairfield.

SNAP — or the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program — is used by more than 1 million Ohioans, according to June totals, the latest available data

“The direct beneficiaries of the SNAP program are poor children, seniors, the disabled, veterans and those who work serving us in low-wage, often part-time, temporary and contingent jobs,” Hamler-Fugitt said.

Hamler-Fugitt said Ohio ranks sixth-highest for food insecurity with around 1.8 million Ohioans living in poverty. Food assistance requests have increased by 40 percent since 2010 for the emergency food network’s 12 foodbanks and 3,300 member charities, she said. Foodbanks and member charities, which the lion’s share are faith-based groups, “cannot hold the floodgates” as the demand for food requests increase who may not be eligible for SNAP, she said.

In 2013, the government shut down for 16 days over the political battle on the funding of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, commonly referenced as ObamaCare.

The impact of that 2013 shutdown was felt by millions of Americans who weren’t able to receive their monthly food assistance benefits. Butler County Job and Family Services Director Jerome Kearns said the department in 2013 did what it could to help short of providing funds.

“We continued to process applications, we continued to do the things we needed to do to determine eligibility,” said Kearns.

And when people ran out of government-assistance funds, Kearns said they directed folks to local food pantries and information referral resources, such as 211 in Butler County.

Ohio Department of Job and Family Services spokesman Ben Johnson said the impact on Ohio is right now unknown.

“We’re monitoring very closely but it’s too early to say what, if any, impact would be,” he said. “We don’t know enough now about what will or will not happen.”

Sen. Pat Roberts, a Kansas Republican who is chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee, said Democrats concerned about SNAP dollars should vote for the Republican Senate bill that would keep the government operating through Dec. 11 and block Planned Parenthood’s federal funds for a year.

Democrats are expected to block that measure later this week.

Sen. Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, said money that has already been allocated but not used will still be available if the government shuts down, but new allowances won’t be issued during a shut down.

“ We’re on the brink of another manufactured crisis and a number of my colleagues in both houses of Congress seem to be threatening another government shutdown,” Brown said. “We know that when you shut the government down in the name of saving money, you end up costing tax payers a lot more money to shut down and scale back up.”

Sen. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, is for defunding Planned Parenthood, and in August the Capitol Hill newspaper “The Hill” reported the first-term senator saying, “I don’t think anybody is talking about shutting down the government, but we want to defund Planned Parenthood, so we’ll see.”

In February, Portman introduced the End Government Shutdowns Act in February to stop “last-minute deals that fail to address out out-of-control spending” and the threat of cutting services. Portman spokeswoman Christyn Lansing said the senator and his staff “are working to get a vote on it as soon as possible.”

“Sen. Portman has always said that Americans should not have the threat of a government shutdown hanging over their heads,” Lansing said. “He will continue to push for a vote on his legislation that would prevent government shutdowns and save taxpayer dollars.”

This article contains reporting from the Associated Press.