Just before the Supreme Court upheld the Affordable Care Act last month, Gov. Greg Abbott was railing against it.

“Now is not the time to double down on the welfare state,” Abbott wrote in an op-ed piece in the National Review. The headline read: “Congress and Governors: Just Say No to Obamacare.”

Abbott was anticipating the law would be rejected, but the court voted the other way, 6-3. And that’s not the only way he was wide of the mark.

After the ruling, Abbott wrote, “Employers won’t face the job-killing Obamacare penalties” in states that refuse to buy into the law, such as Texas. And he urged them to move here.

“I proudly welcome more by doing everything I can to end Obamacare in Texas,” he wrote.

That may play to his base, but it’s just flat wrong. His rhetoric won’t move Texas ahead on health care, and it’s not a clarion call to business.

“I’m confused by his remarks,” said Bill Hammond, CEO of the Texas Association of Business. “It doesn’t work like that.”

While states have latitude in how they approach the health law, it’s a national program. No one can escape the mandate for coverage by simply moving to a state that opposes the ACA. Taxpayers, employers and providers also can’t avoid paying their share by living somewhere that doesn’t embrace it.

Everybody’s paying for health reform. But Texas is lagging big-time in what it gets back.

It has the highest uninsured rate in the country, roughly 1 in 4 residents. And it trails the U.S. average in enrollment on Healthcare.gov, the exchange that provides federal subsidies for most of its customers.

In theory, no state has more to gain from affordable coverage for all. But Texas leaders are constantly dissing the law and forgoing billions in federal dollars. Money is the main reason business groups, including Hammond’s, want to expand Medicaid.

Texas’ sign-ups lag

If Texas extended the program to low-income adults, as have 29 states and Washington, over 1 million residents would get coverage — with federal money paying for nearly all of it.

But even more Texans, over 3 million in total, are eligible to buy insurance on the exchange. Yet just 32 percent of them enrolled this year, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

While that’s an improvement from 2014, the national average is 36 percent. Many large states enrolled over 40 percent, and Florida hit 57 percent. Florida enrolled almost half a million more than much-larger Texas.

Top lawmakers in Florida often criticize Obamacare. But the state has exceptional outreach efforts among nonprofits and community groups, especially around Miami and the central part of the state.

In Texas, large metro areas benefited from the work of consumer groups, local leaders and insurers. But the response has varied widely. In the College Station area, as few as 12 percent of those who were eligible signed up for coverage, Kaiser said. The share topped 81 percent in some Houston suburbs.

In northeast Dallas County, including parts of Richardson and Garland, 71 percent of those eligible signed up, Kaiser said. Several other areas — including Coppell, north Irving, Duncanville and DeSoto — topped 50 percent.

But there were no statewide initiatives to boost sign-ups, and a consumer program ended a few years ago. The governor’s office, insurance department and health department haven’t launched efforts to increase participation. And leaders required extra training, background checks and fingerprinting for navigators.

Researchers from Harvard compared the impact of state policies in three Southern states — Arkansas, Kentucky and Texas. Kentucky expanded Medicaid, branded its own program and had extensive outreach. That paid off in the highest application rates, enrollment and positive experiences.

Caught up in rhetoric

Texas performed the worst.

“Our study suggests that state policy decisions are likely having a critical impact not only on eligibility but also on who chooses to apply for coverage and whether they successfully enroll,” the researchers wrote in Health Affairs magazine last month.

The finding seems predictable: More residents enroll if a state promotes the program and provides more help. So what are we waiting for?

“Can’t we tone down the rhetoric and try to work collaboratively for the citizens of Texas?” said Steve Love, CEO of the Dallas-Fort Worth Hospital Council.

As a starting point, he suggested Chief Justice John Roberts’ majority opinion: “Congress passed the Affordable Care Act to improve health insurance markets, not to destroy them,” Roberts wrote.

Employers still have many concerns about the health law, including mandates and filing regulations. But they’re relieved the court upheld it, said Marianne Fazen, executive director of the Dallas-Fort Worth Business Group on Health. She wants the focus to shift to improving the law, not repealing it.

“Employers want health care to work better,” Fazen said.

Can Texas’ leaders even agree on that?

Follow Mitchell Schnurman on Twitter at @mitchschnurman.