A clunky website is likely to blame for low enrollment by small-business groups on the state health exchange, Connect for Health Colorado officials said at a board meeting Monday.

The health exchange’s Small-employer Health Option Program, or SHOP, offered up to a 50 percent tax credit for businesses with fewer than 25 employees who have average annual income of less than $50,000. But it fell far short of the exchange’s first-year target market of 1,000 employers and 8,000 covered employees.

Only 304 employers and 2,519 employees bought coverage on what exchange staff described as a hard-to-navigate site.

“It’s not a large piece of our business, but it’s a large part of our mission,” said Marcia Benshoof, chief sales officer.

The total small-employer market encompasses more than 245,000 Coloradans, who account for more than $1 billion in premiums.

The exchange’s response is to try again next year to meet the original goals and to expand the potential market in 2016 to include employers with 100 or fewer employees.

SHOP’s strength is that it offers employers many choices of plans, said Benshoof and implementation manager Adele Work. Forty-four percent of SHOP employers chose to offer their employees more than one carrier and 68 percent chose to offer more than one plan.

However, the two managers reported, the system was not user-friendly, asked for an excessive amount of information before it would generate a quote, offered few reference plans for comparison, had limited functionality in terms of employees reporting changes and took too long to complete enrollment (more than two weeks) and generate invoices. There were eligibility glitches when enrolling in some Kaiser Permanente plans and other technical issues.

In SHOP, the average monthly premium per person was $364, and the average employer contribution was 67 percent. Just over half of employers offered dependent coverage.

Interim fixes were made early, such as a stand-alone quick-quote tool for brokers up and running by November 2013, and speedier enrollment by mid-March. But Kaiser plan selections weren’t straightened out until June 14, they said.

The system for 2015, with open enrollment beginning Nov. 15, will be much clearer and easier for applicants to use, Benshoof said.

Addressing all the system changes in 2015 to handle new business and renewals, interim chief executive Gary Drews said: “This is a hugely complex system. We’re adding a lot of functionality. We’re bound to have system hiccups.”

Electa Draper: 303-954-1276, edraper@denverpost.com or twitter.com/electadraper