Aman Bhandari and Sachin H. Jain

November 12, 2014

Health-focused startup “accelerators” are a new approach to developing solutions to problems in health care. An accelerator serves as a short-term incubator for startups to build innovative new businesses through funding, mentorship, network access and coaching.

Accelerators have been a critical part of the technology economy and innovation ecosystem since the 2006 launch of YCombinator. Health care-focused accelerators emerged in 2011, largely as a result of changes in national health care policy–including the HITECH Act and the Affordable Care Act–and the perceived new opportunities these changes created. Since that time, there has been tremendous growth in accelerators across the nation supported by a diverse set of stakeholders, part of a larger innovation economy that has formed in response to federal policy making.

How Accelerators Work

The aim of an accelerator is to increase the odds of building a successful business–from concept, to product, to launch, and beyond–by bringing together entrepreneurs, investors, and other industry influencers. Accelerator programs are structured within a limited duration–typically 3-6 months–to help cohorts of startup businesses with the new venture process. Through a highly selective application process, accelerators typically accept only 10-15 companies per year.

Once accepted into an accelerator program, startups are provided with a small amount of seed capital ($20K-$100K), strategic support, specific training and mentorship, and working space. Accelerators provide access to services and shared services that help with the design and build of the new ventures’ initial products; define customer segments; and provide access to networking opportunities with mentors, peer ventures, and successful entrepreneurs. Most accelerator programs conclude with a “demo day” where ventures pitch their business idea to a large audience of qualified investors. In return, accelerators receive a small, but meaningful share of equity in the company ranging from 2-10 percent.

By the end of 2013, hundreds of companies and entrepreneurs actively participated in accelerators. At the time of this writing, there were 30 health-focused accelerators with hubs of activity in San Francisco, Dallas, Chicago, Miami, Boston, and New York. Rock Health, the first health accelerator, inspired other health care-focused accelerators with 3 launches in 2011; 11 launches in 2012; 7 launches in 2013; and to-date 4 launches in 2014.

Organizational funding for health accelerators has come from pharmaceutical companies, payers, venture investors, technology companies, and non-profits (See Table 1). These sponsor organizations–most recently organizations such as GE, BlueCross Blue Shield Association, Kaiser Permanente, and Verizon–provide product feedback and allow entrepreneurs to see their solution through the eyes of potential customers. Ultimately, accelerators hope that these relationships offer insight into how to gain visibility to other larger investors and companies that could lead to post-program funding and commercial progress of products and solutions.

One early focus of accelerators spurred by commercial sponsors has been integrating the voice of consumers into health care delivery. Many accelerators have focused their efforts on activating and supporting a consumer focus in activities increasingly made important by health care reform, such as purchasing insurance; locating health care services; and improving communications with their providers.

Importantly, accelerators have fostered the growth of “non-traditional” talent to solve problems in health care; a notable example is a team of hedge fund analysts who recently took the top prize in a challenge competition by devising an algorithm to predict how many days a patient will spend in a hospital. It is now not uncommon to see teams of physicians, business people, designers, technologists and scientists coming together in accelerators. Conversely, different funding and equity models have also created a competitive marketplace among accelerators as they compete to bring in the best talent for each new class of entrepreneurs.

Challenges Facing Accelerators

While offering the potential to help spur new innovation, accelerators operate within the bounds of an intensely regulated industry, and value-based payment that rewards innovation is only in its nascent stages. To design solutions that are quickly scalable, entrepreneurs need to find the right customers and build products that are flexible enough to work with a variety of health systems and workflows — the challenges associated with real-world implementation of solutions have led some to suggest that accelerators are poorly positioned to solve significant health care problems.

An additional challenge for health care accelerators is demonstrating true outcome measurement and improvement. Accelerator programs are designed to help entrepreneurs demonstrate promise in a limited time frame of 3-6 months; skeptics question whether any real promising outcomes improvement is achievable in short time frames. The aggregate effect of new health startups that enhance patient engagement, clinical engagement, workflow, care coordination, and predictive analytics for payers, providers, and patients may be more meaningful than the effect of any one startup.

Health care entrepreneurship is taking new forms, spurred by changes in health care policies and new platforms for collaboration; in addition to accelerators, another booming trend is health-focused hackathons, where patients, health professionals, designers, developers, and entrepreneurs gather to compete in solving a specific problem, over a period of 24 to 48 hours. This new era is still in its early days, but there are rays of hope in both the volume of activity and the breadth of new participants. The critical challenge for all involved will be to ensure that these high levels of new entrepreneurial activity result in tangible improvements in the quality and value of care delivered to patients.

Acknowledgements: We would like to thank Anusha Sridaharan and Arnaub Chatterjee for contributing to the accelerator database and content here.

Table 1