She is not shy about putting her amazing figure in an endless array of form-fitting numbers.

And on Saturday, Amy Childs stayed true to her roots by stepping out in yet another sexy outfit as she headed into work at her fancy boutique in Brentwood, Essex.

Dressed in the nude version of the ‘Chloe’ dress from her line, the 24-year-old star showed off her toned pins perfectly, while she added height to her slender frame with a pair of classy white heels.

Scroll down for video

Turning heads: Amy Childs stayed true to her roots by stepping out in yet another sexy outfit as she headed into work at her fancy boutique in Brentwood on Saturday

Amy wore her famous luscious red-haired locks in sleek waves, while she highlighted her pretty facial features with a touch of blusher, smoky eyewear and a slick of pink petal lipstick.

The former TOWIE babe was accompanied by her loveable pug Leonardo, who seemed at ease kicking back in his caramel leather snugglebed.

Meanwhile, Amy was recently titled the highest top-earning reality TV star thanks to her successful beauty and fashion franchise, and on Friday she was seen doing her bit for charity with her cousin Harry Derbidge.

A tight fit! The 24-year-old star sported the nude version of the ‘Chloe’ dress from her line

Touch of glam: The former TOWIE babe added height to her slender frame with a pair of classy white heels, while she accessorised with a statement watch and dazzling ring

Not alone: Amy was accompanied by her loveable pug Leonardo, who seemed at ease kicking back in his caramel leather snugglebed

The two reality TV stars - who both lost their granddad to cancer - hosted at Macmillan coffee morning at Harry’s shop to raise funds for the foundation.

Harry later took to Twitter to share: ‘Macmillian day at my shop Harrys World, thank you to everyone who came today xx’

‘What a lovely day yesterday was, raised lots of money for Macmillan,’ he added.

Quick change: The red-haired beauty was also spotted in another figure-hugging ensemble

Amy recently launched her latest clothing line from her A/W collection, which boasts an impressive 20 pieces.

When asked which number is her favourite, she told The Mirror: ‘I honestly can’t pick. This season has been different as I’ve really embraced the trends and moved away from my comfort zone.

‘I also have more of a diverse range of prices as well as styles – making more affordable pieces starting from £39.99 and styles that suit a range of shapes.’

Doing her bit: Amy Childs hosted at Macmillan coffee morning with her cousin Harry Derbidge at his Harry World’s shop in Brentwood on Friday

Hard to miss: The former TOWIE star looked immaculately pristine in her ‘Livvy’ dress, which showed off her tanned pins to perfectly