The two-time player tells THR what she would have done differently and whether she'd play again.

Kat Edorsson didn't make it to the merge on her second shot at playing Survivor, and that was a source of much emotion for the two-time competitor.

After trying to vote out Monica Culpepper, who was in her alliance, her group found her to be untrustworthy and sent her to Redemption Island. There, the 23-year-old student from Orlando lost the duel to John Cody and Laura Morett and was sent packing. (She also was voted out of Survivor: One World after proving herself unpredictable to her then-alliance.)

PHOTOS: 'Survivor: Blood vs. Water': Meet the Returning Players (Again) and the Loved Ones They'll Compete With

But one of her biggest concerns is that her boyfriend, fellow competitor and former Big Brother winner Hayden Moss, would think she was a "loser" for not making it to the merge.

Following her elimination episode, she answered a few questions from The Hollywood Reporter via email.

You made a big move by trying to get Monica voted out, but your alliance thought you were untrustworthy as a result. What do you wish you'd done differently?

TOLD MONICA THE TRUTH!

You were worried about what Hayden would think of you getting voted out before the merge, and he assured you that nothing about your relationship would change. Where do you two stand now?

We are very much in love and can’t wait for another opportunity to compete again. We are hoping to live in the same state soon and see where life will take us!

PHOTOS: Jeff Probst's 'Survivor' Picture Diary

It appeared to be an agonizing decision about whether to swap places at Redemption Island, but you ended up losing the duel and were sent packing. Looking back, do you wish he'd switched places with you?

Ideally, I would have liked to play more and really see how far I would go after being sent to Redemption Island from my tribe, but as a team we were able to make the right decision when it come to the million dollars. Yes, there could be possibilities that I would have done well, but because I was eliminated there could be a small chance of doubt somewhere and we did not want to take that chance! So I’m praying Hayden brings me home the money! #TeamHat

Why did you believe that Hayden had a better chance of winning the whole thing than you?

Hello -- it's Hayden Moss, he’s the greatest there ever was! Kidding, he a very smart, knows when to speak and clearly when to listen. Really great player of the game!

Would you play Survivora third time if asked?

Survivor? Absolutely! Although Hayden and I would play any game anytime.

Survivor: Blood vs. Waterairs at 8 p.m. Wednesdays on CBS.