Airmen and women from Tyndall Air Force Base returned from Nevada on Saturday. They took part and led an aerial combat training mission involving some 3,000 airmen from across the country and the world. Leaders from Tyndall's fighter squadron are proud of their work and one pilot just completed what might be his most important mission yet.

Every year the military's finest in flight head to Las Vegas. It's not for a night on the town but above it.

"It is a huge unique opportunity to train like a team and train like we'll fight," Colonel Derek France said.

France, the 325th fighter Squadron's leader, was in command of Red Flag 16-1 at Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada.

The mission? Train to fight using day and nighttime combat.

Nellis hosted squadrons all over the country including Tyndall's 95th Fighter Squadron, plus U.S. allies from all over the world.

"Rather than a competitive environment, we wanted to create an environment where we operated as a team and competed as an enemy," France said. "And the enemy is real unique out there are Nellis, it is specially trained pilots, equipment and the array of threats they have out there is like nothing we have here and nothing really in the Air Force on the planet."

It's not only the pilots who get to flex their militaristic muscles for practice.

"Stay focused to always be on my toes, to don't be stagnant," Britnee Stephens said. Stephens said she helps support the pilots and their equipment. "Find something to do and always help somebody out because someone always needs help."

Every mission has its secrets, so we don't know exactly what happens in the air. We do know what pilot D.J. Foss was thinking on his flight back. All he could think about was one of his most important missions to date.

"Yeah almost the whole way back I was thinking about it quite a bit. It was surprising how, I mean I was really nervous," Foss said.

As soon as he descended from his F-22 Raptor, Foss got down on one knee and proposed to his girlfriend on the airfield.

"You were shaking," his fiance, Abby Comm said.

"I had a good idea what she would say," he said. "But the whole way back everybody's, you know saying oh man what if she says no!"

"But I said yes!"

This is the first Tyndall has been part of an international Red Flag training. France said he is proud of his squadron and his leadership experience.