A close election for a leadership post on a powerful committee became an outlet for House Democrats to vent unhappiness with Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi on Wednesday.

Rep. Frank Pallone Jr.

And the beneficiary was Rep. Frank Pallone of Monmouth County, who defeated a friend of Pelosi’s, Rep. Anna Eshoo of California, to become the top-ranking Democrat on the Energy and Commerce Committee.

The secret vote in the Democratic caucus was 100-90, and came a day after Pelosi was reelected minority leader without opposition. Pelosi had publicly endorsed Eshoo, saying the representative of Silicon Valley would provide new vision on the committee.

“It’s a solid rebuke to Pelosi,” said Ross Baker, a Rutgers University political scientist. “There’s an undercurrent of discontent with her leadership, but it’s very unfashionable to express it publicly against the first woman to be speaker of the House.”

Pallone also benefitted from his record as a party soldier and vigorous defender of the Affordable Care Act, his ability to raise money and spread it around to colleagues, and his seniority over Eshoo on the committee. With the two most senior Democrats retiring, Pallone was third and Eshoo was fifth.

“This is good for New Jersey,” said Rep. Bill Pascrell Jr., D-Paterson, who helped Pallone line up votes. “It’s a very prestigious committee, and Frank’s worked hard since he’s been in Congress.”

The committee’s jurisdiction includes health insurance, food and drug regulations, telecommunications and some environmental policy.

In a statement, Pallone said he was “humbled” by the outcome.

“I am committed to developing real solutions to challenges that average Americans face, while building an agenda that will make our party stronger for years to come,” Pallone said.

Of the $1.6 million Pallone spent through Oct. 15 from his reelection campaign account, $805,000 went to other candidates, including $270,000 to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. Pallone had also spent another $3 million last year on an unsuccessful bid for U.S. Senate.

After Democrats lost at least a dozen seats on Nov. 4, Pascrell had called for Pelosi to postpone leadership elections to allow time for an in-depth examination of what happened and where the party needed to go next year.

“It really shows there’s kick in our rank-and-file, that were not going to be led by the nose,” Pascrell said of Pallone’s win.

A committee’s ranking minority member is often consulted on hearings and can pick some witnesses. When legislation is being considered, the ranking member has a say in which amendments the minority party will offer.

Pallone, who was first elected in 1988, has headed the House Democrats’ messaging operation, which involves lining up members to give speeches on topics the party wants to stress at the start of sessions.

“That’s not a job that everybody wants to have, but Pallone was regarded as the ultimate good soldier among House Democrats, and he picked up a lot of credit for that,” Baker said.

Email: jackson@northjersey.com Blog: northjersey.com/thepoliticalstate