Topics: #blacklivesmatter, African American, African Americans, black lives matter, black people, campus activism, campus protests, charleston shooting, Civil rights movement, Donald Trump, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Dylann Roof, Editor's Picks, freddie gray, Martin Luther King, Martin Luther King Day, police violence, Race, Racism, whiteness, News, Politics News

It’s easy to feel a bit cynical about the way the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., whose birthday we celebrate this weekend, has become an American secular saint. King is misquoted or selectively paraphrased by politicians who would have had him investigated or arrested as a contemporary. Or he is framed as a one-issue “man of faith” whose vision of social justice and racial equality went no further than the soaring rhetoric of the 1963 “I Have a Dream” speech and the Voting Rights Act (a law that was radical enough in its own way, and that many of the elected officials who quote King at opportune moments have stealthily worked to defund, defang and disable).

King did not live long enough to play a major role in popular organizing against the Vietnam War, but he was clearly heading in that direction. We can only speculate how he would have interacted with the modern feminist movement, or the LGBT movement, both of which were in their infancy in 1968. As we saw King portrayed by David Oyelowo in Ava DuVernay’s fascinating but flawed film “Selma,” he was both a strategist and a theoretician of nonviolent civil disobedience, a confrontational approach to power that goes well beyond “protest.” As developed by Mahatma Gandhi, King and many other people in many other movements, nonviolent civil disobedience requires activists who are prepared to put their safety, their freedom and sometimes their lives at risk, in order to expose the hypocrisy and brutality of ruling elites and the police who serve their interests.

We know that King was in Memphis at the time of his death to help organize the city’s exploited and underpaid sanitation workers, and that he understood racism not simply as a matter of legal inequality but also as a question of economic power. He commented on several occasions that poor and disadvantaged whites in the rural South had been encouraged to vent their frustrations by way of racist violence and overt bigotry, directed at the only group worse off than themselves. He would have been fascinated by Black Panther leader Fred Hampton’s outreach efforts in poor white neighborhoods on the South Side of Chicago, and might have wondered how much that had to do with the Chicago Police Department’s assassination of Hampton shortly thereafter.

King was a man of his time, and a person whose troubled personal life might have made him an unpalatable political leader today (as “Selma” also made clear). What would he make of America circa 2016, on what would have been his 87th birthday? (It’s startling to realize that King could easily still be alive. He’d be younger than my mother.) No one can answer that question, and I won’t presume to try. One indirect but important legacy of King’s movement is that someone in my position — a white man behind a computer, writing about “race” from a position of presumed journalistic neutrality — is compelled, for both moral and pragmatic reasons, to consider the limits of his own perspective. Can I actually discern and correct for my own level of privilege, or detect whatever unconscious attitudes and prejudices I have internalized? By definition, I’m pretty sure I can’t. But being aware that those things may be issues for me, or for readers, is an important starting point.

On one hand, all is changed, changed utterly, in the years since King’s death, as the Irish poet William Butler Yeats said about a different era of political transformation. The dynamics of race in America have altered significantly: In 1968, Latinos were a scattered and disparate group with little sense of collective identity, largely found in California, Texas and New York City. Outside certain urban enclaves, immigrants were nearly invisible. Despite this reshaped context, the contours of American society might look familiar to King, and the patterns of race and racism tend to repeat themselves.

If race in America is no longer just a question of black and white, those two invented categories that have haunted our nation’s history have loomed large over the last year. This was the year of Black Lives Matter, and a year of extensive public debate over the nature of the relationship between African-Americans and the police. It was a year that brought us an unfolding series of protests or disturbances or “riots” in African-American neighborhoods, a theme or pattern King would recognize immediately. While the Civil Rights Movement in the American South concerned much bigger and broader issues than policing, the overt violence and repression it provoked from police departments and rural sheriffs attracted worldwide attention, and became an enormous part of King’s struggle for justice.

For other black activists of that period — especially the Black Panthers, but also Malcolm X’s Nation of Islam and Stokely Carmichael’s “black power” movement — police violence was a central and defining issue. It was the mechanism by which African-American communities were imprisoned and oppressed, and it was a metaphor that revealed the actual power relationships of American society. It would not be remotely true to say that nothing has changed since those turbulent days of the mid-1960s, but the cyclical recurrence of this issue suggests that those fundamental power relationships have not been addressed.

As numerous commentators on Fox News or right-wing radio will tell you, most of the Baltimore police officers apparently implicated in the death of Freddie Gray are themselves black. That would not have seemed conceivable to King or the Panthers, perhaps, and neither would the fact that the United States has twice elected a black president. But those who would argue today that facts on the ground in Baltimore, or in the White House, prove that racism is no longer a factor in policing, in politics or in the exercise of power are deliberately ignoring the lessons of history. (Which is virtually our national pastime. If it stings when snooty foreign intellectuals depict Americans as not merely ignorant about the world but also profoundly incurious, that’s because it’s largely true.)