Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

From this morning’s LBO Wire:

ICV Partners sold Consolidated Aviation Services LLC to Worldwide Flight Services, a portfolio company of Platinum Equity, reports Laura Cooper.

Based at the John F. Kennedy International Airport, Consolidated Aviation Services is a cargo handler with 5,000 employees and operations at 45 airports, according to a news release. The Jamaica, N.Y., company provides cargo, passenger ramp and express handling services.

More stories available to LBO Wire subscribers:

MTS Health Investors so far raised $155 million toward a target of $300 million for its fourth private equity fund…Leonard Green & Partners won’t be the only firm feeling the burn from the bankruptcy of sporting goods retailer Sports Authority Holdings Inc.: A number of investors that provided mezzanine debt to the company also may lose out,…And turmoil in key Latin American economies weighed down private equity and venture capital activity in the region last year, with strong results from Mexico and Peru partially making up for weakness in Brazil.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere on the Web:

Aubrey McClendon, an Oklahoma wildcatter who helped pioneer the shale energy boom and had ties to private equity, died in a fiery car crash Wednesday, a day after he was indicted by a federal grand jury on charges of conspiring to rig the price of oil and gas leases, Bradley Olson, Ryan Dezember and Erin Ailworth report for The Wall Street Journal.



London-based Doughty Hanson, one of the first private equity firms to have a dedicated responsible investment chief, lost an executive who headed sustainability to secondaries firm Coller Capital, according to U.K. sister publication Private Equity News. (Subscription required.)

Sports Authority Inc.’s flop into bankruptcy teaches private equity a lesson, according to Bloomberg Gadfly columnists Gillian Tan and Shelly Banjo.

Business Insider presents the 25 richest people in private equity, noting “most folks” on the list have lost money since last year.

Write to Mike Lucas at michael.lucas@wsj.com