The president of The University of North Carolina, Margaret Spellings, said that the 17 campuses she oversees will follow the state’s new law requiring transgender people to use bathrooms based on their biological sex.

Spellings said in a letter to chancellors, “The 16 college campuses and the N.C. School of Science and Math must label multi-occupancy changing facilities for single-sex use. Schools may provide single-occupancy bathrooms or changing facilities that are gender neutral.”

State lawmakers approved the Public Facilities Privacy & Security Act two weeks ago, which creates a statewide employment and public discrimination policy that bars protections for LGBT people.

The North Carolina chapter of the ACLU criticized Spellings for her decision to follow the new law. The ACLU is challenging the law in court on behalf of a University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill worker, a University of North Carolina at Greensboro student, and a North Carolina Central University professor.

The ACLU is being assisted in the lawsuit by North Carolina’s Lambda Legal and Equality.

“By requiring people to use restrooms that do not correspond to their gender identity, this policy not only endangers and discriminates against transgender people, it also violates federal law,” the groups said in a joint statement.

The law states that the University of North Carolina system and the community colleges in the state are among those that have to comply with the bathroom rules.

Spellings also noted in the memo that the new law does not address enforcement. The state law is unclear whether students would be included in the loophole or if it only applies to employees.

When a law is implemented there have to be clear enforcement procedures and guidelines. How and what type of punishment can ensue from using a public restroom that is outside of your biological sex? If North Carolina really implemented this law for safety reasons, it seems as though enforcement and punishment would have been more clearly spelled out in the statute.

Source: University of North Carolina president says campuses must follow LGBT law

Join the Discussion