Syracuse, N.Y. -- The federal government is cutting payments to Crouse Hospital and Upstate University Hospital for having high rates of patient infections and other avoidable complications.

Crouse and Upstate are among 721 U.S. hospitals getting their Medicare payments reduced by 1 percent as part of a government crackdown on medical errors.

Medicare released the list of hospitals facing penalties Thursday. Kaiser Health News published the list as part of an analysis of the penalties. Kaiser estimates the penalties for all U.S. hospitals will total $373 million. A breakdown of the amount of the penalties at Crouse and Upstate was not immediately available.

The penalties, created under the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, are designed to encourage hospitals to reduce "hospital acquired conditions," HAC for short. These are conditions such as infections, bed sores and broken hips that patients did not have when they arrived at the hospital, but developed during their hospital stay.

The government gives each hospital a HAC score of one to 10, with 1 being the best and 10 the worst. The government is penalizing hospitals with scores above seven.

HAC scores are based on three measures: frequency of infections caused by tubes that pump fluids or medicine into veins, infections from tubes placed in bladders to remove urine and rates of eight types of serious complications. Those serious complications included collapsed lungs, surgical cuts, tears, reopened wounds and broken hips.

Here are HAC scores for Central New York hospitals: Crouse: 9* Upstate University: 7.4* Cayuga Medical Center, Ithaca: 6.35 Cortland Regional Medical Center, Cortland: 5.42 St. Joseph's Hospital Health Center: 5.02 Oneida Healthcare Center: 2.05 Oswego: 1.67 Auburn Community: 1.35 *Hospitals with scores above seven are being penalized

Source: Medicare, Kaiser Health News

Dr. Patrick Conway, deputy administrator for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, said the data on complications will help spur improvements. "This transparency is critical to transforming the health care delivery system to achieve the three aims of better care for patients, better health for communities and spending dollars wisely," he wrote on the agency's website.

The penalties are the latest in series of financial incentives the government has rolled out in recent years to encourage hospital improvements. Medicare already fines hospitals that have too many patients return within a month of being discharged. It also gives bonuses or penalties to hospitals based on how they stack up on a variety of other quality measures.

Contact James T. Mulder anytime: Email | Twitter | 315-470-2245