Andre Comeaux (Photo: unknown)

André Comeaux, a local insurance broker and on the Greater Lafayette Chamber of Commerce board of directors, has thrown his name into the race for state representative for the 45th district.

Comeaux will run for the seat vacated by Rep. Joel Robideaux, who announced that he will run for Lafayette City-Parish President.

“I like to help people. My wife and I have been in community service for many, many years and this is part of that,” Comeaux said. “There’s a seat that’s open and a need for someone to step in and serve for this district. And I feel called that I can serve best in my community.”

Comeaux has a lot of volunteer work on his resume, as he has done community service for several schools in the parish, including on the ReProm court for the Lafayette Education Foundation and on Northside High School’s Academy of Engineering Advisory Board in 2011.

Comeaux, a Republican, was a big supporter for Robideaux’s 2004 campaign, as well as Rep. Nancy Landry’s campaigns in 2007 and 2008. Comeaux said his main focus for running is trying to balance the state’s budget.

“The most important thing to do in Baton Rouge is to stabilize the budget,” he said. “I can’t tell you right now how that’s going to happen, a lot is going to depend on where the next legislative session is going to move the ball. ”

Comeaux is a risk management consultant and senior vice president for Regions Insurance and has been in the commercial insurance business for the last 14 years, his biography says. He said he has worked with school boards, state and parish governments and community health care providers.

Comeaux has a degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Louisiana at Lafayette and worked in the oilfield right out of college, according to his bio. He is married to Angie Perrin Comeaux and has two daughters.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/news/local/2015/03/01/insurance-broker-run-state-representative/24237897/