Jennifer Boysko will again vie for Tom Rust’s House of Delegates seat in 2015

Democrat Jennifer Boysko, who lost election to incumbent state Del. Tom Rust (R-86th) by less than 60 votes out of roughly 20,500 cast in 2013, will again challenge the veteran GOP lawmaker in 2015, Boysko told the Times-Mirror today.



Last year was Boysko's first bid for public office. She previously served as a former legislative aide to Fairfax County Supervisor John Foust, who last week lost Virginia's 10th Congressional District election to Republican Barbara Comstock.



Boysko has lived in Herndon since 1996 after growing up in Alabama and Arkansas and graduating from Hollins College in Roanoke.



"I am running for the 86th District in the Virginia House of Delegates because I still believe we need a delegate who will stand up for us," said Boysko, who conceded the 2013 race after a recount. "You won't find my hands tied by other politicians. I care about our community and will make that my priority every single day."



The 86th District, comprised mostly of Fairfax County and sections of Sterling, has belonged to Rust, a former mayor of Herndon, since 2002. Demographically, the makeup has shifted to lean Democrat, with 60 percent of voters pulling for President Barack Obama (D) in 2012 and 57 percent for Terry McAuliffe (D) in 2013.



Recognized as an "effective, constructive and bipartisan leader," according to his website, Rust was named chairman of the House's Transportation Committee for the 2014 General Assembly session. He is the only Republican in the House of Delegates who supported Medicaid expansion in Virginia through the Affordable Care Act.





Contact the writer at .(JavaScript must be enabled to view this email address) .





Comments

Post a comment

Commenting is not available in this channel entry.

Comments express only the views of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of this website or any associated person or entity. Any user who believes a message is objectionable can contact us at [email protected].



More News