Each week HuffPost Gay Voices, in a partnership with bloggers Liz Margolies and Scout , brings you a round up of some of the biggest LGBT wellness stories from the past seven days. For more LGBT Wellness, visit our page dedicated to the topic here .

1 Married Gay Couples Soon Covered Under Obamacare Family Plans Elea Dumas via Getty Images

The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) announced that beginning in 2015, insurance companies that provide coverage to opposite-sex spouses must also offer coverage to same-sex spouses regardless of whether their state recognizes their marriage. Dr. Matthew Heinz, from HHS, says that this new policy will “...further enhance access to healthcare for all Americans, including those with same-sex spouses."

2 No Medical Rationale for Banning Trans from Military Shutterstock / Jami Garrison

The Palm Center released a report this week which found no medical rationale for banning trans service-members. The widely covered report, led by former Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders and Rear Admiral Alan Steinman, found that eliminating the ban would also advance a number of military interests.

3 New Study on Violence in Gay Men’s Relationships Shutterstock / Odua Images

Intimate partner violence in gay male couples is often concealed out of shame and a belief that they should “take it like a man.” This study exposes the beliefs about masculinity that harm gay men and limit the resources available to help victims of gay domestic violence.

4 Exploring How to Provide LGBT Senior Services Shutterstock / auremar

A trio of resources came out this week on LGBT senior services. The L.A. Gay & Lesbian Center published an academic article outlining their extensive service delivery model and SAGE partnered with other groups to release both a ten-state study of housing barriers as well as a needs assessment of Hispanic elders.

5 Protecting LGBT Youth from Utah to New York Shutterstock / fasphotographic

Caitlin Ryan, director of the Family Acceptance Project, is working with religious leaders in Utah to create programs to stop suicide and homelessness in LGBT Mormon youth. Meanwhile, NYC Department of Education released guidelines to meet the needs of transgender students. Also see a new review of research on how stressful childhood experiences contribute to adverse health outcomes for sexual minority individuals.

6 MtF Should Probably Stay Away from Oral Estrogens for Heart Health Shutterstock / Arman Zhenikeyev

We’re delighted to see a series of too-rare trans clinical studies come out. Read a review of breast development in trans women and a surgery outcomes article or one on the effect of hormones on the brain. Top it all off with the news that hormones don’t significantly increase FtM cardiovascular risk but MtF should probably stay away from oral Estrogens for best heart health.

7 Bisexuals Face the Greatest Health Disparities HuffPost Live

As we continue Bisexual Health Awareness Month our own Huffington Post Live interviewed leaders about the little-known fact that bisexual health disparities are greater than for lesbians or gays.

8 First Confirmed Case of Lesbian HIV Transmission Shutterstock / leolintang