Republicans are still debating one another on how to approach economic inequality. | AP Photos GOP's confused inequality message

Don’t ever accuse the Republicans of having nothing to say about inequality. They have lots to say about it. Lots of different things.

Now that President Barack Obama has put inequality on the national agenda, the GOP is on the hunt for something to say. They’re making progress, with prominent Republicans adopting some of the latest ideas generated by conservative thinkers — everything from rewrites of antipoverty programs to new tax breaks for middle-class families.

Story Continued Below

And they’re challenging Obama’s seriousness in actually addressing the economic inequality he warned about. “We are facing an inequality crisis — one to which the president has paid lip service, but seems uninterested in truly confronting or correcting,” Sen. Mike Lee of Utah said in the tea party response to Obama’s State of the Union address.

( Also on POLITICO: Senate blocks unemployment insurance again)

But for all of the headline-grabbing speeches by their rising stars, the GOP still isn’t ready to finish this sentence: “And the Republican plan for inequality is …”

The Democrats have a script on inequality — the lengthy script that Obama read in his State of the Union stemwinder. Republicans are more like the roomful of scriptwriters who are still writing things down and crossing them out, still debating each other about what the actual plot is going to be.

They’ve got some fully developed scenes, thanks to serious speeches by high-profile Republicans like Paul Ryan, Marco Rubio and Lee — but there are also some that really haven’t progressed beyond one-liners yet. (Why did Lee call Obamacare an “inequality Godzilla” in his State of the Union response? We’ll come back to that one.)

It’s another example of how the GOP can sometimes stumble around when it needs an answer to Obama’s policies. For years, Republicans have been hard pressed to identify an alternative to Obamacare, and although some Republicans are starting to outline their own plans now, Obama can still score points with the “What’s your plan?” zinger. Now that Obama is talking inequality, Republicans are being put in the same box.

( Also on POLITICO: Obama’s power play)

But leading Republicans and conservative thinkers say it’s fine to keep hashing out the solutions — because for the GOP, it’s progress just to be talking about the issue at all.

“I think there is a general consensus that Republicans have solutions, so it’s something we should be talking about,” said Lanhee Chen, Mitt Romney’s former policy director. “The only way we’re going to grow our constituency and get more people to vote Republican is to address some of these issues head on.”

That was a major theme of the Growth and Opportunity Project report, the Republican National Committee-led effort to examine the lessons of its losses in 2012. The report warned that “if we are going to grow as a Party, our policies and actions must take into account that the middle class has struggled mightily and that far too many of our citizens live in poverty. To people who are flat on their back, unemployed or disabled and in need of help, they do not care if the help comes from the private sector or the government — they just want help.”

( Also on POLITICO: Why the rich are freaking out)

But when Republicans try to figure out what else to talk about besides the old standbys — welfare reform and economic growth — “that’s where you start to see a cacophony of voices and ideas” on how to tackle the growing economic divide, said Scott Winship, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute who has testified at congressional hearings about inequality and poverty.

Right now, the GOP responses to the inequality debate fall into these camps:

It’s not really about inequality. The one general area of consensus, most Republicans say, is that “opportunity” is the better way to frame the debate, rather than focusing on the income inequality that Obama and liberal Democrats like New York Mayor Bill de Blasio have talked about. To Republicans, a lack of economic opportunities is what causes inequality in the first place.

Lee, who talked about an “opportunity crisis” in a speech to The Heritage Foundation last year — lack of mobility for the poor, middle-class insecurity and too much privilege for political and economic elites — reframed the same three points as an “inequality crisis” when he gave the tea party response to Obama’s speech.

But Republicans note that even Obama has shifted gears. Even though he talked about the huge gap between average wages and the income of the wealthiest Americans, the slogan he’s using now is, “Opportunity for All.”

( Also on POLITICO: The war on inequality … may take a while)

In general, Republicans and conservative think-tankers are responding to Obama by saying income inequality isn’t really the problem. For one thing, they say, it doesn’t make sense to go after rich people for making too much money. But they also argue that there’s little evidence that the income gap, by itself, makes it harder for low-income and middle-class Americans to thrive.

“Some say the problem is income inequality. The more the rich make, the less there is for the rest of us — and the harder it is to get ahead. It’s a compelling argument; the only problem is, it’s not true,” Ryan said at a House Budget Committee hearing on poverty on the day of Obama’s speech.

Even Rubio, who has said the statistics on the income gap are “startling figures” that deserve attention, argues that the problem is less about how much money a CEO makes than the cashier who can’t move on to a better job.

Winship, who testified at a Joint Economic Committee hearing that the impact of inequality has been overstated, said the majority of Republicans aren’t interested in reducing income inequality for its own sake. The more common view, he said, is that “if what we care about is inequality of opportunity, let’s address that.”

Lee, however, is fine describing the problem as “inequality.” But in his State of the Union response, he redefined the term expansively, describing it as everything from bad schools for poor children to marriage penalties, “taxpayer bailouts” for health insurance companies under Obamacare, government surveillance and ”denying viable, unborn children any protection under the law.”

CORRECTION: Corrected by: Alysha Love @ 02/07/2014 09:57 AM CORRECTION: An earlier version of this report misstated the nature of David Winston’s presentation to the GOP retreat.