Research presented at a US conference has revived hopes of eventually curing cancer, but at what cost?

The annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) is always an opportunity to show off promising research, and this year has been no exception.

As thousands of researchers, clinicians and policy-holders met in Chicago on May 30th to June 3rd, the presentations have sparked headlines about breakthroughs resulting from over a decade of immuno-oncology research.

But this year's ASCO also focused on a less encouraging debate—over the affordability of the next generation of cancer drugs.

On the research side, the biggest buzz this year was over anti-PD-1 therapies, the so-called checkpoint inhibitors that disable the programmed cell death 1 proteins used by tumours to evade attack from the patient's immune system.

Two of them, pembrolizumab and nivolumab, roused particular interest at ASCO for their success in Phase I melanoma trials. The trial for pembrolizumab (previously MK-3475) showed that, of 411 patients with advanced melanoma, 69% survived for more than a year. The trial for Nivolumab, a drug candidate that has already shown impressive trial results, reported an 85% one-year survival rate when used in combination with a licensed therapy, Yervoy (ipilimumab).

The resulting headlines have circled the world. One consultant, whose patient reported a near-cure on pembrolizumab, described the drug as a "paradigm shift for cancer research". Its developer, Merck & Co (US), is already well on its way to getting it approved for the treatment of advanced melanoma, after the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) gave it a priority review designation in May.

But the drug may have other capabilities too. The ten clinical trials of pembrolizumab that are currently under way involve more than 4,000 patients and a wide range of cancers, from bladder and gastric to lung and renal.

Nivolumab, developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb (US), is also undergoing several trials, as it heads for a large-scale Phase III one. Though this is still at the recruitment stage, results from the earlier trials have been extremely encouraging. Bristol-Myers has also reported progress with BMS-936559, which targets the PD-1 ligand (or PD-L1). As with the Merck drug, both may work against a number of different cancers, and trials are ongoing.

In all, around eight anti-PD-1 or PD-L1 drugs are now in clinical trials. Roche/Genentech (Switzerland) recently reported encouraging Phase I results for bladder cancer for MPDL3280A, which has an FDA breakthrough designation. Amplimmune of the US, an immunology specialist that was last year bought by AstraZeneca to expand its work in this area, currently has two anti-PD-1s in development.

Yet not everyone involved in immuno-oncology is backing anti-PD-1s. Last December, Teva of Israel shocked investors by stepping back from its collaboration with Celltech, an Israeli biotech company with which it had been developing one such drug, dubbed pidiluzumab. GlaxoSmithKline, despite its decision to sell its oncology arm to Novartis in April, recently snapped up Adaptimmune, a US biotech company, in order to focus on its cell-based approach instead.

Value for money

This may be less because of doubts over the potential of anti-PD-1s than concerns over the amount of competition in this area. With several companies piling in to invest in immuno-oncology, not all will benefit equally—all the more so because of the rising concern over healthcare payors' ability to pay for new cancer drugs. At ASCO, one key speaker was Ezekiel Emanuel, the architect of US healthcare reforms, who warned that the US would struggle to afford the cancer treatments that are now becoming available.

Among the drugs getting attention at ASCO, for example, was ramucirumab, a drug developed by Eli Lilly (US) that was approved for gastric cancer in April. Research presented at ASCO suggests it extends life for patients with advanced gastric cancer by 2.4 months; it may also be effective against lung cancer, a rare bit of good news in a difficult area. Yet in the US ramucirumab costs US$7,140 per infusion, with one needed every two weeks. That is a price that may prove prohibitive, particularly if it extends life by just weeks.

Eli Lilly will clearly have work to do to prove the value of ramucirumab, but it is not alone. According to Express Scripts' annual Drug Trends Report, the average cost per prescription for a cancer drug in 2013 was US$4,023—22 times more than when reporting began in 1997. In the UK, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence recently issued a public call for Roche to cut the price of its new breast cancer drug Kadcyla, after deciding it was unaffordable for the NHS.

The issue is also raising questions about the FDA's "breakthrough" designation, which is intended to pinpoint particularly innovative treatments. This has gone to 40 drugs so far, of which nearly half are cancer drugs. For the FDA, which is barred from considering cost, this is a way of highlighting which drugs may deserve priority approval.

But it may also end up influencing funding decisions. Indeed, many are starting to ask whether FDA approval should take into account the number of weeks of life added, so that the value of cancer breakthroughs becomes easier to determine. Others are fearful that this might dampen the flow of good news coming from ASCO's annual meetings.

Click here to subscribe to The Economist.

Read the original article on The Economist. Copyright 2014. Follow The Economist on Twitter.