The Supreme Court’s June 25 ruling to preserve ObamaCare exchange subsidies in 34 states using HealthCare.gov had the effect of a starter’s pistol, shifting insurer consolidation into high gear.

The immediate stakes in the case weren’t dramatic for bigger health insurers. The individual-exchange market still represents a tiny fraction of their overall business and a negligible share — if any — of profits. But the stocks jumped following the news because markets had figured-in the fallout from a possible decision against the Obama administration, which could have cast doubt on the Affordable Care Act’s staying power.

With that uncertainty lifted, Aetna (AET) quickly announced a $37 billion deal to buy Humana (HUM). Centene (CNC) said it would pick up Health Net (HNT) for $6.3 billion. Anthem (ANTM), which made public its $54 billion bid for Cigna (CI) just days before the ruling, is still plodding toward the finish line.

The frenzy of activity among the stocks collected in IBD’s Medical-Managed Care group has been driven by necessity. Buyers are scaling up to keep from being squeezed between government price restraints and the payment demands of a consolidating hospital sector. At the same time, they are repositioning for growth opportunities in Medicare and Medicaid.

Why Size Matters

All this has made the consolidation a seller’s market. Morningstar analyst Vishnu Lekraj thinks Aetna massively overpaid for Humana, offering more than double his estimate of the stock’s $114 fair value. But even under those terms, it was a deal that had to happen, he says.

In the managed care industry, “the bigger you are, the better off you are,” Lekraj said. “You are able to attain deeper pricing discounts from providers” and spread centralized costs over a broader customer pool.

Aetna, without Humana, would be about half the size of the rest of its rivals, leaving it in “a precarious state.”

Though merger talks have snagged Anthem’s bid to buy Cigna, a combination that would surpass UnitedHealth Group (UNH) to create the nation’s largest insurer, the risk of being dwarfed by the competition while facing a challenging regulatory climate led Aetna to quickly seal the deal with Humana.

The rules of health reform, which require insurers to spend 80% to 85% of premiums on health expenses, leave them little leeway to pay for administrative costs and still carve out a narrow profit. That’s touched off a drive for synergies enabling companies to spread their fixed costs over a broader base and hold the line against rising mega-hospital players — which are also consolidating.

Growth of the employer-sponsored insurance market, where Aetna has long had a prime position, is expected to be minimal under ObamaCare as some companies drop coverage and millions of workers join the subsidized exchanges or Medicaid. Meanwhile, the Cadillac tax is due to hit in 2018 — adding 40% to the cost of the richest insurance policies ($10,200 for individual coverage and $27,500 for family plans). That’s sure to have the intended impact of getting people to spend less on employer coverage.

“It’s not a growth market,” said Leerink Partners analyst Ana Gupte. “If you’re looking for growth, you have to look to Medicaid, Medicare and to a lesser extent the public exchanges.”

The need to diversify into these other markets and the “push for scale” to withstand pricing pressure have made it inevitable that the big five insurers become the big three, she said.

Aetna has been rapidly growing its government business, which made up 38% of a total $58 billion in revenue last year. But Humana, whose Medicare and Medicaid business lines account for 76% of $48.5 billion in revenue, offered an opportunity to build scale in a hurry. Humana’s 3.2 million Medicare Advantage members give it a 19% share of the market. Adding that to Aetna’s 7% share would raise the combined company’s total to 4.4 million Medicare Advantage members — before possible divestments required by regulators in markets where they overlap.

Dueling For “Dual Eligibles”

Before ObamaCare, enrollment in Medicare Advantage plans had been soaring because the government paid the plans, on average, an extra 14% per enrollee over its cost for traditional, fee-for-service Medicare. That allowed the insurers to attract customers with extra services, such as dental care or eye care. Because ObamaCare eliminates that 14% premium, Medicare Advantage membership was expected to flatline or worse. Instead, enrollment is up nearly 50% since passage of the ACA, to 17 million. The Congressional Budget Office expects MA membership to hit 24 million in 2020 and 30 million in 2025, adding two members for each new senior entering traditional Medicare.

Medicare pays insurers such as Humana and Aetna on a per-person or capitated basis, rather than reimbursing providers based on services used. The per-person rate is risk-adjusted, meaning it’s higher for patients with more serious conditions, though that’s given rise to charges that some insurers have gamed the system. Still, the method of payment aims to align the incentives of managed care organizations with delivering more proactive care, and there’s tentative evidence that it may be working.

“The available measures, while limited, suggest that, on average, MA plans offer care of equal or higher quality and for less cost than traditional Medicare,” concluded Harvard health economists Joseph Newhouse and Thomas McGuire in a paper last year.

Medicaid’s big growth spurt is mostly behind it, with ObamaCare already adding 10 million to the program, but Medicaid managed care has extra running room. That’s in part because its growth isn’t only tied to the expansion of coverage, but also to state decisions to shift their Medicaid populations to private insurers that provide coordinated care at a defined price.

At present, 39 states contract with managed care organizations to serve about three-fourths of Medicaid beneficiaries. But states have just begun to shift one important segment of their Medicaid populations to managed care. These are the so-called “dual eligibles” because they qualify for both Medicare and Medicaid. Enrollees in this category are generally very poor and have significant health needs.

Research from Oppenheimer puts the dual-eligible population at 9 million, providing a $300 billion market opportunity.

The acquisition of Health Net will add its 1.7 million Medicaid managed care members to Centene’s 4 million, expanding its geographic reach and making it a leader in the category.

ObamaCare’s use of subsidies to lure more individuals into insurance coverage has been about positioning for the future, not about profits. Cigna CEO David Cordani said on a first-quarter conference call that “there’s a loss in the business (in 2015), but (it) is less than 2014 (and) we’d expect that to improve further as we step into 2016.”

Humana Takes A Different Path

Enrollment has lagged expectations so far, with just 10.2 million paid exchange enrollees in 2015 compared to earlier CBO projections of 13 million. But the CBO expects that to double next year and reach 24 million in 2017. The ramping up of the individual mandate penalty (to the lesser of $695 per adult or 2.5% of taxable household income) makes it a pretty sure bet that millions more low-income households will sign up rather than pay a penalty that is equal to, if not greater than, the lowest-cost premium.

Yet these three growth markets (Medicare, Medicaid and public exchange) yield thinner profit margins than the insurance industry has seen in the employer market. That has managed care players looking to make inroads in complementary markets with a lesser degree of regulation.

Humana’s 6% share of the pharmacy benefit-management market could offer such an opportunity to Aetna. Pharmacy benefit managers do the negotiating with drugmakers and pharmacies for health insurers and administer the benefits.

On the call announcing its merger, Aetna management raised as a long-term possibility that when its contract with CVS Caremark (the PBM unit of CVS Health (CVS) expires in 2019, it might convert its own accounts to its new, in-house PBM.

Top health insurer UnitedHealth so far has been sitting out this new round of insurer consolidations, but it’s been building scale on the other side of its business. Its Optum health services unit will close on a $12.8 billion purchase of pharmacy benefit manager Catamaran (CTRX) this month. That combination will give Optum a 22% share of the PBM business, making it a close No. 3 behind CVS Caremark and Express Scripts, according to the Drug Channels Institute.

Optum’s revenue grew 16% from a year ago to $13.6 billion in the first quarter, helping to drive UnitedHealth’s overall revenue increase of 11% to $36.3 billion.

UnitedHealth has been building up the Optum side of its business for five years, to a point where it’s achieved the scale to be “a powerful player on its own,” Lekraj said.

Other managed care providers “may envy” the diversification and scale UnitedHealth has attained in complementary areas of health care services that don’t face government-imposed profit caps, “but they can’t duplicate it,” Lekraj said.