Expanding Medicaid in Alabama would cost state government more than it would receive in new tax revenue from increased economic activity, according a new report challenging a pair of earlier findings.

Produced by Troy University’s Manuel H. Johnson Center for Political Economy, the study released Monday by professors Scott Beaulier and Phillip Mixon, concludes that a University of Alabama at Birmingham report in 2012 and a 2013 University of Alabama study rely on faulty assumptions in concluding that the accepting additional federal funds for Medicaid would generate millions of dollars in additional tax revenue and create tens of thousands of jobs.

Authors of the Troy study argue that under the best-case scenario, new tax revenue would exceed added costs only during the three years that the federal government picks up 100 percent of the expansion.

“Financially, I do not think it’s a good deal for the state,” Mixon said in an interview.

Medicaid has been a hotly debated issue in Alabama since Gov. Robert Bentley decided the state would reject additional federal funds to expand coverage to residents earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty line. Congress included the expansion in the Affordable Care Act, which also created taxpayer-financed subsidies for higher-income people who had trouble affording insurance on their own.

But the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 2012 that states could not be compelled to participate in the Medicaid expansion, and Alabama is one of 25 states has not taken the federal money. That has left between 181,000 and 300,000 Alabamians too rich to qualify for Medicaid but too poor to be eligible for subsidies.

The governor has come under intense pressure from hospital administrators, Democratic lawmakers and others to change his mind. David Bronner, the longtime chief of the state employees’ pension fund, has argued that Bentley’s decision will hurt the state and stunt economic growth.

He has repeatedly pointed to the UAB study in arguing that $11.7 billion in new federal Medicaid spending from 2014 to 2020, plus an additional $8.1 million in spinoff economic activity, would generate more than $1.7 billion in new tax revenue – more than paying for the added cost to state government. The University of Alabama study projected that the spending increases would spark job gains ranging from 24,613 to 51,918 – with a middle estimate of 30,722 jobs.

Flawed methodology cited

Beaulier, executive director of the Johnson Center, said both the Alabama and the UAB studies should be viewed in the context of the political agenda of the Alabama Hospital Association, which commissioned the work.

The Johnson Center, too, has come under criticism for its political influences. It launched with a $1.2 million grant from the Koch Foundation, along with matching funds from the BB&T Charitable Foundation and former Federal Reserve Board Vice Chairman Manuel “Manley” Johnson. Industrialists Charles and David Koch have played an aggressive role in funding conservative political candidates and causes and have become the target of critics on the left as a result.

But Beaulier said his research is independent and offers a free-market perspective often lacking in academia.

“We feel like the work we are presenting here is actually a minority position,” he said.

The Troy study contends that earlier analyses make faulty assumptions that result in unrealistically optimistic projections of economic gains. Among the flaws, Beaulier and Mixon argue, are:

Failure to take into account a current doctor shortage. Bentley has made a similar argument, contending that it takes years to produce a doctor and that the supply will not magically grow just because the federal government provides health insurance to more people.

Use of unrealistically low estimates of overhead costs in the administration of the Medicaid program.

Use of flawed data in calculating tax revenue.

The Troy authors point to data from the Alabama Rural Health Association indicating that 60 of 67 counties in the state have a shortage of primary-care providers. They also argue the previous studies have failed to take into account the increased demand for providers that higher Medicaid spending would trigger, exacerbating the shortage.

If the additional health care employees came from Alabama’s current labor pool, they wrote, it would reduce the state’s unemployment rate below what economists generally consider full employment. The professors also argue that Alabama would be competing against other Medicaid-expanding states for health care providers living outside of Alabama and that states with larger numbers of Medicaid recipients would have an advantage in attracting those workers.

“UAB (hospital) is full right now. Other hospitals don’t have a lot of beds,” Beaulier said. “We don’t think the world is as flexible as UAB does.”

Administrative costs underestimated?

The Troy report also argues that the UAB study underestimates administrative costs at 2.25 percent of spending, which its authors said is based on historical data. But Beaulier and Mixon point out that the Alabama Medicaid Agency already has the smallest share of overhead cost in the country at 3.3 percent. It is doubtful that the state can significantly improve on that, they said.

To calculate tax revenue, the UAB study combines the new Medicaid spending with spinoff economic activity generated by that spending and multiplies the total by 8.6 percent, the average state and local tax burden in Alabama as calculated by the Federation of Tax Administrators.

Beaulier and Mixon expressed skepticism that the spinoff economic activity would be as great as the UAB study suggests. Even setting that aside, though, they said the tax revenue projection is flawed for two reasons.

First, Mixon said, including local tax revenue inflates the taxes flowing to Medicaid because only state taxes support Alabama’s share of the program costs. In addition, the Troy study figures tax revenue only from the spinoff economic activity; Mixon said the Medicaid spending should not be used because, “fortunately in Alabama, that’s one thing that is not taxed – medical care.”

Moreover, the Troy study notes that the Alabama and UAB studies use data from the Congressional Budget Office to determine the growth in the cost of medical care, which Beaulier and Mixon argue is both overly optimistic and fails to factor regional differences.

Adjusting the UAB projections to remove untaxed medical spending, the Troy authors project that new revenue would exceed the additional state costs only in the three years that the feds pay the expansion costs.

Beaulier and Mixon estimate that by 2020, the differential assuming UAB’s middle estimate of the number of new Medicaid enrollees would be $224.9 million – compared with UAB’s projection that the state would be $16.6 million in the black. Using a more conservative model developed the professors, the Troy study suggests that costs could exceed new tax revenues even in the early years.

Beaulier said expanding Medicaid would create benefits for the state, including a substantial increase in the number of Alabamians with health insurance. He said supporters should focus on those outcomes rather than trying to oversell the economic benefits.

“They’re overdoing it and playing up the job-creation benefit,” he said. “They’re making it too good to be true,” he said.