We cover conflicts of interest, and the effects they have on the practice of medicine, pretty closely here at MedPage Today. The work of John Fauber, for example, has led to congressional hearings on the subject. So I was intrigued by a new paper in the International Journal of Medical Practice by researchers at Harvard and elsewhere arguing that concerns over such conflicts are overblown and divert attention from what's really important. The abstract:

After more than 20 years, the conflict of interest (COI) movement has failed to substantiate its central claim that interactions between physicians, researchers, and the medical products industry cause physicians to make clinical decisions that are adverse to the best interests of their patients. The COI movement's instigators have produced no solid evidence of harm commensurate with their extravagant allegations. At the same time, they have diverted resources away from more worthwhile pursuits, such as basic and applied medical research, clinical care, and medical education towards onerous compliance exercises and obtrusive laws. Perhaps worst of all, they have made it respectable to ignore the epistemological foundations of medical science, diverting attention away from the scientific merit of the information presented and focusing it instead on the identity and motives of those who present the information.

One of the authors of the piece is Tom Stossel, who has been an outspoken critic of disclosures, and whom The Harvard Crimson called "The Pro-Industry Professor."

While accusing "the conflict of interest movement" of "rhetorical wizardry," the authors engage in plenty of rhetoric of their own, from "apartheid" to "propaganda echo chamber."

Similarly, they claim that the real question, when asking why industry-funded research is far more likely to show a positive finding, is "Are industry-funded studies scientifically unsound?" But the authors are engaging in the very act of "substitution," which they claim is the mainstay of "the conflict of interest movement." The real question, of course, is whether the positive publication bias means the literature, upon which guidelines are based, reflects reality.

Stossel and colleagues do the same thing when they cite a study claiming to show that papers written by medical writers and drug companies were less likely to be retracted for misconduct than other papers. But that paper wasn't asking the right question, either, because it couldn't account for studies that hadn't disclosed medical writers' involvement.

I asked ProPublica's Charles Ornstein, who has reported on conflicts of interest for years, what he thought of the paper:

The abuses of the past have been amply documented, in research articles, media reports, and court documents. Rather than re-litigate them, it's important to recognize that a new era of transparency has arrived.

Patients can now search whether their physicians have received payments from some drug companies using our Dollars for Docs tool. By year's end, they will be able to search for payments from all drug and device companies, under rules put in place under the Affordable Care Act. Not every patient is interested in this information -- and that's fine. But for those patients who are, this data is empowering and can serve as the basis for a thoughtful conversation in the doctor's office. Information shouldn't be a one-way street in medicine, and patients are entitled to know whether their doctor has a financial interest in a product he or she is prescribing.

In case it's unclear by now: I'm with Ornstein.

Hat tip: Rolf Degen