Area youngsters taking part in soccer camps in June were learning the kicking and passing skills to score and work as a team. But, something else also was on their minds.

“The World Cup was a popular topic of conversation during camp,” Carrie Ogonowski, director of the Sunflower Soccer Association in Topeka, said.

Some of those youngsters likely will be among the millions of viewers watching the World Cup championship game between Argentina and Germany that will be broadcast at 2 p.m. Sunday on the ABC television network. The Associated Press reported the four World Cup quarterfinals averaged more than 10 million viewers in the United States combined on ABC, ESPN networks and Spanish-language Univision.

Ogonowski said overall youth soccer participation through the Sunflower Soccer Association has held steady for the past few years.

“Not only is the World Cup a participation driver, but Sporting KC and their success and the women’s professional team, FC Kansas City, drives soccer participation,” she said.

During the fall 2013-spring 2014 soccer season, Sunflower Soccer registered 2,087 players — 844 competitive players and 1,243 recreational players.

So far, 1,232 youths have signed up for the fall recreational leagues and 900 players are expected to sign up for the competitive leagues.

“These registration numbers are tentative because registration is not final,” Ogonowski said. “Summer camp participation in June increased from 413 participants in 2013 to 479 this summer.”

Carol Cleek, president of the Olathe-based Kansas Youth Soccer Association, said the association currently has registered 28,000 youth soccer players. However, that number is deflated because not all recreational players have to register with the association.

Jerry Stamm, president of Topeka Select Soccer Club, a competitive soccer club for boys and girls that has a training facility in Tecumseh, said while the World Cup has drawn in people who don’t usually follow soccer, “for the soccer players and their families it’s been popular all the time.”

“This particular World Cup has a lot of scoring, and a few twists and turns,” said Stamm, who is rooting for the Argentine team to win the championship. “It’s been the most entertaining World Cup so far.”

Stamm and Joe Waldron, a former Topeka High School coach, founded Topeka Select in 1998, with four or five teams on its roster in the beginning. Today, the club has 26 teams.

“Ninety-eight percent of them are from Shawnee County,” he said, adding other players come from Manhattan and Lawrence. “The Midwest is pretty involved in soccer, although it’s huge everywhere.”

Stamm said youngsters like soccer because, at the entry level, it’s an easy game to play.

“If you can kick a ball, you can play soccer, but then they fall in love with it,” he said.

Cleek said the goal of youth soccer associations is to provide a “soccer experience for any kid at any level of play” and to grow players who can advance to a competitive league.

Most American children have the opportunity to participate in a variety of different sports, she said. At some point, because of time constraints, expense or other factors, they typically narrow their interests to one or two sports.

“We lose youths to basketball, football and baseball as they get older,” Cleek said. “So our goal is to create an experience where they will choose soccer.”