FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE:

September 10, 2013

CONTACT:

Allyson Funk



202-434-2560 | @AARPmedia | media@aarp.org



Spanish language version available here.



“Mom Means It – Get Health Insurance”

AARP Launches E-Card Campaign for Parents to Encourage Young Adult Children to Enroll in Health Insurance

WASHINGTON, D.C. - Today, AARP launched an e-card campaign aimed at moms with adult children, offering a unique way to encourage young adults to purchase health insurance. Recognizing that 8.6 million young adults age 26-34 are uninsured, AARP is encouraging their moms – many of whom are our members – to remind their kids to sign up for insurance as required by the Affordable Care Act.

The e-cards say things like: “As a reward for signing up for health insurance, I’ll defriend you on Facebook. You’re welcome.” and “Shop for a health plan the same way you shop for everything…online, in your underpants.”

“We know that parents remain an important fixture in the lives of their adult children,” said Nicole Duritz, Vice President AARP Health Education and Outreach. “That’s why AARP created these cheeky e-cards for parents to remind their young adult children to sign-up for health insurance starting October 1st – because when Mom says it, she means it.”

The e-cards are available at MomMeansIt.org where moms – or dads or grandparents – can share e-cards with their children by email or through social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter and Google+. AARP also released a set of six unique e-cards is in Spanish available at TuMamaSabe.org.

The e-cards supplement AARP’s existing resources on the health care law including a free online tool – HealthLawAnswers.org – and an information-rich website called HealthLawFacts.org. These resources offer consumers customized information on what the law means for them and additional details on specific aspects of the law. AARP’s resources include information for those who are currently insured, those without health coverage or fear of losing it and people with Medicare.

To view and share e-cards visit: www.MomMeansIt.org or www.TuMamaSabe.org.

AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization, with a membership of more than 37 million, that helps people turn their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities and fights for the issues that matter most to families such as healthcare, employment and income security, retirement planning, affordable utilities and protection from financial abuse. We advocate for individuals in the marketplace by selecting products and services of high quality and value to carry the AARP name as well as help our members obtain discounts on a wide range of products, travel, and services. A trusted source for lifestyle tips, news and educational information, AARP produces AARP The Magazine, the world's largest circulation magazine; AARP Bulletin; www.aarp.org; AARP TV & Radio; AARP Books; and AARP en Español, a bilingual news source. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to political campaigns or candidates. The AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. AARP has staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Learn more at www.aarp.org

###