Normally, no one would care that in a recent Atlantic essay — “Why I hope to die at 75”— Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel, 57, argued that living to 75 was long enough for anyone. After 75, he suggests, “We are no longer remembered as vibrant and engaged but as feeble, ineffectual, even pathetic.”

Emanuel is no garden-variety crackpot. Unfortunately, he was a chief architect of the troubled Affordable Care Act and a key medical adviser to the Obama administration.

Read Emanuel’s diatribe against living too long, and suddenly Sarah Palin’s attack on ObamaCare’s “death panels” doesn’t seem so far-fetched.

His main point is that those who live past 75 inordinately gobble up collective health resources — like flu shots.

Emanuel asserts that at age 75 and beyond, he’ll decline nearly all medical tests and treatments. (“What about simple stuff? Flu shots are out.”) He claims he won’t take antibiotics either.

“I think this manic desperation to endlessly extend life is misguided and potentially destructive,” he writes. “For many reasons, 75 is a pretty good age to aim to stop.”

Emanuel takes the banal position that aging is more costly than youth, and then he takes it to a pathetic extreme, revealing his ignorance of both history and ethics.

And his past influence and his present desire to disseminate his views make it clear he’d like Americans to follow his advice that it would be wise for them to be dead at 75.

Yet our lives would be poorer had we taken away history’s 75-year-olds.

The great Athenian playwright Sophocles (who wrote until his death in his 90s) would never have crafted some of Greece’s greatest tragedies. The Founding Fathers wouldn’t have had the sober wisdom of Benjamin Franklin in his later years.

The late Jacques Barzun, the greatest contemporary student of Western values and history, published his masterpiece, “From Dawn to Decadence,” when he was 93. Henry Kissinger, at 91, just published a magnum opus, “World Order.”

Some of the most gripping volumes about World War II would never have been written by a supposedly too old Winston Churchill. Had Ronald Reagan refused medical care and hoped to die at 75, the world would never have heard at Berlin, “Tear down this wall, Mr. Gorbachev.”

Hoping that we all die at 75 is about as inane as barring those under 50 from assuming positions of influence without commensurate experience.

When an untried 31-year old Kaiser Wilhelm II dismissed the sober and experienced Chancellor Otto von Bismarck, who was 75 at the time, the German Empire took a path that would lead to World War I.

Does anyone believe that an inexperienced but youthful Barack Obama is a better president because he didn’t wait to run until he was 60, when he might have had over a decade more of political savvy?

Age is no absolute barometer. We all know those who at 75 are far more vigorous than others who are couch potatoes at 40.

If Emanuel’s point is that living beyond 75 is unwise given the odds that society will reap less achievement per resources invested, then that frightening anti-humanist argument can be extended to almost any category.

Should we do away with health care for those with chronic debilitating diseases on the theory that society inordinately gives them too much time and capital and gets very little in return? Why incarcerate prisoners for life sentences? They’ll likely produce little behind bars.

Many might suggest that a naive and clueless Emanuel in his early 50s did the nation a lot of damage by dreaming up a lousy, big-government health-care scheme.

Under ObamaCare, millions lost their doctors and existing health care. They have paid more for deductibles and premiums, as the nation increased its debt to only marginally cover more of the uninsured.

Most Americans can cite a grandparent’s wise advice and aggregate experience as changing their lives for the better. I was blessed that three of my grandparents lived well beyond 75 and taught me everything from riding a horse and farming to accepting setbacks with calm and dignity.

In contrast, the greatest tragedy in my life was the far too early death of my mother at 67 — at precisely the point when our family most needed her omnipresence, caring and sage counsel.

Who knows — had Dr. Emanuel been asked to help draft an Affordable Care Act in his mid-70s, we might not have had to collectively suffer from his youthful inexperience.