Left to right, Penelope Wilton as Isobel Crawley, Allen Leech as Tom Branson, Robert James-Collier as Thomas and Laura Carmichael as Lady Edith. Courtesy of Nick Briggs/Carnival Film & Television Limited 2014 for Masterpiece

This week’s episode of “Downton Abbey” featured Lady Mary (Michelle Dockery) attending a London dress show in which she got to gaze upon dazzling, of-the-moment beaded gowns. And to quote Lady Mary, that scene was the sole “yummy” moment of the entire hour – because the rest of the episode was quite depressing, to say the least.

True, there was a proposal, and Violet, the Dowager Countess (Maggie Smith), revealed the depth of her relationship with Prince Kuragin (Rade Sherbedgia), but otherwise, this episode was beset with friction between loved ones.

Love, Downton Style

Even in the cases of happy news, like Lord Merton’s (Douglas Reith) romance-tinged proposal to Isobel Crawley (Penelope Wilton), the reality of the situation still casts a gloomy pall over the proceedings. Since Isobel never expected Lord Merton to bring love into it, she’s now exhibiting doubts over her already-planned refusal. My advice? See how you two feel calling each other “Dickie” and “Isobel” first before making any rash decisions.

Michelle Dockery as Lady Mary and Samantha Bond as Aunt Rosamund. Courtesy of Nick Briggs/Carnival Film & Television Limited 2014 for Materpiece

Isobel’s BFF Violet is dealing with her own maelstrom of emotions this episode – feelings she’s kept bottled up for 50 years. Following a visit to the dreary York church basement where Prince Kuragin and his fellow refugees spend their days, Violet confides her borderline inappropriate past to Isobel: Back in 1874, he had asked Violet to run away with him. But, in a crisis of conscience right out of “Peggy Sue Got Married,” Violet opted to stay with her husband when he presented her with a Fabergé frame with photos of her children as a not-so-subtle reminder of her familial obligations. She seems to have made peace with her decision, but there’s a sadness that envelops Violet throughout the episode. Even when she tries to use her imperious tone to persuade Lady Edith (Laura Carmichael) to let both Michael Gregson and little Marigold go, giving the excuse that what is in Edith’s best interest is also in the family’s best interest, Edith summarily shoots her down. So since Violet can’t change the past, but obviously still harbors strong feelings for her lost prince, she decides the most honorable thing to do is to assist Kuragin in locating his missing wife, the Princess Irina.

Tom Cullen as Lord Gillingham and Michelle Dockery as Lady Mary. ourtesy of Nick Briggs/Carnival Film & Television Limited 2014 for Masterpiece

Make Up, Break Up, Everything Is Shake Up

Mary’s stylish sojourn in London this episode was a procrastination of the inevitable: She was in town to break things off with Lord Gillingham (Tom Cullen), but ended up reconnecting with her other suitor, Charles Blake (Julian Ovenden), at the aforementioned dress show. The Cleopatra headdresses and boyish fashions (Mary upon viewing a grey and black suit complete with men’s necktie: “Golly! That’d be useful!”) only serve to distract Mary for a handful of minutes before Charles introduces his companion, Mabel Lane Fox (Catherine Steadman), a.k.a. Tony Gillingham’s ex-fiancée. Mabel’s catty remarks (“It’s not often you meet the woman you were jilted for”) don’t do much for Mary’s confidence, but after an ego-boosting dinner with Charles that evening, Mary gets up the courage to tell Tony the next morning that she won’t marry him.

Well, so much for Mary’s revolutionary behavior of the past couple of weeks, because it’s still 1924, she’s still an aristocrat, and Tony isn’t taking no for an answer. Channeling the Dowager Countess, Tony refuses to believe that a “lady” such as Mary “could give herself to a man without first being certain that he was the one.” What’s worse, the more Mary speaks the truth to their relationship, the more Tony wants to ignore the facts and continue on with the façade that they are perfectly happy. You’d think that upon hearing, “I feel I’ve sort of woken up out of a dream” would be emasculating enough for Tony to hitch up what little pride he had left and walk away. But, no, now he plans to drag this out for as long as it takes. “This is something we have to get through – together,” he tells a disillusioned Mary. Because remember, there’s no sleeping around on “Downton Abbey” without consequences!

Richard E. Grant as Simon Bricker and Elizabeth McGovern as Cora, Countess of Grantham Courtesy of Nick Briggs/Carnival Film & Television Limited 2014 for Masterpiece

Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner?

All three of this week’s Downton Abbey house and dinner guests are instrumental in the ongoing tension throughout the household, but at the same time, they each embody the changing spirit of the times. So one has to wonder if Cora, Countess of Grantham (Elizabeth McGovern), is deliberately trying to drag her antediluvian husband kicking and screaming into the 20th century by bringing in a steady stream of visitors who are certain to make him blow his perfectly starched collar off. The first guest is Lady Rose MacClare’s (Lily James) father, Lord “Shrimpy” Flintshire (Peter Egan), who has returned to England to announce his impending divorce from his shrew of a wife, Susan. Robert, Earl of Grantham (Hugh Bonneville), of course, is none too keen on Shrimpy bringing the stigma of divorce into the family, but Shrimpy reminds his cousin-in-law that life cannot thrive on loyalty and duty, and that sometimes just living apart isn’t an option: “If you’d ever been as unhappy as I am, you’d know why not.” Come on, Robert, even Violet knows how awful Rose’s mother is: “Susan has been in a rage since she was playing with her dolls.”

Lady Grantham is certainly playing with fire with her second guest, Simon Bricker (Richard E. Grant), but at the same time, as we discovered last week, she’s getting a little sick of her husband’s dismissive behavior and is need of some attention. When she asks Lord Grantham to school her on the impending real estate offer he and Mary and Tom Branson (Allen Leech) are mulling over, Robert flat out ignores her. Who cares if Simon winds up being the guest that wouldn’t leave? At least he’s giving Cora the opportunity for intellectual conversation, even if their art discussions are dotted with flirtatious compliments about Lady Grantham’s beauty. I can’t blame Cora for keeping Simon around – watching Lord Grantham seethe with jealousy is almost as entertaining as Lady Mary’s London dress show.

But it’s the third Downton guest who is responsible for this week’s climactic scene, as well as making Lord Grantham finally crack under the pressure of the changing times. Sarah Bunting (Daisy Lewis) somehow manages to wrangle another invitation to dinner, and despite a heart-to-heart talk with Tom beforehand, in which he implores her to play it cool, she still ends up causing a major scene and promptly gets herself banned from Downton Abbey. Again, Sarah is on the right side of history here (“I can’t bear to see you waste your life propping up a system that’s dying,” she tells Tom), but her behavior at dinner is downright obnoxious. She goads Lord Grantham into an argument about her tutoring sessions with Daisy Mason (Sophie McShera), giving him a hard time about not knowing Daisy’s name (which, to be fair, he didn’t) and suggesting that Lord Grantham thinks Daisy’s studies are a waste of time. Eventually, Daisy is summoned to the dining room, where she sings Sarah’s praises to Lord Grantham, happy that her newfound education provides her with “choices” now.

Sarah’s failing here, however, is even when she’s “won” an argument, she can’t let it rest. Once Daisy is back downstairs and Lord Grantham has stated for the record that he is “pleased” his assistant cook is enjoying her studies, Sarah pushes her host’s patience even further by asking, “Are you [pleased]?” Even Mary’s demand that Sarah “let it go” doesn’t do anything to deter Sarah from driving a bulldozer at full speed into whatever relationship she and Tom might have at this point. “All I’ve proved is that Lord Grantham would like us serfs to stay in our allotted place from cradle to grave.” Robert’s subsequent temper tantrum and decree that Sarah never set foot inside Downton again are understandable – albeit short-lived, with Lord Grantham apologizing for his outburst to Tom later on – but what’s more important is why Tom chooses to keep Sarah around. “Since Sybil died,” he tells Mary and Lord Grantham, “I’d forgotten what it’s like to be with someone who feels about things as I do. That’s why, or, that’s been why.” From that statement, I’d say Tom’s rebound has served her purpose.

Stray Observations

– Edith, who spends the episode stalking Marigold and the Drewe family, looks like she may have some closure regarding Michael Gregson in an upcoming episode. Gregson’s office informed her that the “leader” of the “brown shirts” gang responsible for beating up her baby daddy will be going on trial in Munich. “Leader”=Adolf Hitler.

– Things aren’t looking too good for Anna Bates (Joanne Froggatt). After she delivered a letter to Lord Gillingham from Lady Mary, Anna strolled over to Piccadilly Circus – where she just happened to stop at the exact spot where Gillingham’s valet, Alex Green, was murdered. It appears innocent enough, but what she didn’t know was that she was followed by a plainclothes police officer who patrols the area around Lord Gillingham’s residence. And now Sgt. Willis’s (Howard Ward) interest in the Bates couple is piqued even further.

– Whether it’s intentional or not, “Downton Abbey” continues its self-parody streak this week, with two scenes clearly influenced by the “Late Night With Jimmy Fallon” satire, “Downton Sixbey.

– Lord Grantham’s episode-closing speech about how “We will build, we’ll even make money for the estate. But we won’t destroy what people love about this place” is weirdly reminiscent of Fallon’s recurring “Sixbey” line, “Have I ever told you how much I love this place? I hope I die hee-aaahh.”

– The scene between the sickly, sunken-eyed Thomas Barrow (Robert James-Collier) and Phyllis Baxter (Raquel Cassidy), in which she deduces his recent trip to London wasn’t to visit his sick father, but instead to obtain a treatment to cure his homosexuality. Just the way the scene is shot, with Baxter at the servants’ table, her pained face turned away from Barrow, and the under-butler hanging in the doorway puffing on his cigarette – it’s so overly dramatic that any credibility it had as a serious scene is destroyed.

‘Downton Abbey’ airs on ‘Masterpiece’ on PBS, Sundays at 9 p.m. ET. Follow our recaps all season long. Follow Sarene Leeds on Twitter.