Voters opted to send both of the Congressmen representing Delaware County back to Washington for another two years.

U.S. Reps. Bob Brady, D-1, of Philadelphia, and Patrick Meehan, R-7, of Upper Darby, easily won re-election bids Tuesday.

Brady defeated Republican Megan Rath by an unofficial vote tally of 103,027 to 20,808 to earn a 10th term. Meehan topped Democrat Mary Ellen Balchunis by an unofficial vote tally of 66,881 to 39,981 to gain a third term. Vote totals are as of 10 p.m.

Both Brady and Meehan helped finalize a deal that enabled Philadelphia International Airport to expand without displacing Tinicum residents. They each also played roles in saving refinery jobs when three regional refineries were slated for closure in 2011.

Advertisement

The First District includes portions of Philadelphia and Delaware County. The Seventh District includes portions of Berks, Chester, Delaware, Lancaster and Montgomery counties.

Meehan, a former U.S. Attorney and Delaware County District Attorney, seeks to enhance the region’s energy production, envisioning a booming future involving natural gas. He co-sponsored legislation to strengthen background checks on gun purchases and led efforts to pass cybersecurity legislation.

Balchunis, a La Salle University political science professor, was critical of Meehan’s votes to repeal the Affordable Care Act and his involvement in the government shutdown last fall. She campaigned on tightening gun laws, raising the minimum wage and ensuring women receive equal pay for equal work.

Brady, a former carpenter, is known as a fixer, having helped save both refinery and shipyard jobs and helping finalize the airport deal. He also has helped save the Philadelphia International Cycling Championship and worked to get the Delaware River deepened.

Rath, a sales consultant for Biomet, a manufacturer of medical devices, ran on a platform seeking congressional term limits, increased vocational opportunities and reforming healthcare. Rath, of Philadelphia, particularly sought to repeal the medical device tax in the Affordable Care Act and amend Medicare Part D to make prescription drug prices negotiable.

Meehan serves on the Oversight and Government Reform Committee, the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee and the House Ethics Committee. He also sits on the Homeland Security Committee, of which he serves as chairman of the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection and Security Technologies.

Brady, who is the longtime chairman of the Philadelphia Democratic Party, is the minority chairman of the Committee on House Administration and sits on the Committee on Armed Services.