Jessica Bejarano (Courtesy Photo / Daily Camera)

Toni Carpenter's niece, Jessica Bejarano, died eight years ago this month, a victim of a homicide that has so far gone unsolved.

Carpenter has not given up trying to get the case closed. She and her family have traveled to Frederick - where Bejarano died - to hand out flyers in an effort to catch her killer.

"If I could post billboards up and down Interstate 25, I would," she said.

Most recently Carpenter and her family have penned an open letter to John Hickenlooper that both demands justice and expresses frustration at the lack of progress on the case.

A representative of Hickenlooper said the office had not received the letter, but it might have been sent somewhere else. The representative said the matter would need to be reviewed but had not responded as of Friday afternoon.

"The intention was to really get this back out there and make people aware of the fact that nothing is going on," Carpenter said.

A Frederick police report said that an officer responded to 7984 Larkspur Circle on April 6, 2007 on a suicide call. The officer found Jessica Bejarano, 25, lying inside a shower with no pulse, and an autopsy determined she had died from a chest wound.

Frederick Police Chief Gary Barbour said his department quickly turned the investigation over to the Colorado Bureau of Investigation but declined to comment further.

Jessica Bejarano's brother-in-law, Cimmeron Johns, called police and told them he found her body inside a home she shared with her husband, Daniel Bejarano. Her children were also inside the house and crying.

Advertisement

Johns died in February of last year of an apparently self-inflicted gunshot wound to the chest inside a Thornton apartment after police surrounded it. Johns was a suspect in the deaths of his wife, Alisha Johns, and her mother, Sherri Pachello.

An autopsy revealed Jessica Bejarano died from a chest wound, and her daughter — who was 4-years-old at the time — told police that her father, Daniel Bejarano, had "shot her mother with a knife."

Police questioned Daniel Bejarano and collected blood and hair samples from him.

Barbour told the Times-Call in 2007 that the investigation did not primarily focus on Daniel Bejarano, who has never been charged with any crime related his wife's death.

Daniel Bejarano told the Times-Call on Thursday that he is frustrated by the investigation because he doesn't get to see his kids and he is considered a "person of interest."

"I was on my way to work at the time of the incident," Bejarano said. "My children were asleep, so there is no way my daughter saw me do anything."

Attempts to reach Daniel Bejarano's father Gerald — who is mentioned in Carpenter's letter — were not successful.

A CBI representative released a statement on Friday saying the Jessica Bejarano homicide is an open an active investigation that "remains a a priority for Colorado Bureau of Investigation (CBI) agents and analysts along with the Weld County District Attorney's Office."

"The CBI continues to work closely with the Bejarano family and the Weld County District Attorney's Office with the ultimate goal of a successful prosecution and justice for Jessica," the statement said. "Because this case remains an open and active investigation, the CBI cannot provide comments on the case at this time."

A spokeswoman for Rep. Ken Buck, who was Weld County District Attorney at the time of Jessica Bejarano's death, referred questions to the current Weld County DA.

Weld County District Attorney Michael Rourke said that his office has been in contact with Jessica Bejarano's family during the investigation, which is still open and as active as it can be.

"There are a number of possible suspects," he said. "To say that there is just one would be inappropriate. We wouldn't want investigators to have tunnel vision on one suspect."

Rourke said the case has never been presented to a grand jury, because his office isn't yet in a position that it could ethically charge someone.

"We're only going to file a case if we have a reasonable likelihood of conviction at trial," he said. "We have to be comfortable that we can prove each of the elements."

Jessica's Bejarano's death has weighed heavily on her family for the last eight years, and they worry that as time goes by, witnesses will die and Bejarano's name will slowly fade from memory.

"We know there are people out there who know something but aren't saying," Carpenter said. "We know justice will come for Jessica. We believe it. But we can't let Jessica's name be forgotten."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme