Critically understaffed Marillac hires 5 new doctors, expects more to come

Critically understaffed Marillac hires 5 new doctors, expects more to come





With three new doctors expected Sept. 1 and two more the following month, Marillac Clinic has managed to hire five of the 10 medical staff it needs to meet its goal of nearly doubling its patient load to 10,000 before the end of 2016.

The clinic has been critically understaffed since July with only Dr. John Whiteside, medical director, and Dr. Erica Lovett available to treat patients.

In part because of the shift to a high-volume, more business-like and professional organization, “We’ve had 100 percent turnover on all providers,” Whiteside said.

Dr. Elizabeth Buisker, Dr. Katherine McCrea, and Dr. Moriah Tarpey are the new family doctors expected in September. The plan is to add two more by October, Whiteside said.

In addition to new personnel, Marillac implemented a variety of other changes since announcing in May its designation as a federally qualified community health center and the receipt of a $704,000 federal grant to assist with its expansion. Perhaps the biggest shift is the range of patients now eligible to receive treatment.

“Marillac has always served people ages 18 to 64,” Whiteside said. “As a community health center, however, it’s now from birth to death, a much wider scope of practice. That’s a big change.

“We’re a different clinic than we used to be,” he said. “We’re moving to what is a much more typical family medicine model where it’s high-volume, high-quality medicine. We live and die now on our visit numbers. We need to see patients to survive.”

Recruiting five family practice doctors to the clinic was no small accomplishment, given the scarcity of these specialists on the Western Slope, said Kay Ramachandran, the clinic’s executive director.

“We have been successful for three reasons. Number one is John Whiteside — people want to come and work for him,” Ramachandran said. “The second is salary and benefits. We did make sure we are competitive in salary and benefits. Finally, widening the scope of practice has attracted people to work here.”

Because patients new to Medicaid typically see a doctor 3½ times more often than other patients, the clinic must be prepared for 35,000 doctor visits to reach its goal of seeing 10,000 new patients. That will ultimately require a medical staff of 10, Whiteside said.

If successful in meeting its goals, the clinic will end up treating roughly 25 percent of the 42,000 Mesa County residents who enrolled in Medicaid since the Affordable Care Act took effect, Whiteside said.

Nearly as important, meeting those milestones secures for the immediate future Marillac’s continued designation as a federal community health center, which comes with a multitude of benefits for Mesa County residents, he said.

For example, the expansion helps to ease a financial burden that St. Mary’s Hospital and other health care providers take on when they treat people insured by Medicaid, which normally pays less for medical service than private insurance, said Mike McBride, St. Mary’s president and CEO.

“Marillac plays an incredibly important role,” McBride said.

Under the new regime, Medicaid is the primary source of payment for Marillac, Whiteside said.

Marillac became an independent entity in order to obtain the community health center designation. That meant establishing a new board of directors comprised of a majority who are Marillac patients, Ramachandran said.

The new board has been learning how to perform its policy-setting role and also reviewing new written policies the clinic needs to operate, she said.

Designation as a federally qualified community health center came with a $704,000 grant for 2015, which is helping to pay for the transition.

For many patients, little will change. Marillac will still charge based on a sliding scale that takes into account the patient’s ability to pay. Patients also will continue going to the clinic offices at 2333 N. Sixth St. and at the Mesa County Health Department.

Eventually, though, the new medical staff will settle into place and begin accepting new patients, Ramachandran said.

Marillac also will have to provide the core services required of health centers. It has contracted one of those services, family planning, to the Mesa County Health Department.

The clinic’s relationship with St. Mary’s Hospital and the Sisters of Charity of Leavenworth continues to be strong and both organizations supported the clinic’s application to be qualified as a health center, McBride said.

St. Mary’s provides Marillac with many in-kind services, cash and the space it needs to operate — in all, a value of around $2 million a year from St. Mary’s, McBride said.

Marillac was founded 27 years ago by St. Mary’s in an effort to deliver medical services to uninsured people using volunteer providers. Today, it has its own staff and offers medical, dental and optical services.