3 Facts Employers Should Know About the PPACA

The healthcare reform law is a source of confusion around insuring diverse populations of hospital employees, making compliance complicated—unless you understand three things.

The PPACA means many things to many people and organizations: controversy, fear, confusion. There are few industries where these reactions resonate more strongly than in healthcare.

Not only does the PPACA transform multiple elements of the American healthcare industry, but for healthcare employers, it creates confusion around insuring diverse populations of hospital employees.



Catherine E. Livingston

"There are no legal…. differences [between healthcare and non-healthcare employers regarding insuring employees], but it may be that hospitals and health systems have a very complicated workforce, composed of everything from minimum wage employees… up to the most highly trained technical professionals," says Catherine E. Livingston, a partner with Jones Day law firm in Washington, DC.

"When you have a complex workforce with lots of different categories of workers, working lots of different schedules, complying with the employer mandate becomes very complex."

Here are three things healthcare employers should be aware of regarding the complexity of insuring healthcare employees.

1. Size Matters

In the eyes of the US government, being a larger organization means being responsible for insuring employees. "The Affordable Care Act creates an employer mandate—a penalty—that can apply to employers of a certain size that fail to offer good, affordable coverage to their full time employees," says Livingston. "Virtually any hospital or health system is going to be large enough to be subject to that penalty."

The threshold for being required to provide adequate coverage is fifty full-time employees or the equivalent, which even most small hospitals will easily exceed.

Hospitals and health systems must pay attention to the employer mandate, unless they have fewer under 50 full-time employees. To be in compliance, organizations must "offer coverage to avoid the penalty, plan for the possibility of the penalty, and also take account of the new IRS information reporting requirements that apply to all employers," says Livingston.

Healthcare employers might not be very different legally from other large employers, but the variation within a single organization among employee roles, schedules, compensation, and skill levels is fairly unique to healthcare, Livingston says.

2. Seasonal Means Seasonal

If your hospital is in an area with a seasonally variable population, such as a resort or college town, seasonal or part time employees such locum tenens physicians, travel nurses, and even temporary employees in non-clinical areas can be a huge relief. One benefit of such arrangements is not having to extend benefits such as health insurance to these workers.

But think twice and ask yourself: does the government consider this employee to be seasonal?



"In the regulations that implement the [PPACA] employer mandate, there are specific definitions, including a definition of seasonal employees," says Livingston.