DeMarcus Ware has been in the league long enough to know when he’s not quite ready to play.

The Broncos linebacker said Thursday he believes his back injury will keep him out for the third consecutive game and cause him to miss Sunday night’s matchup at home against New England.

“I wish I could,” Ware said. “I can’t go out there and go halfway.”

Defensive coordinator Wade Phillips spoke on Wednesday about the importance of getting pressure on Tom Brady early and often Sunday, but he also lemented the fact that the Broncos’ leader in sacks, Ware, has not been present.

Ware has been dealing with a back injury, which he termed as a “structural issue,” for the past month and a half. Ware, 33, has missed three games this season, including the past two after aggravating the injury against Indianapolis.

“He’s close. He’s making some progress,” Broncos coach Gary Kubiak said Thursday morning. “Like I said yesterday, he still has some steps to go.”

Outside linebackers Shaquil Barrett, Shane Ray and Lerentee McCray again will pick up the bulk of Ware’s snaps.

Ware wasn’t the only key starter out of practice Thursday morning. Left guard Evan Mathis (ankle) sat out for the second consecutive day.

Kubiak said Mathis’ ankle was “really sore” and he also had a ways to go before being ready to play Sunday. Rookie guard Max Garcia likely would start at left guard if Mathis is unable to play.

The Broncos did get some positive news from the wideout position Thursday as Emmanuel Sanders practiced for the second day in a row.

Sanders missed the Broncos’ 17-15 win at Chicago because of a left high ankle sprain, but he ran well both days in practice this week.

Quarterback Peyton Manning (foot) was the only other player not at practice Thursday. He will be out for at least the next two weeks.

Kubiak said safety T.J. Ward was the Broncos’ defensive player of the week Sunday against Chicago. He praised Ward’s composure after some tough penalties and non-penalties as well as his play in the run game and in coverage.

Cameron Wolfe: 303-954-1891, cwolfe@denverpost.com or @CameronWolfe