Appeals court overturns ruling favoring HBU in contraception case

An appeals court has ruled that Houston Baptist University cannot dodge federal regulations it believes indirectly forces it to provide its employees with "morning after pills" and other forms of contraception it finds religiously objectionable.

The New Orleans-based U.S. 5th Circuit Court of Appeals Monday overturned an a lower-court ruling favoring the university, saying that government provisions for honoring moral objections to the contraceptive procedures do not infringe on the school's rights under the U.S. Religious Freedom Restoration Act. That act bars the government from imposing a "substantial burden" on an individual's exercise of religion.

The legal battled stemmed from U.S. Department of Health and Human Services regulations under the Affordable Care Act which required employers of more than 50 people to provide free employee access to 20 forms of birth control approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Houston Baptist University, East Texas Baptist University and the Westminster Theological Seminary objected to four forms of the contraception, which interfere with implantation of a fertilized ovum in the uterus.

According to the federal regulation, religious non-profits morally opposed to such contraception can exempt themselves from the requirements, which then would be independently fulfilled ‑ by government mandate ‑ by their insurers. The schools argued that exempting themselves under the plan would, in essence, set in motion a mechanism for providing contraception they found abhorrent.

An appeals court panel ruled that actions involving a third party ‑ the schools' insurance companies acting under government mandate ‑ did not infringe on the university's exercise of religion.

The court's opinion essentially brings it into alliance with decisions handed up in similar cases by federal appeals courts in Washington, D.C., Philadelphia and Cincinnati.

The case is the latest in a series of court challenges to the contraception regulations. In its 2014 Burwell vs. Hobby Lobby Decision, the U.S. Supreme Court exempted closely held for-profit corporations from the rule if their owners have religious objections.