What you see above isn’t a vintage photo taken of Abraham Zapruder on his Dealey Plaza perch on Nov. 22, 1963. Looks like it, but, no. Try April 16, 1991, when Oliver Stone was in Dallas filming JFK. It was taken by The Dallas Morning News’ Randy Eli Grothe. And this is what that very same scene looked like 22 years later, when Parkland writer-director Peter Landesman brought Paul Giamatti, as Zapruder, to Dealey Plaza to stage the assassination of President John Kennedy. Time and again the killing of the president has been recreated in downtown Dallas — for narrative films (including 2013′s Killing Kennedy with Rob Lowe), for documentaries, forever. We live in what sci-fi writers call a time loop, experiencing the same thing over and over … and over.

But, perhaps, this time will be different. That, after all, is the plot of Stephen King’s 11/22/63, the best-selling, well-regarded story of a Maine high-school English teacher who, in 2011, time-travels to Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963, to stop Lee Harvey Oswald from killing the president. That book is being turned into a Hulu series by J.J. Abrams’ Bad Robot Productions. And that series, starring James Franco as time-traveling English teacher Jake Epping, will film in Dallas at some point next month.

Production has been underway for months in Ontario, but city officials and Dallas County documents confirm that 11/22/63 will shoot in Dallas for five days in early October. They won’t say where (well, you can probably guess) or precisely when, only that “they are doing more than what Parkland did,” says Janis Burklund, head of the Dallas Film Commission.



Texas School Books… #11/22/63 #savekennedy pic.twitter.com/9dTI0xGyCP — 11/22/63 WritersRoom (@112263writers) September 17, 2015

11/22/63’s cast includes Josh Duhamel and Chris Cooper — and the great Cherry Jones as Marguerite Oswald. Daniel Webber plays her boy, Lee; Lucy Fry, his wife Marina. And the more-or-less-trustworthy cast lists shows Jack Ruby, Will Fritz and Ruth Paine appear in at least one of the expected nine episodes.

When he was at the Majestic Theatre in November 2011, King talked about coming to Dallas to research the book, spending time at the Sixth Floor Museum and on Greenville Avenue. He apologized for referring to KLIF as “K-Life” in the novel; he said he felt like a “carpetbagger” when writing about Dallas. And he talked at length about “the extremism” that infected the city in 1963, resulting in the attack on Adlai Stevenson at Memorial Auditorium.

Last time Franco was in the area, if I’m not mistaken, was when he gave the commencement address at the University of Texas at Arlington in 2012. It was pretty, pretty, pretty good.