Topics: 12 years a slave, Academy Awards, American Hustle, anne thompson, cate blanchett, David O. Russell, Gabourey Sidibe, Hollywood, lupita nyong'o, mia farrow, Oscars 2014, The $11 billion year, the oscars, Viola Davis, Woody Allen, Entertainment News

Anne Thompson knows the Oscars.

The veteran journalist, now affiliated with Indiewire, has been covering the Academy Awards for years; her new book, “The $11 Billion Year,” runs through the events of 2012, culminating in the Oscar campaign that saw Ben Affleck’s “Argo” take the 2012 best picture trophy. (Was it just last year?)

Reached by phone at LAX as she prepared to leave Los Angeles, post-Oscars, Thompson discussed the “12 Years a Slave” Oscar win, which had come to seem something of a surprise after widespread predictions that its themes made it a less-than-ideal movie for a stodgy, largely white group to honor. “I wouldn’t say this year was ugly,” said Thompson, noting that the arguments that academy members wouldn’t watch the film were overblown.

As for the future of “Slave” star Lupita Nyong’o, who became a red-carpet icon before picking up the best supporting actress Oscar, Thompson nodded to Gabourey Sidibe and Viola Davis, both of whom have worked consistently since their Oscar nominations despite a paucity of roles for black women, as potential role models. As for Cate Blanchett’s best actress win — despite her appearing in a film by Woody Allen, recently the subject of great controversy over allegations raised by his daughter, Thompson said: “The scandal was a long time ago. You have this very noisy media vortex that takes on a life of its own.” As her book documents, she’s been at the center of that vortex through good and bad for quite some time.

Your book describes the opponents of “Zero Dark Thirty,” whose opposition arguably led to that film underperforming at the Oscars. Did you see any ugly campaigns this year?

Well, it isn’t so much ugly. I wouldn’t say this year was ugly. What you saw were memes. Working with such a small group of about 6,000 academy members, it’s very easy to plant an idea. That’s why the trades are so powerful; you can plant things in the conversation. There was a lot of talk that people weren’t going to watch “12 Years a Slave.” I knew that since it was one of the top contenders people would still be watching it, they’d be obligated to watch it. I don’t believe anybody voted for it without seeing the film. The academy — they’re all guilty of working on crap a lot of the time, but they believe in art. They want to do the right thing, they’re all pretty liberal.

What does the future hold for Lupita Nyong’o? Actresses have often had trouble finding great roles after Oscar wins.