"The 2012 election was not one that Republicans 'should' have won," Sides said. "This is not to say that they were destined to lose, just that the fundamentals in the country favored Obama. As a consequence, there were very few things Romney could have done to win."

In a race where each candidate spent about a billion dollars, their respective advertising blitzes largely neutralized each other. Moreover, any boost in support from advertising decayed within five days. Most of the effects of ads were gone within a day. Despite the perception that the Republican primary cost Romney the election by forcing him to run a much more conservative campaign than he might otherwise have done, Romney was actually perceived to be closer ideologically to the average voter than Obama. "Obama appeared to be the candidate more ideologically out of step with American voters in 2012," Vavreck and Sides write. Racial prejudice was a factor in 2012 and may have cost Obama 3 percent of the vote, calling into question the "post-racial America" that his 2008 victory heralded for some pundits. On the other hand, incumbency typically boosts support by 3 percentage points. Despite being the focus of intense media attention, such political gaffes as Obama's insistence that the private sector was "doing fine" while the nation was still in the shadow of the 2007–08 recession and Romney's comment that 47 percent of Americans can't be persuaded to take personal responsibility had only a small and temporary effect on persuadable voters' attitudes about the candidates and resulted in very little shift in voters' intentions. Even though Romney chalked Obama's victory up to "gifts" to certain constituencies, such as the Affordable Care Act and Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, Obama's support of these policies had very little effect. While polls showed that more voters had a negative view of Ryan than had a positive view, his selection did not affect the election's outcome. In fact, vice-presidential picks have had at most a small influence on modern presidential elections, history has shown. The public perception of the Obama administration's response to Hurricane Sandy neither halted Romney’s momentum nor caused a clear shift to Obama. "The result was the impression of a groundswell of support moving toward Romney, when what we were seeing was just the same people he drove away two weeks earlier returning to him," Vavreck said. "If I thought they came up with this series of events on purpose, I would think they were ridiculously clever." Reporters can obtain review copies of "The Gamble" from Jessica Pellien at Princeton University Press (609-258-7979 | jessica_pellien@press.princeton.edu ). Video: Vavreck and Sides discuss writing "The Gamble." ( http://bit.ly/16Udb8P For more news, visit the UCLA Newsroom and follow us on Twitter The most vivid example of the trend, Vavreck and Sides write, occurred after Romney's "47 percent" comment. In the following two weeks, some supporters left his camp, but instead of throwing support behind Obama, they identified themselves as "undecided." When Romney nailed the first presidential debate two weeks later, these partisans returned to him as supporters, accounting for a strong surge in his direction in the polls. That dynamic was especially important for undecided voters, Vavreck and Sides found. For most of the election, polls showed that 6 percent of voters were undecided — a spread large enough to determine the election. Yet the numbers actually obscured two key characteristics of the group, Vavreck and Sides determined with their surveys. First, despite describing themselves as undecided, many of these voters actually harbored partisan loyalties, and they ultimately voted accordingly. Second, it was not the same 6 percent of voters who declared themselves "undecided" throughout the entire election. From week to week, voters shifted in and out of the ranks of the undecided as the candidate they most identified with appealed to or disappointed them. In this way, each campaign served to balance the other campaign's efforts. Like all elections, the 2012 campaign also served to encourage "voters to join the fold to which they belong," Sides said. "What a campaign does is activate the political dispositions of voters." "The flag in the middle of the rope remains stationary if both sides pull with equal force, which is what occurred in this election," Vavreck said. "If one side decided to stop pulling or discovered a better strategy for pulling, you would have seen the flag fly, but that didn't happen." Despite the fact that the election's outcome was predictable close to a year in advance, Vavreck and Sides stop short of contending that it was preordained. They maintain that the two rivals were so equally matched that the election constituted a kind of tug of war. Among other findings:

Forecasting an annualized growth rate of 1.7 percent in the six months before the 2012 election, Vavreck and Sides predicted in December 2011 that Obama would win the election with 52.9 percent of the popular vote. He ended up winning with 52 percent, while Romney garnered 47 percent.