Janelle Arevalo (L) an insurance agent with Sunshine Life and Health Advisors makes a house call to sign up Sandra Berrios (R) for an insurance plan under the Affordable Care Act on November 14, 2013 in Miami, Florida. Norma Pacheco (2nd L) and Rosa Gonzalez (C) speak with Sunshine agent Gisselle Rubio in the background as they also sign up for insurance under the Affordable Care Act. As insurance agents with Sunshine continue to help people purchase and understand the policies offered under the act, President Barack Obama today in Washington announced that Americans who have had their health insurance plans canceled because of provisions in the act can keep those plans for another year. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images)

Having watched their party descend into chaos over the government shutdown, Republicans aren’t likely to let the fiscal negotiations upstage Obamacare’s problems again. And that could be good news for the Congressional leaders who are struggling to put together a budget agreement by mid-December.

Republicans have seen a huge reversal in political fortune since the government reopened and Obamacare’s problems have taken center stage. “It would argue against not having another shutdown: have Democrats keep shooting themselves in the foot and the president keep giving disastrous press conferences,” says Tevi Troy, a senior fellow at the Hudson Institute and a former Bush health official.

Pro-shutdown conservatives who successfully convinced the GOP to go to war over the budget are now happy to get out of the way and let Obamacare’s rocky rollout be Topic A. ”Looking ahead, the nation is in a state of flux as the health care law continues to implode. How that plays out over the next several weeks and through the holidays will go a long way in determining what actions will be taken in 2014,” said Dan Holler, a spokeman for Heritage Action, an outside pressure group at the heart of the GOP shutdown push.

And right now, there’s nothing that they would prefer to focus on. “All indications are that the only things Republicans want to talk about is repealing the Affordable Care Act,” Rep. Chris Van Hollen, the second-ranking Democrat in the budget negotiations.

Congressional leaders have already set exceedingly low expectations for a budget deal to avoid more gridlock and legislative failure. While not all Republicans are crazy about sequestration, most seem willing to live with it, and more have openly embraced the status quo as a conservative victory.

Beating Democrats up on the Affordable Care Act, House conservatives may not feel the need to extract ten pounds of blood and flesh over the budget. “Separate from all of the spending negotiations, we should be working on repeal. It’s the right thing do, regardless if you have a spending bill coming up or debt limit bill coming up. I don’t think you need to attach the issues together,” Rep. Justin Amash told Buzzfeed.

Click here to read more.