DES MOINES — The campaign of Sen. Ted Cruz hopes to fill in the details of an alternative to President Obama's healthcare law though there isn't any specific timeline to do so, a spokesman told the Washington Examiner.

Though Cruz rose to national prominence through his effort to defund Obamacare, he hasn't spoken as much about what type of healthcare system he'd want. When pressed to do so in Thursday night's Republican debate, he mentioned three general principles.

One, he wants to allow individuals to purchase insurance across state lines. Two, he wants to expand the use of health savings accounts. And three, he said, he wants to "de-link health insurance from employment so if you lose your job, your health insurance goes with you and it is personal, portable and affordable."

Though a number of Republicans have proposed removing or weakening the tie between insurance and employment, there's a huge debate over how to go about it. There are differences over how aggressively to unravel the employer-based health insurance system, which roughly half of the nation depends on for coverage.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

Beyond that, one of the biggest dividing lines among conservative health policy analysts is over whether to simply allow all individuals to deduct a certain amount from their taxes toward the purchase of insurance, or to provide them with tax credits to do so (the latter option would mean more spending but likely ensure broader coverage).

Following the debate, I asked Cruz's communication's director Rick Tyler whether Cruz would flesh out the details of his healthcare reform vision.

"He's talked about having insurance that's portable and affordable and that comes when you allow the market to work," Tyler said. "That means you can buy insurance policies across state lines and allow insurance companies to offer the products that people actually want."

I then pressed Tyler on how specifically Cruz would go about de-linking health insurance from employment.

"Insurance is not technically linked to employment," he said. "I get my insurance from my employer currently, but before I went to work for Cruz for President I owned my own insurance."

I interjected that what I meant was there was a tax advantage for employer-based insurance.

"And I should get the same advantage as an individual," he said. "So there's lots of things that you can do to make insurance — and healthcare — cheaper and put market forces in it."

I followed up by noting that there were a number of avenues to de-link insurance from employment, and asked, "Is he going to spell out specifically how he would do that?"

Tyler responded, "Yeah, we hope to fill it out."

Asked if there was a timeline for doing so, he said, "I don't have any timeline. I'll check on that."