Topics: allison williams, Brian Williams, Brittney Spears, peter pan, the daily dot, Video, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot

So Peter Pan Live!, starring Allison Williams as the titular boy-girl man-baby and Christopher Walken as nemesis Captain Hook, debuted on NBC last night, and it was…marginally better than predicted! First, the good parts: Walken made for a delightfully debonair Hook, Allison Williams hit the notes she wanted to hit at least 80 percent of the time, and no one fell out of their harnesses during “I’m Flying.” Overall, if we compared live NBC musicals to Britney Spears albums, and last year’s dismal Sound of Music Live! was a Britney Jean-level flop, than Peter Pan Live! was about on par with In the Zone.

That said, we’d be remiss if we didn’t point out thatPeter Pan Live! had some major issues. As a lifelong diehard musical theater fan who played Captain Hook in her fifth-grade school production (seriously, see photo), I feel uniquely qualified to point out all of them. Below, we list seven ways NBC could’ve made Peter Pan Live!better—and what the network can do next time to pull off a Britney-sized hit.

1) Cast someone who can actually pull off the role of Peter Pan.

I’ve gone on record in this publication saying I’m not a huge fan of Allison Williams, nor am I a fan of Marnie Michaels, the simpering millennial she plays on Girls.When NBC announced earlier this year that Williams would be playing Peter Pan, I was skeptical that she’d be able to pull it off: Mary Martin’s performance in the 1960 televised production are some big tights to fill, and while Williams has a nice mezzo-soprano voice, it’s far too reedy and thin to match up to Martin’s trademark belt.

As it turned out, I was (about 75 percent) right: While Williams certainly didn’t hit her notes with the same aplomb that Martin did in the 1960 televised version, at least she could hit them, which you couldn’t say for poor Christopher Walken. (Anyone else catch that squeaky fart thing his voice did at the end of his tarantella?) And she certainly looked great in her steampunk-meets-American Apparel Neverland costume.

The problem was that Williams simply doesn’t have the charisma to pull off the Boy Who Never Grew Up. She looked nice, and sounded nice, but as the A.V. Club’s Caroline Siede put it, “Williams feels like the girl who got every lead role in high school but couldn’t quite compete with stronger performers in college. She’s not bad, but she lacks the right impulsive, impish energy for Peter Pan.” Someone with more firecracker energy, like an Anna Kendrick or an Ellen Page, would’ve made for a much stronger Peter.

2) Replace your costume designer.

If you started watching Peter Pan during the Native American musical numbers (more on that later), and you had the sound off, you probably would’ve thought you were watching a Navajo-themed Ariana Grandemusic video. (I, for one, have never seen Native peoples pull off crop tops and sparkly hot pants.) Same goes for if you started tuning into a Lost Boys-centric number, in which case you likely would’ve thought you were watching a gay softcore porn set in a British boarding school. At no point did the costumes reflect the actual setting of Peter Pan, which is supposed to be early 20th century Victorian England.

While that’s fine in itself, at least aim for some consistency so you don’t distract me with the Lost Boys’ prep-school boy shorts and give me the lady equivalent of a tent in my pants.

3) Don’t make everyone try a British accent.

Most everyone in the cast at least attempted a British accent last night, and while no one came close to pulling a Van Dyke, it’s fair to say that some of the linguistic efforts were noticeably better than others. Case in point: Williams pronouncing “girls” as “gulls,” which I can only imagine was part of some bizarre cross-promotional deal between her own TV show on HBO and a seabird advocacy organization.

4) Replace or cut out the “Ugg-A-Wugg/True Blood Brothers” number.

When NBC announced it would be staging Peter Panearlier this year, the first thing everyone wondered, apart from wondering whether or not Brian Williams would make an impromptu cameo as Smee, is what the network would do with the controversial “Ugg-A-Wugg” number, featuring Tiger Lily and her band of “Indians.” If you’ve never seen Peter Pan, and you don’t know why “Ugg-A-Wugg” is controversial, allow us to direct your attention to the 1960 version of the number, featuring the flaxen-haired, very, very WASP-y looking Sondra Lee as the Native American Tiger Lily:

“Ugg-A-Wugg-A Meatball, indeed.”

Fortunately, following the uproar over the equally Caucasian Rooney Mara being cast as Tiger Lily in the upcoming film Pan, NBC decided to get ahead of any accusations of cultural appropriation by making two very smart moves: 1) They cast a real Native American woman, 22-year-old Alanna Saunders, as Tiger Lily, and 2) They rewrote the lyrics to “Ugg-A-Wugg” to make them sound less like a white person’s attempt at Native American gibberish, replacing them with nursery rhymes and renaming the song “True Blood Brothers.”