NEW HAVEN — Listening to the Bernie Sanders of Sunday night, compared with the same candidate who spoke in New York's Washington Square Park 11 days earlier, it was clear that the goal is longer and deeper than this campaign, this upcoming presidency.

In New York, he needed an outright win to wrest the nomination from front-runner Hillary Clinton. His voice had more edge, more anger, and he didn't flesh out his ideas quite as much.

This time around, perhaps because he was speaking to an audience largely made up of students, perhaps because of the loss in New York, the questions about electoral politics didn't seem to matter quite as much. Sanders was speaking as part of a sweeping movement to equalize the crazy income divide, confer rights on the disenfranchised, save the planet from environmental destruction and spend taxpayer dollars taking more care of more people.

Whether he drops out if a victory falls out of reach pales as a question compared with the fate of the ideas that have ignited the left for more than a century.

"Do not believe what the media or anyone else tells you that we cannot change the status quo," Sanders said. "What we need are millions of Americans, working people, middle-class people, standing up and saying, enough is enough."

Sanders delivered the appeal for votes in Connecticut, specifically. "If the voter turnout is high, we win," he said. "So let us have that great state of Connecticut help lead this country in this political revolution."

But his revolution belongs to the long sweep of history, from the dramatic growth of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union after the Triangle Shirtwaist fire in New York in 1911, to women's right to vote in 1920, through the civil rights era and beyond. That was the scope of Sanders' speech on the New Haven Green, where his words bounced off the Greek Revival courthouse, with its six imposing ionic columns.

The body of Sanders' talk was a manifesto of 16 broad reforms. Some, like making medical care free and available as a human right for all, won't happen in the next several years, if ever, given the backlash against the partial solution of Obamacare. Some are long-shot minority positions, among them breaking up the big banks, creating three months of paid family leave, imposing a "carbon tax" on all fuel and Sanders' signature call, making all public colleges free.

Bernie Sanders made his first campaign stop in Connecticut Sunday with a rally on the New Haven Green and followed it up with a stop in Hartford Monday. (Cloe Poisson) (Cloe Poisson)

"That is not a radical idea. It exists in Germany, it exists in Scandinavia," he said.

Some of Sanders' imperatives are happening, though more slowly than he would like; among them, rebuilding America's inner cities, breaking down the criminal justice system that treats drug use as a reason to lock people up, and focusing on mental health in a more serious way. "I'm not quite sure why your governor has cut mental health treatment," he said to the roar of the crowd, referring to Gov. Dannel P. Malloy's recent layoffs of workers at the state Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services.

(A spokesman for Malloy said late Sunday that spending in the department has climbed by 7 percent since 2012.)

Some ideas, like legalizing marijuana and gay marriage, are happening fast, supplying Sanders with fuel for his argument that progress is possible.

"I have been criticized that this campaign is thinking too big," Sanders said, brushing that notion aside.

Will supporters of all this big thinking back Clinton if she is the Democratic nominee? Most polls say yes, though with less passion. Sheldon Krevit, a Hamden artist who grew up in New Haven, said he would do it "holding my nose," and even then, only if Connecticut's vote mattered in the count. "No," said his wife of 42 years, Louise.

They, unlike many in Sunday's audience, understood the sweep of Sanders' message, the way it's part of something bigger than this election, especially in the days when it's becoming clearer that his ideas will not rule the day for the next four years.

"It's been going on for 50 years," Louise Krevit said. "It's part of the counterculture."