WILMINGTON — More than a year remains before a single vote is cast in the 2016 presidential election, but GOP hopeful Donald Trump is already looming large over the campaign.

In recent weeks, the outspoken billionaire has made almost daily waves on issues ranging from immigration to Obamacare as he pounds the pavement in his quest to secure the Republican nomination.

While his activities overtake the political news cycle around the country, including Thursday night’s GOP presidential debate in Cleveland, the larger-than-life business magnate’s reach can be seen in Wilmington thanks to a few local connections.

1. Local woman finds love with Trump’s son.

A member of the Trump empire calls Wilmington home. Local native Lara Yunaska Trump is married to Trump’s son, Eric. The couple, who dated for six years, tied the knot last November in Palm Beach at the Mar-a-Lago club owned by Trump.

In true elegant high-fashion, the bride wore Vera Wang on her big day. The ring bearer for the occasion was the couple’s miniature Beagle, Charlie. Yunaska is an associate producer with the CBS program “Inside Edition” and sits on the Board of Trustees for her husband’s foundation, The Eric Trump Foundation. Today, the couple lives in New York City, but her folks remain attached to the Carolina coast.

2. Trump’s ownership of the Miss USA pageant since 1996 has brought him in contact with several of the competition’s local contestants.

In the last six years, four Wilmington women have held the title of Miss NC USA — including Kristen Dalton (2009), Brittany York (2011) and Sydney Perry (2012).

Most recently, Julia Dalton, the reigning Miss North Carolina USA 2015, was part of the pageant — although Trump was absent from the competition after comments about the Hispanic community left him in hot water. Kristen went on to win the Miss USA title in 2009.

3. Stephanie Castagnier Dunn, a lender with Live Oak Bank in Wilmington, appeared as a contestant on the 10th season of Trump’s NBC reality competition series “The Apprentice” in 2010.

Dunn, who has lived in Wilmington for nearly two years, was one of 12 contestants chosen from a pool of 25,000 to compete for a position within one of Trump’s organizations.

Then living in Chicago, Dunn said it was the search for change and big opportunity that drew her to the watercooler show.

“I was ready for something new and different,” she said. “At the time, it was the hot thing on TV, so I applied. I never in a million years thought I would make it on.”

In her time on the show, Dunn produced a Broadway show and a fashion show. She stuck it out until week ten, when she was “fired” for not creating an AT&T commercial that Trump’s felt was suitable to air.

“I still disagree with his decision,” Dunn said.

But hearing those dreaded words, “You’re fired,” wasn’t the end of her time in the Trump inner circle. For nearly a year after the show, she said she worked with the Trump organization.

Ultimately, Dunn said her reality TV stint was the opportunity of a lifetime.

“I wanted to spend time with Trump and see who he did business with,” she said. “It was great to expand my Rolodex. A lot of the people I do business with today have connections to the people I met on the show.”

Contact Hunter Ingram at 910-343-2327 or Hunter.Ingram@StarnewsOnline.com.