GUELPH — So much was going on.

In an act of worship, a drummer removed a well-worn running shoe and threw it at the feet of his lead singer. She disdainfully kicked it away. A dozen women learned the basics of roller derby without the benefit of roller skates, while 20 other women drummed in a nearby circle encircled with cedar boughs, singing praises to Mother Earth.

Anyone with even a hint of social anxiety — and without the aid of a tranquilizing agent — would have been a ball of nerves on Guelph Island over the weekend, as a massive crowd poured into the 2014 edition of the Hillside Festival and did not pour out until the last send-off Sunday night.

The crowds were massive at all venues, starting from the Friday evening opening and continuing all through Saturday. By early Sunday, the crowds were back — and rambunctious.

Hillside executive director Marie Zimmerman said there seemed to be a heightened dancing vibe at the event, as though the fact that everyone is working harder to make ends meet made them more inclined to cutting loose on the festival grounds.

As has come to be expected, the musical lineup was a microcosm of the world of music, with rippin' rhythm and blues, politically aimed folk, Chinese reggae, experimental, electronic and eardrum-searing rock piercing the air.

The shoulder-to-shoulder crowds were demonstrative in attire, with throwback hippie fashions a favourite among the strong showing of youth in the crowd, and the more time-worn, decades-old hippie attire coming out of storage and adorning the older set.

The bicycle parking zone was crammed, and the now entrenched greeting of "Happy Hillside" was offered all along the road into the venue. Rain that was expected Saturday stayed away, aside from a few drops, but it was a different story Sunday evening, when a downpour closed the stages for about 40 minutes.

With impeccable timing and wit, poetic performer/entertainer PrufRock Shadowrunner had one of the defining moments on the Sun Stage. In a slam poetry genre known for dishing out hard blows to the conventional powers of the day, and denouncing in rhyme contemporary ills, PrufRock, went in a different direction.

The people causing all the trouble in the world today are those who are just not very bright, not very virtuous, and generally lacking in social graces and common decency. His take on them had the Sun Stage audience really digging poetry.

"What I've learned from doing a lot of these festivals is there are more people who have come to understand it's not your grandmother's poetry," he said in an interview, a hint of tranquilizing agent in the air. "It's nice to see how it's growing and evolving, and how more people that didn't know they were fans of spoken word or poetry in general, have come to love it and be around it."

Poetry can loosen people up, chill them out, open them up, he said. We are too serious too much of the time, too wrapped up in hustle.

"Poetry can just allow people to see the world for what it really is, help them appreciate it and love it," he said. "We are always so mad at everything. But if you take a moment and really, really appreciate where you come from, where you are, and what's going on, it's really beautiful, man."

Joanne "Cherry Paincakes" Emeneau, president of Royal City Roller Girls, taught intro roller derby in the "active living" area of the festival. She said roller derby is as much a part of active living as anything, and a sport that attracts a broad age group.

"It's very inclusive of the same kinds of people that would come to Hillside," she said. "We embrace all kinds of weirdness and oddness in people, and it's great to mesh the two together."

Hillside isn't just a music festival, she said. It's a community festival as well.

"This is about learning what's going on in your community, about creating community," she added. "You create community very quickly in a small, enclosed space like this. Everyone here seems to be about love and friendship, and I like that."

In a solo musical act that brought an uproarious Island Stage crowd swaying to its feet, Australian performer Daniel Champagne, 24, seemed to surprise even himself with the passion he was able to demonstrate at Hillside. There were, however, grave doubts about the survivability of his guitar as he slashed it, plucked it, beat and pounded it in a gutsy, bluesy performance heavy with emotion. He was unknown when he came, beloved when he left.

"That was a lot of energy," he said, moments after leaving the stage to a standing ovation.

"I learned off other people who were doing similar things, and then it was just a matter of experimenting on my own with the instrument to get different sounds and figure out what sounded good and what didn't," he said, speaking of his playing art. "Today I feel like I got it, and they got it."

With a rush of exuberance in her voice, Zimmerman said the crowd was full of passion this year, and stirred by a "dancing spirit." The only time it rained, she said, was during a performance by the Chinese reggae band Long Shen Dao. And the crowd, ranging from two-year-olds to grandfathers, relished the music, the rain and the dancing.

"It was just fantastic, and I thought, I just feel so blessed to see that in these patrons," Zimmerman said. "They are having a wonderful time. I realized that for so many of us, we all work so hard, we don't have time to just let loose, be creative and have fun. For so many people, Hillside is a vacation, their time to escape from the drudgery of the daily, and just have fun and let go."

From ticket sales, she expects the festival to come in on budget. Some unexpected expenses will be variables when it comes to the final financial result. "I think we're OK," she said.

Year after year, Sam Baijal comes up with a diverse and exceptional lineup of musical acts, Zimmerman added. "There is always a wonderful diversity," she said.