— An executive from B. Braun Medical Inc. in Bethlehem urged federal lawmakers to undo a tax on medical devices that has cost the company $33 million since it was enacted, requiring across-the-board cutbacks.

In order to pay that tax bill — the result of a 2.3 percent tax created in the Affordable Care Act on a range of medical items — the company slashed costs. No employees were laid off, but plans for a new headquarters in Upper Saucon Township were shelved.

Research and development spending, travel expenses, clinical trials, and employee raises, pensions and other benefits also faced cuts, said Bruce Heugel, the company's senior vice president and chief financial officer.

"We have a responsibility to our employees, shareholders and community not to end up like Bethlehem Steel," Heugel said. "So when the new medical device tax takes away $33 million through 2015, we are forced to launch painful counter-measures."

Heugel testified at a Senate hearing led by Republican Sen. Pat Toomey, who has co-sponsored a bill to repeal the tax.

Toomey and other supporters, including Democratic Sen. Bob Casey and Republican Rep. Charlie Dent, say the levy has stifled innovation of new products, cost jobs within the medical industry, and raised prices for patients.

The three Pennsylvania lawmakers received campaign contributions last quarter from B. Braun CEO Caroll Neubauer. Dent and Casey reported receiving $1,000 each, and Toomey reported $4,700 from Neubauer this election cycle.

The device tax went into effect in 2013 and is assessed on the sales of certain medical supplies. Some items, such as eyeglasses, hearing aids and wheelchairs, are exempt. It is projected to raise $29 billion over the next 10 years to help pay for Obamacare, which has provided health coverage for millions more Americans.

Repealing the tax was among Toomey's top agenda items as his party regained majority control in the Senate. Toomey said he hopes the proposal can move through the Senate Finance Committee, but if not, he'll try other approaches to get a vote.

"It's been difficult to find the space on the Senate floor, but I'm going to continue to push as hard as I can," Toomey said.

Heugel tried to help bolster the case against the tax Thursday. Contrary to some arguments made as the levy was being crafted, he said, the federal Affordable Care Act has not led to a rush of new customers as more Americans gained insurance and access to health care.

"We were hoping for a windfall, we were hoping for a lot of patients, but we haven't seen any," Heugel said. "They never showed up."

Instead, the tax has reduced industry profits by 29 percent, he said, citing a 2012 Ernst & Young study prepared for the Advanced Medical Technology Association, an industry group. That reduction means companies will have fewer dollars available to reinvest in new products, Heugel said.

Some independent analyses have questioned such claims. A report from the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service concluded that the tax is most likely to affect consumer prices, not company profits.

Sen. Debbie Stabenow of Michigan, the sole Democrat at Thursday's hearing, said the device industry still has been able to grow in spite of the tax.

She asked Heugel how they could undo the device tax in a way that won't add to the federal deficit. So far there's no agreement on how to replace the money that is being raised through the tax, and some supporters argue that doing so is not necessary.

Heugel replied that the Affordable Care Act has provided more care, and that the companies providing that care already are being taxed, creating more tax revenue.

lolson@mcall.com

Twitter @LauraOlson

202-824-8216