MIAMI COUNTY — Every second counts in a medical emergency and Miami County Sheriff’s Office cruisers are now equipped with six new automated external defibrillators (AEDs) to help the public during a cardiac event.

According to Miami County Sheriff’s Office Chief Deputy Dave Duchak, all sheriff’s office deputies are trained to use the AEDs, as well as having CPR and basic medical training. The automated external defibrillators are used to treat sudden cardiac arrest by sending an electrical shock to attempt to restart the heart.

“We are very grateful for the Miami County Foundation for adding one more life-saving tool for our road deputies to use,” Duchak said Friday.

There are a minimum of six road deputies patrolling county roads per shift, Duchak said. Deputy often are able to respond to the scene of a medical emergency before medics arrive, especially in rural areas, to begin life-saving services.

“We are very happy to be able to deploy this invaluable life-saving device throughout Miami County. We are extremely grateful to the Miami County Foundation for their very generous award and for all of their past awards to the Sheriff’s Office which has increased public safety throughout Miami County,” Duchak said in a press release.

The AEDs will be deployed in cruisers for use throughout the county by sheriff’s deputies. All Miami County deputies and corrections officers are certified on the AEDs.

Provided photo | Miami County Sheriff’s Office Deputy Nate Jessup places an automated external defibrillator into a sheriff’s cruiser last week. The sheriff’s office received six AEDs purchased through a grant from the Miami County Foundation. http://tdn-net.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/web1_AED-1.jpg Provided photo | Miami County Sheriff’s Office Deputy Nate Jessup places an automated external defibrillator into a sheriff’s cruiser last week. The sheriff’s office received six AEDs purchased through a grant from the Miami County Foundation. The Miami County Sheriff’s Office received six automated external defibrillators last week. The Miami County Foundation awarded the office a grant for the AEDs to be added to the sheriff’s office patrol units. http://tdn-net.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/web1_AED.jpg The Miami County Sheriff’s Office received six automated external defibrillators last week. The Miami County Foundation awarded the office a grant for the AEDs to be added to the sheriff’s office patrol units.

Miami County Foundations awards grant for six AED devices for road deputies

By Melanie Yingst [email protected]

Reach Melanie Yingst at [email protected] or follow her on Twitter @Troydailynews

Reach Melanie Yingst at [email protected] or follow her on Twitter @Troydailynews

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus