By Bobby Harrison

Daily Journal Jackson Bureau

JACKSON – Northeast Mississippi’s new legislators said they enjoyed their first week of the 2016 legislative session, but hope to begin the work of legislating soon.

“It has been overwhelming,” said Rep. Shane Aguirre, R-Tupelo. “There has been a lot of hurrying up and waiting, but everybody has been very friendly and very cordial.

“But I know that will change soon.”

Aguirre, who represents District 17 in Lee County, Rep. Jay Hughes, D-Oxford, Rep. Rob Roberson, R-Starkville, and Sen. Chad McMahan, R-Guntown, are the only new legislators for the new four-year term representing portions of Northeast Mississippi.

They were sworn in Tuesday – the opening day of the 2016 session – with the other 28 legislators who represent portions of Northeast Mississippi.

The work of actually taking up legislation is expected to begin soon. But first, the Legislature’s two presiding officers, Speaker Philip Gunn in the House and Lt. Gov. Tate Reeves in the Senate, must make committee assignments. That process might be delayed until two election challenges – one in each chamber – are decided in the coming days.

Still, the new members said the first week was hectic.

“The first week has been busy – meeting my colleagues…finding the bathrooms,” joked McMahan. “I have been busy acclimating myself to the Capitol and finding out where all the facilities are.”

As far as the session, McMahan said, “I would like to see some tax reform this year. I also would like to see some investment in education.”

McMahan, who represents the bulk of Lee County and a portion of Itawamba, said he also would focus on trying to help secure state funding for the planned Vietnam War Memorial at Veterans Park in Tupelo. The plan is to build a replica of the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington, D.C., which McMahan said is one of the most visited sites in the nation’s capitol. He said such a memorial would be a big draw for Tupelo.

Aguirre said he is working on health care legislation.

“I am like a kid on Christmas morning,” said Hughes, whose district consists solely of a portion of Lafayette County. “This is a wonderful opportunity, and I can’t wait to see what is under the tree in terms of policy opportunities to help the state.

“We have opportunities to excel all over the place. I am proud to have a seat at the table.”

Hughes said he would focus on education.

As far as specific bills, he said he would file legislation:

• To make all school superintendents appointed and increase their required levels of experience and education.

• To have open primaries so voters can cross party lines.

• To make all local offices, such as circuit clerks and sheriffs, non-partisan.

He said there is not a Republican or Democratic way for a coroner to handle his or her duties.

Hughes also said proudly he would file a resolution congratulating the University of Mississippi, which is in his district, for winning the Sugar Bowl.

Hughes defeated incumbent Brad Mayo, R-Oxford, while McMahan defeated incumbent Nancy Collins, R-Tupelo. Aguirre replaced incumbent Brian Aldridge, R-Tupelo, who opted not to run for re-election.

Roberson is representing newly created District 43, which consists of portions of Oktibbeha and Winston counties

Family members and others were at the Capitol Tuesday for the swearing-in ceremony. Nearly 30 people traveled from Lee County for McMahan’s swearing-in.

McMahan said he plans to have a ceremonial swearing-in ceremony at 6 p.m. Jan. 29 at the Guntown City Hall with a reception to follow in the Guntown Community Center.

“It will be an opportunity for working people to come out and visit with me and have input,” he said.

McMahan said for the time being, he plans to remain a member of the Guntown Board of Aldermen to save the expense of a special election. The courts have ruled that people could serve in the Legislature and on city governing boards because both positions are legislative. A person could not, for instance, serve in the executive position of mayor and in the Legislature.

Hughes has resigned from the Oxford Board of Aldermen.

bobby.harrison@journalinc.com

Twitter: @bobbyharrison9