U.S. President Barack Obama hugs Vice President Joe Biden during the funeral of Mr. Biden’s son, former Delaware Attorney General Beau Biden, at St. Anthony of Padua church in Wilimington, Del., Saturday. Kevin Lamarque/Reuters …

‘That’s what our country was built on, men like Beau. That’s who built it—families like this,’ Mr. Obama said at a memorial service in Wilmington, Del. Kevin Lamarque/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Mourners gather in front of St. Anthony's of Padua in Wilmington, Del., Saturday for the funeral Mass of Beau Biden. More than 1,000 people attended the funeral on Saturday morning. Noah Scialom/European Pressphoto Agency …

People gather outside St. Anthony of Padua Church in Wilmington, Del., as family and friends inside bid farewell to Beau Biden. Noah Scialom/European Pressphoto Agency …

A procession enters St. Anthony of Padua Church in Wilmington, Del., Saturday with the casket bearing Beau Biden. Yuri Gripas/Associated Press …

President Obama, first lady Michelle Obama, and others attend funeral services for Beau Biden Saturday. Yuri Gripas/Associated Press …

Joe Biden, center, and his wife, Jill Biden, right, arrive with Beau Biden’s wife and children for the Mass Saturday. Mark Makela/Getty Images …

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, right, and former President Bill Clinton arrive for the funeral in Wilmington, Del., Saturday. Matt Rourke/Associated Press …

Vice President Joe Biden watches an honor guard carry the casket before the church service in Wilmington, Del., Saturday. Patrick Semansky/Associated Press …

A procession in front of St. Anthony of Padua church Saturday. Noah Scialom/European Pressphoto Agency …

As an honor guard waits on the sidewalk, a hearse carrying the casket of Beau Biden, the former Delaware attorney general and eldest son of Vice President Joe Biden, arrives at St. Anthony of Padua Roman Catholic Church in Wilmington, Del., for a viewing on Friday. William Bretzger/The Wilmington News-Journal/Associated Press …

The honor guard carries Beau Biden’s casket into the church. Mr. Biden was a major in the Delaware National Guard and served in Iraq. Patrick Semansky/Associated Press …

The honor guard carries Beau Biden’s casket into the church on Friday. Mr. Biden’s mother Neilia and sister Naomi were killed in a car crash in 1972, weeks after his father was elected to the U.S. Senate. Beau and his brother Hunter were seriously injured in the crash. William Bretzger/The Wilmington News-Journal/Associated Press …

The family of Beau Biden—including his father, Vice President Joe Biden—follows an honor guard and the casket into the Delaware Legislative Hall in Dover, Del., for a memorial service on Thursday. Beau Biden died May 30 at age 46 from brain cancer. Patrick Semansky/Associated Press …

Vice President Joe Biden, center, shuts his eyes and holds the hand of his grandson, Hunter, while flanked by his family—from left, son Hunter, granddaughter Natalie, daughter-in-law Hallie, and wife Jill—before the memorial service inside the Delaware Legislative Hall. Patrick Semansky/Associated Press …

Vice President Joe Biden greets mourners after they pass the casket containing the remains of his son during the viewing at the Legislative Hall in Dover, Del., on Thursday. Beau Biden was elected as Delaware’s attorney general in 2006 and 2010. Jason Minto/The Wilmington News-Journal/Associated Press …

Vice President Joe Biden, right, hides his face during the Thursday viewing of his son’s casket in the Legislative Hall. Mr. Biden said Beau fought brain cancer “with the same integrity, courage and strength he demonstrated every day of his life.” Patrick Semansky/Associated Press …