San Antonio Express-News

There’s a new Most Wanted suspect on the nutrition hit list, and it may be bringing down one of the good guys with it.

The No. 1 villain in the American diet is no longer fat or cholesterol or even calories. Sure, they all had their run, but science has determined they’re not as guilty of making us fat and unhealthy as once thought.

Today’s No. 1-with-a-bullet dietary bad boy is sugar.

Unfortunately, as more people try to avoid sugar, some are passing on fruit, too. And that’s a mistake.

Avoiding sugar can be hard, since so many foods sneak in added sugar. These include no-duh! things like candy bars and soda, as well as more surprising culprits like spaghetti sauce (7 grams of added sugar per serving), instant oatmeal (12 grams) and sports drinks (14 grams).

Federal guidelines call for kids to eat no more than 6 to 9 teaspoons of sugar a day. Yet a bowl of Froot Loops and an 8-ounce glass of orange juice — a typical meal fed to kids in the national school breakfast program — contains 11 teaspoons of sugar. So a kid has blown through his limit and it’s not even 10 a.m. yet.

But avoiding fruit because of sugar would be like throwing the good-for-you baby out with the sugary bath water.

While fruit does indeed contain sugar — that’s why it tastes so good — there’s no proof that eating it has the same detrimental health effects as eating processed foods with added sugar.

In fact, a recent study found that increased fruit consumption is neatly tied to reductions in both body weight and risk of obesity-related diseases.

“Sugar in foods is absorbed by the body within minutes,” explained Georgiana Gross, faculty dietitian at the University of Texas Health Science Center’s School of Dentistry. “That quickly raises blood sugar levels and can, in time, lead to diabetes. Plus, the body uses stored vitamins and minerals to digest sugar, so it truly is empty calories.”

What makes fruit different is the fiber it contains.

“The fiber makes eating fruit OK,” said Dr. Robert Lustig, a pediatric endocrinologist at the University of California, San Francisco.

According to Lustig, the fiber in fruit slows the rate that sugar is absorbed so blood sugar rises more gradually. This also gives the good bacteria in your gut more time to consume the sugars themselves, keeping them happy and healthy.