In the early years of the last decade, difficult state budget years, there were constant threats to eliminate a health insurance program for low-income adults without children, as a way to save money. But advocates for those clients succeeded in keeping the program alive. With the coming of Obamacare it became HUSKY D, and it now covers more than 160,000 people.

The advocates in this and many similar cases were lawyer-lobbyists from the Legal Assistance Resource Center of Connecticut, the lobbying and public policy arm of the state's three legal-aid groups. Over the years, LARC has lobbied and influenced legislation on everything from tenants' rights and predatory lending to access to the courts, affordable housing and employment. But not for much longer. Faced with a major funding crisis, the legal aid groups are shutting down LARC in September, CT Mirror's Mark Pazniokas reports.

This would be a devastating loss, and not just to the poor. When LARC advocates for sound banking policies or rights of renters, it helps a lot of middle-class people as well. LARC's highly regarded Raphael L. "Rafie" Podolsky has often been the only lobbyist representing the public on banking legislation. History sugests that insiders sometimes game the system for the well-connected if no one is there to call them on it. We are all better off if Mr. Podolsky is in the room.

The program should be preserved.

Legal aid services are funded by interest on lawyers' trust accounts, or IOLTA, the interest on accounts that lawyers hold for clients or third parties for such things as real estate closings. In 2007, the program generated nearly $21 million for legal aid, but it's fallen by a stunning 90 percent since the recession of 2008 slowed real-estate transactions and drove down interest rates, Mr. Pazniokas reports.

The state created another revenue stream, fees on civil court filings, but these have been flat. The result is that reserve funds are gone and the programs are running at a deficit, Steven D. Eppler-Epstein, executive director of Connecticut Legal Services, told The Mirror. Rather than lay off staff lawyers who provide direct legal services to the poor — some of whom have been laid off — they chose to close LARC.

We need both. A lawyer who keeps a client from being unfairly evicted helps that person. When LARC advocates get a law passed that prevents unfair evictions, they help many people.

Legal aid officials say that using contract lobbyists and other legal aid lawyers can somewhat mitigate the loss of LARC. But while the lobbyists, Betty Gallo and Kate Robinson, are first-rate, they have other clients and often rely on LARC for research and analysis.

The legal aid funding crisis is genuine, and troubling. It's left the aid groups with nothing but bad choices. Nonetheless we urge them to try again, to make sure every potential funding stone has been turned. For example, are there foundations that work in the subject areas that LARC covers, such as housing, health care, family services, etc., who might support the effort?

Rep. Matt Lesser, D-Middletown, said that LARC is in many ways "the conscience of the legislature." That would make it essential.