Topics: authors, Books, Fiction, novelists, Entertainment News

As always, autumn has yielded a bumper crop of new fiction. So I posed a series of questions–with a few verbal restrictions–to Matthew Thomas (“We Are Not Ourselves,” a novel already out), Emily St. John Mandel (“Station Eleven,” a novel available Sept. 9), Dylan Landis (“Rainey Royal,” a novel available Sept. 9), John Warner, “Tough Day for the Army,” stories available Sept. 15), and Lindsay Hunter (“Ugly Girls,” a novel available Nov. 4).

Without summarizing the plot in any way, what would you say your novel is about?

THOMAS: The persistence of hope in the face of certain defeat; the refusal to despair; a brief moment of triumph; years spent chasing an idyll; in short, an alternate history of the New York Mets.

LANDIS: A girl in trouble named Rainey Royal. Also jazz, sex, cigarettes, New York, 1970s, girls and men, friendships and cruelty, art, and Saint Catherine of Bologna.

MANDEL: It’s about a traveling Shakespearean theatre company in a post-apocalyptic North America. It’s also about friendship, memory, love, celebrity, our obsession with objects, oppressive dinner parties, comic books, and knife-throwing.

HUNTER: The “friendship” between two teenaged girls. Acting out of desperation. Nostalgia for something that never existed. The Internet as predator. The assumptions we make and accept as fact.

WARNER: Mankind is a pestilence, bent on destroying ourselves and others, but occasionally we break free from our monstrousness and achieve something like grace. Also has a talking monkey.

Without explaining why and without naming other authors or books, can you discuss the various influences on your novels?

HUNTER: My mother’s yearbooks. 48 Hours Mystery. Keith Morrison. Fairy tales. The kind of heat you feel in August when you just get back into your car at 2:00 in the afternoon. The silence of waiting. Ugliness.

WARNER: “Slap Shot,” “Ferris Bueller’s Day Off,” fraternity hazing, Mitt Romney’s smile, small town newspapers, the Double Jeopardy noise, crappy zoos.

MANDEL: Post-apocalyptic novels, a 2010 book tour on the Michigan lake shore, the 1918 flu, the New York Public Theater, an unsettling moment one night in Toronto when I was nineteen and just for a second all the lights on Yonge Street blinked out, the 2003 blackout in New York City, orchestral music.

LANDIS: Mean girls, biology, the language of jazz, specific pieces of art, collage, yearning, the language of seduction.

THOMAS: The scent of bitter almonds. The watery part of the world. Such wonderful shirts. Bernard is thinking of his biographer. Old father, old artificer. See the child. These fragments I have shored against my ruins. I can’t go on, I’ll go on. The apparition of these faces in the crowd. Only connect. Isn’t it pretty to think so?

Without using complete sentences, can you describe what was going on in your lives as you wrote this book?

LANDIS: Loss, death, and caregiving for my parents.

THOMAS: Sleepless nights, two a.m. feedings, growing pains, wailing, burping, babbling, unreasonability—and then my twin children were born.

MANDEL: Day job, book tour, disappointment, happiness, exhaustion. Constant work.

HUNTER: Pregnant. Summer. Winter. Basement. Loss. Change. Home.

WARNER: Stories span 1997 to 2014: MFA, giving up writing, career (marketing research), first book, marriage, moving, second career (teaching), moving, begin editing McSweeney’s Internet Tendency, moving, second book, father died, grandmother died, father-in-law died, third book, fourth book, failed humor imprint (TOW Books), moving, novel published, novel failed in marketplace, moving, purchase of weed whacker.

What are some words you despise that have been used to describe your book by readers and/or reviewers?

MANDEL: “Women’s fiction.” There’s absolutely nothing wrong with writing books that are aimed specifically at women. But since I don’t actually write those books, it’s impossible to interpret that label as anything other than “this book was written by a girl.”