Buy Photo Joni Ernst (Photo: Kelsey KremerThe Register, Kelsey Kremer/The Register)Buy Photo

This fall Iowa voters will choose a replacement for U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin in Iowa's first open contest for the Senate in 40 years.

The process begins June 3 when Republican voters pick a nominee from a large and capable field of candidates, one of whom will face Democratic candidate Bruce Braley in November. Because of the historic importance of this election, the Register's editorial board met with each of the five Republican nominees over the past few weeks, and today we offer our perspective on the race.

Endorsing candidates in a party primary is unusual but not unique for the Register. While these are largely party decisions, Iowa's open primary process means any eligible voter is free to change his or her previous party registration on Election Day and cast a ballot in the primary. The winner on June 3 will have a shot at becoming the next U.S. senator from Iowa and must represent all Iowans in Congress.

So we believe this primary is worth our expressing an opinion, and we have spent more than five hours in meetings with all of the candidates individually, looked at their positions and watched their campaigns.

Although some of the five Republican candidates are stronger than others, three stand out: state Sen. Joni Ernst, former Texas energy executive Mark Jacobs and former U.S. Attorney Matt Whitaker. Among those, Ernst is the best prepared and the most qualified of the field.

For a politician appealing to Iowa voters, Ernst, 43, has a sterling resume and a compelling biography. She lives in the same southwest Iowa county where she grew up helping out on the family farm and graduating at the top of her Stanton High School class. She is a lieutenant colonel in Iowa Army National Guard and was deployed to Iraq in 2003 during Operation Iraqi Freedom. She has twice been elected to public office, first as Montgomery County auditor and to the Iowa Senate four years ago.

MORE ON ERNST: Her bio and top issues

THE RACE FOR SENATE: Register news coverage

Ernst's conservative credentials are impeccable as well. Her absolutist position on the Second Amendment earned her the NRA's top rating and its endorsement. She would eliminate the U.S. Department of Education and would replace Obamacare with a "free-market solution" and the federal tax code with a flat tax. She believes federal rules and regulations are a burden. She supports amending the U.S. Constitution to require Congress to balance the budget.

Yet, unlike candidates who cannot go beyond campaign talking points, Ernst exhibits a nuanced grasp of the details. On the federal budget deficit, for example, she readily concedes that cutting federal discretionary spending won't be nearly enough and that the biggest savings must come from Medicare and Medicaid. Ernst also admits the renewable fuels standard is the sort of federal mandate she philosophically opposes, but she said it should not be repealed until all other energy mandates and subsidies are eliminated.

She is equally nuanced on the question of applying a Christian litmus test to federal judicial nominees in fulfilling the Senate's constitutional duty to give its advice and consent on the president's appointees to the federal courts. Senators should apply no Bible-based litmus test, not least because the U.S. Constitution says "no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United States."

On this question, Ernst said her "bottom line" test is whether the nominee will abide by the U.S. Constitution. Ernst said nominees' moral judgment should grounded in the Judeo-Christian values found in the Bible, but, when asked, she said she could vote to confirm judges who are not Christians and would not rule out an atheist.

Besides demonstrating leadership in her military career, Ernst has managed an impressive statewide political campaign. She has emerged from a crowded field with support from many establishment Republicans. She captured national attention with a clever campaign ad that said she would apply her experience castrating hogs to cut pork in Washington.

Yet, while she might come across in some ads as an Iowa version of Sarah Palin who rides a Harley and packs a gun in her purse, Ernst does not exhibit a Palinesque swagger in person. She talks of driving a hybrid car and of the values of simplicity learned from her mother, teaching Sunday school in her family church and taking pride in being a mother and grandmother. Though Ernst could be the first woman to represent Iowa in Congress, she says she cares about the same things as men.

Ernst is a smart, well-prepared candidate who can wrestle with the details of public policy from a conservative perspective without seeming inflexible. She would be a formidable opponent to Democratic candidate Bruce Braley in a contest that would give Iowans a clear choice in November.

The other candidates

Here are summaries of the other U.S. Senate candidates' meetings with the Register editorial board.

Sam Clovis, 64,

has an interesting resume: U.S. Air Force Academy; former fighter pilot; professor at Morningside College; radio talk-show host. He can go deep into issues. While presenting himself as a cast-iron conservative, he has some moderate views (it would be "heartless" to deport millions living here illegally, and the EPA was right to modify the renewable fuels standard). He is engaging and funny. If he is not elected, the winner could do worse than hiring him as chief policy adviser.

Mark Jacobs, 52,

emphasized his Iowa roots as a Roosevelt High School graduate and a newspaper carrier. But his formative experience was as a senior executive who helped lead a Texas utility through financial troubles. He said he would apply lessons learned in business to the nation's fiscal problems. Jacobs introduced himself at our meeting by announcing that "I am not a politician," and it showed with his lack of depth on many issues.

Scott Schaben, 39,

might be the everyman candidate. The native Iowan spent six years in the Navy and went to Iowa State University on the G.I. Bill. Until lately, he was a car dealership sales manager. He said he got into the race to put a new face on the Republican Party, yet in our meeting he reeled off standard party positions on everything from Obamacare to gun control. Schaben does stand out in one respect: He is the only candidate trained to fire a Tomahawk missile from a naval destroyer.

Matt Whitaker, 44,

made the most aggressive case of any candidate we met, which is no surprise for a former federal prosecutor. He was strong on small-government principles ("as government expands, liberty recedes"), hostile to federal regulations, excessive taxes, bloated budgets and "aid to countries that don't like us." Yet he is consistent in defending not just the right to bear arms but also the right to be free of government spying. He is smart, can think fast on his feet and made his case in our meeting like a courtroom lawyer.

Read or Share this story: http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/opinion/editorials/2014/05/17/joni-ernst-senate-register-editorial-board-endorsement/9231191/