Suzanne Kreiter/Globe staff/file 2012 James Roosevelt.

James Roosevelt Jr., one of the

longest reigning health care executives in Massachusetts, will retire at the end of the year.

The chief executive of Watertown-based Tufts Health Plan is stepping down after 16 years with the insurer, including the last 10 as chief executive. Roosevelt, who turns 70 next month, will be succeeded by Thomas A. Croswell, president and chief operating officer of Tufts Health, who will become CEO in January.

Advertisement

“We are at the top of our game,” said Roosevelt, who will stay on as a full-time adviser for six months, then work as a part-time consultant. “We’re at a membership high, we’re expanding regionally . . . We are very financially sound.”

As chief executive, Roosevelt oversaw expansion of the nonprofit insurer’s membership to more than 1 million from less than 600,000, Tufts Health said. He also led the insurer’s expansion in Rhode Island and New Hampshire and spearheaded the acquisition of Network Health, an insurer that serves low-income families and individuals.

Tufts Health, which last year earned an operating profit of $7.1 million on revenue of $4.3 billion, is the state’s third-largest commercial health insurer, after Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts and Harvard Pilgrim Health Care.

Roosevelt said that cost containment remains a major challenge for the industry.

“We’re all still dealing with the cost of the transition to the Affordable Care Act,” he said, referring to the federal law also known as Obamacare, which has imposed new taxes on health insurers. “We’re all standing by for a possible resurgence in medical costs, particularly the skyrocketing cost of pharmaceuticals.” Government estimates show that health care spending is accelerating, in part because of higher costs of prescription drugs.

Advertisement

Roosevelt, a lawyer by training, previously worked as a top official at the Social Security Administration — a program founded by his grandfather, President Franklin D. Roosevelt.

Roosevelt cochairs the Democratic National Committee’s rules and bylaws committee and said he plans to stay involved in politics. He ran unsuccessfully for Congress in 1986 in a crowded Democratic primary that was won by former US representative Joseph P. Kennedy II.

He arrived at Tufts in 1999 as senior vice president and general counsel and was promoted to chief executive six years later. In 2011, Roosevelt explored a merger with Harvard Pilgrim, but the deal never panned out.

In 2013, he earned $2.3 million in salary, retirement benefits, and other compensation, according to tax filings.

Health care executives who know Roosevelt described him as someone who is well-liked, understands the issues, and can build consensus.

“He’s almost like a professor. He’s very knowledgeable about health policy. He has a long view,” said Dr. David Torchiana, chief executive of Partners HealthCare. “He’s easy to talk to, even though he has a famous family name.”

Across the table from hospital executives, he is a deft negotiator, said Jeanette G. Clough, chief executive of Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge.

Roosevelt “tries to understand where you’re coming from,” she said. “That always makes for a better outcome, when both sides can walk in the shoes of the other.”

As a past board chairman of the Massachusetts Association of Health Plans, he had “a really uncanny ability to hear all sides and find a reasonable middle ground,” said Lora M. Pellegrini, chief executive of the trade group.

“He really is a true statesmen in every fashion of the word,” she said. “When he talks, people listen.”