Nashville, TN – Kathleen Sebelius, 21st U.S. secretary of Health and Human Services, will deliver the opening keynote presentation at Modern Healthcare’s 5th annual Women Leaders in Healthcare Conference August 20th in Nashville, Tennessee.

Sebelius, a nationally recognized expert on health policy and leadership, led HHS during the historic passage and implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

“We’re honored to have Kathleen Sebelius as the opening keynote speaker for this event,” said Fawn Lopez, publisher of Modern Healthcare. “Her experience and accomplishments coupled with the obstacles she overcame in her roles as the governor of Kansas and most recently, as the secretary of Health and Human Services are truly inspirational.”

The full-day conference is designed for women professionals in healthcare and offers unique learning opportunities and networking for the women leaders of today and tomorrow.

“What’s unique about our Women Leaders in Healthcare Conference is the format, which allows for rich presenter-attendee interaction and sharing of best practices,” said Maureen McKinney, Modern Healthcare’s editorial programs manager, “We’re fortunate to have these extraordinary women anchoring the conference as our opening and closing keynote speakers.”

The day’s agenda also includes panel discussions on critical topics, such as how to help more women reach top leadership positions, and how to lead in a transforming healthcare system.

To learn more about Modern Healthcare’s Women Leaders in Healthcare Conference, visit www.ModernHealthcare.com/Leaders2015

About Modern Healthcare

Modern Healthcare is the most trusted business news and information brand in the healthcare industry. Combining the power of a print publication, 24-7 digital news products, robust research and event platforms, Modern Healthcare empowers healthcare leaders and influencers to make timely and informed business decisions.

Crain Communications Inc. is a privately held media company producing trusted and relevant news publications, lead generation, research and data products, custom publishing and events with uncompromising integrity. Reaching more than 5 million business decision makers and consumers across the United States and in select markets in Europe and Asia, the company’s portfolio includes many of the most influential media properties in the verticals they serve.

Sections

Topics