Dan Garfinkel wipes down the bar at the Finkel and Garf Craft Brewing Company in Gunbarrel. ( Cliff Grassmick )

At Finkel & Garf Brewing Co., which on Monday becomes Boulder's newest craft brewery, the custom coat of arms of the father-and-son-owned operation silently gives a taste of the ideology behind the business.

Finkel & Garf's shield is emblazoned with elements of a Big Wheel, robot, wind-up car, Frisbee and jack-in-the-box. The meaning of each, respectively: Go places, stay curious, let it go, play often and surprise yourself.

The taproom of the brewery, at 5455 Spine Road in Gunbarrel, plays off those statements.

Bright-colored chairs sit against tables and bars made from reclaimed wood from the floors of box cars; a Steampunk-meets-Rube Goldberg "ball machine" sends croquet balls on a journey through old computer fans, wooden roller skate wheels and a Cessna tank; table games such as Skittles and Nok Hockey hang on the wall awaiting play; and a collection of old games is intermingled with a slew of snacks behind the bar.

"We want this to be a fun, family-oriented place," said Eric Garfinkel, who founded the brewery with his son Dan and brewer Mychal Johnson.

That includes having a laid-back atmosphere and a line-up of beers that is both approachable for new purveyors of craft beer and also meticulously brewed to satisfy the palates of industry veterans.

"Quality assurance is not any one thing, it's the overall encompassing of every aspect of the beer," Johnson said.

When Finkel & Garf opens at 3 p.m. Monday, it will do so with 11 beers on draft. The lager, which takes longer to execute, is expected to come a couple weeks later.

The 5,500-square-foot brewery has a 15-barrel brewhouse and also plenty of open space for expansion.

In the coming months, Finkel & Garf plans to install a canning line built by Boulder's Wild Goose Canning. The machine will allow for the placement of custom labels, which could give Finkel & Garf flexibility in what it cans, the elder Garfinkel said.

Finkel & Garf's opening comes amid a national and local boom of the craft brewing industry — the U.S. brewery count eclipsed 3,000 operations, the Boulder-based Brewers Association reported this week.

In Boulder's Gunbarrel area, Finkel & Garf joins Asher Brewing Co., Vindication Brewing Co., and the newly opened tap room for New Planet Beer.

Gunbarrel, which also has hundreds of apartments under construction, also next year will be home to Boulder's Avery Brewing, which is building a 96,000-square-foot brewery and restaurant.

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com