With the implementation of new Affordable Care Act and Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) measures, hospitals are increasingly being held accountable for higher standards of patient care and more intensive data reporting – and are subject to severe penalties when they fall short.

Meeting these new standards requires that hospitals reimagine operations and address workflow issues in every department. One critical solution to help improve clinical efficiencies is moving diagnosis – including initial assessment, ongoing monitoring and interpretation of results – to the point of care (POC).

The current model in many hospitals requires staff to go to a central workstation to process tests or input results. When seconds can make the difference in a critical patient's outcomes, this approach can significantly delay how quickly providers can obtain results and make the most informed treatment decisions. Besides affecting patient outcomes, this model creates efficiency-sapping bottlenecks and drives health care costs. It also increases patient wait time, which CMS is targeting since delays in admittance and discharge put patients at risk (by exposing them to hospital-acquired infections in exam rooms, for example) and reflect potentially harmful shortfalls in hospital operations.

[MORE: How the Slowdown in Medicare Spending Is Affecting Hospitals]

Rapid POC tests address these issues by decentralizing and streamlining diagnosis, empowering staff to obtain critical test results more easily and quickly – in some cases, even by the patient's bedside. As an example, portable and central lab blood gas, electrolyte and metabolite analyzers require as many as 18 discreet steps and can take up to 2 hours to deliver results. Conversely, handheld bedside blood gas analyzers streamline the process considerably, requiring fewer steps and providing results in about 3 minutes, reflecting the patient's immediate condition.

Tests that rapidly assess key markers of disease in the emergency department can expedite treatment and discharge, and can support hospital programs to systemize the entire patient experience, from arrival to discharge. In addition, many of today's POC tests offer wireless connectivity, allowing every member of a treatment team to access results instantly.

By connecting POC tests with laboratory information systems, the laboratory can remotely oversee the provider performing the test, the test result, the patient information, whether the instrument has been properly validated with regular quality control checks, and whether the operator has been trained and qualified to perform the test. In essence, this connectivity ensures the accuracy of POC testing by providing laboratory oversight of the hospital staff members who are performing the tests and the testing instruments they are using.

[RANKINGS: Best Hospitals]

Beyond acute care, screening at the point of care in the outpatient setting can help hospitals meet many of the increasingly rigorous Affordable Care Act and CMS standards for patient care. For example, a critical first step toward reducing readmissions is ensuring the initial diagnosis is correct and that the initial treatment decision is accordingly informed. Ongoing monitoring of patients after they are discharged is critical for improving treatment adherence and compliance, and for recalling patients if needed.

Another key area being targeted by CMS is reducing health care-associated infections (HAIs), which are increasing at an alarming rate. A key driver of this increase is the well-documented overuse of antibiotics, and rapid POC diagnostics enable providers to differentiate bacterial versus viral illnesses while a patient is still under their care, and to make the most informed treatment decisions that improve patient outcomes and reduce HAIs.

Deployed throughout the hospital, rapid POC tests can enhance operations and, most importantly, patient outcomes.