Related Stories Boulder Valley to work out $576.5M bond issue project timing

Boulder Valley buildings by the numbers 55 — school buildings (53 district owned, 1 charter owned, 1 leased) 4 — support facilities 4.8 million — total building square feet 72 — percent of Boulder Valley-owned buildings that are more than 30 years old Oldest — Boulder's Whittier Elementary, built in 1882 Newest — Boulder's Columbine Elementary, rebuilt in 2011





Boulder Valley tax increases Mill levy overrides (operating money raised through what's usually a permanent property tax increase) 2002 — $7.5 million three-year technology mill levy override failed, $15 million general override passed 2005 — $7.3 million transportation mill levy override passed 2010 — Indexed mill levy override approved originally at $22.5 million and is adjusted annually to provide 25 percent more than the state's total program funding for Boulder Valley



Bond issues (capital construction money raised by selling bonds that are repaid through a property tax increase over a set period) 1998 — $63 million bond issue passed 2006 — $296.8 million bond issue passed



Total outstanding debt Advertisement $337.5 million in general obligation bonds outstanding, to be paid off by 2035 at a total repayment cost of $517.9 million.



Other school district tax increases St. Vrain Valley 2008 — $189 million bond issue passed 2012 — $14.8 million mill levy override passed Adams 12 On November ballot — $15 million mill levy override, $220 million bond issue Boulder High School students walk the third-floor hallway with missing and damaged ceiling tiles overhead during passing period Thursday. Repairing and refreshing Boulder High and the rest of Boulder Valley's 55 schools is a main component of the $576.5 million bond issue that's before voters. (David R. Jennings / Daily Camera) 2008 — $9.9 million mill levy override passed, $80 million bond issue failed Adams 14 On November ballot — $95.7 million bond issue 2013 — $44 million bond issue failed Denver 2012 — $466 million bond issue passed, $49 million mill levy override passed Jefferson County 2012 — $99 million bond issue passed, $39 million mill levy override passed Littleton 2013 — $80 million bond issue passed





Boulder Valley's $576.5 million bond issue package Repair and maintenance (heating, ventilation and cooling system improvements; restroom renovations; roof repairs; interior finishes; safety and security): $235.8 million Program renovations: $39 million Early childhood and full-day K classroom spaces: $22.4 million Sustainability: $14.8 million New Erie K-8 campus: $39.7 million Replace three school buildings: $56 million Districtwide needs (transportation/central kitchen, etc.): $47.5 million Technology: $12.3 million Health and physical development (playground and field upgrades): $28.5 million Education innovation fund: $20.1 million Kennedi Thurman, left, holds up math flash cards for Hailey Nichols in the upper-level open classrooms at Heatherwood Elementary School on Oct. 2. The school, built in 1971, would get permanent partitions and sound buffering, plus classroom storage for teachers, if this fall's bond issue is approved. (David R. Jennings / Daily Camera) Total*: $576.5 million For a complete list of projects, go to bvsd.org. *Total cost includes fees, inflation and overhead costs Source: Boulder Valley School District

Walking through Boulder High, alumnus Ariel Solomon pointed out tiles on the ceiling in the halls that are damaged or, in some spots, missing altogether because of a leaky roof.

Old single-pane windows are inefficient. Some bathrooms are dingy and dark, while the basement floor, used by the theater department, is described as "creepy and gross" — even when it's not serving as a student-run haunted house. In one of the basement bathrooms, a leaky pipe had flooded the floor.

The band room is consistently hot and stuffy, while the furniture in the small cafeteria is mismatched and beaten up from years of use. The carpeting for the student center was removed after it wore out, and it was never replaced.

Outside, the field house is barely usable and "almost feels like it should be condemned," while the courtyard's concrete is riddled with cracks and holes, said Solomon, a former NFL player who attended the school in the '80s and supports this fall's bond issue campaign for the Boulder Valley School District.

"It's just a shame to let a cornerstone of our whole school system fall into such disrepair," he said. "Boulder High is always going to be a quirky building, but it can be clean and safe."

Repairing and refreshing Boulder High and the rest of Boulder Valley's 55 schools is a main component of the $576.5 million bond issue, titled Issue 3A, that's before voters. The measure also would pay for building a new school in Erie, rebuilding three existing elementary schools, adding a centralized kitchen and other capital projects in the 31,000-student school district.

If approved, it would be the largest K-12 capital construction bond issue in Colorado history.

The district estimates that the total repayment cost of its bond issue would be $1.35 billion.

"We know it's a big ask," said Boulder Valley Superintendent Bruce Messinger. "It's an opportunity for citizens to invest in their public schools. Our students now, and for a couple of generations, will benefit from this."

It's estimated that the tax increase would cost homeowners $47 more a year per $100,000 of home value, or $188 a year for a $400,000 home.

Some opponents aren't convinced all the projects are necessary or that the amount of the bond issue needs to be so high. They point out that less than half of the $1.35 billion that the measure may ultimately cost voters would go to the district, with the rest going to interest and reserves.

Districts ask for more than ever

Tracie Rainey, executive director of the Colorado School Finance Project, said the school district bond issues on the ballot, which total $1.45 billion, represent the state's largest K-12 capital construction request.

When mill levy overrides — tax increases for operating expenses — are included, the total jumps to $1.5 billion.

Rainey said much of the money that would be raised by the bond issues would go to maintenance, repairs and upgrades rather than new construction — a result of state cuts to education funding that have forced districts to reduce budgets and defer maintenance.

"It's a reflection of the amount of money that's still owed to K-12," she said.

In 2009-10, a state assessment of public schools found more than $13.9 billion in capital improvement needs. By 2018, the amount of need is expected to increase to more than $17.8 billion.

Rainey noted that Colorado's school funding system creates significant disparities across the state, with many districts lacking the capacity or voter will to pass tax increases to boost revenue or build and repair schools.

"The state provides very little in capital dollars," she said. "You really are putting the burden on the community. Most districts wouldn't have the capacity to ask for such a large amount as Boulder Valley."

Still, she said, she doesn't blame Boulder Valley or other districts with a strong property tax base for turning to voters.

"Does everybody have the same capacity and opportunity? No," she said. "But districts are going to do everything they can because the state hasn't stepped up."

In Boulder Valley, voters have a history of approving tax increases for schools, saying "yes" to a $296.8 million bond issue for capital construction in 2006 and a mill levy override for operating money in 2010.

The district's current $576.5 million package was the largest of three options passed along by a Capital Improvement Planning Committee, which developed a complete list of capital needs that totaled $858 million.

The citizen committee and district staff members whittled the list down to three options that ranged in cost from $367 million to $576 million. Based on recent political polling, all three options garnered at least 60 percent support — the target percentage needed for a good chance of voter approval.

District officials said the 2006 capital construction package allowed them to make the most critical repairs, but it was focused mainly on modernizing schools and adding space — schools got bigger gyms and cafeterias, art and music rooms, classroom additions and remodeled front offices and entrances. Thanks to office and entrance remodels, about two-thirds of schools now admit visitors through a buzzer-and-intercom system for increased security.

In contrast, Superintendent Messinger said, more than half the money in the current $576.5 million bond issue would be spent on basic building maintenance and improvements, including new roofs, HVAC systems, interior and exterior doors, electrical wiring, windows, carpet and paint. Bathroom upgrades and renovations to special education spaces also made the list at many schools.

"We know these issues won't heal themselves," Messinger said. "This will take care of the immediate, pressing needs, and we'll get caught up."

He said the district didn't keep up with maintenance and repairs because of state cuts to education funding. Boulder Valley, he said, has received almost $35 million less a year.

As with the 2006 bond issue, this one would be overseen by a citizens committee, which would make recommendations about any changes.

"This is a lot of money," Messinger said. "We want the community to be confident that, over time, we will do what we said we would do."

Opponent concerns

Those running the "Yes on 3A" campaign include Frank Bruno, president of Western Disposal; Chuck Sisk, former mayor of Louisville; and Stan Garnett, Boulder County's district attorney and a former Boulder Valley school board president.

Groups giving endorsements include the Boulder Chamber of Commerce, the Boulder Valley Education Association, Impact on Education, the Community Foundation Serving Boulder County, Boulder City Council, Erie trustees, Nederland trustees, Superior trustees and various school parent groups.

Although there's no organized campaign against the measure, detractors include those who always vote "no" on tax increases, those who aren't convinced all the projects are necessary and those who question the overall amount.

Another argument is that a "no" vote will put more pressure on the state to provide better and more equitable funding for schools.

Sarah Hayes, of Lafayette, posted on the "Yes on 3A" Facebook page about her concerns, which include the impact on small businesses.

She posted that, while she has two children in Boulder Valley schools and agree the schools need help, the amount is too high.

"We can give them that help with a more modest proposal that also balances the burden for small businesses," she wrote.

Michael Knuckey, business director at Children's House Preschool in Boulder, said his main concerns are the overall size of the bond issue and the amount of interest voters will need to repay.

In a bond issue, voters agree to the amount, in this case $576.5 million, then the district sells bonds to raise the money. The money is paid back, with interest, using property tax revenue.

Boulder Valley estimates that the total repayment cost of its bond issue would be $1.35 billion, assuming a 30-year term for each of the two to three planned general obligation bond sales. The actual repayment terms are determined at the time of each sale. Proceeds from the sale of the bonds also are invested by the district to maximize earnings.

Knuckey said less than half of the estimated $1.35 billion that the measure would ultimately cost voters would go to the district, with the rest going to interest and reserves.

"The way it's being portrayed, half the money will go to building renovations," he said. "But when you look at the interest, less than 18 percent of the money will actually go to improving the buildings."

He said the district would be better off asking for smaller amounts of money more often, allowing it to secure shorter repayment terms and lower the percentage that goes to interest payments.

"The schools will get more money even if the taxes were exactly the same," he said. "Now, it's too much over too long a period of time."

He said he also has concerns about the district adding preschool space without first researching where more preschools are needed.

The bond issue includes money to add kindergarten classrooms at every school and preschool classrooms at every school or in the neighborhood. The goal is to expand both full-day kindergarten and preschool options, though the district hasn't yet identified a way to pay for the ongoing costs of teachers and supplies for those classrooms.

Others have questioned why Boulder Valley needs more money after voters legalized marijuana, with the first $40 million in retail marijuana excise tax revenue collected annually required to go to public school construction across the state.

But the tax hasn't produced nearly as much revenue for schools as expected. Plus, the money is targeted for low property wealth school districts, making it unlikely Boulder Valley will see much, if any, of the money.

New schools, improvements

Overall, Boulder Valley's enrollment is stable, with limited possibilities for future growth. The exceptions are Lafayette and, especially, Erie.

To accommodate growth, the bond package includes a new $39.7 million K-8, or possibly a separate elementary and middle school, in Erie. Boulder Valley doesn't have a school in Erie, with the town served by Lafayette schools.

Eastern Boulder County elementary schools will need to accommodate the enrollment from nearly 1,500 new single-family, detached units over the next 10 years, primarily from development underway in Erie, according to district officials.

Messinger said Erie likely will need two elementary schools and one middle school at full buildout in 10 to 15 years. Lafayette's Angevine Middle School is at capacity. The schools on the St. Vrain Valley School District side of the town also are full.

Land for an Erie school has been identified and is anticipated to be dedicated to the district at no cost by the end of 2014.

The project list also includes rebuilding Creekside, Douglass and Emerald elementary schools. Those schools, district officials said, would cost so much to repair that it makes better financial sense to start over and rebuild them.

Broomfield's Emerald Elementary, built in 1958, would cost $8.2 million to repair and $11.3 million to rebuild.

"It's just worn out," said Principal Samara Williams. "The district has to spend a lot of money to keep this school going."

Problems include old playground equipment, cracks in sidewalks, low ceilings, bad lighting and a lack of an auditorium or stage for student performances.

When the school was built, all students walked. Now, with only about half living in walking distance, the parking lot is too small.

The school's brick-and-cinder block construction makes it difficult to rewire to provide Internet access, and it's hot during Emerald's summer classes for struggling students.

"If it's 105 in the room, it's just not high-quality instruction, no matter how high quality the teachers," Williams said.

Emerald is one of eight schools that would be air conditioned if the measure is approved.

Although some school board members debated air conditioning any schools because of increased energy use, the board decided to add it at five schools that have proved particularly difficult to cool even with ventilation system improvements, and at three used for summer programs.

Air conditioning all schools that don't already have it would have cost more than $80 million and wasn't recommended.

Districtwide projects that made the list include a new transportation center and renovating Halcyon, a building now used for students with mental health needs. Once it's renovated, Halcyon would serve as a districtwide site for students with intensive special education needs.

On the athletics and fitness side, middle-level track improvements, renovations to high school stadiums and more tennis courts all made the list.

The most controversial project with both the citizens review committee and the school board was a central district kitchen, with a price tag of $10 million. District officials argued that a central kitchen is the most efficient option.

Now, the district uses three regional kitchens, preparing meals that are then delivered to schools, where they're heated and served. But those regional kitchens don't have adequate storage, work or refrigeration space, district officials said.

District goals include buying fresh, locally sourced ingredients, but the district lacks the facilities to store or process larger quantities of seasonal produce. Leslie Stafford, Boulder Valley's chief financial officer, said the district will either need a centralized kitchen or to add a fourth regional kitchen.

Schools districtwide also would share a $20 million education innovation fund. Schools would apply for money to "support improvements to facilities to encourage innovative approaches to educational delivery."

Projects could include elements such as non-traditional furniture, small performance spaces for presentations, labs to support project-based learning, 3D printers or video production labs.

At Boulder's Heatherwood Elementary, built in 1971, Principal Brent Caldwell said teachers and other staff members are most excited about the innovation money. Upgrades to the school's wireless network over the summer have opened up the possibility for more one-to-one devices, he said.

"It could be a huge step for us," he said.

At the same time, he said, his school is desperately in need of upgrades. The school was built with an open design, so there are no internal walls, and classrooms are divided by partitions.

"It's really loud now," he said. "Everything has to be orchestrated and coordinated by teachers to keep the noise down."

He said the bond money would provide more permanent partitions and sound buffering, plus classroom storage for teachers.

Going through his building, he also pointed out antiquated fluorescent lighting and lamps brought in by teachers because there's not enough light. There's cracked tile, exterior doors that must be forced shut and a leaky roof. The wooden storage sheds for P.E. equipment are run down and rotting in places.

At Lafayette's Centaurus High School, built in 1973, problems include poor visibility from the office to the front of the school, a cramped cafeteria ringed by lockers, an undersized gym and many classrooms without windows.

Principal Rhonda Haniford added that bathrooms, thanks to age and leaky plumbing, are both "dirty and smelly."

"It's not an environment you would be excited to be in," she said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com.