Sioux Falls, SD

Sioux Falls hosts the 4th annual "It's All About Science" Festival at the Sanford Research Center. Event Director Dr. Jill Weimer says this event draws thousands each year.

While the festival provides a day of fun, the ultimate goal is to spark an interest in science in the younger generation. When it comes to science, every child seems to have a different favorite part.

"Getting to discover new things about like the body, and about space and stuff like that," Lucas Henricks Leuning said.

"Because there's a lot of things to learn about science," Mkenzie Peterson said.

"Because there's a lot of fun stuff,” Norah Peterson said.

"And, you get to discover DNA," Emily Piper said.

This interest is just what Weimer is hoping for. She says it's all about exposing kids to what science is all about.

"I'm not Albert Einstein in a lab coat with goggles on, yet I'm a developmental neuroscientist and I work in a research lab every day, so giving kids that, just, interaction and experiences hopefully will help inform their decisions for the future," Weimer said.

From learning about dinosaurs and robots to experiencing what it's like to be a doctor for a day, this event is focused on engaging kids and adults in hands-on learning, which is important for children, especially during the summer.

"So when they're out of the classroom, they still get to experience those things, but also, a lot of times our classrooms are so regimented in what we have to cover, and this allows them to come in and experience science in a whole different light," Weimer said.

And at the end of the day, Piper and Henricks Leuning both want to be scientists when they grow up.

"I want to study animals' DNA and see if I can hybrid a different kind of creature," Piper said.

"It will give me a chance to discover new things to improve cancer, and making new medicines to help people that have cancer," Henricks Leuning said.

Aspirations that could lead to future doctors and even zoologists.

Saturday's event also features stage performers including a dancing scientist and a stunt scientist.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.