Community-based program seeks donations, building to support expansion

St. Vrain Community Adult Education students Hlermila Escalante, left, and Alice Wall attend an English as a Second Language class Wednesday at First Congregational United Church of Christ. A task force of community members obtained a federal grant to resume the program this fall. ( LEWIS GEYER )

LONGMONT -- After securing a federal grant and finding locations for its classes, St. Vrain Community Adult Education began its English as a Second Language on Sept. 9.

Yes, that Sept. 9 -- days before the St. Vrain River and Left Hand Creek flooded, tearing through much of Boulder County, including western and southern Longmont.

The new program, which began organizing after the St. Vrain Valley School District stopped its adult education program in the spring, held classes Sept. 9 and 10, and the afternoon of Sept. 11.

St. Vrain Community Adult Education For more information, contact El Comité de Longmont, 455 Kimbark St., or call 303-651-6125

Because of that night's rainstorm, though, Sept. 11's evening classes were cancelled, as were all classes for the following week.

Since classes resumed, 70 students have been attending ESL classes through the program, program director Kat Bradley-Bennett said Wednesday. Students come from several countries, including Afghanistan, Guatemala, Russia, South Korea, El Salvador and Mexico, she said.

"I feel good about where we are," she said.

St. Vrain Community Adult Education offers six levels of English as a Second Language classes at four locations: First Congregational Church, Northridge Elementary School, the YMCA and El Comité. Classes for each ESL level -- students are placed after taking a reading assessment -- are offered twice a day.

"We have somebody enrolled in every class now," Bradley-Bennett said.

Nancy Nangle, program coordinator and teacher, said officials expect enrollment to increase.

"We think the numbers will only go up from here," Nangle said.

Of course, they don't know how many potential students were displaced by the flood, and some students who were enrolled in the school district's program have not yet re-enrolled, Bradley-Bennett said.

"It's been kind of slow getting our previous students back," she said. With the changes to the program, such as the new name and new locations, she's not surprised, though.

She hopes that by May, Community Adult Ed will have served 250 people. However, it will need a building before it can offer adult basic education and general educational development -- formerly general equivalency diploma -- preparation classes, she said.

St. Vrain Community Adult Education received a two-year federal grant over the summer to get started, but matching funds of 40 percent also are required. Members of the task force that helped get the program off the ground are now serving as an advisory board that is raising money for operating costs and other expenses the grant won't cover, Bradley-Bennett said.

The board also is looking for a building to house the classes, Nangle said. They want to find a new location by next spring so they can expand, Bradley-Bennett said.

"Right now, we wouldn't be able to," she said.

Victoria Camron can be reached at 303-684-5226 or vcamron@times-call.com.