Outsourcing substitute teaching jobs could save area school districts thousands of dollars this year.

Local districts, including Abington Heights, Lakeland, North Pocono and Valley View, will not employ their own substitute teachers and instead will rely on a staffing agency to fill vacancies. Riverside is also considering the option.

The move is not only expected to save money, but will ensure districts have the subs needed to fill classroom absences and meet provisions of the Affordable Care Act.

“Across the nation, this has been an emerging trend,” said Michael Mahon, Ph.D., Abington Heights superintendent.

The districts have entered into contracts with Kelly Services, which offers substitute teaching services across the country.

Instead of being employees of the school district, the subs work for Kelly. The districts will pay Kelly their daily sub rate, plus a service fee of between 30 and 40 percent. Kelly then pays the subs.

The change means districts no longer have to worry about tracking the number of hours a substitute works in a week. Under the Affordable Care Act, employees who work more than 30 hours a week must be offered health insurance. If substitute teachers work more than four days a week, they will work more than 30 hours. Tracking hours will now be the responsibility of Kelly. Last year, as districts prepared to meet the act’s provisions, substitutes were limited to how much they could work in a week, even though districts experienced shortages.

At Lakeland, the process of filling positions will be much easier now, too. A staff member used to call subs to try to find someone to work.

“It was a management nightmare,” Superintendent R. Scott Jeffery said.

Kelly uses an automated system, and superintendents said they expect fill rates to be close to 100 percent.

When a district cannot find a sub, teachers are pulled from their planning periods to cover the vacancy. Teachers are then reimbursed for missing their planning periods. In North Pocono, teacher coverage is $30 an hour. Subs make $80 per day.

Districts will also save in pension costs. This fiscal year, districts will contribute 25.8 percent of total payroll, including sub costs, to the Public School Employees Retirement System. Because the subs will be Kelly employees, districts will no longer have to contribute to pensions.

North Pocono expects to save $40,000 this year, even with paying a service charge to Kelly, Superintendent Bryan McGraw said.

Contact the writer: shofius@timesshamrock.com, @hofiushallTT on Twitter