By Jan Hoffman

A common impairment with lifelong consequences turns out to be highly contagious between parent and child, a new study shows.

The impairment? Math anxiety.

Means of transmission? Homework help.

Children of highly math-anxious parents learned less math and were more likely to develop math anxiety themselves, but only when their parents provided frequent help on homework, according to a study of first- and second-graders in Psychological Science.

Researchers tested 438 children from 29 public and private schools, at the beginning and end of the school year.The more the math-anxious parents tried to work with their children, the worse their children did in math, slipping more than a third of a grade level.

“The parents are not out to sabotage their kids,” said Sian L. Beilock, a cognitive psychologist at the University of Chicago and the author of “Choke,” about anxiety and performance. “But we have to ensure their input is productive. They need to have an awareness of their own math anxiety, and that what you say is important.”

For example, she said, comforting a child, by saying, “‘I’m not a math person either, and that’s OK,’ is not a good message to convey.”

For decades, researchers have looked at high math anxiety, which, some studies show, can afflict 10 percent to 20 percent of adults. It affects not only grades but also self-esteem and everyday skills. (How many gallons of paint for two coats of your living room? Can you convert a double-layer cake recipe into a triple-layer?) Mark H. Ashcraft, at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, explains that the condition can feed upon itself.

“On challenging math problems that require a lot of working memory, math-anxious people fall apart,” he said. Their working memory is consumed by worry, “and they don’t have enough left over to do the math.”

Many adults identify middle-school algebra as the onset of math anxiety. Research has shown it can begin earlier. In a 2010 study, Beilock’s team found one significant factor, particularly for young girls: math-anxious elementary teachers, almost 90 percent of whom are female.

But the effect of math-anxious, homework-helping parents is a newly discovered factor. This is exacerbated when schools introduce new methods of learning, said Harris Cooper, a professor of psychology and neuroscience at Duke University.

“Educators can’t take math, turn it into Greek, and say, ‘Mom, Dad, will you help your kid with this,’ and not expect to get a ‘wha?’” he said.

Cooper suggests that parents of young children create a math-positive environment by modeling “math behavior.” Tell your child, “‘You have your math homework, and I have mine,’” he said, and show them whenever you “count your change, calculate when dinner will be ready, look at prices in a grocery store.”