Buy Photo The House of Representatives meets during the first day of the legislature at the Capitol Tuesday. (Photo: Dylan Buell, Special to The CJ)Buy Photo

With a little luck and a big Republican turnout on Tuesday, the GOP could effectively gain control of the Kentucky House of Representatives after four special elections to fill seats vacated when members moved up to statewide office or accepted appointments from Gov. Matt Bevin.

Les Fugate, a Republican activist, said party registration in the districts doesn't necessarily favor the GOP. He downplayed expectations, saying that merely breaking even would put Republicans in position take control of the House in the fall.

“It’s critical they win two,” said Fugate, who noted that House Democrats would then have a 52-48 advantage. “If they win two, they keep the fundraising interest going because it (the Democratic advantage) is still at two seats, closer than it’s ever been and it keeps everything in play.”

The Democrats have registration advantages in three of the four districts, but voters don’t always vote that way, particularly when federal issues are at play.

Danny Briscoe, a Democratic political consultant, said it’s important for the Democrats to win at least two of those three seats if they want to start turning the tide after Republicans took the governor’s office and most other statewide offices in last year’s elections.

“They need to at least win two of the four to maintain the status quo," he said. "Everything seems to be trending Republican.”

Currently, Democrats have a 50-46 advantage in the House, which they have controlled for the last 95 years.

But a sweep would move the Republicans into a tie for the House, giving them effective control of the chamber because state Rep. Tom McKee, D-Cynthiana, has not returned following heart surgery earlier in the session.

If that happens, it could free a slew of bills that the Democrats have kept bottled up for years – everything from legislation designed to reduce the influence of unions to abortion legislation that has been held back.

House Speaker Greg Stumbo, D-Prestonsburg, said he doesn't expect that to happen.

Stumbo said the elections are hard to predict "because it's going to be a low turnout, special election. It's all about get-out-the vote. But I think there is a good likelihood that we will win at least two. I'm hopeful for three. And four is not out of the realm of possibility."

Senate President Robert Stivers, a Republican, said he expects the GOP to win two to four races as well. He also expects the elections will give both parties a better understanding of the political landscape. Whatever the outcome, he said, the special elections will "allow, I think, for there to be a clear understanding what the dynamics are as it relates to politics for the balance of the session."

The open seats include one in northeastern Kentucky, one in Western Kentucky and one in the Bluegrass region.

Two of the seats were previously held by Democrats, two by Republicans.

In Western Kentucky, where Rep. John Tilley resigned his 8th District seat to be Bevin’s justice secretary, Democrat Jeffrey R. Taylor is taking on Republican Walker Wood Thomas.

That region of the state has been trending more Republican for more than 20 years, which puts the GOP in a position to pick up a seat with Thomas, who owns a roller skating rink.

But Democrats hope the significant African-American vote in Hopkinsville shows up and powers Taylor, a former Tennessee Valley Authority worker who is black, to victory.

Two Republican seats are open in central Kentucky, with former Rep. Mike Harmon moving up to state auditor and former Rep. Ryan Quarles becoming agriculture commissioner.

In Harmon’s 54th district, a couple of lawyers are squaring off. Republicans have Daniel Elliott, of Danville, facing off against Democrat Bill Noelker, a former Navy fighter pilot, who sometimes has campaigned with a holstered handgun on his hip.

In Quarles’ district, the race pits Democrat Chuck Tackett against Republican Phillip Pratt. Tackett is a farmer and former Scott County magistrate. Pratt owns a lawn care business.

Democrats also are trying to keep former Rep. Tanya Pullen’s 98th District seat, vacated when Bevin appointed her as an administrative law judge. The Democrats found Lewis Nicholls, a former circuit judge, to vie for the seat.

Republicans picked Greenup County Commissioner Tony Quillen to wrest it away.

Briscoe, the Democratic consultant, said Democrats need to quell the GOP tide.

"If they lose three of the four or four of the four," he said, "it’s going to continue to be the narrative that the Republicans are taking charge."

Reporter Joseph Gerth can be reached at (502) 582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1oYdlcN