Dauphin County's drug and alcohol services department has a new leader, culled from a related state agency.

Cheryl Dondero, a native of Middletown, was introduced by the commissioners Wednesday.

Dondero, who had been deputy secretary of state Department of Drug and Alcohol Programs for the last two years, retired Friday after 37 years to accept the position with Dauphin County. Her salary with the county is $60,008.

With the state, she oversaw planning and implementation of programs relating to alcohol and substance abuse and problem gambling, including grants, budget, quality assurance, and treatment, prevent and intervention.

Dondero said she missed interaction with clients, which is what she now has in her office on Cameron Street.

She understands addictions, she told the commissioners Wednesday, as she is a recovering addict herself. Her first treatment was through the county's drug and alcohol services. But it wasn't until she received long-term treatment away from home five years later that she attained sobriety, and was able to regain her life and career, she said.

Dondero pledged to "lead the charge" to continue evolving the role of drug and alcohol services, with addiction affecting one in three families in the county. "It's a changing environment," she said, with many people obtaining drug and alcohol services through the Affordable Care Act, and the county being seen as the "funder of last resorts."

"If we continue to view Dauphin County as funder of last resorts, we could quickly be making the agency irrelevant, and I am not going to let that happen," Dondero said.

She wants the department to be "a one-stop shop" for information, services and prevention. The department's role is vital, with eight or nine Pennsylvanians dying each day of heroin addiction, 70 to 80 percent of whom started with prescription drugs.

The prescription drug abuse and heroin crisis will get much of her attention, and she is glad to see expansion of prescription drug take-back boxes and the growing availability of Naloxone, which can revive people clinically dead from overdoses. Residents can now obtain Naloxone at all CVS pharmacies, she said.

Dondero told the commissioners she thought she would have to spend her first year breaking down walls in government, since drug and alcohol crosses every county department. "That's already been done," she said, with visionary thinking on the part of the county.

She said she looks forward to working with Children & Youth Services, aging, and probation, among other departments. She is familiar with the criminal justice system, having been training director for five years at the state board of probation and parole.

More than 80 percent of inmates have drug and alcohol problems, she noted.

Dondero said she will also look for grants to help deal with the overdose crisis, which she said resulted after years of cuts from primary prevention programs.

"We hit two home runs here with Children & Youth and now you. This is a great day for Dauphin County," said Commissioner Mike Pries, in welcoming Dondero.

The commissioners in September hired Annmarie Kaiser as Children & Youth Services director.

Commissioner George Hartwick said Dondero understands not only addictions, but budgets and finance. "I am looking forward to some of the other innovations that are going to occur," he said.

Randie Yeager, county human services director, said a dozen candidates were interviewed for the drug and alcohol position. The department had been overseen in recent months by Sherry Clouser, deputy director.

Dondero replaces Mavis Nimoh, who left in May for a job with the state department of probation and parole.

Dondero also worked from 2004-13 as deputy secretary of administrative services in the state Department of Banking and Securities; director of human services in that department from 2001-04; training coordinator from 1998-2001 in state board of probation and parole; and in a host of other positions in state government starting in 1978.