By Don Manley

Educating senior citizens and others in the skills needed to navigate the health care system in age the Affordable Care Act is the purpose of a new continuing education program being offered by the Greater Marco Family YMCA.

The free program's first installment, "The Art of Active Listening," will be presented at 9 a.m., May 25 at the Y's Youth Development Center.

Plans call for the classes to be presented bimonthly, initially, and include such additional topics as "Advance Directives," a written statement of a person's wishes regarding medical treatment, such as a living will or a do-not-resuscitate request, "Fall Prevention," "Taking Care of Me — Managing Stress While Providing Quality Care" and "Understanding Alzheimer's disease."

"We're going to start with getting residents in the community to understand that everything is changing with the Affordable Care Act in terms of doctors, hospitals and insurance and Medicare," said the presenter, M.J. Scarpelli, a community liaison in Collier County for Vitas Healthcare. "There will be programs that help people learn how to navigate the health care system and have a better quality of life."

Active listening is defined as being the act of carefully hearing and attempting to understand the meaning of words spoken by another in a conversation or speech.

Scarpelli said the active listening class will breakdown the communication process to heighten awareness of how it works, which is especially important "when you have someone who is sick or receiving treatment, and watching for cues from doctors, hospitals and family members."

Vitas Healthcare serves people with serious illnesses, providing hospice care and palliative services to comfort patients and preserve their dignity when faced with a terminal illness. The company also has a slate of about 40 different continuing education programs for health care professionals that have also been customized for consumption by the general public.

The program came about from a meeting between Scarpelli, who is also a fall-prevention presenter for the Collier County Injury Prevention Coalition, and Deborah Passero, the Y's healthy living director. "I told her what I do and I told her Marco was a community where I had not had much success in reaching residents and the Y wants to attract more people for activities, especially educational," Scarpelli added.

Passero said the program is just another aspect of the Y's goal "to be the place our community thinks of for wellness. Our goal is provide excellent wellness resources that are educational, relational, and multigenerational. One of our greatest strengths are the collaborations with health care communities. By providing education in the wide variety of support systems, our community will be able to better equipped during challenging times."

Scarpelli said she and Passero plan to offer the classes during the summer and gage the response, which could lead to them being offered more frequently.

"Hopefully, it will go through all of next year," she added. "That's Deborah's and I's plan of attack."

The Greater Marco Family YMCA is located at 101 Sand Hill St. For more information about the Y or programs, visit greatermarcoy.org or call 394-9622. Ask for Debora Passero at Ext. 119.