Adam Meier (Photo: Provided)

Adam Meier is an attorney and member of the Fort Thomas City Council.

The rollout of Kentucky’s health care exchange, Kynect, was more successful than that of the federal exchange, Healthcare.gov – and to that, I’ll give credit where credit is due.

With that said, it’s been a bad few weeks for Obamacare in Kentucky. Gov. Steve Beshear recently announced in a Friday afternoon news dump that the Kentucky Health Cooperative, the Kynect exchange’s largest insurer, was closing its doors, leaving 51,000 people to find other coverage in 2016. The co-ops were a creation of Obamacare as a way to ensure that there would be competition on the exchanges when created. The Kentucky Health Co-Op closed despite being federally subsidized to the tune of $146.5 million. But when you pay out $1.58 for every $1 you take in, I guess that is to be expected. And we’re not alone – these Obamacare co-ops are falling like dominoes across the US – 21 of 23 were running at a loss, and seven have closed in the last year – several in recent weeks.

We are already seeing the bulk of the kynect plan premiums increase by double-digit percentages. The closing of the co-op is likely to cause those premiums of other Kynect plans to rise even steeper when those the co-op customers seek other coverage options on the exchange.

It was also reported that the Health and Human Services Inspector General audit of Kynect found potential problems in eight out of the 45 randomly chosen applications – meaning Kynect was not using adequate processes for verifying identity, citizenship or plan eligibility 18 percent of the time.

Perhaps the most concerning news coming out in recent weeks is the spike in Medicare Part B premium rates – a 52 percent increase over the previous year. In covering dual-eligibles (people who qualify for Medicare and Medicaid), unless there is some sort of federal waiver, the state will have to pay the cost for the new premiums. In Kentucky, I’m hearing that number will be an unplanned $38 million hit to next year’s budget – much of that can be attributed to the Medicaid expansion, which substantially grew our rolls.

Speaking of the Medicaid expansion, the bill is coming due soon for the buy-now, pay-later plan Beshear signed us up for. Conveniently, he will be departing office (term limited), leaving the mess for the next governor. He got the feel-good benefits – someone else gets to figure out how to pay for it.

That someone else is going to be Democrat Jack Conway or Republican Matt Bevin. Conway, who said he would have been “proud” to vote for Obamacare, wants to keep things as is for both Kynect and the Medicaid expansion. Regarding the Medicaid expansion, Bevin, citing the fact that 1 of 4 Kentuckians is on Medicaid, says it is unsustainable in the current Obamcare construct.

Bevin has proposed following the lead of states like Indiana and applying for 1115 waivers that would allow us to design our own plans for covering low income Kentuckians in order to make what is offered more efficient, effective, improve health outcomes, and drive down our proportionate share, while still continuing to cover those who are eligible. This would take the place of the current one-size-fits-all Medicaid expansion of Obamacare.

As far as Kynect is concerned, Bevin has proposed shuttering the Kynect exchange that costs $27 million per year to operate, and moving everyone over to the Federal Exchange. This would free up much of that $27 million to be used for other pressing health care needs, and let those actually using the exchange pay for the service – after all, most are getting premium subsidies to boot.

It’s time to elect a conservative governor to responsibly improve the unsustainable financial disaster created by Obamacare. It is time to elect Matt Bevin.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1N6AJ0Q