That Congress should pass legislation to put more Americans to work in the tech manufacturing sector

That he'll protect natural lands with his executive power

Poll finds jobs as a top priority for Washington. "90% have a favorable view of American manufacturing companies." Gallup : Is government doing too much, too little, or about right amount of environmental protection?

Too much: 16

Too little: 47

About right: 35



Congress should repeal tax breaks for Big Oil

That Congress should restore unemployment insurance that it let expire at the end of the year

That women deserve equal pay for equal work

That nobody who works full time should have to raise a family in poverty, so Congress should raise the minimum wage to $10.10

That Congress shouldn't have another 40+ votes to repeal Obamacare

That votes, not money, should drive democracy

That he'll work to prevent more tragedies like Sandy Hook

A total of 74 percent wanted to see them gone when last polled. The energy industry is feeling the heat, so they commissioned this crazy-worded poll . Look at questions seven and eight for a primer in how to NOT conduct a real poll.A total of 58 percent want extension of emergency unemployment benefits.A total of 90 percent of Americans support this. Yes. NINETY. Congressional Republicans are in the fringe 10 percent.A total of 71 percent want minimum wage increased. CBS : [Health care law] Needs to be repealed: 34% (down from 43 percent last November) AP : 83 percent of Americans want limits on corporate spending on elections. CBS : Should gun laws be more strict, less strict, or kept the same?

More: 49

Less: 12

Same: 36

Republicans are on the wrong side of every one of these except, arguably, the environment question (which gives a narrow edge to those who don't think there needs to be additional environmental protections). But on every other issue, and there's lots of them, Republicans are at odds with public opinion.

It's now on Democrats to push that advantage because, as last night proved, Republicans are intent on sticking with their minority fringe position to the bitter end.