Buy Photo La’ James International College (Photo: Register file photo)Buy Photo

The lawsuit filed recently by Iowa Attorney General Tom Miller against La'James International College, one of the state's largest cosmetology schools, portrays a business that blatantly disregarded its legal obligations.

But the consumer fraud case also shows that it is time the Iowa Legislature finally faces up to the need to overhaul the requirements for obtaining a cosmetologist's license from any school.

Iowa requires people who want to cut and style hair to receive 2,100 hours of education and training at a cosmetology school. For most of those hours, the students provide unpaid labor in the schools' own salons.

The state's requirements have been crafted to perpetuate a business model for these schools that is out of sync with many other states. Iowa's 2,100 hours is twice as large as some states require. In addition, Iowa's requirements exceed the requirements for such licensed professions as emergency medical technician, hearing aid dispenser or commercial pilot.

The attorney general's lawsuit alleges La'James violated Iowa's consumer fraud law through deception and misrepresentation when selling education to students.

The Des Moines Register has written repeatedly about problems at La'James. Dozens of current and former students contacted us. They told strikingly similar stories about not being given credit for the hours worked and being unable to graduate on time. Some were forced to drop out because La'James "pays itself first" with students' student loan and grant money, leaving them with no money for rent or living expenses.

One student told us she had to pay a $1,300 "cancellation fee" when she withdrew from La'James. Another who did graduate said she was afraid to give haircuts to men because she had had no practice during her 2,100 hours of instruction. The mother of one young woman said La'James refused to refund the enrollment fee of her daughter, who had been killed in a car accident a month before classes began.

At La'James, students sat in classrooms without instructors, performed janitorial duties and were forced to sell beauty products to graduate, the lawsuit says. Students had no choice but to recruit customers who pay the school for beauty services provided by the unpaid students.

When students enroll, they sign an agreement to complete the training hours by a specific date. Yet some say the school wouldn't extend the deadline if they were ill or faced a family emergency.

Between 2010 and 2013, one-fourth of La'James students could not meet their completion deadline and had to pay more than $630,000 in additional fees to obtain the hours needed to graduate.

Miller's lawyers rightly observe that the school treats students like "free labor." Of course, this is essentially the same observation about cosmetology and barber schools made by an Iowa public health official 50 years ago when he noted that they are the only businesses where "people pay you to work for nothing."

For this decades-old arrangement, students can thank Iowa lawmakers.

Iowa's training requirement guarantees the cosmetology schools a stream of customers. These customers take out student loans and use federal Pell Grants to pay tuition, and then spend months as free laborers providing services to customers who also pay the school.

So it's a relief the Iowa attorney general's office is pursuing La'James for wrongdoing. Yet the bigger problem is one that must be addressed by the Legislature.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1odisPp