The super PAC backing Rick Perry is out with a new ad, provided first to NBC News, declaring the candidate "our country's best defense" against surveillance and wasteful government spending.

The ad is the group's first since news that Perry would have to stop paying his staff due to his campaign's financial struggles broke earlier this week. Austin Barbour, an adviser for the trio of Opportunity and Freedom groups that are backing Perry, told NBC News earlier this week that the group would pick up the slack for the campaign by airing ads and building a ground game for Perry in Iowa and potentially other early primary states.

The 30-second spot is a signal that the groups plan to make good Barbour's promise.

But while they raised nearly $17 million in the first half of the year, and launched six-figure buys in Iowa before, an adviser to the group said this latest ad is only running on the campaign's statewide digital media buy in the state — a far cheaper option for a campaign hoping to get out its message.

A television buy, the adviser said, is expected sometime "in the very near future."

The ad frames Perry as a Washington outsider who will "cut Washington down to size and then rebuild it from the ground up." "Rick Perry has declared war on Washington," the ad opens.

It continues: "They're wasting our money, listening to our phone calls, making deals with people who want to kill us," a reference to the national debt, government surveillance and the nuclear deal with Iran.

"Our country's best defense is Rick Perry," the ad says, declaring Perry secured the border and when "Washington pushed Obamacare on Texas, he sent them packing."

Perry made that same case to voters in South Carolina this week, during his first campaign swing since his financial troubles went public. He told supporters in the early primary state that he wanted to make Washington "as inconsequential as possible" in their lives, and declared that, financial challenges aside, he's "in it to win."