SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On Thursday, former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin declared that Americans will never “submit” to radical Islam and urged President Barack Obama to “wake up” and realize its existential threat.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Addressing the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC), Palin who is considered the conservative movement’s North Star, reminded Obama that ISIS has threatened to raise its black flag over the White House and even behead him. She blasted Obama for telling Christians to get off their high horse at the National Prayer Breakfast while ISIS was beheading Christians across the Middle East.

“Stop blaming the victim and wake up, Mr. President,” she said. “While Christians bow our heads to pray for you, radical Islamists want to cut off your head.”

Palin said that radical Islamists want a world that would “submit” to them and their religion and ideology.

“We will never submit to evil,” Palin promised. “We will consign radical Islam to the ash heap of history.”

Palin said past leaders confronted evil with moral clarity and “eliminated fascists and Nazis” and consigned Communism to the “dustbin of history.”

She said to “make no mistake” that radical Islam is “just as dangerous as those ideologies.” She mocked Obama for thinking the world can “co-exist with these genocidal thugs” and for refusing to even say that the Islamic State is “Islamic.”

Palin said that ISIS is taking back land that Americans secured with their blood. She noted that Obama inherited a War on Terror in 2009 where “Islamists were in retreat,” but now “they control more territory than ever before.” The former Alaska Governor said the “rise of ISIS is the direct result” of the Obama administration’s failure to heed the warning about needing residual troops in the Middle East.

She said America must provide its troops the political will and the rules of engagement to win and wondered how many Americans have been harmed because the Obama administration is “too uncomfortable to give the troops the trust and the tools to win.”

Palin said that when “evil Islamic terrorists” are on the march screaming “Allah Akbar” from Syria to Iraq to Libya to Yemen to the Streets of Paris, “it doesn’t look like victory.”

She had strong words for Obama’s “naive” State Department that, according to spokeswoman Marie Harf, does not believe America can “kill our way out of war.”

“Tell that to the Nazis,” Palin said. “Oh wait. You can’t. Because they’re dead. We killed them.”

Palin said that “aside from God Almighty,” the “only thing standing between us” and the ISIS savages “is the Red, White, and Blue.”

“It’s the United States military,” she said.

Ultimately, she pointed out the “virtues that set our nation apart from our enemy, you’ll find them in those who wear the uniform and who pay the price for our freedom.”

Palin said the radical Islamists fight out hatred–of jews, women, diversity and freedom. America’s troops, in contrast, have always fought for the love of family, country, and freedom, she said.

On some of the biggest foreign policy issues over the years–Ukraine, Egypt, Syria–Palin has been out in front and her predictions have been correct.