The state House of Representatives, on a largely party-line 54-44 vote, on Wednesday passed legislation that would require health insurers whose plans cover maternity care to also offer abortion services.

The Reproductive Parity Act stalled last year in the state Senate, which is run by a Republican-dominated coalition. Rep. Eileen Cody, D-Seattle, its chief sponsor, hinted at a similar fate.

“While a majority of the Senate supports it, I can only expect that the Reproductive Parity Act will suffer the same fate it did last year,” Cody said in a statement.

While Republican-run legislatures have moved to restrict abortion access in Midwest, border and deep South states, Washington has continued in the other direction. The state first voted to legalize abortion in 1970, three years before the Supreme Court’s landmark Roe v. Wade decision.

The Reproductive Parity Act has stemmed from fears that some insurers will not offer abortion services as part of the Washington State Health Benefit Exchange, a key to implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

Under Congress’ Hyde Amendment, federal dollars cannot be used to pay for abortions. Eight multistate Premera Blue Cross plans do not cover abortion services.

“The people of this state have said over and over and over again that choice is a right they support,” Cody said. “They expect and deserve more than legislative games and political posturing.”

Rep. Gael Tarleton, D-Seattle, laid out the Reproductive Parity Act case, saying: “This affirms what Washington voters have been saying since 1970: We trust women to make their own choices, in private, regarding family planning, reproductive health and termination of pregnancy.

“The Reproductive Parity Act protects women’s rights and access at a time when we are revolutionizing health care for all people.”

Despite a conscience clause for religious-affiliated plans, Republican lawmakers argued that the act would take away their choices.

“This bill is really about forcing people to pay for others’ abortions,” said Rep. Elizabeth Scott, R-Monroe.

Rep. Norma Smith, R-Langley, argued: “This is an abortion mandate bill.”

Republicans in the House wore white ribbons to indicate their opposition to the legislation.

The political picture on abortion has flip-flopped in the 43-plus years since Washington voted for Referendum 20, which legalized abortion in the Evergreen State.

At the time, support for abortion rights was championed by moderate Republican state Senators from the Seattle area. Several prominent Democratic legislators were vocal opponents of Referendum 20.

Support for abortion rights has now become a litmus test for Democrats. A few pro-choice Republicans remain, such as Sen. Steve Litzow, R-Mercer Island, but the GOP has generally taken a hard anti-abortion stance.