MOREHEAD CITY — Carteret County residents interested in obtaining health coverage for 2015 will have a number of resources to get assistance as area navigators and insurance representatives prepare for a busy season enrolling.

Open enrollment through the federal exchange begins Saturday and runs through Sunday, Feb. 15.

North Carolina opted out of piloting its own exchange; therefore, residents can access information, applications and enrollment through the federal market place at www.healthcare.gov.

A team of Carteret County navigators will be working in the community to assist residents with the application and plan selection process.

“Last year we targeted food banks, libraries, the Broad Street Clinic,” navigator Holly Powell with Legal Aid of NC Inc. told the News-Times in a phone interview Wednesday. “This year we’re trying to target people who don’t get insurance through their employer, but have jobs.”

Ms. Powell and fellow navigator Hilary Schultz will be making appointments at the Carteret County Public Library in Beaufort, Mondays through Thursdays and Saturdays.

Navigator Barbara Thomas will be on hand at the Broad Street Clinic in Morehead City Monday afternoons and Wednesdays, trying to reach out to those interested in getting covered.

Several other volunteers with Get Covered Carteret are working to become certified as well, noted Ms. Powell.

Area insurance agents are also setting appointments to help Carteret County residents through enrollment.

“We are all booked next week,” said Valerie Styron of Styron & Styron Insurance. “The marketplace was down … earlier this week, for improvements I would assume, but we’re hopeful everything will be good to go.”

Though she said enrollment saw a somewhat lethargic response, a number of Carteret County residents enrolled in health insurance coverage during the inaugural year of the Affordable Care Act.

According to a report out of the federal Health and Human Services Planning and Evaluation Department, more than 2,500 Carteret County residents became covered through the exchange last year.

This year’s strategy will work to target those who do not fall into the Medicaid gap, Ms. Powell said of work with Legal Aid of NC and Get Covered Carteret.

The gap, created by North Carolina’s officials in turning down the federal Medicaid expansion, leaves no subsidies or relief for those families making less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level, equating to an income of $27,310 for a family a three.

Medicaid in North Carolina picks up through 50 percent or less of the federal poverty level, roughly $9,900 for a family of three, while subsidies assist individuals with affordable coverage between 100 and 400 percent of the federal poverty level, $11,670-$46,680.

“This year we’re trying to target small businesses, civic groups, chamber groups, small business roundtables,” Ms. Powell said of accessing those in the 100 to 400 percent bracket.

The group also looks to partner with various organizations in the coming months to get the word out about enrollment, including Carteret Community College and the clinic.

The Carteret County Health Department will have navigator Shirley Johnson on hand beginning Monday, according to a press release.

Carteret General Hospital officials could not say whether they would be able to connect interested patients with a navigator.

In addition to the state’s refusal to expand Medicaid and cover workers and families in the Medicaid gap, navigators also face several challenges in determining subsidy eligibility.

“What you have to do when you enroll is project your income for the next year,” Ms. Powell explained. “For most people that’s relatively easy, but for someone who works part-time, is self-employed or moves from job to job that can be a challenge.”

Determining taxable household size can also be tricky, she noted and both weigh heavily on subsidy estimations during the application process.

“We’ve gotten a lot of training and resources to help us and we’re hoping this year it will be a bit less complicated,” she said.

In other news, networks serving Carteret are expanding – Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina will still be the only provider for the area, but companies offering dental coverage have grown from one to four, with an expanded repertoire of area dentists.

Only three insurance providers opted into the federal marketplace for North Carolina, BCBS, Coventry Healthcare, which offered in more metropolitan areas, and FirstCarolinaCare, which operated in just six counties.

Clients who obtained coverage last year won’t have to endure the application process again if they wish to simply renew, said Ms. Styron.

“They’re going to get two mailings. The first, an overview of their subsidy, in case there was any discrepancy with their tax filing … the other is a renewal letter from Blue Cross with their new rates,” she told the News-Times via phone. “We hope we don’t have to see everyone we saw (last year) again because we just don’t have the time. We’re hoping renewal is transparent.”

Federal officials are banking on renewals going smoothly, as well. Democrats hope the Affordable Care Act’s second year will be more successful than last year’s launch – a botched rollout and buggy website that plagued the enrollment process, went down for hours at a time and forced the federal government to extend the period through March.

“Things will not be perfect,” Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell told the Associated Press. “We are aiming for strong consumer experience and it will be better.”

In the fallout of the 2013 exchange launch, former health and human services secretary Kathleen Sebelius tendered her resignation over the website failure.

Stakes continue to be high this year, with federal officials projecting the insurance exchanges will cover a projected 13 million people in 2015.

The penalty for not having health insurance, a provision of the Affordable Care Act, is on the rise, as well.

For the uninsured in Carteret County that comes down to $295 or two percent of your income, whichever is greater, due with your tax bill.

“It is a larger penalty, but it still isn’t more than a couple months premium,” Ms. Styron noted. “So there still isn’t a big urge yet to enroll. It’s not like people are clamoring to get signed up.”

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Contact Jackie Starkey at 726-7081, ext. 232; email jackie@thenewstimes.com; or follow on Twitter @jackieccnt.