As a matter of political reality, Gov. John Kasich is cruising to re-election in part for things out of his control – a nationwide economic recovery that has pumped jobs and hope into Ohio, and the implosion of the campaign of his Democratic challenger, Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald.

But also as a matter of political reality, Republican Kasich deserves that re-election. He has proven himself a good governor – and an excellent fiscal manager of Ohioans' money.

His vision on issues critical to Cleveland, from the Cleveland schools plan to making the city's Opportunity Corridor a reality to protecting Lake Erie, has been transformative for Northeast Ohio.

Even a strong FitzGerald would have been hard-pressed to beat Kasich, who showed foresight and political acumen by pushing through a needed Medicaid expansion that allowed Ohio access to federal funds and made this benefit of the Affordable Care Act available to low-income residents across the state.

That was a gutsy piece of leadership that had Kasich going against his own party in making an end run around the state legislature to have the State Controlling Board push it through. During Thursday's endorsement interview, Kasich said he is confident that the Medicaid expansion won't be thwarted legislatively in Ohio.

Kasich also showed his independence by proposing – and continuing to push for -- higher severance taxes on hydraulic fracturing for the oil and gas industry than what House Republicans have embraced.

He is more than ready for a second term during which he can solidify these and other important policies – including by naming a Lake Erie czar to oversee intensified efforts to address toxic algal blooms and by making sure that the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' shortsighted efforts to dump river dredge in Lake Erie don't continue.

Kasich deserves that re-election, for his vision and his efforts to be a governor of all the people, from Steubenville, to Lima, to Medina and Cleveland.

About our editorials Editorials express the view of the Editorials express the view of the editorial board of The Plain Dealer and Northeast Ohio Media Group -- the senior leadership and editorial-writing staff. As is traditional, editorials are unsigned and intended to be seen as the voice of the newspaper. • Talk about the topic of this editorial in the comments below. • Send a letter to the editor, which will be considered for print publication. • Email general questions or comments about the editorial board to Elizabeth Sullivan, opinion director for the Northeast Ohio Media Group.

At the same time, FitzGerald has nobody but himself to blame for the fact the governor's race is not more focused on the issues he wanted to press – access to adequate health services for women, for one, and the state's shortsighted retreat from renewable energy, for another.

FitzGerald's self-inflicted wounds arose from revelations that Westlake police confronted him in 2012, at 4:30 a.m., in a car with a woman who was not his wife and, more significantly and shamefully, that he went 10 years without a full driver's license. FitzGerald's inexplicable driver's license omissions, along with his defensive and inadequate response to both revelations, overtook his ability to press his policy views.

FitzGerald, 46, also tarnished his strong early record as Cuyahoga County's first elected executive with his failure to release his county parking and swipe-card records that are clearly public information.

Also in the race is Green Party candidate Anita Rios, 60, the daughter of Texas migrant workers who settled in Toledo. A mental health caseworker who is currently unemployed, Rios is articulate and committed but not ready for the governorship.

Kasich, 62, is ready to move Ohio significantly forward in a second term -- in part by nudging the state Republican Party closer to the middle.

Kasich, for instance, said during the endorsement interview that he sees no need for a right-to-work law in Ohio. That is a message the far right of his party must heed, to avoid another bruising and costly ideological fight.

Kasich also said he strongly supports the Common Core educational standards taking effect in Ohio this academic year. Now he must ensure that the legislature does not give in to irrational fear and derail Common Core, while also making sure schools have the resources to implement the standards.

Kasich already stood up to GOP lawmakers in managing to water down ill-advised legislation that froze the state's energy-conservation and renewable-energy mandates for two years.

Kasich, however, should have vetoed Senate Bill 310 altogether, as it contradicts his own stated vision for Ohio's energy policy, when he said in 2011 that "our commitment to [clean alternative, renewable and advanced energy sources] shouldn't [waver] despite the fact that their costs aren't yet where we want them to be."

The governor needs to make sure the committee formed to study the mandates gives them a fair shake and isn't just a tool of the electric utilities and of the large energy consumers that are expected to oppose them.

Kasich doesn't hesitate to preen over improved employment numbers, including restoring the bulk of the 350,000 jobs lost during predecessor Ted Strickland's administration – and rightfully so.

His efforts to boost the rainy day fund to $1.5 billion and to reduce regulations have helped establish a pro-investment climate in Ohio – although the governor needs to start returning some of the surplus to localities, many of which have responded to state cuts by raising taxes at the local level.

Still, the lack of transparency of Kasich's privatized JobsOhio economic development arm makes it hard to determine whether state job-attraction policies are working. With the legislature stepping in to bar the state auditor from examining JobsOhio's books in any meaningful way, it's impossible to know whether its policies are effective or justified.

Kasich's overall record, however, speaks to his ability to see past partisanship to issues of critical importance to all of Ohio, including urban Ohio and to those who live in Northeast Ohio. He can solidify that record with a second term focused on addressing current threats to Lake Erie, expanding the state's funding for public education, including for early education, and reinforcing the state's investment in energy innovation and the Third Frontier.

He clearly deserves the chance to do so.

Listen to an audio file of the Oct. 23 endorsement interview with the three candidates: