The NFL season is finally underway after an off season focused on deflated footballs. The so-called “Deflategate” controversy started with an allegation that Tom Brady and the New England Patriots intentionally altered footballs in pursuit of a competitive advantage in last year’s playoffs.

The issue evolved into a legal battle centered on what, with hindsight, looks to be a deeply flawed dispute resolution process of the NFL.

Lost in the talk radio debates over Brady’s moral integrity and legal wrangling over NFL commissioner Roger Goodell’s authority is a more basic principle: Sport is made possible because of the integrity of rules.

Deflategate occurred because the NFL and the Players Association together agreed that each team would have responsibility for providing the balls that it uses while on offense. There were few checks in place to ensure compliance with the rules for equipment preparation. Under such an arrangement, the opportunities for mischief are many.

Imagine if instead of each team providing its own footballs, that each team had responsibility for providing its own referees. Each team would contract individually with a licensed NFL referee to officiate their games. What possibly could go wrong?

If this hypothetical scenario sounds ridiculous, it is. Throughout business and government, policies are put into place to ensure that conflicts of interest — either real or perceived — don’t compromise the integrity of decision- making.

However, it seems that the world of sports missed a memo somewhere.

Consider drug testing in sport. The U.S. Anti-Doping Agency, located in Colorado Springs, was given responsibility by Congress for overseeing American athletes who participate in Olympic sports, such as track and field. The USADA is best known for its investigation and punishment of Lance Armstrong, who had his seven Tour de France titles stripped due to his long-term violation of doping rules.

The USADA makes money on the side by offering its services to non-Olympic sports, including boxing. For instance, the USADA was recently paid to perform the drug testing of Floyd Mayweather and Manny Paquiao in advance of their big fight earlier this year.

Thomas Hauser reports for SB Nation that the USADA found out prior to the fight that Mayweather had violated its drug policies — and apparently not for the first time. Yet the Nevada State Athletic Commission was not informed of the violation until three weeks after the fight, when the USADA retroactively issued an exemption for Mayweather.

Hauser reports that when Bob Bennett, executive director of the Nevada commission, learned of the USADA’s actions, he sent a letter to the organization’s president, Travis Tygart, stating that the USADA’s actions were “totally unacceptable … USADA is a drug-testing agency. USADA should not be granting waivers and exemptions. Not in this state.”

This was not the first such controversy the USADA has faced in its moonlighting for money in boxing. Boxing, of course, has a shady history. Why should anyone care if it skirts the rules? After all, the Mayweather-Paquiao fight earned a reported $500 million.

We should care for several reasons. One is that the USADA, while ostensibly an independent organization, is recognized in law as the nation’s official anti-doping agency. Taxpayers provide the USADA with more than $10 million per year, which pays Tygart nearly $400,000 per year, the same as President Obama. Yet, the USADA has little accountability to Congress or the public.

Should a taxpayer-funded, public interest organization really be contracting directly with professional boxing? The USADA makes almost $2 million per year through such moonlighting.

A second reason is that elite sports — both in the U.S. and internationally — are currently awash in controversies centered on conflicts of interest. The unfolding FIFA scandal is just the tip of the iceberg. The International Association of Athletics Federations, headquartered in Monaco, is facing allegations of systematic doping among track and field athletes from around the world. Its newly elected president, Sebastian Coe of Great Britain, is on the payroll of Nike, which has recently been associated with alleged complicity in prohibited performance-enhancing drug use among several of its sponsored athletes.

The spectacle of actual or perceived conflicts of interest cast a pall on both the USADA and the IAAF, which have public interest mandates to enforce the rules of sport. For too long, sports organizations have sat outside the public eye, letting the spectacle of the games distract us from how they do business. In case after case, we have come to learn that the way that they do business, at times, leaves a lot to be desired.

We expect rules to be followed in sport. We should expect no less from those who run the games. After all, the games belong to all of us, and one way or another we are paying the salaries of those who oversee the games. It is time to expect better.

Roger Pielke Jr. is a professor at the University of Colorado Boulder in Boulder. He writes a sports blog at leastthing.blogspot.com.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.