Prison time for cutting two women







Jahaira Jimenez Browse for Republican American Reprints



WATERBURY — Jahaira Jimenez said Friday she's human and made a mistake when she cut two women during a brawl in front of her family's grocery store last year.



"Even though I was provoked, I feel bad for what I did," she said.



Jimenez, a 25-year-old mother, was sentenced Friday to two-and-half years in prison for the April 2012 attack in front of the Stop One Grocery on Walnut Street.



Jimenez pleaded guilty in August to two counts of first-degree assault in connection with the brawl. Jimenez knew the women, who were both in their 20s, but it's unclear what drew her out of the grocery store where she worked and sparked the fight, which occurred in the city's WOW neighborhood.



Jimenez was believed to have pulled a small blade or utility razor to stab one woman in the neck and the other in the arm. Surgery was needed to close the wound on one woman's biceps, which was slashed open during the attack.



Her attorney, Timothy Sullivan, said she had trouble dealing with her emotions and is taking advantage of counseling programs while she's in jail.



Although Jimenez's two victims didn't show up for her hearing Friday in Waterbury Superior Court, she apologized to them in an emotional plea for leniency before Judge Roland Fasano.



Before her arrest, Jimenez said, she had been studying to become a paralegal, a goal she might still reach. She broke out in tears at one point, telling Fasano that her young son is suffering with her locked up. Sullivan said she has already given up custody of the boy.



Fasano told Jimenez that prosecutors could have pressed for more prison time for the attack and that she needed to get herself together. Fasano could have given Jimenez up to five years, the maximum allowed under a plea deal worked out with State's Attorney Maureen Platt.



After she's released from prison, Jimenez will have to serve three years of probation.

Follow Us