In his State of the State address Thursday, Gov. Jerry Brown was suprisingly cautionary, defying predictions that he would tout such expansionary projects as high-speed rail and the twin water tunnels under the Sacramento Delta.

The most-telling moment came after he celebrated, to applause from the gathered lawmakers in the state Capitol, putting the budget in surplus and paying down the $26 billion debt left him in 2011 by the exiting Arnold Schwarzenegger administration.

“You should applaud,” Gov. Brown said, departing from his prepared text. “Because there might not be much coming after this,” meaning new surpluses. That was an obvious reference to the sharp declines in stock markets so far this year.

Yet there was much he celebrated. He touted raising the state’s mimimum wage to $10 this year from $8 when he took office. That jump also has encouraged Los Angeles, San Francisco and other cities to raise their minimum wages yet higher, to $15 over the next few years. Actually, a higher minimum wage, especially in low-wage areas such as the Inland Empire, mainly will kill entry-level jobs – even as another recession may loom.

“Most importantly – and this is truly monumental – we have wholeheartedly embraced the Affordable Care Act,” he said. “As a result, we are now enrolling 13.5 million Californians in Medi-Cal and another 1.5 million in Covered California.” We would contend that it should not be a matter of pride that one-third of Californians are getting medical welfare.

He called for fixing the state’s crumbling roads, but insisted that “[d]oing so without an expanded and permanent revenue source is impossible.” Actually, the state just needs to spend highway taxes and fees on repairs instead of siphoning off the money to the General Fund.

Since he is running to replace Gov. Brown in 2018, Lt. Gov. Gavin Newsom’s heart must have skipped a beat when the governor quipped that he might change the state Constitution to run for a fifth term.

In sum, the speech made it clear that the one legacy Gov. Brown values above all others is that he did not bust the budget.