Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Burlington police officer Jesse Hill, responding to a report of a domestic fight, fired his weapon at a growling family dog and inadvertently hit and killed 34-year-old Autumn Steele.

When the city of Burlington announced plans in September 2014 to equip all of its police officers with body-worn cameras, the police chief said he was motivated by a desire to increase public trust.

But that was Burlington, Vt.

In Burlington, Ia., police seem less concerned about earning public trust. How else to explain the 10-month battle authorities have been waging to keep secret the police body camera footage of an officer-involved fatal shooting?

On Thursday morning, it seemed likely that the Iowa Public Information Board would tighten that lid of secrecy. Its staff, after all, had twice recommended that a complaint filed by the Hawk Eye newspaper in Burlington be dismissed, saying the full video doesn’t have to be released because it’s part of an investigative file and can be withheld under Iowa law.

But public information board members, in a 4-3 split, disagreed. Instead, they opted for formal charges — only the third time they’ve done so in their two years of existence — and sent the case to an administrative law judge.

It was an important first step. Had the board dismissed the complaint, the Hawk Eye would have little legal wiggle room to continue fighting for those records.

In the city of Burlington, population 25,000, fatal officer-involved shootings are rare. And this one has been cloaked in suspicion and secrecy from the start.

We know that Officer Jesse Hill was wearing a body camera when he shot 34-year-old Autumn Steele in January while responding to a disturbance. Steele had been hitting her husband outside their home after spending the previous night in jail on accusations of assaulting him, police said.

A 12-second clip of the video from Hill’s body camera — the only portion released by authorities — shows Hill firing his gun twice without warning after a growling dog is heard. It’s not seen on the video, but authorities have said the family’s German shepherd jumped on Hill’s back and bit his thigh, causing injuries that required treatment.

We don't know much more than that, or why Hill's account doesn't seem to line up with those of Steele's husband and a neighbor. Presumably, the video could help clear it up, and would show what happened and what was said immediately after Hill fired his weapon.

The shooting was quickly deemed justified. The case was closed. Hill returned to work.

And yet evidence of what transpired that day — captured on a tool designed to increase transparency — remains hidden.

The Iowa Public Information Board did the right thing in refusing to rubber-stamp the staff's recommendation. As board member Bill Monroe aptly noted, the state’s public records law was written before police began using body cameras, and part of the board’s job is to interpret how new technology fits into the law.

But the other, much bigger problem is the law itself. It’s hard to imagine that when lawmakers drafted the clunky section of the public records law on police investigative files, they intended the records to be kept secret forever, even after the investigations are completed.

In fact, it’s been argued that if it wasn’t for the placement of a comma in the 36-word sentence that makes up this section of the law, that wouldn’t be the case. Citizens would be allowed to inspect the records once the files were closed.

It’s past time for lawmakers to address this serious defect in state law. They should do it because public trust matters. And they should do it because public access to the records of a fatal police shooting shouldn't hinge on a comma.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1m311ai