Last week, I met with a group of education technology entrepreneurs at 1776, a Washington, D.C.-based startup incubator and venture fund that supports innovators working to solve major public policy challenges. It was inspiring to meet so many people interested in pitching their ideas to schools and to see how much technology stands to help the space. From a platform designed to boost teacher retention by offering peer-to-peer mentoring and one designed to empower data-driven decision-making, to a resource to help Parent-Teacher Organizations and Parent-Teacher Associations with their fundraising needs, these early- to mid-stage ventures are testing the waters with ideas that could revolutionize how our schools operate. Many will fail, some will be able to sell their innovation to larger companies and others will hopefully take off a la Uber one day.



[READ: It Takes a Community]

As the former head of the Office of Innovation and Improvement at the U.S. Department of Education who later worked for a for-profit company interested in pitching its services to the K-12 sector, I have a keen appreciation for ideas and products that can shake up the status quo in education. There are, of course, countless challenges involved with penetrating the K-12 space, but the odds of success will improve if innovators follow five guidelines:

1. Know the funding streams that can support your work. Entrepreneurs sometimes treat the K-12 space as if schools were private enterprises with discretionary funds set aside to support a new idea. Unfortunately, most school budgets are locked into specific silos with little discretion to move the funds around. Being familiar with these funding streams and the flexibility inherent in some programs will make it easier for the schools to adopt a new idea.

2. Influence the debate in the court of public opinion. Businesses often buy ads to market their ideas, but an even more effective way to draw attention to an idea is by influencing the policy discussion in the court of public opinion. This can be achieved by publishing an op-ed that highlights the importance of tackling the problem you’ve identified. Asking moms to blog about your products on local listservs or having community organizers or elected officials on your side can have a much greater influence on district officials’ views of your products or services than an ad placed in a trade paper.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

3. Focus on authenticity. Though the K-12 space is often considered slow to change and filled with bureaucrats who are skeptical of innovation, the space does have many open-minded people who will listen to your idea if you come across as genuinely interested in the challenge they are trying to tackle. These are individuals who have invested their lives in service to others, and thus will be more attracted to your ultimate mission – learn to inspire them!

4. Think small. While it’s attractive to go after the big districts and clients, the smaller districts (especially rural districts) are in greater need of help and if you land a successful contract with a few small districts, they will be able to influence their peers much faster.

5. Find out what your potential customers want. Don’t be afraid to ask teachers, parents and students what they want. There is a tendency for education innovators to come up with ideas and then try to make the idea fit into what they think schools want or need. A better approach would be to understand the secondary clients’ needs and focus on serving those needs.



[READ: A Real Threat to the Status Quo]