Senate ‘Cures’ sees action this week

With help from Darius Tahir (@DariusTahir), Brett Norman (@brettnorman) and Sarah Karlin-Smith (@SarahKarlin)

DRIVING THE WEEK: SENATE ‘CURES’ LEGISLATIVE WORK: The HELP Committee will mark up the last five bills of its biomedical innovation package Wednesday with Chairman Lamar Alexander’s assurance that he will reach a bipartisan agreement on mandatory NIH funding before the legislation comes to the floor. But no deal yet. The size of NIH's boost, and where that money will come from, won’t be settled before the markup, and disagreements could still kill the package. There were signs of optimism last week, however: two lobbyists said the companion legislation to the House-passed 21st Century Cures could reach the floor as soon as April 11. With no breakthrough on the thorniest problem — which cuts would fund the NIH — it seemed likely to take longer.

Story Continued Below

— Expect the offset hunt, which has been ongoing for months, to intensify this week, as the policy phase of HELP’s innovation effort wraps up. “The conversation is very real and very serious,” a well wired GOP lobbyist said. “But offsets are just incredibly hard even under ideal circumstances with must-pass legislation, and this isn’t that.”

— With the work of the Senate 'Cures' companion lies the fate of the Improving Health IT Act (S. 2511), on which bipartisan work began a full year ago. Lawmakers and staff have yet to address questions about what will happen to the health IT portion of the Senate 'Cures' work should the FDA and NIH portions fall apart. Your Pro eHealth team will be on the story all week.

Welcome to Monday morning eHealth where we are glad we’re not in live television after viewing this Australian reporter’s reaction when a parrot landed on her shoulder: http://huff.to/25Fq1GA. Between laughs, pass along your news to dpittman@politico.com and connect with us on Twitter @David_Pittman, @arthurallen202, @DariusTahir @ POLITICOPro, @Morning_eHealth.

eHealth tweet of the day: @MedStarHealth: As of Friday morning, we were approaching 90 percent functionality of our systems. Learn more http://ow.ly/10bMIY

STILL NO RANSOMWARE CONFIRMATION: Despite reports from multiple, reputable news outlets confirming the MedStart Health cyber attack last week was in fact ransomware, the 10-hospital system still isn’t calling it that. The health system has some kind of PR strategy in mind, as apparent from its statement late Friday: “Additional media coverage featuring criminal acts—offenses against the public that are punishable—perpetuates the infamy of malicious attacks for airtime and publicity, even if anonymous in nature. Evidence shows that copycat perpetrators and plotters look to previous examples for inspiration and operational details. MedStar will not provide details publicly to the malware details, the attack or the attackers.” The company did say it has not paid any ransom.

— A spate of ransomware attacks started in mid-February when Hollywood Presbyterian in Los Angles was attacked with ransomware and later admitted to paying hackers $17,000.

WHERE IN THE WORLD IS VALUE-BASED INVESTMENT?: Medicare and the Obama administration are full-steam ahead on value-based payments, which depend on successful use of information technology. But investors are becoming stingy, stock prices are shrinking and resources are being diverted elsewhere, for example to cybersecurity. That’s leaving investments in value-based care in a tough position, Pro’s Darius Tahir reports.

— “Researchers at the Center for Health Care Strategies say accountable care organizations are spending money to explore whiz-bang technologies such as telemedicine, intensive data-sharing, real-time alerts and analytics. But it's all a little experimental. Although logic holds that such technology will improve care, so far there's little solid data that good tech equals better Medicare reimbursement. All this may help explain why digital health funding is slowing.” Darius has more: http://politico.pro/1UZ0jcu

NURSE LICENSING COMPACT TRIES TO GAIN STEAM: The National Council of State Boards of Nursing will try to ramp up work on further adoption of its renewed licensing compact this week when it hosts a forum at the Newseum Friday. The compact, which allows nurses to work freely in all states that have adopted it, has been picked up by six states (Wyoming, Virginia, South Dakota, Idaho, Florida and Tennessee) and is pending in nine others. It’s seen as a way to help ease the practice of telemedicine across state lines. Friday’s event will bring together nursing leaders, health care executives and policymakers.

--State nurses associations, hospital associations and nursing boards have been pressing state lawmakers to pick up the new compact, which establishes an interstate commission, adds requirements for criminal background checks and uniform licensure requirements. The “enhanced” compact goes into effect once 26 states have adopted it or Dec. 31, 2018, whichever comes first. “We are pleased with the progress we’ve made in just three short months and look forward to the prospect of adding more states to the NLC this year and in 2017,” said Elliot Vice, director of government affairs at NCSBN.

— Physical therapists are also working on the own licensing compact, with bills signed in Oregon and awaiting signature in Arizona. http://bit.ly/22WanYD

And more cyber trouble….

SAN DIEGO LATEST ATTACK VICTIM: “Alvarado Hospital Medical Center in San Diego is among the growing number of health care facilities nationwide coping with the effects of a malicious software attack,” the San Diego Union-Tribune reports. http://bit.ly/1Xamhaf

SPEAKING OF RANSOMWARE: The FTC has scheduled a Sept. 7 seminar on the growing problem, which will consider whether public education campaigns and antivirus and other technologies are up to par. "We have no predetermined answer to that question, we really are trying to figure this out," said Dan Salsburg, chief counsel at FTC's Office of Technology, Research and Investigation.

A BIT LATE ON THIS: The U.S. and Canadian governments last week issued a rare joint alert warning about an increase in ransomware attacks. http://reut.rs/25APhhm

AND LASTLY: The Office of Personnel Management plans to issue guidance to insurers on reporting cybersecurity incidents in health plans covering federal employees, the office's acting director said last week. It follows last year’s breach of Anthem, one of the biggest insurers in the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program. http://bit.ly/1RRo0mM

POINT: Journalist Ezra Klein subtly makes the case against FDA regulation of clinical decision support software like IBM’s Watson, in the weekly Vox podcast The Weeds. “I think the place that something like Watson will go is not to replace doctors, but to be part of their tool kit,” Klein says in his discussion with former POLITICO reporter Sarah Kliff. “It’s the same way that as a journalist we are constantly using Google to augment our ability to know about the world.” In the future, Klein says, what will separate good doctors from bad ones is the ability to use technology like Watson. The full podcast, which starts off with an elementary discussion of electronic medical records: http://bit.ly/1oq7sV8

COUNTERPOINT: This AMIA survey we told you about last week found 93 percent of the chief medical information officers had at least one clinical decision support malfunction and two-thirds experienced malfunctions at least annually. http://bit.ly/1Uy7Wqc

WHAT WE’RE CLICKING:

The AMA’s chief medical information officer talks Sequoia Project, interoperability: http://bit.ly/1UxhTV8

Apple changes Siri responses to inquiries about sex assault, abuse: http://bayareane.ws/1Rm0RW7

Data needed for Medicare pay policies to succeed: http://bit.ly/236LpSR

59 percent of digital health users have chronic conditions, but 7 percent use a disease management tool: http://bit.ly/1qpkjZa

Telemedicine can save Alaska travel costs in Medicaid: http://bit.ly/1qpkm7n

Tips, comments, suggestions? Send them along via email to our team: Arthur Allen (aallen@politico.com, @ArthurAllen202), David Pittman (dpittman@politico.com, @David_Pittman) and Darius Tahir (dtahir@politico.com, (@DariusTahir).