News

Potomac Local sent a candidate survey to Andrea Bailey. She’s running to represent the Potomac Magisterial District on the Prince William County Board of Supervisors.

Bailey faces Derrick Wood in a June 9, 2015 Primary Election. The winner of the Primary Election will go on to face Republican Incumbent Maureen Caddigan in the November General Election on Nov. 3, 2015.

PL: What are the top three major issues facing the district you wish to represent?

Bailey: Transportation, housing, and education.

PL: What concrete solutions do you propose to address these issues?

Bailey: Transportation- Create alternate sources of transportation for workers, families and friends visiting the Prince William County. I would like to improve the roads and infrastructure for traveling inside the county and outside of the county for the community.

Housing- Provide more secure and affordable housing for the disenfranchised. I would like to eradicate the ten tent cities in Prince William County. In addition, I would like to provide economic and veteran administration education to those who purchase their homes and those who would like to rent.

Education- Provide an improved learning environment for all students to excel in the educational systems, with an emphasis placed on high risk and low-income students. Provide the necessary resources or write grants to maintain current and attract prospective teachers.

PL: From your prospective, what is the job description of the office you’re seeking?

Bailey: I will be [elected] as a professional, nonpartisan County Executive to manage government agencies. I will be responsible for setting local tax policy, approving land use plans and appointing officials to various countywide positions; including a County Executive who prepares the annual budget, and carries out laws enacted by the Board.

I will act within the limits set forth by the Virginia General Assembly. I plan to meet every second Tuesday of every month in the Prince William County McCoart Administration Building. I understand that members of the public are invited to attend these meetings.

My aim will be to serve not only the Potomac Magisterial District, but assume my responsibility of collaborating with my fellow colleagues in making Prince William County a world class, economically secure community.

PL: What expertise will you bring to the office?

Bailey: I am a 20-year veteran of the private sector with business acumen in corporate budgetary management, operational management, business development, community relations management and human resource management.

Additionally, I have over forty-one years of community service in several different organizations at the national and local levels. I have over ten years of experience in political campaign orchestration at the national and local level. I have served on political campaigns for the President, Senator, Congressman, State Representative and School Board.

PL: Do you feel that the average citizen is well-informed and understands the workings of local government? If not, how do you intend on improving communication with your constituency?

Bailey: The average citizen is not informed of the workings of the local government. I plan to alleviate this through improving communications at the local level building partnerships within the community with citizens and local business owners.

I plan to bridge the gap between government and the people. In addition, I plan to use public forums, town halls, community events and the most current social media available to educate all.

PL: Have you ever made any mistakes in your public life? How have they effected you?

Bailey: No, I have not made any public mistakes. However, I have noticed and understand when mistakes are made in the public, and it costs our local constituents their homes, jobs, and families.

PL: Our readers want leaders in local government. Why should they vote for you?

Bailey: Being a military’s spouse for twenty-three years and a pastor’s wife for 10 years and being married for 38 years, I understand the importance of moral integrity and family values.

The reason why they should vote for me is because I believe that strong families build strong communities, which creates a secure environment. I believe my platform of transportation, housing, education and economic development will improve and sustain Prince William County for generations to come.