Conservatives, especially those “inside the Beltway,” are starting to get a little nervous. They watch the polls like ordinary Americans follow the box scores in baseball – and they don’t like what they see. To them, the data says the Democrats are still in a position to control the U.S. Senate after the November elections.

What they forget, however, is that data is a tool, something to be used in analysis that is not in and of itself determinant of outcomes. Unless, after studying it, people act in such a way as to make the data a sort of self-fulfilling prophecy.

Of particular interest are the attitudes of campaign consultants, the collection of technicians who advise on everything from the overall theme to the color of the yard signs. As a group they are easy to bash and are frequently the subject of criticism from party activists and policy wonks because they are considered to lack a vision, have an overall aversion to addressing ideological differences and are unwilling to take risks. And if they, as has been suggested numerous times over the course of the 2014 campaign, are advising the candidate for whom they work to cast every issue in “pale pastels” rather than the “bold colors” President Ronald Reagan famously suggested conservatives employ, then they are guilty of malpractice. Elections are about forcing choices and explaining why changes in personnel matter, and this cannot be done with any great success without explaining why differences rather than similarities matter.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on the 2014 Congressional Elections]

It is not enough, therefore, to simply be the anti-Obama or to tie opposing Democrats to the president’s coattails. Sure, as the polls clearly show, Obama’s a drag on the party overall, but that does not mean he is the only issue on which the electorate will be voting in November. The GOP candidates must be “for” something. It’s the only way for them to win; even in 2010, when the Republicans retook the House, governorships and state legislative chambers by big numbers, they were by and large unanimously “for” the repeal of Obamacare.

The party has yet to coalesce around a set of issues – or even one – over which the election can be nationalized. Even so, they have managed to all but wrest four Senate seats away from the Democrats – Montana, South Dakota, Arkansas and West Virginia – just because of the general national environment and local issues. There are other states where they are on the cusp of victory – North Carolina, New Hampshire, Iowa, Virginia, Alaska, Louisiana and Colorado – but where there is still work to be done. In those states, the candidates are still introducing themselves to the electorate, making it possible for people to vote for them. Once you have gained the general confidence of the electorate as someone who is up to the task at hand, then you can begin to force the choice. Election Day may be just over a month and a half away, but the challenger candidates in competitive races still have to be visible, still have to meet people, still have to press the flesh and prove they have what it takes.

[SEE: Cartoons on the Democratic Party]

This lesson is not lost on vulnerable Democrats like Louisiana’s Mary Landrieu – who chose assisting a 20-something doing a handstand on a beer keg to help reestablish her “down home” bona fides – or Virginia’s Mark Warner, who has been reintroducing himself to voters with TV spots focusing a lot on the four years he spent as governor just after the turn of the century. They understand the voters have to know you before they will vote for you – although Landrieu trying to show she’s still “a good ole’ girl” and Warner’s trying to remind people that for an invisible senator, he was a good governor, seem odd choices on which to base a fall campaign.

If the GOP candidates have a plan to close strong, to finish the campaign by explaining the contrast in visions between the two candidates (or three in the case of Louisiana) after first having established in the minds of the voters who they are, then a lot of incumbents are going to fall in November. If the Republicans plan to remain little more than the opposition to Obama, they are still likely to take the Senate, though not by as much.