A billboard on Chapman highway calls on House Speaker Beth Harwell to bring Insure Tennessee to a full vote.

Signs calling on House Speaker Beth Harwell to bring Insure Tennessee to a vote rolled out Monday.

Citizens for Insure Tennessee are paying for 20 billboards in cities across the state, urging people to call on Harwell, R-Nashville, to bring Gov. Bill Haslam's Insure Tennessee to a vote on the House floor.

House Speaker Beth Harwell resisted calls Monday to bring Insure Tennessee to a floor vote, citing a decision by the governor not to pursue implementation.

In a statement to The Tennessean, Harwell said Gov. Bill Haslam decided "not to pursue the implementation of Insure Tennessee."

"As Speaker, I cannot unilaterally bring it to a vote," Harwell said. "All bills go through the committee process, and this has failed to receive the support needed to advance."

In Knoxville, a local couple, Todd Shelton and his wife, Polly Murphy paid for a sign on Chapman Highway.

“It’s been a real tough battle,” said Shelton of the fight to get Insure Tennessee passed. “But the speaker of the house is a powerful position. It always has been.”

There are additional billboards with Harwell's number in Memphis, Chattanooga, the Tri-Cities, Tullahoma and more, at least 20 in all, according to organizers. Plus, the number of billboards in Nashville has increased to six.

Citizens for Insure Tennessee said on a conference call Monday morning that they are focused on Harwell because she has the skills and political clout to sway opinion.

"Speaker Harwell does not represent just her district. She represents all of us in the state of Tennessee," said Ed Wolff, a retired minister in the Tri-Cities area.

“One tool they can use is the two-thirds majority to bring anything to the floor for a vote,” said Shelton. “We feel like, and we have evidence that, there are a lot of people on both sides of the aisle who are interested in Insure Tennessee at this point.”

Haslam proposed Insure Tennessee, a tiered system, to use federal Medicaid funding to expand health insurance coverage. Two subsets of state senators killed Insure Tennessee in 2015 before the proposal made it to either floor for discussion and a vote. Much of the opposing rhetoric characterized the proposal as a further extension of Obamacare.

Insure Tennessee has been blocked at several turns in the legislature, primarily the Senate, in 2015 and 2016. Last week, concern over presidential politics and disappointment with the lack of leadership in the legislature killed two bills regarding Insure Tennessee in a House subcommittee.

First, Rep. Larry Miller, D-Memphis, withdrew a resolution to empower Haslam to enact Insure Tennessee through any means necessary after stating that he was "heartbroken" over the leadership void shown by lawmakers and legislative leaders.

Then, Rep. Jeremy Durham, R-Franklin, successfully proposed sending a non-binding referendum on Insure Tennessee to summer study rather than giving Tennessee voters the chance to weigh in with a "yes" or "no" about whether they support the expansion on the November ballot.

A version of this story originally appeared on Tennessean.com