Topics: Affordable Care Act, Congress, Healthcare Reform, House Republicans, Obamacare, Paul Ryan, Pre-existing conditions, Elections News, Politics News

One of the biggest problems Republicans have had to deal with when it comes to health care reform is that the Affordable Care Act, while unpopular as a whole, has individual components in it that people love. Perhaps foremost among these well-liked slices of Obamacare is the law’s provision barring insurance companies from discriminating against people based on pre-existing conditions. It used to be that a health insurer could jack up your premiums or deny you coverage altogether based solely on your health history. The Affordable Care Act put an end to that as part of its coverage mandate, and now people who most desperately need access to health care can get it.

For Republicans, this popular policy is unadulterated Bolshevism. They recoil at the idea of the government regulating the insurance industry in this way, and they argue that there is a solution for guaranteeing sick people can get covered that is better than simply guaranteeing they can get covered. This better way is found within the inscrutable magicks of the free market.

House Speaker Paul Ryan is himself an ardent devotee of finding free-market solutions to literally every problem, and he also happens to be the person in charge of developing the House GOP’s long-awaited Obamacare replacement. This week, the Speaker gave us all a preview of what we can expect to see in the Republicans’ health reform plan, and he specifically addressed the issue of pre-existing conditions and how they can be dealt with in a way that doesn’t involve government regulation. Here’s what he said, according to Reuters:

“Less than 10 percent of people under 65 are what we call people with pre-existing conditions, who are really kind of uninsurable,” Ryan, a Wisconsin Republican, told a student audience at Georgetown University. “Let’s fund risk pools at the state level to subsidize their coverage, so that they can get affordable coverage,” he said. “You dramatically lower the price for everybody else. You make health insurance so much more affordable, so much more competitive and open up competition.”

High-risk pools! If you were at all concerned that the Republican Obamacare alternative would embrace any new thinking or policy innovations, this should set your mind at ease. High-risk pools have been a staple of Republican health care policy proposals for a long time now, and enthusiasm for them hasn’t diminished despite the fact that they’re a terrible policy.

The way high-risk pools work is that if you’re one of the “really kind of uninsurable people” Paul Ryan talks about who can’t get otherwise insured because of your medical history, you apply for coverage through a high-risk pool where you’ll pay higher premiums and cover more out-of-pocket costs than you would expect to in the normal insurance market. “In addition to these high premiums,” the Commonwealth Fund explains, “enrollees in state-based high-risk pools faced annual deductibles as high as $25,000 and annual coverage limits as low as $75,000.” In dispassionate economic terms, this makes sense: your health care needs are more expensive, so you pay more than a healthy person would. But if you’re a sick low-income person who can’t really afford insurance to begin with, shunting you off into a high-risk pool wouldn’t do you any good.