U.S. Rep. Raul Grijalva, D-Ariz. (Photo: The Republic)

U.S. Rep. Raul Grijalva urged the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to reject Gov. Doug Ducey’s plan to tighten eligibility and impose cost-sharing requirements for able-bodied adults enrolled in Arizona’s Medicaid program.

The Tucson Democrat said in a letter to the federal agency that Arizona’s public input was “woefully insufficient” for a sweeping reform plan that would impose work requirements, co-payments and a five-year eligibility limit on more than 300,000 able-bodied adults.

The state’s Medicaid program, the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, held a half dozen public meetings in August, posted details on the agency's Website and gathered input before submitting an application on Sept. 30 seeking changes to the state’s Medicaid program. The federal agency is expected to review the application and issue a decision before Oct. 1, 2016.

In a letter sent Thursday, Grijalva urged CMS Acting Administrator Andy Slavitt to reject the waiver application because AHCCCS “failed to publish the application in its entirety and instead posted confusing videos and summaries" that did not give the public enough detail.

Grijalva, who was not available for an interview Thursday, said in the letter that because the full reform plan was not posted on the AHCCCS website the public could not "properly prepare for the forums or provide meaningful public input ..."

But Ducey administration officials said that the plan was publicly available on the AHCCCS website and the half dozen public meetings were held in Phoenix, Tucson, Yuma and Flagstaff. What's more, AHCCCS collected 138 letters from AHCCCS recipients, medical groups, patient advocates and others before submitting the application to the federal agency.

“He is just flat wrong,” Ducey spokesman Daniel Scarpinato said. “We rolled this out in a very public away. There has been ample discussion throughout the state on this issue.”

Scarpinato added that while Grijalva may disagree with details of Ducey's Medicaid reform plan, the public input was thorough and more than required by law.

Christina Corieri, Ducey's health-policy adviser, said the the governor's staff also changed some plan details based on public input.

The original plan called for able-bodied adults to pay premiums equal to 2 percent of income. After hearing concerns about affordability, AHCCCS changed the proposed premium to the lesser of 2 percent of income or $25 per month. The money would be deposited into a health-savings account that would pay for services not covered by AHCCCS, such as dental, vision, weight-loss programs, gym memberships or sunscreen.

The reform also incorporates requirements of Senate Bill 1092, which calls for able-bodied adults on Medicaid to be employed, actively seeking work or enrolled in school or a job-training program. The legislation also would impose a five-year eligibility limit.

As of Jan. 1, 2014, Arizona expanded Medicaid eligibility to include adults who earn up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level. The expansion was mainly funded by the Affordable Care Act, with Arizona hospitals funding some costs.

A report issued earlier this week by Families USA estimated that more than 220,000 Arizonans who gained health coverage through the Medicaid expansion already work. Industries with the largest numbers of Medicaid-covered workers include cleaning and maintenance, food service, construction, sales and office/administrative support. The estimates were derived from Census data collected in 2010 and 2012.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1RxZz9J