UPDATE(WKOW) -- From the steps of the U.S. Capitol later today, 50 seniors from Janesville, Endeavor and Madison will join 75 Milwaukee area residents flying in on an Honor flight to protest the controversial MPRA Law.

The Mulit-Employer Pension Reform Act targets pension funds dealing with billions of unpaid debt.

The protesters will make up part of an expected 5,000 rallying against the law.

Wisconsin Committee to Protect Pensions coordinators say they have meetings planned today with Speaker of the House Paul Ryan's administrators as well as several other politicians to ensure they have their voices heard.

Stay with 27 News throughout the day as we learn more about this developing story.

********

ENDEAVOR (WKOW) -- Hundreds of thousands of teamster retirees from across the nation, many of them right here in Wisconsin could soon find their promised pension checks slashed by as much as 70%.

The cut to the Central States Fund is expected to go into effect July 1st of this year, unless Congress decides to repeal the 2014 Multi-Employer Pension Reform Act.

The Central States Fund is facing billions of unpaid debt. The Wisconsin Committee to Protect Pension says it's the first of many funds trying to use the law as a bail-out.

In order for this to happen, the fund's application must be approved by a federal mediator on May 7th.

Meanwhile, as millions of retirees face an uncertain future, the Endeavor committee of Wisconsin Committee to Protect Pensions is trying to stop the law from doing damage.

"We gotta keep fighting no matter what," with tears in Bob Brockway's eyes, the 75-year-old former trucker know how important it is to battle for his pension.

"That's my money, that's nobody else's money, Congress should leave their hand's off it," Brockway said.

More than 5,000 pensioners are expected to head to D.C. next week, with dozens from the Endeavor committee telling Congress why they want the law repealed.

"We're gonna stop this, so nobody else loses," Brockway said.

He is worried not just for the 400,000 teamster pensioners and their retirement in jeopardy, but for other fund groups hoping to use the law to their advantage.

"We can't afford this, and it's not only me, it's 14 hundred different pension plans the multi-employee pension plans, that's 10 million people."

Learn more about the Wisconsin Committee to Protect Pensions here.