If you could make your everyday existence just a tiny bit better every day, your life would be dramatically improved in a year. That’s the goal behind our new series, starting with these 14 tips:

1. GET JUICING



It’s 2014 and you’re desperate to help shake that sluggish feeling you’ve have from drinking too many holiday cocktails and eating countless cookies, pies and cakes. Confession: I ate a pie as a cookie. Bigger confession: I ate it in the car in the grocery store parking lot. But cookie binging was so 2013. You’ve heard a lot about juicing and juice cleanses and like the idea of feeling energized and looking younger, but don’t know where to start.

The topic can be confusing: Fresh juice can make you feel like a superhero, but a five-day, liquid-only diet along with all the conflicting juice information can make you dizzy.

I’ve been juicing for 13 years, and over the last six, I’ve become a 70/30 raw vegetable (including juice) to nuts-fish-and-beans eater, excepting the parking lot pie incident. Here’s what I know.

The theory behind juicing raw vegetables and fruit is that by removing the fiber and consuming the liquid, you give your digestive system a break and can quickly absorb the enzymes, vitamins and minerals.

Some of the benefits of drinking fresh juice include weight loss, mental clarity, better sleep, improved immunity and relief from skin conditions like eczema and rosacea. Sounds good. Though before you run out a buy a juicer, try an organic green juice — not a smoothie with strawberries, ice cream and gummy bears at the bottom, but a raw juice that’s green in colour. The ingredient list should read something like this: celery, cucumber, parsley, kale, lemon, ginger and apple.

If you’re game to drink more green juice, buying your own juicer will save you money. There are two main types. The old-school centrifugal juicer has a fast-spinning blade-and-filter basket that separates the juice from the pulp. Masticating juicers, also known as cold-press juicers, are a newer breed that chew and grind produce at low speeds. A masticating juicer is quieter than a centrifugal, produces more juice, and is better for grasses and leafy greens like parsley. You can also use them to make nut butters, baby food and even pasta.

Avoid drinking too many fruit and carrot juices.

I won’t be making the switch to a masticating juicer anytime soon. I don’t have 10 minutes to make a glass of juice or the patience to chop and feed individual sticks of celery through the machine.

Celery, incidentally is a vegetable that produces a lot of juice because of its high water content. Other high water content fruits and vegetables include, cucumbers, carrots, apples and pears. You can’t juice a banana or a kiwi. (Sadly, I had five banana casualties before I figured this out).

You’re going to find some contrary opinions about my next suggestion, but avoid drinking too many fruit and carrot juices. Yes, I know I just told you about the high juice yield of fruit. But when you remove the pulp from fruit or high-glycemic vegetables like carrots and beets, the sugar (along with the nutrients) gets absorbed into your system quickly. An 8-ounce glass of fresh fruit juice can have 15 grams of sugar. It’s not a news flash: sugar is the devil. Of course, you can use a little fruit to sweeten your juice so it doesn’t taste like you’ve mowed the lawn with your mouth.

On the flip side, you want to avoid making your juice too dark with leafy greens like kale, spinach and dandelion. A good ratio is 25% dark greens to 75% celery, cucumber or carrot. Otherwise, the taste is unbearably bitter; and, you may feel like someone punched you in the stomach. Start with the dark greens and ingredients like ginger or garlic first, and finish with high-water content produce to flush those intense flavors through your juicer.

Drinking green vegetable juice doesn’t mean you should eliminate vegetables from your diet. You need the fiber. If you don’t like eating veggies, another option is to blend them. I know many longtime juice aficionados who’ve become green smoothie converts because of super-blenders like the Vitamix. The convenience of the super-creamy smoothies made from these machines is hard to resist.

As far as full-throttle juice cleanses go, some people love that feeling of “lightness.” Unfortunately, when I’ve tried cleanses for more than a couple days, I miss exits on the highway and dream of my dead childhood cats. But adding just one glass of fresh juice to your day will put a spring in your step. And, because the instant sense of well-being from juice is so addictive, you may get to two or three glasses a day. If you decide to go on a juice cleanse, talk to your doctor and listen to your body. If you start hallucinating about Fluffy and Mr. Whiskers at the office, eat something. Samantha Pynn

2. PAY BY TAP



The life-changing moment came, as they rarely do, at a drive-through window.

I handed my Visa to the young woman to pay my $11-and-change total or whatever it was. She took the card and, rather than insert it in the hand-held machine and return it to me, waved it over the screen for a second. It beeped an approval.

I expressed surprise. What just happened? “Your card can be tapped,” she said. “See?” She pointed to the little graphic on it, which looks like a sideways WiFi logo.

If I am able to hold my credit card over the machine for a moment and earn the beep of freedom, it is as though a small victory has been won

Well, look at that. Having a tap-able credit card was one of those things to which I vaguely aspired, but I had never managed to contact my bank and apply for that capability. Who has time for such luxuries? But my card had recently been replaced — my Visa gets “compromised” a lot, like a certain Mayor who hangs around disreputable sorts — and the new version was fully tap capable.

Huh, I thought. Nifty.

Three months later, I am drunk on tapping. If I make a purchase, and am able to simply hold my credit card over the machine for a moment and earn the beep of freedom, it is as though a small victory has been won. No signature. No PIN number. Boom, done, have a nice day. I am aware that the act of tapping only saves me — maybe — 10 seconds. I do not care. The successful tap feels like I have pulled off an daring art heist.

Because that it is the other thing about tapping: It remains stubbornly elusive. Every shop, every counter has some sort of device that reads credit cards. Not all of them allow me to tap. I curse those that still do not. The lowest form of customer-merchant interaction are those that have devices that say Swipe/Insert/Tap on their LCD screens, but then a sticker pasted on that says DO NOT TAP. A crushing disappointment. You have a tap-capable device, and yet you expect me to insert my card and enter a PIN? Like some kind of CHUMP?

None of it makes sense to me, frankly. What does the tap thingy know that the embedded chip does not? Why does the machine trust the tap implicitly but force the chip to give up a PIN number to prove it is who it says it is?

No matter. Soon, we will be tapping everywhere. My productivity is up a solid 0.02%. That’s arbitrage, baby. And it is glorious. Scott Stinson

3. WHITEN YOUR WHITES



If Walter White were doing your laundry, you can bet your ass this is what he’d be using. No messing around. Ferric hexacyanoferrate. Uh huh. You heard me. A “little tweak of chemistry,” just like fulminated mercury. Boom. A few drops of this stuff, and your whites are whiter than white. Your jeans, inkier than ink. Make no mistake.

So, if you want to up your personal optics, add a bit of this optical whitener to your laundry. On the street they call it Prussian Blue — blue iron in liquid suspension — an optical whitener added to your laundry’s rinse water.

Makes your whites arctic. Your denim, dastardly dark. But go easy: just a drop or two. By the way, you won’t need an intermediary.

Just head into your laundry aisle at the local grocery store. Ask for Mrs. Stewart’s Bluing. It’s been around since 1883. Jane Macdougall

4. EAT COTTAGE CHEESE



I’ll bet you didn’t think cottage cheese was going to be the game-changer of 2014. Well, sport, think again. Do yourself a favour and pick a container for the first time since 1984. Buy 2%, as anything lower tastes weak.

At first glance it’ll look creamy; almost too much so.

Fear not, it’s just 100 calories per half cup yet the rich looks totally deliver. So why are we eating it? Protein, son. That half-cup serving will set you up till lunch. You’ll feel satiated, your bones will strengthen, your skin will radiate health and wellness and you’ll start back up at the gym. That’s the power of cottage cheese, friend. Amy Rosen

5. DIRECT TRAFFIC



The bane of every four-way stop are overly polite drivers who absolutely refuse to move forward, even when invited by other motorists. We’ve all encountered these maniacs: You beckon their Volvo station wagon forward, only to see them wave you forward — thus locking the two of you into an idiotic Mexican standoff of courtesy. Luckily, the solution is to simply adopt a more assertive hand gesture. Point at the driver while looking them sternly in the eyes, and then slowly point in the direction where you want them to go. If they fail to immediately get the message, a slight eyebrow raise can be used for effect. This method, first pioneered by Los Angeles-based podcast host Adam Carolla, has worked 100% of the time for me, even when I’m on a bicycle. Tristin Hopper

6. USE A PENCIL



I am a low-tech guy. When it comes to keeping my schedule, I write appointments in a leather-bound Sun Graphix. My innovation in agenda-keeping is low-tech, too. Last year I found that my commitments were exploding. Not just exploding, but also frequently changing. I found myself one day cutting pieces of paper and gluing them in my agenda, to cover up days whose schedule had completely changed. So I began to write appointments in my agenda only in pencil. That way, when they change I can erase them. The lowly pencil has changed my life. Now, if only I could find a decent pencil sharpener! Peter Kuitenbrouwer

7. DON’T HIT SNOOZE



Sometimes a life hack can simply involve taking conventional wisdom and turning it on its sleepy head. Other times, though, it can involve waging war against the very design of a common appliance, and how it’s become deeply woven into our everyday existence.

Hitting the snooze button a few times on your alarm clock may not seem like a bad, self-sabotaging habit at all (after all, you deserve that extra 10 minutes, right? Or maybe you even set your alarm to account for a few snooze hits every morning?). But even if it may seem innocuous, providing an extra few moments of “peace” and “warmth” in bed, especially during the cold, dark mornings of Canadian winter, it may actually be making you feel a lot more tired than you would if you simply got up the first time. New research by sleep scientists that surfaced in The New Yorker just this month points to some very real conclusions about how we’re actually the source of our own grogginess when we reach for the button designed to delay the inevitable … for just five more minutes for supposed bed bliss.

It might just be the dirtiest trick you’re playing on your own brain to start each and every day

“Sleep inertia” — which to us sounds like The Dark Heart of Anti-Coffee — is actually that overhang of dopey, groggy feelings that can follow us into mid-morning. It’s that moment (or many moments, lasting up to 3-4 hours following wakeup when it’s at its worst), when our bodies are awake, our eyes are open and we’re moving around, but our minds are still long behind, with cognition and its related rational functioning lagging way behind. It turns out sleep inertia, which can feel a lot like jet lag, affects us a lot more (and for a lot longer into the day) if there’s a lot of lingering melatonin (the sleep hormone) in our blood when we rise, and it also turns out that the body tends to have more melatonin left in it when we awake suddenly, or unnaturally, especially from an early stage of sleep.

Now, alarm clocks will likely continue to be a firm part of daily lives in 2014 and for many years to come. “Social jet lag” as Till Roenneberg, a professor of chronobiology at Ludwig-Maximilians University in Munich, calls it, isn’t going anywhere as long as there’s places humans need to be at early hours, money that needs to be made, and morning is a fact of life. Coffee futures aren’t in any danger of plummeting just yet. But, a key finding reported in the New Yorker was that we do make things much harder when we hit snooze after the first jolt. Why? Simple. When you awake to an alarm, grogginess inevitably ensues on some level, since your brain isn’t awaking naturally and slowly to increased light from outside, the healthiest (and often most impractical and decadent) way of getting up. But, at least when the alarm goes off the first time, you’re likely already in the later stages of sleep, if you managed a good bedtime the night before. When you hit that tempting (and often huge) snooze button, however, you reset the sleep cycle, sending yourself back to the beginning of sleep’s stages, and releasing more melatonin. That’s why, when you hear the alarm that second, third or fourth time, it can be even HARDER to get up, since your body is being wrenched not just from a later stage of sleep, but from the beginning stages, when it thought it might actually be headed to a few more hours of rest.

So while a screaming alarm clock on a weekday morning might seem like a curse on circadian rhythms, just keep in mind that the snooze button is no saviour — and it might just be the dirtiest trick you’re playing on your own brain to start each and every day. Jason Rehel

8. BE SEEN



You are — we all are — Princes (and Princesses) of Darkness. We have mastered the art of disappearing into the night. Head to toe, we favour the colour of night for our attire.

Black: it’s so practical, chic and flattering. We combine that sense of style with a, perhaps, uniquely Canadian sense of entitlement: What is fair, what is right — and thereby court our own death.

And yes, I do mean death. It’s a perfect storm of events on our streets: hybrid vehicles, round the clock commerce, densification, and the kicker? Distraction.

More than the customer, we have always held that it’s the pedestrian who’s always right. The pedestrian has the right of way; the pedestrian is sovereign on the streets. But what if I don’t see you? What if you don’t see me?

Pay attention. Walk defensively. Don’t be a statistic

Don’t want to be fender fodder? Here’s something cheap, fast, and easy that you can do.

Buy a length of reflective ribbon. Double it up so it’s reflective on both sides. Pin that ribbon inside both coat pockets. Pull it out when you walk in the dark. Simply tuck it back in when you get where you’re going.

And pay attention. Walk defensively. Don’t be a statistic. Be seen.

And here’s my plug: Visit my site, pedviz.com for more tips on staying safe on two feet. J.M.

9. MASTER WINTER



Last December I was waiting for the cable car at the foot of Japan’s Mount Hakone when four twentysomething Australians stood enraptured by some tiny flakes wafting timidly in the air. Never having seen snow before, they were trying to snap some evidence with their camera phones. Feeling like an expert all of a sudden, I intervened.

“If the snowflakes look like that here,” I said, “they’ll be bigger and fluffier once we get to the top.”

When this proved to be true, the Aussies looked awestruck. This Canadian guy knows his winter, they said. Canadians must be tough, hardy folk who bear the winter with stoic grace and hard-won knowledge.

Which is hilariously wrong, of course. Canadians are bad at winter. Aside from the odd ski trip, we spend it in misery. We slip around on the roads; we kvetch constantly; we go on and on about the wind chill factor. We wear salt-stained Uggs (ugh). We’re so busy grouchily cocooning that we forget to greet winter with wonder, as a child, dog or Australian does. This is terrible flaw in the national character, given that our winters last — what, like, seven months?

I’m not going to bang on predictably about how other nationalities do winter better (oh, I could mention the Finns and their saunas, Norwegians and their Nordic skiing or the Russians and their knack for crushing otherwise unstoppable armies). And Canadians do a few things right. I’m looking at you, Montreal’s pop-up cabanes à sucre.

And you, St. John’s, with your hair-trigger finger on the snow day alarm.

Instead of huddling at home, why not toboggan or organize a game of shinny? Don’t let kids have all the fun

That said, we would be much better at winter if we obeyed three simple rules meant to make us hardier and happier in the face of the inevitable. May we become the snow-heroes those Australians imagined. I, for one, promise:

1. To never complain, even about slush.

2. To never mention the wind chill factor (anyway, it can’t “feel like -30” to you, because if it actually were -30, you’d claim it felt like it was -45. And so on. The whole thing is a logical fallacy. It’s called recursion; look it up).

3. To have fun out there.

Instead of huddling at home, why not toboggan or organize a game of shinny? Don’t let kids have all the fun. And hey, pubs, instead of complaining about slow business, how about throwing pancake parties on the patio? (To say nothing of winterizing your beverage selection — think stout and mulled wine, not pale lager.)

Last month I took a long, awkward step toward mastering winter when I bought snowshoes. I live directly next to Toronto’s 160-hectare High Park, and I’ve been able to use them half a dozen times already. If you take the Toronto subway and you see a red-cheeked, bearded guy carrying dripping snowshoes during morning rush hour, please do say hello.

I even tried winter hike-in camping last March, in -10 weather at Lion’s Head, Ont. I was a little terrified at the prospect. For one thing, it’s possible to die if you do it wrong. For another, one of my friends suffered from hypothermia on an earlier camping trip that I had missed, on a weekend that was much milder. But in the end it was an invigorating if challenging 30 hours in a snowy wonderland, and my buddies and I mostly had the provincial park to ourselves. Which is my point: We shouldn’t have. Adam McDowell

10. WRITE A THANK-YOU NOTE



Oprah would have us all keeping a daily gratitude journal. I’ve never been able to sustain a personal diary, but I can write a thank-you note to make both Miss Manners and Ms. Winfrey proud.

At the One of a Kind Show last month I met Carolyn Verkuyl, the graphic designer behind the new letterpress stationery brand Carolyn Draws. Verkuyl’s line includes a set of colourful notecards for kids, because she starting making the cards to instill good manners in her then seven-year-old son, sitting him down to write thank-yous for his birthday gifts.

Left to my own devices as an adult after years of similarly dutiful childhood scribblings (followed by years of recalcitrant teenage telephone mumblings) of thanks, I had stopped. I don’t remember why, except that I probably thought I had better things to do with my time. In an age where I can dash off “thx!” with a few keystrokes and be done with it, writing a physical note seems willfully archaic.

Considering the zeitgeist of meditation and slow movements, writing a thank-you note is its own brand of mindfulness. It forces me to not only articulate sentiment but (much more importantly) identify what the sentiment is in the first place.

Maybe the thank-you note is the gateway drug to happiness? Whatever it is, thinking and writing them works a little interior magic, an outward sign of an inward change. Like saying grace before a meal, be it ever so humble.

I sit down with a pen and think, not about what I will write, but about what it is I want to say

I have a lot to be thankful for, and the more I write thank-you notes, the more I discover. (That’d be the Aristotle, who suggests — as did my Catechism classes — that moral virtue comes about from the practice of habit.)

It also offers me a regular reset of perspective. At the end of every week I go over my appointment diary to remind me what’s what and to avoid any excuse to turn procrastination into neglect, I keep blank notecards and postage stamps at hand. Pen, ink and nice stationery make it more enjoyable but they’re just accouterments: It could be torn workbook paper and a Bic. This isn’t a case of the medium being the message – it’s not the object mailed that’s the thing: it’s the process.

The first step is: Do nothing at all. Etiquette coaches teach MBA students to fire off a thank-you after every job interview, mailed so promptly it’s practically before they’re out the door. Such perfunctory, formal social courtesies are not what I mean here. (Neither is signing one’s name to the rhyming sentiment of a prefab greeting card.) I sit down with a pen and think, not about what I will write, but about what it is I want to say. For me it’s that moment of pause before setting it down in writing that’s key — a slice of time to find, let alone gather, my thoughts.

As for mechanics, a thank-you after a visit is known as a bread-and-butter letter (also called a “Collins,” for Williams Collins, Jane Austen’s obsequiously proper character in Pride and Prejudice), to thank one’s host for hospitality. Whatever it’s for — to acknowledge appreciation of a gift, a meal, a kindness, friendship — a thank-you note is simple. Think about what exactly it is you appreciate in the gesture. You might include a remark about something specific to the event/thing/visit/person — it can be an anecdote, an observation, a compliment. Waiting a day or so helps the occasion distill itself to one or two salient details — bring one to mind and refer to it directly, whether it’s one of the dishes in the meal or a tangent of the cocktail party chatter.

It’s a thing that is only really learned by doing, just as you can’t be brave without performing an act of bravery. I am more properly and thoroughly grateful when I take the time to express my thanks in writing. Nathalie Atkinson

11. SHAVE BETTER



Yes, you’re in a great hurry. You shave quickly, cheerlessly, scrape scrape scrape with your fat five-bladed chopper and the squirt-from-a-can smelly gel — or worse, pre-fab foam. You have to be somewhere and shaving is not something you want to waste another minute on. It’s a bothersome chore.

You have it all wrong. I messed it up too, and for decades, truth be told. I never liked shaving and avoided it, even on weekdays. I can’t grow a decent beard, so I began wearing several days stubble instead, telling myself that I looked rugged, carefree and cool.

“Are you really going to work looking like that?” my wife asked late last spring, not for the first time.

I opened the bathroom cabinet and there, on my designated shelf, was the same half-used can and that hideous mediocrity, the whisker-tugging plastic disposable from the ubiquitous, duopolistic mega-brand. Thought turned to my cordless electric shaver, the one bought in desperation and which now lives in a closet somewhere. It always leaves my face feeling patchy and burned, and it can’t hold a charge worth a damn. Ugh. Forget it.

So I went online. Search term: Good shave.

Thus began my belated education on proper whisker removal, and what has since become a mild obsession with double-edge wet shaving. Whisker removal, the old school way.

It seems counter-intuitive, but those pricey multi-bladed disposable razors, their high-tech motorized handles and their allegedly ergonomic designs? They just don’t do a proper job. The canned stuff we’ve been using to lather up? Expensive, hard on the skin, just plain bad. So I learned, reading various authoritative shaving sources. The Internet attracts all kinds, including communities of committed wet shavers, men — and a few women — who know how to handle a real razor blade, the kind your grandaddy used.

I was in business within minutes, ordering from a reputable shaving specialist my first chrome-plated double-edge safety razor, and a quality badger hair brush, and a variety pack of platinum-coated blades, made in different factories around the world. I’d just invested close to $100, a fair commitment to something I’d never tried before. Somehow I knew it would work out just fine.

The equipment arrived a week later; by then, I’d already experimented with a cheap drug store brush and a new shave cream, an Italian-made product called Proraso. It comes in several subtle scents and forms, including a large green and white tube found at Shoppers Drug Mart.

A little of this stuff goes a very long way; one pea-sized dollop, 20 seconds of brush work and voila: You’ve got a fluffy, handmade foam that exfoliates the skin as you brush it onto your face.

Combined with a standard cartridge razor, the new product worked better for me than any of the canned for convenience muck I’d previously used.

Here’s the rub: Double edge shaving takes a bit of practice

With a double edge shaver, and a top-notch razor blade, it was something else. A revelation. I’d never had such a comfortable, smooth and close shave. What had taken me so long to get here?

Shaving is no longer a drag. It’s become a pleasant morning ritual, with choices and options galore. One morning, I might apply a pre-shave cream, to soften and prepare the whiskers. Then I’ll decide what razor blade to use. After some testing, first with a Czech-made Derby Extra, then a super-sharp Feather that’s made in Japan, I settled on a Russian Astra Platinum, now my daily go-to razor blade. Each blade comes wrapped in waxed paper, and over that, a paper envelope. Such style.

Bought in bulk — say, 100 razor blades at a time — one Astra Platinum costs about 16 cents, a fraction of the cost of a single multi-blade cartridge. I get about three or four quality shaves from each razor blade. Then it’s time to change.

Drop one blade into the disassembled shaver head. Screw the head pieces back together. Lather up and shave. One pass, with the grain. Lather up again, and take another pass, this time cross-grain. Presto: The best shave you’ve ever had.

Here’s the rub: Double edge shaving takes a bit of practice. You may nick yourself on the first few attempts, before adjusting to the correct shaver angle, learning not to press the device on your skin, allowing the tool to do the work and just letting it glide.

It will consume more of your time. But not much. Six months into wet shaving, I complete the entire process — wet towel pre-shave, lather, two passes and a quick mopping up — in eight minutes. I actually look forward to my shave every day, and I love the result. Best of all, she does, too. Brian Hutchinson

12. UNLOCK YOUR PHONE



Coming home to cellphone-bill sticker shock after international travel is a big enough problem that the CRTC is looking at capping the amount carriers can charge for roaming, but there’s already a surefire way to make sure you don’t rack up big charges for using your mobile abroad: Unlock your phone and use local SIM cards when you travel.

It may sound shady, but there is no computer hacking required. Carriers lock phones to prevent their use on competitors’ networks, but will set you free legitimately for a nominal fee, usually about $50. Once untethered, and provided you have a GSM phone (which most popular smartphones are), you are free to eject the SIM card, which stores your phone number and account information, and replace it with one from the country you are visiting.

Packages are affordable and the cards, which give you a local telephone number, are widely available at telecom shops and convenience stores. On a recent trip to Vienna I skipped Fido’s international data add-on — for $50 I could get 40MB of data, or enough for a day’s worth of Google mapping — in favour of a T-Mobile card picked up at the airport that offered 1,000 minutes of local talk time, 1,000 text messages and 1GB of data (in other words, too much of everything) all for 10 euro, or about $15. Makes for a much better souvenir than that giant phone bill. Jessica Leigh Johnston

13. GET ENGAGED



Crave begrudged respect, handshakes and unexpectedly perceptive conversations about life with men you normally just drink and grunt with during the game’s commercial breaks? Pretty sure your parents don’t take you seriously despite your ability to go to work every day and wear (relatively) clean pants? Solve all these problems by getting a fiancée! Yes, there is a small start-up cost and commitment, but there are numerous side-benefits including, but not limited to: Up to two months worth of “congratulations” drinks, self-validation, extra heat in the winter, newfound long-term planning skills and possible upgrades in the kitchen. Also, life partner. (Note: this life hack is generally only effective once.) Josh Visser

14. WEAR A CRAPPY WATCH



Back from vacation, I’m working my way through the pile of late-December copies of The New York Times stacked up in my front hallway. The news therein is two weeks stale. But I never get tired of checking out those beautiful holiday gift-season wristwatch ads.

Pulling out a December edition of the Times at random, page 2 invites me to consider a Cartier: “Collection starting at $7,400.” On the next page is the Oris “Depth Gauge” 0 at $3,500. Deeper into the A-section, one finds a Longines model, from “The Saint-Imier Collection,” at $4,525. More obscure and prestigious brands also are featured, but without any dollar amount indicated — the implicit message being “If you have to ask ….”

Though you wouldn’t know it from what I now wear on my wrist, this is a world I recognize. When I graduated from university a quarter century ago, my father gave me an ultra-fancy self-winding Swiss watch that was the envy of my young friends. Over the next two decades, I acquired two more watches of similar value — one as a gift, and another in barter with my cousin Danny.

These three specimens — which I rotated monthly for many years, in the same way that a woman might rotate handbags — were a big deal for me. It made my day if a stranger complimented my watch. My wife, meanwhile, wore a $7 wristwatch she’d bought on Canal Street before we got married. I told her it was the equivalent of using a plastic shopping bag as a purse.

One thing I had to admit, though: My wife was punctual. Her battery-operated model, cheap as it was, actually kept perfect time. My fancy Swiss self-winding timepiece, on the other hand, lost 30 seconds per day. If I forgot to reset the time on a regular basis, I could find myself running 15 minutes late by the end of the month.

When I brought the watch into the name-branded repair shop — a suitably impressive place with a guard, lots of glass and attractive young women wearing business suits — I was surprised to learn that this is actually somewhat normal behavior for this particular brand: The sophisticated self-winding mechanism behaves erratically depending on what you do with your wrist (oh, grow up).

It made my day if a stranger complimented my watch

Still, it looked great. Same with the second watch I owned, an Omega Speedmaster (which required hand-winding, and lost a mere 15 seconds per day). My next-door neighbour Craig had the same watch, and we sometimes would just sit there examining each other’s timepieces, assuring each other how cool they were.

But one thing that was uncool was the cost of maintenance. In 2010, I dropped my Omega on a hard tile floor and the bezel fell off. When I brought it in for servicing, I was told that the thing had to be sent to Switzerland, and that it would take six months to get it back.

Oh, and the bill (which I have kept) would be $1,519.85. At the time, this was literally more than the value of the car I drove. But I paid it. In the same year, I also paid $600 in “scheduled maintenance” for the ultra-fancy Swiss self-winder — even after my wife forced me to stop wearing it because I was always late.

That was just three years ago. But watch-wise, it feels like those experiences, those bills, belong to a different human being.

My transformation began a few months ago, when I smashed my Omega against the side of a formica tabletop at Wendy’s, as I was (unsuccessfully) lunging to rescue a cup of chili my child had knocked over. The thing stopped working. There was no way my wife was going to let me spend another $1,519.85 on watch repair. So I put the thing in a drawer, next to the self-winder, and went full-time to my one remaining watch.

That lasted six weeks, until I forgot to take the thing off before getting into the shower. The waterproofing had worn out years ago. It was wrecked, pending another massively expensive repair job.

By this time, the battery in my wife’s $7 Canal Street watch finally had worn out, after yielding her a decade of service. (That’s 0.2¢ per day of watch use, compared to the $1.09 per day in maintenance alone that, according to my calculations, I paid during the same period for my own watch trio.) But that didn’t bother her because she now uses no watch. “I always have a smartphone on me,” she said. “And so do you. If you haven’t noticed, your BlackBerry has a clock.”

I tried that for a month. But I still found myself reflexively staring down at my left wrist every time I wanted to know the time. I needed a new watch.

Then, two weeks ago, as I was walking with my children through a shabby connecting passage between two downtown shopping malls, my daughter pointed to a shoe-repair kiosk and said “Daddy, that man is selling watches.” I ambled over, and saw a dusty display case full of no-name timepieces and other cheap merchandise. Needless to say, I was unimpressed. But my children — too young to know quality from crap — were geared up about the possibility of picking out a new watch for me.

“How much for … that one?” I halfheartedly asked, pointing to the one they liked best. One sticker on the watch announced that it was from China, while another said it had been “assembled” in Singapore. It was a plain silver model, with the brand written in tiny, cramped, illegible script on the watch face.

When I squinted, it kind of looked like a bastardized spelling of Monte Carlo. Murray Carlo, perhaps. Or maybe Monte Camry? I kept squinting: An old instinct told me that I needed to know the brand in case someone asked. “Every watch, $11, battery included,” the man said, in a tone that suggested there would be no tax, no receipt and no returns.

And you know, the thing didn’t actually look that crappy. OK, maybe not worthy of the Saint-Imier Collection, but presentable enough. The shopkeeper handed me the watch, and took my money. And that was it. The watch didn’t come in a big clamshell box with a glossy manual congratulating me on my purchase. There was no warranty card to fill out. No “certificate of authenticity.” Just a thing on my wrist that told the time.

No one noticed that I suddenly had become a guy who wore crap on his wrist — or, if they did, they didn’t say anything about it

And told it accurately, as it turns out, just like my wife’s Canal Street model. I set the time on a Monday, and the thing was off by just a second by the time Friday rolled around. In my entire life, I had never owned a watch this accurate — even if I was somewhat mortified by the stigma of wearing a Murray Carlo to holiday parties where some of my friends would be sporting Rolexes.

As it turned out, my shallow social fears were misplaced: No one noticed that I suddenly had become a guy who wore crap on his wrist — or, if they did, they didn’t say anything about it. As for my wife, she could perceive no real aesthetic difference between my new watch and the old broken ones. Her only interest was how much money I’d “wasted” — and she was pleased that it was a mere 11 bucks.

Of course, there are all sorts of consumer products that exhibit brand-to-brand price variations spanning several orders of magnitude. A cheap purse can cost $10; a super-expensive one, $10,000. But at least, in that case, there really is some difference in quality between the two items — even if the scale of the difference bears little relationship to the difference in price. With many watches, though, it is the opposite: My $11 Murray Carlo is delivering a more satisfying consumer experience than the more expensive (and less accurate) watches it replaced.

And if it breaks tomorrow, I can buy another. In fact, given the $1.09/day I was paying on watch-servicing until recently, I can buy a new $11 watch every 10 days, and still break even. (So far, I have had my new watch for two weeks. I’m already in the black.)

There also is something curiously liberating about wearing a crappy watch. At the gym, I once would rush through my shower routine, eager to get back to my locker to ensure no one was trying to steal that great prize I wore on my wrist. No longer. Shampoo or conditioner? These days, I don’t have to choose.

As for those three fancy watches that once made me so proud, they still have great sentimental value to me, and I will never part with them. All three sit silently in my safety deposit box — awaiting a time when I have the cash available to repair them. If that happy day ever arrives, you’ll know because of the expensive piece of machinery I’m wearing on my wrist.

That, and the fact I’m 10 minutes late. Jonathan Kay