The dog park at Loveland's new Mehaffey Park looks like it is ready for pooches Friday. The park opens Saturday, Aug. 1. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The Larimer Humane Society doesn't want to forget the dogs when Mehaffey Park is dedicated Aug. 1.

The nonprofit will be co-presenting the grand opening of the Mehaffey Dog Park on the west side of the new 69-acre park in northwest Loveland with contests, giveaways, dog adoptions and pet-related vendor booths.

The event will take place from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. at the park, 3285 W. 22nd St.

"It gets people excited and lets people know about us," said Danielle Hastings, marketing and community relations manager for the Larimer Humane Society.

The dog park — a city facility within the larger park of fields, play areas, trails and shelters — covers almost an acre and features shade structures and natural boulders for the dogs to climb. The east side is for shy and small dogs, and the west side is for the rest. There also is water available for the dogs to drink.

"We really hope that the Loveland residents and their furry, four-legged friends will enjoy this for years to come," said Elizabeth Anderson, parks and recreation director for the city of Loveland, adding that urban dog parks fill a niche in recreation amenities. "They need a place to have them off leash and recreate with them."

The Humane Society has planned several activities to mark the dog park's opening. They include:

• 11 a.m. Skippy Scarfdown, a speed peanut butter eating contest for dogs. Each participant receives a plate of peanut butter to see who can clean the plate the fastest. Prizes will be given for the speediest eaters.

"Dogs really love peanut butter," Hastings said. "It's really funny to see them eat it quickly. It slows them down.

Advertisement

• Noon. Doggie Doggelganger, a human-and-dog look-alike contest with prizes.

"I think sometimes people choose an animal that looks like them in appearance or personality," Hastings said.

The nonprofit has offered Skippy Scarfdown and Doggie Doppelganger at its annual Fire Hydrant 5K in the spring and has found them to be popular events, Hastings said.

"This is a fun way to get people to come down and enjoy the dog park and enjoy the friendly competition as well," she said.

Dogs will be available for adoption during the event, and members of the Humane Society's Disaster Animal Response Team and Animal Protection and Control will answer questions about preparing an emergency evacuation kit for pets, licensing and other animal-related issues.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm