By Dr. Michele Libman

Telemedicine is the remote diagnosis and treatment of patients by means of telecommunications technology. This can be through a webcam or SKYPE type set up.

The medical provider who can be located anywhere in the world speaks with the patient and may view a mark or lesion to determine what the problem may be. It seems convenient and you're being treated by what you think is a qualified medical professional, right? Well, maybe ? or maybe not. Here are three potential problem areas with which anyone contemplating telemedicine needs to consider.

1. Electronic glitches. Has your computer ever gone down at an inopportune time? Do you lose power during electric storms, rendering all your "toys" useless? Remember, technology is only as reliable as the electrical current that keeps it running. A power outage or disrupted Internet connection will complicate an online consultation with a doctor. These problems can be on the provider side so you wind up at urgent care anyway after wasting time waiting for answers from telemedicine consultation.

2. Physician resistance. Many doctors have opted out of practicing telemedicine for the time being. They're not comfortable using the new technology. Regulations are not fully in place regarding how the Affordable Care Act's reporting requirements will apply to telemedicine.

3. Inadequate assessment or qualifications. While having the ability to interface with your primary care physician or dentist is a major plus, certain nonverbal cues might still slip through the cracks. Do you really want to be evaluated by a doctor who cannot perform a physical exam, which is necessary to properly diagnose certain conditions?

What I consider an acceptable level of patient care cannot be provided through telemedicine means. If you don't lay your hands on a patient, you may miss something.

In addition, a patient may not see a rash or mark on their back that may change the initial diagnosis. What is first thought to be a simple cold could be the start of a serious disease. If a proper assessment isn't done, like the simple use of a stethoscope or getting an X-ray, your life could be in jeopardy.

Lastly, many doctors practicing telemedicine may be rendering opinions outside their field of expertise or be in a foreign country with no malpractice requirements or substandard medical training.

Nothing can replace certain cues like eye contact, body language and verbal communication in assessing just what is ailing a patient, particularly when there is a history of treatment between the medical professional, his or her staff and the patient. Treating the whole patient face-to-face has always been of primary importance at Treasure Coast Urgent Care and Family Care and Treasure Coast Primary Care. We have no plan to change that philosophy and we encourage you to think twice about telemedicine visits.

Michele Libman, M.D. is board certified in both Internal Medicine and Emergency Medicine. Her practices, Treasure Coast Urgent & Family Care and Treasure Coast Primary Care have offices in Stuart and Port St. Lucie. Visit www.tcurgentcare.com.