<p>This photo taken Sept. 19, 2009, shows the Tennessee state Capitol in Nashville. (AP Photo/Mark Humphrey)</p>

By Richard Locker

NASHVILLE — The new Tennessee Legislature opens its two-year run Tuesday with an agenda of controversial issues that would hit Tennesseans in their doctors’ offices, schools, workplaces and pocketbooks.

That list includes fights over abortion restrictions, a possible gasoline tax hike, tax cuts, school vouchers and Common Core academic standards, guns, and Gov. Bill Haslam’s new health insurance proposal.

The abortion issues come in response to Tennesseans’ ratification of a state constitutional amendment in November that removed abortion rights from the state Constitution and gives the Legislature authority to enact whatever abortion regulations are allowed under U.S. constitutional law. Abortion-restriction bills have already been filed.

Legislative leaders are backing at least three restrictions: a mandatory 24- or 48-hour waiting period before a woman seeking an abortion can undergo the procedure, mandatory pre-abortion counseling and new inspection requirements where abortions are performed.

As a result, lawmakers will be greeted Tuesday by a “Women’s March on Nashville,” whose organizers, a coalition called Healthy and Free Tennessee, say will be attended by hundreds “to send a loud and strong message to our lawmakers that we are watching and ready to take action against any laws that restrict our individual rights and threaten the health of Tennesseans.”

The march will culminate with a rally across from the State Capitol just before the Legislature is gaveled into session.

After that, the opening week is largely organizational and ceremonial, with the swearing in of members and the formal re-elections of state Rep. Beth Harwell and state Sen. Ron Ramsey as the House and Senate speakers on Tuesday and the re-elections of state Comptroller Justin Wilson and state Treasurer David Lillard on Wednesday.

On Friday, officials from all three branches of state government will pack 50,000 meals for food banks across the state as part of a Campaign Against Hunger community service event organized by Senate Majority Leader Mark Norris, R-Collierville, and others.

The week will end next Saturday with the Legislature’s inauguration of Gov. Bill Haslam to a second term.

Legislative leaders then plan to recess the session until Feb. 2, when they will go immediately into a special session called by the governor to consider his alternative Medicaid expansion plan. Harwell and Ramsey said Thursday they expect that session to run a week or two because it will be limited to discussion and action on the governor’s controversial plan.

That means legislative action on all the other issues won’t begin until mid-February. The 2015 session will likely run through late April and possibly into early May.

The 109th General Assembly has the largest Republican majority since the 19th century: 28-5 in the Senate, 73-26 in the House. The majority in the Tennessee Senate, 84.8 percent, is second among the states only to the Wyoming Senate’s 86.7 percent.

But Republicans are deeply divided on some issues, between more traditional business-oriented members and tea party conservatives. Haslam, for example, said Wednesday it will take every Democratic legislator’s vote, plus a share of Republicans, for his “Insure Tennessee” plan to pass.

Harwell acknowledged as much on Thursday that so deeply are Republicans divided on any issue associated with the federal Affordable Care Act, which would fund the governor’s plan.

The special session pushes back the governor’s budget presentation and all the fiscal battles associated with it, including higher tuition on the state’s public campuses.

Haslam and his transportation commission have spoken of the need for more highway funding, but he hasn’t said yet whether he’ll ask for a gasoline tax hike to pay for it. A statewide Transportation Coalition of Tennessee, made up of business and other groups, has formed to lobby for a fuel tax increase, but even though the last state gas tax hike occurred in 1989, it will still face an uphill battle among lawmakers pledged to raise no taxes.

In education, there will be battles over efforts by conservatives to repeal the Common Core state standards in math and English language arts; vouchers, which divert public school funding to pay private school tuition; and how textbooks are chosen.

The Legislature will again consider whether to abolish the authority of city and county governments to ban guns in local parks, and some gun activists are pushing for fewer restrictions on guns elsewhere, including revisions in the 2013 law allowing handgun-carry permit holders to keep guns in their cars at work despite employer policies.

There are also efforts to cut the state’s Hall income tax on certain interest and stock dividends, which Haslam says the state can’t currently afford.