Zach Galifianakis' weed-loving sketch comedy program Between Two Ferns wasn't President Barack Obama's first choice for his Obamacare-themed cameo this spring, duo Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele claim.

In an excerpt of an interview with Entertainment Weekly for it's cover story this week, the Obama impersonator and his anger translator revealed that the president wanted to team up with them to promote the Affordable Care Act, but they were too busy.

'We had to turn him down,' Peele told EW. 'We were making the season.'

'We literally couldn’t fit it in to our schedules,' Key added 'with regret,' according to the magazine.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

Actors Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele, a.k.a. President Barack Obama's anger translator Luther and President Obama, say POTUS wanted to do an Obamacare sketch with them but they turned him down

Instead, Obama appeared on Between Two Ferns with Zach Galifianakis. Key and Peele left the door open to a future collaboration with the president, though

Peele went on to say that he and his acting partner 'actually had to relieve the president of his duties.'

'We couldn’t help him out on that one particular time,' he said, leaving the door open for a future collaboration with the nation's leader when the 2015 open enrollment period for Obamacare begins in November.

'But this is a country where we technically have status over our elected officials. So you gotta remember, Obama works for us,' he noted.

HHS LOWERS EXPECTATIONS FOR 2015 OBAMACARE ENROLLMENT Health and Human Services Secretary Slyvia Burwell sought on Wednesday to downplay a government report claiming that 13 million people will be eligible to for health care under the Affordable Care Act in the upcoming open enrollment period. 'One of things we are doing right now is applying analytics to how should we think about that goal,' she said, according to the LA Times. During the first sign-up period 7.3 million Americans signed up for Obamacare, surpassing the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office's estimate of 6 million. But HHS appears to be concerned that it won't be able to replicate its past success and nearly double the number of enrollees in 2015.

Key and Peele are known for their portrayal of the president's anger translator Luther, played by Key, and President Obama, acted out by Peele, in skits on their Comedy Central show of the same name, Key & Peele.

Last night the show launched into it's fourth season with a skit featuring 'Obama' at the end of a press conference, sans sidekick Luther, code-switching as he takes a different tone with white supporters than he does black supporters as he interacts with them.

Key and Peele told Vulture over the summer that at some point this season they would unveil former Secretary of State and presumed 2016 presidential candidate Hillary Clinton's anger translator on the show, expanding on the popular bit that now includes impersonations of Michelle Obama, as well.

'Whereas Michelle’s translator Contendra felt like she owned a beauty salon, maybe somewhere on Love & Hip Hop: Atlanta, I think Hillary’s translator would be more trailer bait,' Peele told Vulture.