Warren Buffett’s two handpicked investment managers, Todd Combs and Ted Weschler, put out a joint statement Monday cheering AT&T’s $49 billion cash-and-stock deal for satellite TV operator DirecTV.

“This is a terrific transaction for all involved: Enhanced choice for consumers, coupled with increased value for both AT&T and DirecTV shareholders – a natural,” they said.

Indeed, the deal is a win for Berkshire Hathaway if it closes. Berkshire is a DirecTV’s second-largest shareholder, with a stake of 6.85% at the end of March, according to Capital IQ. Although the position, now worth about $2.9 billion, is small compared to the Omaha, Neb. conglomerate’s stakes in companies such as Coca-Cola and American Express, it’s significant because it’s the two managers’ biggest investment.

In his 2012 annual letter, Mr. Buffett said that DirecTV was a combined purchase of Messrs. Combs and Weschler and included the holding in Berkshire’s list of stock positions of at least $1 billion. The stock climbed 34% in 2013, and has steadily risen this year as well, although it’s currently trading about 11% lower than the $95-per-share price AT&T has offered for DirecTV.

The two managers have been building Berkshire’s stake in the satellite TV operator since 2011. Initially, Berkshire owned about 4.3 million shares valued at $180 million, according to FactSet research. At that time, the stock was trading in the $40s, and rose to the $50s over the next two years. The managers continued to build the position until the fourth quarter of 2013, when they owned 36.5 million shares, or nearly 7% of DirecTV, valued at $2.2 billion.

However, during the first quarter of 2014, Berkshire sold off two million shares and currently owns 34.5 million shares, according to its most-recent 13F filing. If the deal goes through at $95 a share, Berkshire will get almost $3.3 billion in cash and AT&T stock from the sale. Given that the cost of purchasing those shares was far lower, Mr. Buffett’s two stock-picker protégés stand to make a tidy profit for Berkshire.

The next question for Messrs. Combs and Weschler: will they keep the shares of AT&T? Berkshire shareholders will need to stay tuned to find out.