With a Republican-controlled House of Representatives that was elected on a message of reining in federal spending, the NTEU's been on alert for any and all legislation that proposes reducing pay and benefits for federal workers. In fact, on the union's website, there's a handy list of 13 active pieces of legislation (all sponsored by Republicans) that the NTEU says it wants to stop. "Warning!" reads the top of the fact sheet. "Which of these bills could hurt you? ALL OF THEM."

The National Treasury Employees Union is an independent union representing, according to its own figures, "some 150,000" federal workers from many different agencies. The union claims to fight for the "dignity and respect" of its members, and it maintains a "legislative action center" to keep tabs on what Congress is up to.

The National Treasury Employees Union is an independent union representing, according to its own figures, "some 150,000" federal workers from many different agencies. The union claims to fight for the "dignity and respect" of its members, and it maintains a "legislative action center" to keep tabs on what Congress is up to.

The Weekly Standard http://assets.weeklystandard.com.s3.amazonaws.com/tws15/images/logo-large.png

The Weekly Standard

2014

Washington, DC

Politics

http://www.weeklystandard.com/federal-employees-union-says-obamacare-could-hurt-members/article/802995

2014-08-15T11:05

2014-08-15T11:05

Federal Employees Union Says Obamacare Could 'Hurt' Members

The National Treasury Employees Union is an independent union representing, according to its own figures, some 150,000 federal workers from many different agencies. The union claims to fight for the dignity and respect of its members, and it maintains a legislative action center to keep tabs on what Congress is up to. With a Republican-controlled House of Representatives that was elected on a message of reining in federal spending, the NTEU's been on alert for any and all legislation that proposes reducing pay and benefits for federal workers. In fact, on the union's website, there's a handy list of 13 active pieces of legislation (all sponsored by Republicans) that the NTEU says it wants to stop. Warning! reads the top of the fact sheet. Which of these bills could hurt you? ALL OF THEM. Among the bills is H.R. 1780, sponsored by Michigan Republican Dave Camp. The NTEU says the bill could hurt workers because it would require most federal employees to leave the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program...and instead join health plans established under the Affordable Care Act.

federal government, Michael Warren, Obamacare, Unions

http://cdn.weeklystandard.biz/cache/280x280-bdcf63390ee4335c7510022252bf2b85.jpg