Topics: aol_on, Congress, The House of Representatives, The NRA, The Republican Party, The Tea Party, Wayne LaPierre, News, Politics News

For the moment, the beltway seems to be to finally be focused on the fact that a rump group of extremists in the House Republican caucus are behaving like… well, extremists.

This is, of course, no surprise to people who’ve been paying attention. After all, 20 years ago, Republicans launched ludicrous witch hunts about alleged ancient Clinton misdeeds in Arkansas and even impeached a president over a sexual indiscretion. In other words, they attempted to overturn a legal election by abusing the oversight power of Congress. That’s pretty extreme. And they so inured the country to their zealotry that, by the 2000 election, their “take no prisoners” tactics in Jeb Bush’s Florida were accepted with barely a protest. The media sagely advised everyone to get over it. And they did.

What’s happened ever since is an inexorable slide toward right-wing fanaticism, so much so that the House of Representatives is now paralyzed by a group of reactionary zealots who simply will not budge, no matter how many people disagree with them or how loathed they are by a majority. It’s a very odd position for the GOP to be in. It has always been known as the more disciplined and mature of the two parties, devoted to hierarchy and order. Those days are long gone.

The modern conservative movement has been on the march since the late 1960s, and it reached the highest levels of power with the election of Ronald Reagan. But it wasn’t until the mid-’90s and the election of Bill Clinton that they started to go a little mad. They had been led to believe that the Reagan era was going to be a 1,000 year reign, and they simply couldn’t accept that a Democrat would once again be president. That it was some baby boomer hippie was simply more than they could bear.

And yet the sad fact remains that, two full decades later, they have yet to pay a price for any of their acts of extremism. So why would they stop?

Sure, since 1995, they have only won the presidency twice (and the popular vote once). But after many decades of being in the minority in the Congress, they have cracked that nut and are now looking at decades of dominance in the House, and probably winning at least half the time in the Senate. Even though they’ve only had two presidential terms out of the last six, they’ve managed to keep the courts much more conservative than liberal. At the state level they are a juggernaut, dominating the majority of them and using their power to turn the laboratories of democracy into little political Manhattan Projects all over the country. They have transformed the media landscape with the help of deregulation and big money devoted to the right-wing cause. Their inability to legitimately win the White House and hold it isn’t something they want exactly, but it isn’t the worst outcome in the world. After all, it’s not as if their agenda has been stymied. Tax rates are still low, the military is still powerful and the religious right is one the move. And after the Bush debacle, they may have realized that only having some of the power means never having to say you’re sorry.

How did they go from being swashbuckling, conservative Reagan warriors wanting to “make America great again” to mutinous revolutionaries determined to bring down the state by any means necessary? There are, no doubt, many reasons for it, from a highly influential demagogic media to the final realignment of the two parties after the civil rights movement. Certainly the ascension of the young Reagan backbenchers, led by Newt Gingrich, put the revolution in warp drive before it careened out of control.

But the recent emergence of the Tea Party right and the intransigent “Freedom Caucus”in the House evinces an anarchistic spirit that even Gingrich couldn’t have imagined. (And he has quite an imagination.) No this slash-and-burn style was modeled elsewhere, by an ultra-successful right-wing institution which continues to flex its muscle today: the NRA.

The NRA had once been a sportsman and safety organization, which took a turn toward the political back in the ’70s, just as the conservative movement was gaining steam. By the ’90s it had transformed itself into a potent political institution which perversely thrived when it was attacked, and built its clout by never giving an inch. Ever.