Arts: The cast of "Do You Know Who I Am?"

Juan Juarez, Victor Galvan, Oscar Juarez, Ana Cristina Temu and Hugo Juarez are the cast of the award-winning theatrical production "Do You Know Who I Am?" playing at the Motus Theater in Boulder. The production is scripted by Kirsten Wilson from monologues written by undocumented immigrants. By sharing their experience, these five immigrants gave a face to the real lives at stake in immigration reform. Nearly 3,000 people in Boulder County have seen the performance since it opened in November 2013. The cast has won two major awards — "People of the Year Award" from the Boulder Weekly and "Peacemaker of the Year Award" from the Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice Center. When they're not touring, working full time, going to school or leading immigration education for Northern Colorado Dreams, the performers support the community in various ways ranging from Toys for Tots campaigns to translating for flood victims.

The cast, from left to right, of "Do You Know Who I Am?": Juan Juarez, Ana Cristina Temu, Victor Galvan, Hugo Juarez and Oscar Juarez. (Courtesy photo)

Business: Angelique Espinoza

As public affairs director for the Boulder Chamber of Commerce, Angelique Espinoza, of Boulder, is the voice of local businesses on policy issues that impact Boulder's economy. She frequently appears before governing boards, advocating for a balanced representation of business interests, social and environmental values. Among issues she has championed are affordable housing, early childhood education, income equality and climate change. She is involved with the Boulder County Democratic Party, Boulder City Council, Impact on Education and The Dairy Center for the Arts among many other groups.

If you go What: Boulder County Community Action Program's 27th annual Multicultural Awards Banquet When: Thursday. Reception, 6 p.m.; dinner, 7 p.m. Where: The Plaza Event Center at the Best Western Plus Plaza Hotel, 1850 Industrial Circle, Longmont Tickets: $65 a person Info: 303-441-3976, 2015awardsbanquet.eventbrite.com or sgoetz@bouldercounty.org Etc.: Keynote speaker is Donna Mejia, a choreographer, director, performer and assistant professor of dance at the University of Colorado

Community Service: Tsunemi Maehara Rooney

Tsunemi Maehara Rooney, of Superior, has served as director of the outreach counseling program at Safehouse Alliance for Progressive Nonviolence (SPAN) since 2003. With a background in teaching at Naropa University and the University of Colorado-Boulder, Rooney is a primary trainer/facilitator for SPAN's social justice and inclusivity training. She has played a key role in developing the cultural competence and social justice perspective that has allowed SPAN to better support survivors of violence as well as providing support and education to the communities. Rooney also has been a leader in developing resources for older adults who are victims of violence by helping to establish the Boulder County Elder Justice Taskforce and conducting intensive training for service providers and law enforcement to help raise awareness about elder abuse.

Education: Olga Cordero

As a counselor at Skyline High School in Longmont, Olga Cordero of Firestone encourages students to reach for their dreams. She explains to parents that they can make possible their children's dreams of higher education, even if they have limited resources. She works with parents on evenings and weekends to help them learn about scholarships, grants and other opportunities to help their children attend college. Cordero attends school and sporting events, makes time to listen to students and helps them successfully navigate high school. As an example of her dedication, more than 20 students asked Cordero to hand them their diplomas during Skyline's 2015 graduation.

Government: Maciel Leon

Click here to read about Maciel Leon

Health: Maya Sol Dansie

Maya Sol Dansie, of Boulder, is a youth specialist with Genesister, a pregnancy prevention program for siblings of pregnant and parenting teens, at Boulder County Public Health. Her focus is working with Latina youth to help them develop healthy lifestyle choices. She volunteers with El Centro Amistad, where she helps lead the youth section of the CumbreCompañeras, and the Colorado Organization for Latina Opportunity of Reproductive Rights. Her volunteer work with Motus Theater and the "One Action Project" highlights the importance of cultural awareness and empowerment in creating a welcoming and inclusive community. Through her work with Genesister, her volunteer work and working on her master's degree in social work, Sol Dansie is a role model, friend, ally, coach and mentor for young Latinas in Boulder County.

Partners: Paula Palmer

An Elise Boulding Peacemaker of the Year, Paula Palmer, of Louisville, is a life-long advocate for peace, human rights, indigenous people's rights and environmental protection. She spent 20 years working with indigenous people in Costa Rica and, from 1996 to 2012, was director of Boulder-based Global Response, which waged campaigns around the world when communities faced environmental threats. In 2012, she became involved in the Indigenous Peoples Concerns committee of the Boulder Friends Meeting that led to the development of a workshop titled "Roots of Injustice, Seeds of Change: Toward Right Relationship with Native Peoples." Palmer has presented this workshop more than 90 times in 18 states and is co-creator of a similar program for middle and high school students, which is offered through the YWCA's Reading to End Racism program. This fall, Paula is traveling the country, researching the history and impact of Native American boarding schools.

Science: Rafael Salgado

As executive director of Cal-Wood Education Center in Jamestown and a board member of Thorne Nature Experience in Boulder, Rafael Salgado, of Jamestown, creates hands-on experiences in environmental science for local youth. At Cal-Wood, he has developed inquiry-based, experiential programs that are highly responsive to the needs of local schools. He is dedicated to making Cal-Wood accessible to all children and collaborates with different schools and organizations to connect Latino families to Colorado's mountains by providing overnight outdoor experiences and bilingual programs.

Youth: Xiuhtezcatl Martinez

Xiuhtezcatl Martinez, a 15-year-old Boulder resident, is passionate about protecting the Earth. As the youth director of Earth Guardians, Martinez uses speeches, presentations and hip-hop performances to make environmental activism relevant to his peers and older audiences. He has earned national and international recognition for his work and became the youngest member of the Presidential Youth Council in 2013. He was chosen President Barack Obama's Youth Activist of the Year and has spoken to the United Nations on three occasions. He also has participated in the Rio de Janeiro Climate Summit and has been featured on HBO, Showtime, PBS and in Rolling Stone magazine.

Source: Boulder County Community Action Program