Topics: Big Agra, Big Pharma, Books, Editor's Picks, FDA, Nutrition, Sustainability News, Business News

Lie: The U.S. Department of Agriculture Knows What Should Be on Your Plate

You know by now that sugar has been pumped into the food chain over the last fifty years, especially in the form of high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS). As a result, there has been a dramatic increase in a whole range of illnesses that manifest in different parts of your bodies, depending on your own genetic profile. All are caused by the same underlying impact of inflammation from sugar, and the resulting nerve damage and compression. Medical professionals can be blinded by the bias of their specialties and miss the important connections linking these seemingly unrelated conditions. But like us, they’re hampered by information linked to the partnership between the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the Big Agra complex.

When the Government Took an Interest in What You Eat

In 1916, the USDA began a well-intended nutrition education program consisting of two publications, “Food for Young Children” and “How to Select Food.” These plans established guidelines for groups and households to provide “protective foods.” Then, in 1992, after several successive programs, the USDA established the familiar Food Guide Pyramid, with its six basic food groups. The base of the pyramid, as we all recall, consisted of the Bread, Cereal, Rice & Pasta Group. Americans were advised that in order to be healthy, they needed to consume 6–11 servings of these foods per day! The pyramid then stacked foods in descending importance: fruits and vegetables, meats and dairy products, and finally, fats and sweets to be used sparingly. A modified MyPyramid Food Guidance System was initiated in 2005; it added the concept of exercise and stressed moderation in food choices rather than specific daily servings.

The latest incarnation, established in 2011, is a dinner plate icon called MyPlate, which advises us on the percentages of foods we should consume daily: 30 percent grains, 40 percent vegetables, 10 percent fruits, and 20 percent protein, with a small, side portion of dairy.

And yet the official government dietary guidelines for healthy eating are dangerously wrong in almost every respect. Like the old food pyramid in its various incarnations, the new food plate is the product of the marriage of politics and Big Agra lobbying—actual nutrition has very little to do with the recommendations. As they stand today, and have for decades, the official recommendations of the USDA are determined by the commercial interests of agribusiness. They’re also the primary reason why two-thirds of all Americans are overweight. They’re why 29 million Americans have type 2 diabetes, another 19 million have it but don’t know it, and 79 million people have prediabetes. They’re also why I never lack for patients suffering from diabetic peripheral neuropathy.

So, what’s wrong with MyPlate? Almost everything. Specifically, the USDA officially promotes a diet that is far too high in carbohydrates and far too low in healthy fat. In other words, your government is promoting a diet that will make you obese, give you a whole slew of illnesses, and kill your nerves.

How Did These Dangerous USDA Recommendations Get Started?

It all started back in the 1950s, when there was an epidemic of middle-aged men dropping dead of heart attacks. The cause, according to the experts, was too much saturated fat in the diet. How did they arrive at this assumption? First, because they knew that a heart attack is caused by a blockage in an artery nourishing the heart. They also knew that atherosclerotic plaques, made up mostly of cholesterol, caused the blockage. And because foods that are high in saturated fat, such as meat, also contain cholesterol, they came to the conclusion, with very little evidence, that a high-fat diet caused heart disease.

Much as I like to see dots connected, the steps that link saturated fat in the diet to a higher risk of a heart attack were unproved then—and they remain unproved. Even so, the saturated fat–cholesterol–heart hypothesis became an article of faith.

But was there actually an epidemic of heart attacks among middle-aged men in the 1950s? No. Instead, there was an epidemic of men aged 50 and up. In 1900, the average life expectancy of an American male was 48 years. Most men died of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, pneumonia, diphtheria, and gastrointestinal illnesses. Accidents of various sorts killed many more men than they do today. In 1900, nutritional deficiencies were fairly common. Pellagra, caused by a lack of the B vitamin niacin, was widespread in the South until the 1930s and beyond.

By 1950, however, the average American male was living into his seventies. Death from infectious disease was way down, due to improved living conditions and the discovery of antibiotics. Death from malnutrition was rare and overall, life was safer and healthier. Many more men were now making it into their fifties and beyond, reaching the prime heart attack years. That means more men were dying of heart attacks simply because more were surviving long enough to have one.

The apparent increase in the rate of heart attacks got a lot of attention, mostly from older white men who were worried about having one themselves (more women die of heart attacks than men, but that fact was largely ignored in the uproar). Then, when President Dwight David “Ike” Eisenhower had a heart attack in 1955, his cardiologist, the famed Dr. Paul Dudley White, blamed the president’s high-fat diet and put him on a low-fat diet instead. (The fact that Eisenhower had smoked four packs of cigarettes a day up until 1949 didn’t seem to cross anyone’s mind as being a likely cause.) When Ike ran again for president in 1956, the low-fat diet was credited for his recovery and ability to return to work. What never got publicized is that Ike hated his low-fat diet. He felt hungry all the time even as he gained weight and his cholesterol continued to rise. He also continued to have heart attacks—six more after leaving office. The last and fatal attack occurred in 1969.

Again, Follow the Money

The supposed link between saturated fats and heart disease was a marketing windfall for the food industry. Suddenly they had a demand for a product that had been pretty unpopular up until then: margarine. In the 1860s, Emperor Napoleon II of France offered a prize for anyone who could come up with an acceptable substitute for butter. Because butter is made from milk, and because cows go dry in the winter, butter in those days before refrigeration was a scarce and expensive commodity. Also, because butter was made by hand on the farm, the quality varied and dairy farmers and retailers were tempted to cheat by adulterating the butter with colorings and flavorings. The prize was won in 1869 by a French chemist named Hippolyte Mège-Mouriès. Alas, the next year saw the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian

War and Napoleon’s abdication; his margarine process, which used beef tallow, never got the government backing Mège-Mouriès hoped for and he died in poverty in 1880.

When hydrogenation, which converts liquid vegetable oils into soft solids, was invented in the early 1900s, margarine became cheaper and easier to produce. It continued to be sold as a cheap substitute for butter, but it was strongly opposed by the dairy industry, for obvious reasons. The industry particularly objected to the use of yellow dye to make the unattractive white margarine look even more tempting than real butter. Margarine gradually caught on as a cheap butter substitute, even though it didn’t really taste much like butter. However, when the saturated fat in butter was named public enemy number one for heart disease, margarine began to be touted as a healthier substitute.

What could be better from a marketing standpoint? Concerned housewives bought margarine to save their husbands from a heart attack—and saved money at the same time! There was just one catch. The manufacturing process that made margarine solid at room temperature did so by changing the molecular structure of the fat molecules. They were warped into something called trans fatty acids, or trans fats for short. Nobody knew it at the time, but trans fats are the only kind of fat that is genuinely bad for your health. Unlike other forms of fat, trans fats have been conclusively shown to contribute to heart disease and diabetes. For decades, the American public was completely duped into eating something that was actually more harmful than what it replaced.

Something very similar happened with lard, once a staple fat for cooking. Scarcity, expense, and adulteration were problems with lard. When a solid white shortening known as Crisco became available in 1911, it caught on quickly. That it, like margarine, was very high in trans fats wasn’t seen as a problem until decades later.

And then a highly respected researcher named Ancel Keys said that he had proved the link from saturated fat to heart disease based on his study of the diets of people in seven countries around the world.