Buy Photo Both Hillary Clinton and Marco Rubio delivered the same overarching theme: I’m the forward-thinking presidential candidate. (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

Both Democrat Hillary Clinton and Republican Marco Rubio said in Iowa last week that their ideas are the ones that will make the country thrive in the 21st century, while their competitors are backward-thinking. Here are the proposals that Clinton, a former U.S. secretary of state, and Rubio, a Florida U.S. senator, laid out during their Iowa speeches:

HILLARY CLINTON

1.ECONOMY: “We’ve got to have an economy that works for everybody.” GOP trickle-down economics doesn’t work, she said. “We’ve tried that. It has failed. It is time to bury it 6 feet deep.”

2. RESEARCH: Invest in research and science instead of cutting back. “What really boosted the economy in the last 35 years or so? Investments the United States government made, in the Internet,” she said. “Yes, the United States government did invent the Internet.” Clinton said the human genome sequencing project was finished soon after her husband’s administration ended, and other investments have led to major discoveries.

3. RENEWABLE ENERGY: “We need also to make ourselves the 21st century clean energy superpower.” Investing in clean, renewable energy will address climate change and create millions of jobs, she said.

4. EDUCATION: Invest in high-quality child care and early childhood education. Use “home visiting” to help kids and young moms. Make college affordable. “It’s outrageous” that Americans hold about $1.2 trillion in outstanding college loan debt, she said.

5. HEALTH CARE: Stand behind the Affordable Care Act. If a GOP president is elected, it will be repealed, she said.

6. FAMILIES: Help people who are both working and raising a family. “We have rules governing how people work and raise families that are out of the 1950s,” she said. “We need paid family leave. We need earned paid sick days. We need predictable work schedules. We need to make sure that we start giving support to families who are doing the most important work they will ever do, which is raising the next generation.”

7. POLITICAL SYSTEM: “We’ve got to fix our dysfunctional political system. Obviously that’s something we all think a lot about.” She said she wants to register every American to vote as soon as they turn 18. She would “stand against these pernicious efforts that are underway in too many states to try to prevent young people, people of color, elderly people from being able to vote.” And she wants to “get dark unaccountable money out of politics,” she said.

8. MARRIAGE AND ABORTION: Stand up for gay rights and abortion rights. “On those two issues, Republicans want to turn the clock back,” she said. “Instead of saying marriage equality is the law of the land, let’s move on to the next part of the agenda, which is ending discrimination against LGBT folks, they’re going to try to fight.”

9. GUNS: “I’m going to speak out against the uncontrollable use of guns in our country because I believe we can do better than that,” she said. “A majority of Americans and a majority of gun owners agree with universal background checks to keep guns out of the hands of domestic abusers and people who are mentally unstable and even terrorists.”

10. IMMIGRATION: “We need comprehensive immigration reform,” she said. The bipartisan immigration bill that Rubio and others in the U.S. Senate passed in 2010 would “be my starting point,” she said. The U.S. is not going to deport the 11 or 12 million people here illegally, she said.

MARCO RUBIO

1. ECONOMY: The U.S. needs to become the best place in the world to do business again, and the chief way to do that is to reform the tax code to set a globally competitive corporate tax rate, he said. “We have the highest combined corporate tax rate in the world,” he said.

2. REGULATIONS: The government has regulations “that are completely out of control and are wiping out not just small business but community banking, which is so critical to small business,” he said. Rubio wants “a hard cap on how much regulations can cost our economy,” to force government agencies to get rid of regulations.

3. BALANCED BUDGET: Balance the budget by reforming Social Security and Medicare. The national debt of $18 trillion will eventually trigger a debt crisis that will make doing business in America impossible, he said.

4. SOCIAL SECURITY AND MEDICARE: Decrease spending on Social Security and Medicare. People who today are in their 40s and younger will need to retire a year later, and their Social Security benefits won’t grow as fast, he said. “Our Medicare might be an option to go out into the private market and find a private plan,” he said.

5. FAMILIES: Help people who are both working and raising a family. Many people can’t get a raise without going back to school for more education, he said. He wants to see more alternatives to traditional four-year degrees, more vocational training, and more college programs with classes at night, online and on weekends.

6. DEFENSE: “We can’t have an American century if we’re not safe,” he said. The United States is still the only nation in the world capable of bringing countries together to confront threats from China, aggression from Moscow, radical jihadists in the Middle East, and Iran’s nuclear ambitions, he said. “Most of the world’s problems cannot be solved without American leadership,” he said.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1IZ7Th1