The Eye

'Real Housewives of Atlanta' Star Phaedra Parks Suing Former Friend For Defamation After Being Labeled as a 'Dominatrix' in Book 'Lies of a Real Housewife'

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook/Real Housewives of Atlanta) Phaedra Parks reveals she's still "close friends" with Kandi Burruss.

There are two things you don't mess with when it comes to "Real Housewives of Atlanta" star Phaedra Parks - Her family and her reputation!



The self proclaimed Southern belle is currently suing her former friend, Angela Stanton, for allegations Stanton wrote against Parks' kinky sexy life in her book "Lies of a Real Housewife."



According to court documents obtained by RadarOnline, Stanton claimed Parks often "dressed up as a dominatrix" and had a "den for S&M," in her home. Parks was insulted by the freaky accusations and is suing her one-time friend for defamation of character for the claims in her book and interviews with Vibe.com.



Parks initially tried to sue Vibe for defamation as well after they published Stanton's S&M claims, however the case was dismissed. Her law suit against Stanton is still ongoing.



While Parks is often seen on RHOA dishing out sex tips and talking rather raunchy with her girlfriends, Parks comments were only intended for girl talk but ended up being discussed in Stanton's book.



"Just about every conversation Phaedra and I had would result in her talking about sex. She would often elaborate about her performance of some type of sexual act," Stanton wrote in Lies of A Real Housewife. "She also shared her personal photo album with me"



As for some of the pictures Stanton referred to, S2S Magazine says Park's S&M pastime could have been ripped right out of the best selling kinky romance novel "50 Shades of Grey."



"There was all kinds of pictures of her dressed up as a dominatrix, bent over, and posing in different positions. I was shocked," Stanton said. "There was a pair of handcuffs attached to the headboard [in her bedroom]. Whips, and freaky-a** underwear were hanging everywhere. This was a den for S&M."



While Parks insists Stanton's written words are all lies, many are speculating if the attorney-turned-funeral-home-director is just trying to keep her respectable southern belle image in tact.



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.