TAMPA — When Sister Helen Prejean first watched the execution of a death-row inmate, it changed her life.

Prejean, a member of the Congregation of Saint Joseph, had begun corresponding with inmate Patrick Sonnier at the Louisiana State Penitentiary in 1982. For two years, she wrote to him, visited him and served as his spiritual adviser.

Prejean was with Sonnier when he was executed by electrocution.

“When I came out of the execution chamber, I vomited,” she said. “I never saw anyone killed.”

The experience prompted her to become an activist against the death penalty. Prejean’s book, “Dead Man Walking,” was adapted into an Academy Award-winning motion picture in 1995, in which she was portrayed by actress Susan Sarandon.

“My story is a simple story,” Prejean said. “It is a story of coming awake and it’s a story of resistance to grace.”

Prejean told her story to about 90 people at the Franciscan Center in Tampa today. She challenged her audience to speak out against Florida’s use of the death penalty.

In 1972, the U.S. Supreme Court determined capital punishment was unconstitutional and struck down all death penalty laws. In 1976, the court overturned its ruling and Florida executions resumed in 1979.

There now are 400 men and five women on Florida’s death row, according to the state Department of Corrections.

Prejean’s presentation was followed by a luncheon and book-signing. Her visit to Tampa concluded several days of events at the center in honor of the Feast of Saint Francis of Assisi, the Catholic Church’s patron saint of animals and the environment. The annual Blessing of the Animals event was held there Wednesday.

“She was very instrumental in the national dialogue of the death penalty and helping shape the Catholic Church’s teaching on the opposition of the death penalty,” said Sister Anne Dougherty, the center’s director. “She continues to counsel people on death row and send the message for Roman Catholics that this is part of our mission, to speak up against the death penalty.”

Patrick Sonnier and his brother, Eddie, were accused of murdering a teen girl and boy, after first raping the girl.

“When I found out his crime, I was so stunned by the evil,” Prejean said during her presentation, which elicited tears from many in the audience. “My first visit to Pat, I was really nervous. I had never talked to anyone who had murdered somebody before.

“(But) there was a dignity in him. That is not all he is. We are all worth more than the worst thing we’ve ever done in our life. That’s why the death penalty is so morally bankrupt.”

Patricia Telford, a nurse practitioner who recently moved to Seminole from New York, described Prejean as a wonderful storyteller.

“It was heartfelt,” Telford said. “I wanted to hear what she had to say. If I were ever called upon as a jury member, I couldn’t go for the death penalty.”

ekourkounis@tampatrib.com

(813)259-7999

Twitter: ErinKTBO