Is this the week for extenders?

With help from Brian Faler

THIS IS THE WEEK. RIGHT?: Stop us if you’ve heard this one before, but it looks like we don’t have any breakthroughs yet on the big deal to make temporary tax provisions permanent. Talks continued over the weekend, and tax writers and congressional leaders will continue to hash it out as the House and the Senate seek a year-end spending deal.

Story Continued Below

There’s a hope among some negotiators that they can wrap up the tax side of negotiations as soon as tonight. But it remains unclear whether Congress will land on the big deal, or the two-year extension of the expired tax breaks. And remember this: There’s no guarantee that lawmakers will beat their new next deadline for funding the government, Wednesday — meaning that the end game for Washington remains unclear less than two weeks before Christmas.

WHAT’S THE HOLD UP?: As Tax Pro Brian Faler reported, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi expressed her distaste for the large extenders deal — likely costing well over a half trillion dollars over a decade — in the clearest terms yet on Friday. Indexing the Child Tax Credit to inflation remains a major concern for House Democrats, well over a week after Senate Democrats dropped that idea as a major demand. “They don’t want to hear about that,” Pelosi said about the GOP.

The minority leader has been using her opposition to the tax extenders deal as leverage, given that Speaker Paul Ryan is going to almost certainly need Democratic votes to pass the omnibus. “It’s too big, it’s unfair and does not have the support of House Democrats,” Pelosi said of the potential tax deal.

Pelosi also seemed to suggest on Friday that the big extenders deal could harm any hopes for tax reform — which is basically the opposite of what many Republicans think.

IT’S MONDAY, and could this actually be Congress’s last week in town in 2015? We know plenty of people that hope so. In the meantime, we hope those celebrating have had a good Hanukkah.

We’ll take your tips even if time is running short on policymaking this year — and maybe even because it is. Email: bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com, bfaler@politico.com and kodonnell@politico.com. Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

KEEP ‘EM SEPARATED: In any event, Pelosi made it clear on Friday that she thought that extenders and the omnibus needed to be separate ventures. She’s not alone: House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy of California said much the same thing, Pro Energy’s Darren Goode reported... (And yes, that header is a ‘90s music reference.)

OTHER HICCUPS: We noted last week that Ryan wasn’t showing any interest in putting an artificial deadline on getting the omnibus done, and that he wouldn’t guarantee that Congress would hit the new Dec. 16 deadline.

Ryan says that’s to make sure the spending deal is done right, but there’s also some frustration among the tax negotiators about the floating deadline for end-of-the-year priorities. It certainly sounds like some of them would prefer to have a hard-and-fast date for when the big tax deal would have to be done.

** A message from the American Suntanning Association: A 10% tan tax was included in the ACA; this tax has shuttered 9,600 small businesses (70% women-owned) and eliminated 81,000 jobs from our economy while only generating 30% of its promised revenue. Repeal cannot wait: abolishing the tan tax must be part of the 2015 tax extenders bill. http://bit.ly/1HUIAON **

ONE LAST THING: Pelosi and House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer of Maryland certainly don’t sound like fans of a major tax deal. But other House Democrats are saying not to be surprised if a deal that would delay the Affordable Care Act’s Cadillac tax, a priority of organized labor, and permanently extended the child credit and Earned Income Tax Credit got a significant amount of support from them — even if the child credit doesn’t get indexed.

“There are a number of items that are being proposed, at least on the periphery, that we have either already voted for or have spoken favorably of,” Rep. Richard Neal of Massachusetts, a senior Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee, told reporters on Friday.

RAISE YOUR HAND: If you thought that a group of accountants could undercut a major bipartisan initiative for the Senate Finance Committee this year. Because the American Institute of CPAs (AICPA) did play a major role in blocking a Senate bill meant to battle tax return fraud, and Tax Pro Katy O’Donnell tells you how.

Some new tidbits: sources say GOP Sens. Richard Burr of North Carolina and Dan Coats of Indiana led the charge in September to delay consideration of the bill, which would give the IRS broader power to regulate paid tax preparers — a major no-no among conservatives who remain angry about the agency’s treatment of Tea Party groups seeking tax-exempt status.

But while it might not have been too hard to gin up GOP anger at the IRS, there are some tax analysts wondering why AICPA is even bothering given that most taxpayers don’t use an accountant to figure out their taxes. But the group doesn’t want to give the paid preparers who don’t have the same sort of raining a “reputational boost,” as Katy put it, from an IRS seal of approval.

Still, even with the Senate bill likely off the calendar until at least 2016, AICPA faces other challenges in keeping the IRS from getting more oversight of paid preparers. There’s a new House GOP bill to give the IRS such powers, raising questions about whether the extenders bill could have some anti-fraud provisions. That’s unlikely, but the very fact that House Republicans have such a bill “underscores the likelihood that such a measure will eventually make it through Congress.” More from Katy: http://politico.pro/1P1Kv5x

DON’T FORGET PARIS: As it turns out, it’s not just folks on the right who are upset about the major climate change agreement recently clinched in Paris. The Guardian notes that James Hansen, a former NASA scientist and an early leader in drumming up action against climate change, called the Paris deal a “fraud” and a “fake” because it didn’t call for a carbon tax.

Secretary of State John Kerry responded to that criticism on ABC’s “This Week” on Sunday: “With all due respect to him, I understand the criticisms of the agreement because it doesn't have a mandatory scheme and it doesn't have a compliance enforcement mechanism. That's true. But we have 186 countries, for the first time in history, all submitting independent plans that they have laid down, which are real, for reducing emissions.”

Kerry added: “The result will be a very clear signal to the marketplace of the world that people are moving into low carbon, no carbon, alternative renewable energy.” http://bit.ly/1Qfv1fB

WHAT’S ON THE BLOCK?: Some of the 50-plus temporary tax provisions whose fate is currently uncertain get more media attention than others (EITC! R&D! NASCAR!). The Wall Street Journal takes a look at another of the extenders — a provision for distressed homeowners that waives taxes on short sales, and how the uncertainty has the real estate industry sweating.

“Realtors argue that the provision remains vital because otherwise homeowners will have an incentive to let their homes go into foreclosure, rather than try to come to an agreement with the bank.” http://on.wsj.com/1QnbglY

YOU'RE INVITED! Playbook Breakfast year-end double-header Tuesday: House Speaker Paul Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell. We'll discuss Ryan's 47 days with the gavel, McConnell's year-long plan to "restore the Senate," and look ahead to 2016 on the Hill and in the campaigns. Jake Sherman joins Mike Allen for the Speaker conversation; Anna Palmer will join for McConnell. Doors open at 7:30 a.m.; program runs 8 to 9. RSVP here; location will come with your confirmation: http://bit.ly/1NY66X2.

STATE NEWS

LITTLE SHORT ON REINVESTMENT: New Jersey has a casino reinvestment authority, which the Philadelphia Inquirer finds has collected a “vast inventory of land tax-exempt under state law.” The problem? A lot of the redevelopment projects for those lands are stalled, starving struggling Atlantic City of needed tax revenue. http://bit.ly/1QFGmUE

TAX-FREE BULLETS: Jerry Costello II, an Illinois state representative, has proposed a measure to ban local governments from implementing their own taxes on guns and ammunition. Costello is a Democrat — and, if that name sounds familiar, his father is former U.S. Rep. Jerry Costello. http://bit.ly/1Z725b7

BROWNBACK SAYS DON’T THINK ABOUT IT: Gov. Sam Brownback of Kansas, who helped push through a controversial tax overhaul for the state, warned legislators there against relitigating those changes. http://bit.ly/220BRt6

QUICK LINKS

Inside Harry Reid's effort to delay the Cadillac tax. http://bit.ly/1Oqtzks

Potential buyers might not be impressed by Yahoo's efforts at a tax-free spinoff. http://usat.ly/1QfH3Wo

DID YOU KNOW?

Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, a noted Bruce Springsteen fan, quoted Springsteen’s “Atlantic City” during a 2012 appearance on NBC’s “Saturday Night Live.”

You’re Invited — Morning Money with Jason Furman: Ben White takes Morning Money live for a conversation on financial reform, the U.S. economy and what it means for your hometown with White House Council of Economic Advisers Chairman Jason Furman. Tuesday, December 15 - Doors at 8 a.m. - The Mayflower Hotel - 1127 Connecticut Ave. NW. RSVP: http://politi.co/1jTIaMT

** A message from the American Suntanning Association: Nearly 10,000 small business owners (70% women-owned) in the tanning salon industry have closed their doors since the 10% tan tax was included in the ACA, and the tax eliminated more than 80,000 women-held jobs. Only 30% of forecasted revenues have been raised, yet 2,000 businesses close annually with 15,000 jobs disappearing. The tax is a net loser. To make matters worse, estimates have found the IRS’ cost to administer the tax is 13 % of receipts collected.

Bipartisan legislation, H.R. 2698, has been introduced to repeal this job-killing tax. Small businesses can’t wait any longer. A provision to repeal the 10 % tax on tanning salon services must be included in this year’s tax extenders bill. Doing so will have the immediate result of halting job losses, boosting economic growth in every state and increasing income and payroll tax collections as an industry is allowed to operate freely again. http://bit.ly/1HUIAON **