Credit: WFAA

The Latest on severe weather hitting parts of the U.S. on Black Friday (all times local):

2:25 p.m.

Search crews have found a third body in floodwaters after record rain deluged the Dallas-Fort Worth area.

Johnson County sheriff's spokesman Tim Jones says deputies responded to a high-water rescue early Friday after three people were swept into the water overnight.

Jones said two people were rescued, but the third person died. Jones said the body was recovered Friday morning near Mansfield, about 18 miles southeast of Fort Worth, but released no other details.

In a separate search effort, crews found the body of 33-year-old Sandra Jones earlier Friday downstream from her vehicle after it was swept into the flooded Rock Creek.

Firefighters in Garland, Texas, found the body of a 29-year-old man inside a submerged vehicle.

Authorities are warning motorists to stay away from rising waters.

10:55 a.m.

Officials say two people have been found dead after their cars were swept away in North Texas floods.

Firefighters in Garland, Texas, found a body inside a submerged Hyundai Elantra early Friday.

Garland fire spokesman Merrill Balanciere says that a search and rescue team was called to the scene about 8:30 a.m., but had to wait for the water to recede before checking the car.? ?The driver's name hasn't been released.

The body of a second person, 33-year-old Sandra Jones, was found downstream from her car in Johnson County west of Fort Worth.

Authorities are still seeking a third person whose car was carried away in a flood in south Fort Worth.

Most of the Dallas-Fort Worth area remains under a flash flood watch, with rain expected to continue.

10:30 a.m.

Authorities say the body of one of two women swept away in fast-moving floodwaters in the Fort Worth area has been found downstream from her car.

Johnson County Sheriff's Office spokesman Tim Jones says emergency services received a 911 call early Friday for a high water rescue at the Rock Creek bridge, west of Fort Worth.

Sandra Jones' vehicle was washed off the road in waters flowing 10 to 12 feet above the banks of Rock Creek.

Around 4 a.m. the water lowered enough for deputies to inspect the vehicle and confirm Jones was not inside.

Crews found the body of the 33-year-old woman just after 8 a.m. on Friday.

Authorities are still looking for a second woman whose car was swept away in a flood in south Fort Worth.

9:30 a.m.

Officials say an elderly motorist is missing after her car was swept away in fast-moving floods over 5 feet deep fueled by record-breaking rain in the Dallas-Fort Worth area.

Tarrant County sheriff's office spokesman Terry Grisham says a 26-year-old deputy was also swept away during an attempt to rescue the motorist in Fort Worth early Friday. A city fire department dive team found the deputy clinging to a tree. The motorist remains missing.

More than 4 inches of rain fell at the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport from Thursday through Friday morning. It has rained 55.23 inches there this year, topping the annual rainfall record of 53.54 inches set in 1991.

National Weather Service forecaster Matt Stalley says rain is forecast through Sunday, with a threat of snow and ice in the Texas Panhandle.