Update at 9:41 a.m.: Dallas Area Rapid Transit says light rail has resumed service between the Mockingbird and Pearl/Arts District stations.

Meanwhile, our Charles Scudder was at the scene and sends back the following:

The 12-story building came down with 553 pounds of explosives in 514 locations inside the first three floors of the building.

Mark Loizeaux, president of Controlled Demolition, Inc., said the company structured the implosion for the weaker, lighter top floors to fall onto the heavier concrete base. That’s why you see in the video the northwest side of the building fall over into the rubble pile instead of straight down.

“It’s a very interesting building,” Loizeaux said. “We restricted our explosives to the lower concrete floors of the building.”

The building was already stripped of most materials, all that came down was concrete and iron, all of which will be recycled. Loizeaux also said the implosion caused less vibration than originally anticipated.

And although the future of the site is still hotly debated — the Sam’s Club planned for the site has been controversial since its inception — Loizeaux said his job was simply to get the building out of the way.

“I know there’s a lot of discussion about what’s going on at this site, our role was simply to clear it,” he said. “I hope that whatever works out that everybody’s pleased with it.”

Update at 8:15 a.m.: As planned, north- and southbound N. Central have re-opened. Replay video above, with many other angles below. That was loud.

Original item posted at 7:08 a.m.: By now you’re likely aware there’s a biggish bang scheduled to take place at 8 this morning along N. Central Expressway near N. Haskell Avenue, where Trammell Crow’s about to implode what remains of the ACS/Xerox building to make way for that East Village Sam’s Club that’s sitting currently under construction in the Fifth Court of Appeals.

But if you haven’t seen our two earlier heads-up, perhaps the third time’s a charm lest you wind up stopped on Central or stuck in DART light rail. Both will grind to a halt ’round 7:30 this morning: Dallas police will bring the expressway to a rolling stop in both directions and close the service roads, while DART’s going to park its trains from Mockingbird Station to the Pearl/Arts District Station until the transit authority can make sure there’s no mud on the tracks (or damage to the Cityplace/Uptown station just beneath the boom).

Right before the explosion we’ll replace the video you see above with a live look at implosion. Then, after, you can relive it to your heart’s content. If that’s what you’re into.