Grand Forks County employee pay scale still under debate

The average salary of a Grand Forks County employee was $41,527, excluding benefits, during the past fiscal year.

Of the 336 county employees, State’s Attorney David Jones earned the most, with an annual salary of $130,403. On the other end is part-time building and grounds maintenance position paying $11 an hour, according to data obtained by the Herald.

With commissioners about to set the county’s annual budget, including its $14 million payroll, determining pay for the bulk of the employees who fall between the high and the low could be controversial in light of an ongoing debate over its pay scale.

The debate has been contentious as issues with the pay scale implemented nearly three years ago have been discussed for the past seven months, but no solution has been found to some employees’ objections.

A pay step plan implemented almost three years ago created compression, meaning less experienced employees get paid the same as those in the same position with more experience.

The Grand Forks County Commission approved a change to the scale at a September 2014 meeting, but pay is still based not on the date employees began working for the county but on when they began working in their current position.

“There's no set way to move people around,” Vicky Hendrickson of the county Payroll Department told the commission at a July 7 meeting. “That's how we find people sitting in a situation like this.”

The commission hired consulting firm Fox Lawson and Associates, but after several options met resistance from county employees and department managers, a committee of employees was appointed to study the issue further.

The county comprises 19 entities including the Sheriff’s Department, Correctional Center, Highway Department and Veterans Services. Part-time and full-time status for employees is mandated individually by department.

The five county Weed Board members only meet once a month but earn the most hourly, at $90 per hour, and the five County Commissioners, David Engen, Tom Falck, Diane Knauf, Gary Malm and Cynthia Pic, each make $17,886 annually.

Pay is set every summer when the commission sets its budget. Finance and Tax Auditor Debbie Nelson said the Grand Forks Employee Association asks for salary increases by predetermined step or for a cost of living increase with the Administrative Services Committee each July.

Nelson said every year is different. Sometimes the association doesn’t ask for an increase, sometimes it asks for too much of an increase, and sometimes it’s granted exactly what it wants, she said.

At an October 2014 open forum, commissioners up for election or reappointment urged county employees to get involved with the process early and bring their concerns before the annual budget is set.

Employee Association President and County Recorder’s Office employee Gwen Nihart said in an email the group collects data with an annual survey to find out what everyone wants.

Negotiator and Sheriff’s Department Deputy Chris Hutton said most of the time, employees want raises but the association has lobbied for other things in the past such as certain paid holidays or other benefits.

“I present information and suggestions of the employees of the county for them to take under consideration,” Hutton said.

Each department has an Employee Association representative, and Hutton fills that role for the Sheriff’s Department.

Hutton said after some turmoil with the change in step plans, the county was supposed to do an annual market pay study to ensure pay level steps are in line with other counties in the region.

As of July 22, Nelson said the market study hadn’t been done. For that to happen, someone would have to ask for it to be considered by the commission for approval, she said.

“It would be up to the commission, and they haven’t approved one,” she said. “So will they? I don't know.”

Grand Forks County Social Services has 84 employees, the most of any department in the county, and about a $4 million payroll. The average annual salary for people working in the department is $47,636.

Social Services Business Manager Lynn Johnson has worked for the county for about two decades and has been with Social Services since the early 2000s. She said the number of employees in Social Services has grown significantly over the years, up from about 60 roughly 10 years ago.

“I would say it's economic assistance,” Johnson said. “It has to do with the Affordable Care Act and Obamacare. More people are eligible for benefits, so that's had an impact. On the other side, in foster care, our numbers have gone up significantly.”

Johnson said about half of the Social Services employees work in economic and public assistance for families, while the other half work more specifically with child care and protection. Some also work with the elderly.

Some salaries are determined a little unconventionally. For example, the Grand Forks Region Base Realignment Impact Committee and Enhanced Use Lease Coordinator Tom Ford has his $46,896 annual salary paid by the county, which in turn is reimbursed by the city for half of it.

Nelson said this is because both the county and city use Ford’s services.

The same goes for Emergency Management Board and the Public Health Department.

Public Health Nursing and Nutrition Supervisor Debbie Swanson said while the budget hasn’t been approved yet, the county is slated to put $490,218 toward Public Health salaries and operations for this fiscal year.

For salaries alone, Swanson said the county covers 33 percent of five employee salaries and 100 percent of two. A number of other positions are covered by state, federal and other sources of funding.

Assistant Emergency Manager Donna Flaten said the five Emergency Management Board members receive $50 per meeting if an emergency meeting is called, and she makes $55,994 annually.

The Water Board is also different in that the County Commission sets those salaries but because of state law the funds to pay the employees come from a mill levy.