Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Residents in north Sterling evacuated due to flooding returning home

Flood water in a field on the northwest side of the intersection of County Road 39 and C.R. 34 Sunday morning.

However, the National Weather Service has extended the flood warning for central Logan County until 11 p.m. Sunday due to reports of continued flooding northwest and north of Sterling. "A spotter 10 miles north of Sterling reported that 4 inches of rain fell (Saturday) from a series of showers and thunderstorms that occurred from late afternoon through the evening hours."

Water flows off a flooded field into the ditch on Pioneer Road Sunday morning. The NWS also has a flash flood watch in effect through this evening for Logan County.The NWS is predicting thunderstorms to hit northeast Colorado this afternoon, with "heaviest rain is expected over the far Eastern Plains where heavy rain has already fallen on Saturday and moisture is greatest." The storm could produce 1 to 2 inches of rain in less than an hour.

"The most sensitive areas will be across Logan County where flooding in ongoing in north Sterling," the watch states.

Advertisement residents in the area of County Roads 36 to 32, between County Road 37 and C.R. 43.5, north of Sterling. Several roads in the area were closed with 8-10 inches of water across some of the roads. The Northeast Colorado Public Affairs Collaborative began issuing alerts at around 10 p.m. Saturday night after authorities determined that the North Sterling Reservoir inlet ditch spillway was over its banks, and there was a possible breach of the Sterling No. 1 Ditch.Pre-evacuation notification calls were made to

As evacuations began, the Sterling Police Department and Sterling Fire Department deployed their large 6x6 rescue vehicles to assist and made several rescues. The American Red Cross opened a shelter at the American Legion Post 20 on the corner of Iris Drive and U.S. 6 at 10:30 p.m. Saturday, and had 27 residents at 2 a.m. This morning, the evacuees had all left for other shelter or to return home, volunteers said. Area restaurants have donated meals for those in the shelter, which will remain open as volunteers continue to monitor the situation.

Mandatory evacuation orders went out at around 1:30 a.m. Sunday for the Globe Meadows trailer park for residents between Pioneer Road and Globe Street in the area between Fillmore Street and Sidney Avenue, according to NPAC. Emergency personnel went door to door to alert residents, and emergency notification phone calls were made.

Pioneer Park was closed Saturday night due to excess water in a small drainage ditch. The NPAC also listed these road closures: · Sidney Avenue, north at Pioneer Road - CLOSED · County Road 25, from CR 38 to Hwy 14 – FLOODED · County Road 26, between CR 27 and 29 - CLOSED · County Road 27, between Hwy 14 and 26 - CLOSED · County Road 29, between Hwy 14 and CR 32 - CLOSED · County Road 30, east to County Road 33 – WATER ACROSS ROAD · County Road 34, west of CR 41 - CLOSED · County Road 34, between CR 35.7 and 43.5 - CLOSED · County Road 39, between 32 and 34 - CLOSED City of Sterling and Logan County residents can still get sand and sandbags by contacting the following agencies; the Crook Volunteer Fire Department (970) 571-3032; the Merino Volunteer Fire Department (970) 466-2460. In Sterling, sand is available at the old county shops located on N. Division Ave. and bags are available at the maintenance shop inside the Logan County Fairgrounds (This is limited to 20 bags per residence at this point.). Sand and sandbags are also available at the Sterling Service Center on Sugar Mill Road, Monday-Friday. There is also sand available for Atwood residents who have their own bags at Highway 63 and 6.

For more information about flooding or to donate to help the Red Cross help local residents affected by disaster like this one, visit www.ColoradoRedCross.org.

As the situation warrants, information will continue to be available on NPAC's Facebook page at www.facebook.com/npacinfo, and on their website at npacinfo.blogspot.com. The public information line has also been set up (970) 466-2871.







The flood waters from the North Sterling Reservoir inlet ditch that prompted a mandatory evacuation on the north end of Sterling overnight had receded enough that residents were able to get back in their homes Sunday morning.