Please enable Javascript to watch this video

MEMPHIS, Tenn. -- Clearing up confusion about your taxes and health insurance!

The tax season officially starts next Tuesday and lots of folks are worried about changes related to the Affordable Care Act.

The On Your Side Investigators break it all down and reveal the one piece of paper for which taxpayers should look.

When WREG visited, it was a quiet day in Kenneth Herron's tax office in Hickory Hill.

Call it the calm before the storm.

"It's different, it's new, it hasn't been done before," says Herron, owner of Readi Tax Solutions.

Herron, who has prepared taxes for a decade and worked for the Internal Revenue Service prior to that, is talking about all of the changes this tax season that came with the Affordable Care Act.

Americans are required to have health insurance and taxpayers must prove it when they file.

The good news is, for most taxpayers, it will simply mean checking a box on their Form 1040.

Herron explained, "The only issue is the taxpayer having the necessary documentation to substantiate their healthcare."

So what documents will you need?

If you have insurance through your employer, there's a code already on your W-2 that shows you have coverage.

If you bought insurance through the Marketplace, be on the lookout for a piece of mail that contains a Form 1095-A, the Health Insurance Marketplace Statement. You should get it by the end of January.

More from the IRS on what you can expect

Herron added, "That tells us that they are covered and what coverage they have."

Folks who got insurance through the Marketplace and also got a tax credit, will have another form to fill out.

If their income changed throughout the year, that could mean paying some of the credit back.

Herron says that will be simple too.

"We will be able to do the calculations to see if they will have to repay."

If you didn't get insurance, you may have to pay a penalty. It's $95 per person or 1% of your gross income, whichever is larger. However, there are exemptions.

While the IRS will start accepting returns January 20th, Herron cautions taxpayers about filing too early.

He says if you haven't received all of the proper documentation in the mail, such as the Marketplace Statement, you could end up having to file an amended return.

How health coverage affects your tax return