An increase in mergers and acquisitions has resulted in greater interest toward Humana Inc (NYSE:HUM) and WellCare Health Plans, Inc. (NYSE:WCG) as acquisition targets for big insurance companies like Anthem Inc (NYSE:ANTM) and Aetna Inc (NYSE:AET).

Humana and WellCare are generating record revenues as the baby boomer generation is aging, thereby causing a dramatic increase in Medicare enrollees. These companies are also benefiting from an expansion in Medicaid coverage under the Obamacare Act.

Kentucky-based Humana has a market cap of $26.7 billion. An acquisition of the company could possibly be the largest acquisition of a US managed healthcare provider in over ten years. WellCare, on the other hand, has a market cap of $4.1 billion, much smaller in size when compared to Humana.

Ana Gupte, an analyst at Leerink Partners, said in a telephonic interview with Bloomberg that many of the large US-based health insurance providers do not have “adequate Medicare and Medicaid exposure [which are] two segments [that] have the most unit growth.” She further said that this particular reason could become the basis of increased mergers and acquisitions-related activity in the industry.

An increase in mergers and acquisitions-related activity would be a stark contrast to the lull time brought on by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, when insurers waited on the sidelines as they evaluated the impact of the regulatory changes on their respective businesses. It comes as no surprise that there were only $1 billion worth of publicly disclosed deals struck in 2013.

Insurers now, however, are under increased pressure to reduce costs of running their businesses, especially in light of the fact that a majority of healthcare reforms have resulted in increased expenses and lower reimbursements. In such times, a consolidation in the industry would bring about synergies and reduce costs of running the business.

A takeover bid could value Humana shares at $222 apiece, marking a premium of 25% on Wednesday's close.

Medicare enrollment has climbed ever since baby boomers — individuals born from 1946 to1964 — have started turning over 65 years of age. The number of enrollees in the program is expected to increase to 68.4 million in 2023, up from 54.4 million this year, as per the data collected by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Medicaid, meanwhile, is expected to add 9.4 million people in the same eight-year period.

These numbers and the vast potential they hold, in terms of increased revenues for companies like Humana and WellCare, have made the two companies extremely viable acquisition targets. Yet another incentive for acquiring these companies is the possibility of cutting costs through consolidating operations.

"It is difficult to get through a conversation about managed care without the M&A topic coming up,” Credit Suisse analyst Ralph Giacobbe pointed out in a report past week. “This has been driven in part by unbashful commentary by management teams citing appetite for deals.”

Could Anthem Really AcquireHumana?

Anthem could also be one potential acquirer, given the fact that earlier this month, the company's chief financial officer Wayne DeVeydt said that the company will possibly continue to add smaller acquisitions similar to its takeover of Florida's Simply Healthcare Holdings Inc. in February; though it is not opposed to the idea of going after a larger acquisition.

“Ultimately, for significant scale, we may have to do something larger,” Mr. DeVeydt said.

Anthem is going to look into expanding its presence in Medicare, given that the company currently only generates three percent of its revenue from Medicare-related programs. The company, as per Mr. Giacobbe, would be less interested in buying a Medicaid provider despite the fact that a WellCare acquisition would bring in an even addition to both its Medicare and Medicaid coverage.