Republican presidential candidates during a debate in December in Las Vegas. (Mark J. Terrill/Associated Press)

If we are lucky, a policy discussion might break out in the middle of the GOP debate. I know, we’re expecting the candidates to go after one another on personal biography and character — which is totally legitimate — but it would also be nice to actually discuss some ideas.

Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) and the kiddie-tabled Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) want a flat tax plus a value-added tax (VAT). New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) have criticized it, and for good reason. As Cato Institute economist Dan Mitchell writes, “[I]t would be a catastrophic mistake to give Washington an additional source of tax revenue. Especially since the European evidence shows that it’s a money machine to expand the welfare state.” It is not merely that the VAT is a hidden tax, although that is a problem. Rather, it is a fundamental error to set up a second revenue scheme while the first one (the income tax is still going strong). It sounds revolutionary to come up with something entirely new, but it has to be new and good. Let the candidates bat that around for a while.

Second, it’s harder to find any free traders in the GOP race these days, although I think Jeb Bush and Rubio still are. It’s a dodge for a candidate to say he just opposes the Trans-Pacific Partnership because it’s a bad deal without spelling out the supposed faults. After that is out of the way how about a healthy argument on the merits of free trade? I realize like immigration reform, it’s been tossed over the side in an effort to pander to know-nothings, but let’s hear the candidates defend their goods and explain what impact its defeat would have on our Asian alliances.

Third, the president ignored the $19 trillion debt in his State of the Union address. Many of the GOP contenders are too. Christie and Bush have concrete plans while Donald Trump thinks everything is hunky-dory. The others should spell out their ideas. Those without ideas should be taken to task. Everyone talks a good game but even Ohio Gov. John Kasich, who pats himself on the back for the 1990s balanced budget, won’t say how he is going to do it this time. Every tax plan a GOP candidate has rolled out comes with an increase in the deficit, so maybe they should fess up that growth and not balancing the budget is what they are really after.

Four, every candidate should be expected at this point to spell out a detailed alternative to Obamacare. What are they willing to spend, and whom do they intend to help? Bush has a detailed plan, but others need to show their cards.

There is no shortage of meaty idea. Several candidates attended the anti-poverty forum last weekend; others did not bother to show. Do Cruz and Trump think fighting poverty is a federal function?

The list of issues is long and there are fundamental differences between serious reformers (Bush, Christie, Kasich and Rubio) and the three others. If you are going to talk about transformational change, it seem incumbent to explain what change you are after, leaving aside the empty rhetoric and ludicrous promises (abolish the IRS!).

Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) is heroically trying to set the table for such serious discussions. But with too many candidates in food fights not bothering to discuss an actual agenda, it makes one wonder if they are ready to govern. At the GOP retreat, Ryan said, “What does 2017 look like if the election goes the way we hope it goes? And that is why we think it’s important for us to offer a positive, solutions-oriented approach and agenda to the American people so that they can choose. They can choose in 2016 what kind of country they want to have.” Ideally the candidates themselves should be doing this, but maybe they can start tonight.

After the debate Right Turn will have analysis and winners and losers.