When evaluating important medical decisions, health care professionals ought to consider what is best for their patients. When evaluating important policy decisions, legislators ought to consider what is best for their constituents.

These two realms are currently converging in Sacramento, where two bills are making their way through the Legislature that would expand the scope of practice of nurse practitioners (Senate Bill 323) and optometrists (SB622). While perhaps well-intentioned, these pieces of legislation pose real risks to the health of Californians.

By expanding the authority of nurse practitioners and optometrists to make key health care decisions and perform medical and surgical procedures that they have neither the qualifications for nor the regulatory oversight to perform, we create the potential for harm to our citizens.

In California, all physicians, including primary care doctors and ophthalmologists, answer to the Medical Board of California, which establishes uniform standards of care and ensures that our residents have confidence that a standard of medical care will be upheld no matter which physician attends to them.

If these bills were to pass, NPs and optometrists would answer not to the Medical Board, but to the Board of Registered Nursing and the State Board of Optometry, respectively. However, none of the individuals on these boards have the requisite experience on the care and procedures that they would be responsible for regulating. Considering the complications that can occur during or as a result of such care and procedures, the lack of appropriate regulatory oversight should be extremely troubling for lawmakers and make both bills nonstarters.

These boards don’t exist for the fun of having them. They play a crucial role in giving Californians every assurance that the care they receive is of the highest caliber. When neither the health care professional performing the procedure nor the board to which they are accountable can adequately evaluate what decisions or actions are safe and effective, then they should not be allowed to critically impact the collective health of Californians. Without reliable and consistent standards, patients are subject to unacceptable uncertainty and risk.

Proponents of SB323 and SB622 have argued (over the past several years) that the ever-growing population of newly insured individuals under the Affordable Care Act requires that health care professionals “do more” to support the additional burden on the health care system. In reality, however, they are asking us to take “shortcuts.” The ACA was intended to improve the quality of health care in addition to access, not improve one at the expense of the other. These bills irresponsibly put the health of Californians on the line by granting practice and surgical authority to individuals underqualified based on education and training.

There have been previous attempts to push these or similar bills through the Legislature, but legislators have smartly rejected them. The fact that they continue to resurface demonstrates a failure to recognize the risks to public safety.

The best interests of Californians are served by voting down SB323 and SB622 yet again.

James J. Strebig, M.D., F.A.C.P. is a board-certified physician practicing in Irvine and the California Medical Association’s Board of Trustees representative for Orange County.