U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson (R-Wis.) speaks at the Waukesha County GOP Pints and Politics event at the Delafield Brewhaus. Credit: Michael Sears

SHARE Affordable Care Act

Special Section: Videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare



By of the

Delafield — If a roomful of Republican supporters is any indication, then U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson may have quite a bit of support among his party's grass-roots in his bid to make Congress pay for health care coverage.

Appearing at a Waukesha County GOP Pints and Politics event Friday night, Johnson received spirited applause when he brought up his lawsuit to block the federal government from helping to pay for health care coverage for members of Congress and their staffs.

"It's no slam-dunk, but it's not frivolous," the Republican from Oshkosh told about 250 people.

Earlier in the week, U.S. Rep. Jim Sensenbrenner (R-Wis.) called Johnson's suit "an unfortunate political stunt."

For his part, Johnson said Congress shouldn't receive special treatment under Obamacare and that President Barack Obama should follow the law.

Johnson objects to a rule issued in October by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management. The rule allows the federal government to continue to contribute to pay the cost of health benefits for members of Congress and their staffs.

"Members of Congress and their staff when they go to the exchanges, they're the only Americans whose employer can make a tax-free contribution," Johnson said. "That's special treatment. That's unfair. That ought to be overturned."

"If President Obama doesn't like the law, if members of Congress don't like that, they ought to change the law," he said. "They have the avenue. They don't go running to President Obama behind closed doors and say, 'Hey, can you take care of this for us?' Which is exactly what he did."

Members of the audience agreed with Johnson.

"I'm for his lawsuit," said Tracy Rath, an interior designer from Pewaukee. "Our government has run amok. You've got Obama breaking rules left and right. If you want to change the law, fine, but do it legally."

Deb Tio, an accounting manager from Erin, agreed.

"We have a system of checks and balances," she said. "Right now, they're not being followed."

Johnson has been a staunch opponent of the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare. His opposition to the law was the centerpiece of his 2010 campaign in which he often brought up the life-saving heart surgery his daughter, Carey, underwent as an infant.

This week, the surgeon who performed the operation, John Foker, told the left-leaning blog Uppity Wisconsin that he was "generally supportive" of Obamacare, and the story went viral.

Foker, who teaches at the University of Minnesota Medical School, told the Journal Sentinel: "I'm generally supportive of having this country provide health insurance to its citizens so people aren't bankrupted having to go to the hospital."

"Health care should be considered a right, and we should figure out how to pay for it," Foker added.

Johnson said: "I have nothing but wonderful feelings about Dr. Foker. I love the man. He saved my daughter's life. I'm trying to save a health care system."

Johnson spoke with the crowd for about 40 minutes and answered a series of questions.

He said he did not favor raising the federal minimum wage because it would lead to fewer jobs. "It may sound callous, but in general you raise the price of labor, you have less jobs," he said.

Johnson blamed the dysfunction in the U.S. Senate on Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.). He said Reid was not interested in "solving the problem" of how to extend unemployment benefits for the long-term jobless. "He's interested in having an election issue," Johnson said.

Johnson told the audience to "stay involved" in the political process and said Republicans are in position to claim the majority in the U.S. Senate in the 2014 elections.

"We have to win elections," he said. "That's what this is all about."