This week, an anti-abortion group released a video from inside a now-closed Planned Parenthood clinic in Clackamas showing an employee giving explicit sexual advice to an "investigator" claiming to be a 15-year-old girl.

The group, Live Action, posted the video on YouTube on Wednesday, and Oregon Right to Life sent out a news release about it Thursday. The groups aim to discredit Planned Parenthood and the Affordable Care Act, arguing that federal funds meant to prevent teen pregnancy are being used inappropriately.

Planned Parenthood Columbia Willamette, in a statement Thursday, tacitly acknowledged that the video is authentic but said it was "highly edited" and taken out of context by a group that opposes its mission.

The "patient" tells the employee that her boyfriend wants to expand their sexual relationship, and the employee answers questions and shares information about role-playing, bondage and various fetishes.

"It just depends on what you're comfortable with," the employee says. "When people get tied up sometimes they use, like, scarves — something easy to do — or ropes. Some people...use actual handcuffs."

While Oregon law allows the secret taping of phone calls, it clearly prohibits the secret taping of in-person conversations, Portland attorney Duane Bosworth said.

Readers had a lot to say about yesterday's story on the video, posting more than 300 comments on Oregonlive.com/politics by Friday morning.

In an online poll, about 43 percent of readers who voted felt the employee acted appropriately, while about 54 percent thought she went too far. The remain three percent marked "other." The responses came from 670 readers as of Friday morning.

Here's a sample of what readers had to say:

@westsidenative: For myself I never mind coming across these type of stories about public debate. Rather than an honest legal fact based discussion many groups, too many, resort to illegal tactics that not only show a total disdain for privacy laws, but more so edit out their "proof" so that any original factual content is removed to show only that which those believe their message is.

People are so far removed from any debate in cases like this that the only thing they are able to do is attack the other side. If the other side isn't presenting enough of a "wrong case" then it's a simple matter of editing the "proof" to make it so you have even more to attack.

All this to avoid finding any real solutions, common ground, or even basic respect for other people. Cases like these are no longer debates, just mindless attacking of those that are "wrong."…

Doc Spector: When someone asks questions at Planned Parenthood (or any other medical service provider) I would hope that what they get is accurate information, thoroughly answering the question. Medical professionals are expected to deal in facts, and not in how "things ought to be". These are facts:

Some minors are sexually active.

Most minors are underinformed, usually deliberately, on questions related to sex.

It would be nice if kids felt comfortable asking their parents about these sorts of questions, but many, possible most, do not.

It is generally* not anyone else's business what sex someone else is having, thinking about having, or planning to have. (*Some exclusions apply. Consult your doctor, your doctor's lawyer, your own lawyer, and also the person you want to have sex with.)

The fact that some people are not really ready for sex may or may not keep from from having sex.

DuckFan83: Forget ethical concerns about abortion or contraception for a second, and overlook the shady way this recording was obtained, this does expose Planned Parenthood for being the perverts that they are. This doesn't really surprise me.

nevetando: …I spent 2 years working at a public health department...The level of ignorance people have about sex, about STIs about pregnancy is absurd and unacceptable. We don't need groups like "live action" harming our children by keeping them stupid, uninformed, and unprotected.

pac10coastie: I am all for planned parenthood and educating the young about sex, but this gal does take it a little to far with a 15 year old girl. teaching her about safe sex is one thing, bondage and pornography is something that should be left to the older and more experienced if it can be helped. I am willing to (bet) this gal posing as a 15 year old was baiting the heck out of her with difficult questions though.

--Ian K. Kullgren