MELBOURNE On Thursday, I attended a breakfast put on by the Melbourne Regional Chamber of East Central Florida.

The guest speaker was Phil Orlando, chief equity market strategist at Federated Investors, a pretty big player when its comes to funds and investments.

Orlando talked a lot of things financial and showed fever chart graphics that made sense to him - and possibly followers of Jackson Pollock - but likely buzzed over a lot of heads, including mine.

But then he started talking about China and what it's doing to reverse its jagged economy. That included cutting the value of currency, slashing interest rates, reversing its one-child-per-family program and adopting its own version of quantitative easing.

"That's an impressive list," Orlando told the audience. "Now are any of those things going to work? The short answer is: I have no freaking clue."

Orlando paused for a round of chortles with his "freaking" - maybe it was "frickin" - comment and I realized that all of a sudden with one word, Orlando, who probably is a financial genius and makes decisions involving billions of dollars, was one of us. It's kind of like finding out Bill Gates clips coupons for $2 off Dr. Scholl's odor-suppressing insoles a Walgreens.

Vice President Joe Biden made headlines when he whispered a profanity in the ear of his boss, President Obama, following the passage of the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: USA TODAY)

Swearing is a tricky thing and the "f" word rises to the top when it comes to the in-artful.

Generally most business leaders, and their employees, aren't supposed to converse like extras in a Quentin Tarantino movie or "talk like sailors." In this day and age of heightened sensitives, I'm not even sure sailors are supposed to talk like sailors.

The general thought is it creates a disturbing work environment and very easily could lead to harassment charges and lawsuits.

Some people can get way with it in way that comes across as endearing while others can't.

Remember a few years ago when Vice President Joe Biden emphasized the importance of Obamacare's passage. Biden whispered to President Obama "this is a big (expletive) deal!" Yes, it was the "f" word.

Had Biden said "This is a big deal" or "This is huge" it wouldn't be that memorable.

Now take the average Bruce going through the drive-up at Wendy's who mutters "Where's my (expletive) double-cheeseburger?" We think tacky and boorishness.

I get it the dilemma. At least once or twice a month, I'll take a phone call from someone swearing at me. I'm polite but in my head I'm thinking "Why did the idiot need to cuss?" And then a few hours later though I might be playing sports and think nothing of slinging some choice profanities like a short-order cook at a New Jersey diner.

Probably for many of us the "f" word rolls off of our tongues much too easily.

One of my New Year's resolutions was to quit swearing.

At 9:42 a.m. New Year's Day, a couple of squirrels were running across the screen on my pack porch causing a tear. I attempted to negotiate with them with a water bottle and then a broom. Didn't work. They kept playing and the rip in the screen grew larger.

My New Year's resolution ended at 9:43 a.m.

Price is Business Editor at FLORIDA TODAY. You can reach him to say "good job" or call him a idiot at 321-242-3658 or wprice@floridatoday.com. You can also find him on Twitter @Fla2dayBiz.

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1Rea19l