Highlight: Pro Bowl cornerback Aqib Talib continues to make plays in practice. This is nothing new.

“Just watch the film,” he said with a smirk. But three interceptions in camp, including a pick-six on Saturday, demand attention. The score didn’t count because cornerback Bradley Roby was offside, but Talib made a perfect read stepping in front of Andre Caldwell. For Talib, coordinator Wade Phillips’ defense plays into his strengths. “It’s simple, straight to the point,” Talib said. “We put a lot of pressure on the quarterback. It lets us get physical with the receivers. And we also get a chance to play with vision.”

Lowlight: The offense failed to gain consistent traction. Safety Darian Stewart said linebacker Brandon Marshall set the tone with his energy and intensity. The offense put the ball on the ground on multiple occasions. Running back C.J. Anderson left with a nicked shoulder. It’s not considered serious, but symbolized a tough day for the offense.

Position battle: Roby is a backup in name only. With the Broncos likely to spend a large chunk of time in nickel coverage, the former Ohio State star functions like a starter. He gave himself a “C” grade for last year’s performance, and is bent on improving and holding his spot over Kayvon Webster. Roby spends extra time after practice working on his hands, and asks plenty of questions of Talib and strong safety T.J. Ward in meetings. “I would be stupid not to,” Roby said.

Quarterback watch: Peyton Manning rolled and ran. It drew a large cheer from the crowd. Coach Gary Kubiak said offensive coordinator Rick Dennison had Manning “running around like he was a much younger man.” Manning made a terrific over-the-shoulder throw to tight end Owen Daniels. Daniels figures to be a reliable target for Manning in the neighborhood of 50-to-60 catches, including several on third down.

Camp facts: Training camp returns Sunday to a two-a-day session. The first practice remains open to the public. It goes from 9:30-11:30 a.m. Crowds have exceeded 5,000 daily. Gates open at 8:30 a.m., with parking by the field house on a first-come, first-serve basis. The stadium bag policy is in effect at training camp.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck