OVERLAND PARK, Kansas -- A fire marshal would likely disapprove of the thousands of voters crammed into a hotel ballroom, overflowing down the hall, waiting for Marco Rubio to begin his rally in the Sunflower state ahead of Saturday's Kansas caucuses.

As the Florida senator took the stage on Friday night with New Mexico Gov. Susana Martinez and former Pennsylvania Senator Rick Santorum (R), the crowd erupted in applause and chanted his name in an uncharacteristic scene for a candidate considered an underdog in the presidential race.

“Before I begin, a public service announcement, because this has been happening at all of our rallies,” Rubio said, his voice cracking as the crowd continued to cheer. “Don’t lock your knees while you’re standing or you’ll pass out. People have passed out, I just wanted you to know,” he added with a smile.

As Rubio launched into his stump speech, it was clear the first-term senator was restraining himself, trying not to wage another personal attack on Republican front-runner, Donald Trump like he had been doing on the campaign trail recently. One of Rubio’s verbal assaults on the business mogul, saying he has “small hands” -- and implying that it extends to other parts of Trump’s body -- took center stage at the GOP Debate on Thursday in Detroit, drawing criticism for lowering the tone of the nationally important occasion.

“I’ve got to take at least one shot, you’ve got to give me at least one shot on Trump, all right,” Rubio said, in an indication that he was attempting to curb the attacks on his main rival on the stump. “Our next commander-in-chief cannot be Donald Trump because he thinks the nuclear triad is a rock band from the ’80’s. I had to do it, it was so fun."

Rubio won just one state on Super Tuesday, leaving the Florida Republican with a nearly impossible path to the GOP nomination.

The junior senator continued to take on Trump a handful of times throughout the evening, sometimes without even naming him, comparing their stances on several issues, while also throwing in some humor.

“I’m taking this campaign seriously. If you go on my website, we have like real public policy,” Rubio said as the crowd burst into laughter. “I know it’s shocking, but we do… on healthcare, I don’t just talk about the lines around the state, I have a real plan to repeal and replace Obamacare once and for all,” he added, in a clear dig at Trump.

Although Rubio has defended making jokes at Trump’s expense, voters in Missouri have noticed he toned down some of his attacks on the billionaire TV star, sticking mainly with comments comparing policy differences on Friday.

“I think his tone cooled down after last night,” said Nathan Ryan, 18, of Pleasant Hill, Missouri. “He got stuck in some fights in the debate that he really shouldn’t have been in. I think he should attack Trump, but keep it on policy.”

Ryan said he’ll continue to support Rubio at the polls on March 15, but took issue with the way he stooped to Trump’s level in lodging personal attacks.