Michael Malone is as competitive and results-oriented as they come. The team’s record never strays too far from the mind of the first-year Nuggets coach.

But there are days when Malone can appreciate the process. Sunday was one of them.

Friday, the Nuggets couldn’t make plays down the stretch in a loss at home to the Brooklyn Nets. Two days later, the Nuggets made all the plays necessary late in the fourth quarter and then in overtime to notch a 116-114 victory over the Dallas Mavericks at the Pepsi Center.

“These are great opportunities for our young players,” Malone said. “Every game we play goes down to the wire. It’s hard to replicate that. What great experiences. I’m just happy we got a win while we’re learning. We’re still a work in progress, but it’s always good to get a win to reward our guys.”

Getting the reward required staying the course and surviving a second-half barrage of 3-pointers. After a first half in which the Nuggets had the 3-point line under control defensively, the second half was a different story.

The Mavericks found open shooters everywhere around the arc, but much of the damage had been done in the corners. They hit 14 3-pointers in the second half and overtime after going just 2-of-10 from the arc in the first half.

“We talked about their small ball, and how we dreaded their small ball,” Malone said. “Very early in the third quarter, they take (center) Zaza (Pachulia) out and they go small. So I had a big smile on my face, saying, ‘Here we go.’ Sure enough, that small-ball lineup is able to generate a ton of 3s.”

But the Mavs couldn’t stop the Nuggets from getting a big steal by rookie point guard Emmanuel Mudiay, who dished to Kenneth Faried for a dunk that tied the game and sent it to overtime.

Then, in overtime, D.J. Augustin took over.

He scored eight of the Nuggets’ 10 points in the extra frame — he finished the game with 12 points.

“I was just being aggressive even though I missed a few shots in the first half,” Augustin said. “My teammates did a great job of helping me.”

Augustin tied the game at 111 on a 3-pointer with 54.1 seconds left in the overtime session. But Dallas’ Wesley Matthews was fouled shooting a 3-pointer with 35.2 seconds left and made all three free throws.

Never one to let an opportunity for a big shot go unchecked, Augustin nailed a 3-pointer with 28.8 seconds left to tie the score at 114. Then, after the Nuggets got a defensive stop, Augustin was fouled with 0.9 seconds to play. He made both free throws. Mudiay blocked a Dallas buzzer shot by Matthews to seal the win.

“He just took it over,” Mudiay said of Augustin. “And when someone is rolling like that, you just have to give it to him. I feel like in overtime it was the D.J. Augustin show, so we were going to ride with him.”

The Nuggets (25-38) had a number of big performances all over the court. Faried produced a monster game, finishing with 25 points and 20 rebounds. Will Barton scored 20 points off the bench. Mudiay finished with 16 points, eight assists, four rebounds, two steals and two blocked shots.

“It’s a much-needed win,” Malone said. “I’m happy for our guys.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost