You probably don't even want to hear this — but if you're past the age of 48, there's almost a 50 percent chance your hearing isn't all that it should be.

It's a huge step, however, between wondering what you might be missing — and compensating in lots of small ways, from unconscious lip-reading to cranking up the TV volume — and actually going to an audiologist for a test.

This can be a daunting process, to sit in a booth with headphones for way longer than you thought possible, listening to strange tones and holding up fingers. Plus, consider the reward you get at the end: more than likely, a pair of hearing devices that can cost every bit as much as a fabulous vacation.

Wouldn't it be nice to know before you make such a leap that your hearing loss is dire enough to make it worthwhile? That, say, if you happen to be a 59-year-old journalist and your livelihood depends on making sure you hear people correctly, it's high time to invest in some job security for your ears.

Well, for the rest of this month, you can take a free, 10-minute phone test that could set your mind at rest — or finally prompt you to start asking around for a good audiologist.

Here's how it works: You dial a toll-free number — (866) 223-7575 — and you will be guided through the test. It's best to have an old-fashioned phone with a separate keypad, rather than a cellphone, because you'll be keying in lots of numbers.

Once you start, you'll hear a pleasant voice reciting three-digit sequences with different levels of background noise. Each time, you'll respond by keying in the three numbers you hear. Or — if you're like me — the numbers you don't hear. The instructions are to make your best guess; if you can't even do that, after a pause you'll hear a different set of numbers.

Once you've tested both ears, you'll be given your results.

The National Hearing Test is offered by Communication Disorders Technology, a company formed by researchers at Indiana University with funding from the National Institutes of Health. They developed the phone test based on one originated by the Dutch, and widely used in Europe.

They're making it free this month as a public service, in hopes that some foundation might step up and fund it permanently — as governments and nonprofits in Europe do now.

"Our experience so far is people don't want to pay anything to take the test, but they will do it if it's free," explains Charles Watson, a professor emeritus of speech and hearing sciences at Indiana. "The cost to have it available to the entire population would be very modest."

Watson and his colleagues first heard about the phone test at an international conference in 2008. His initial reaction: "Nonsense."

"Ever since Alexander Graham Bell, people have aspired to test hearing by telephone," he says. "It's never worked, and the reason is that the standard stimulus for a hearing test has always been a pure tone" — which doesn't travel well over the phone.

American audiologists consider pure-tone testing the "gold standard," Watson adds. But Europeans focus more on the ability to hear voices against a noisy background — and it turned out, Watson says, "that metric correlates remarkably well with the full-scale test you would take at a clinic."

The Indiana team and their Dutch collaborators published a study in 2012 with 90 listeners, comparing the English-language phone test to a full screening. A later test with the Veterans' Administration — on more than "1,500 ears," Watson says — validated those results and has also been accepted by the Journal of the American Academy of Audiology.

Watson's hope is that the National Hearing Test will encourage people to make that trip from their living rooms to the audiologist, and finally get some help.

"Roughly half of all the hearing-impaired people in the United States have never had a hearing test," he says. "Hearing loss can change your quality of life. The sooner it's identified and people do something about it, the better."

As it turns out, I can wait a while on that. The nice man on the phone told me both my ears were in the normal range — for now.