Because timing is everything in politics, Friday’s arrival of a special offer from something called the GOP Store was oh-so appropriate. The e-mail pitched the Republican National Committee’s “brand new travel tumbler” so “you can let ­everyone know that it’s time for America to wake up.”

Sure enough, it pictured a splashy red cup with a stylized elephant over the words “Wake Up America.” By using a promo code, I would get 10 percent off!

But something was missing — there was no price listed. Ten percent off what? It was such an obvious error that I thought the e-mail must be a hoax or a joke.

You know, like the Republican Party itself.

A priceless tumbler is a priceless metaphor for a party leadership that is foolish enough to openly conspire to thwart the front-runner of its presidential field. The meeting where the pashas and pooh-bahs discussed how they could block Donald Trump was described as hush-hush. That makes sense only if you think 20 well-known Republicans could meet in a DC restaurant and nobody would squeal to The Washington Post.

So let’s assume boss Reince Priebus, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and others wanted word to get out that they were aiming to dump Trump. Given that national polls show him with twice as much support as his closest rival, their scheming borders on political malpractice.

It signals that the quaking core of the GOP establishment is more afraid of Trump than of a President Hillary Clinton.

Instead of seeing an opportunity in the fact that Clinton herself is confused about how to handle Trump, his party leaders have decided they can’t stomach him.

To be sure, The Donald has that effect on many people, but most are not Republicans. While the leaders claim to be looking for a winner in November, they are overlooking the fact that no candidate of their liking has been able to command the support of more than a small fraction of the party’s actual members.

It’s not just Trump the leaders don’t like. They are also not fond of Sens. Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, Dr. Ben Carson and Carly Fiorina. In effect, they don’t like anybody that actual GOP voters like.

By deluding themselves that Jeb Bush is going to rise again or that Mitt Romney is available for a draft, the leaders are revealing their ignorance and arrogance. When even the gentle Carson blasts the anti-Trump conclave and threatens to bolt the party if the nominating rules are changed, you know the plotting is a first-class screw-up.

Like it or not, Trump has captured the national mood of “HELL NO” better than anybody else. From illegal immigration to Islamic terrorism to America’s standing in the world, he offers visceral confirmation about voter concerns over decline.

Poll after poll shows that most Republicans aren’t looking for policy white papers; they want somebody who gets their angst and anger. Sizable numbers of independents and Democrats want the same thing.

Sure, Trump can be crude and vulgar and mean and his rogue campaign is way outside any box. But if his flaws are fatal, one of his rivals should be able to put together a march through the primaries and win the old-fashioned way — by getting the most delegates.

For the bosses to try to find a legal trick to manipulate that result would be an act of suicide. They don’t have to embrace Trump, but they should have enough respect for democracy and their own limits to let the process play out.

After all, nobody can say for sure what will happen in Iowa or New Hampshire or anyplace else. But it is certain that making Trump a victim of insider dirty tricks would be the fastest way to boost his outsider appeal.

And that could lead to the worst possible outcome for the party. If Trump is forced out and runs as an independent, it is more likely the Republican nominee would finish third than first, and Democrats would almost certainly win the White House and one or both houses of Congress.

In that event, the pashas and pooh-bahs could fill their unsold crates of priceless red tumblers with beer and have a pity party. They could even do it in public, and nobody would care.

Blasio placing blame on you

Question: How do you know when a politician is failing?

Answer: When he blames his problems on “communications.”

Enter Bill de Blasio. Mayor Putz is so certain he’s right about everything that he’s stumped about why New Yorkers aren’t bursting with adoration and gratitude.

So he’s decided that widespread criticism of his policies on homelessness and affordable housing means that people just don’t understand the facts.

“I’ve got to do a better job of . . . communicating the solutions we’re working on,” he told a TV interviewer. Later, he said that if something is “not getting the kind of response we expected, I start with the assumption we’re not explaining it well enough.”

There is another option. It’s best captured by an old tale about Madison Avenue trying to sell a certain dog food.

Tasked with making a commercial where dogs would be filmed wolfing down the product, the admen had no luck. When even hungry hounds turned up their noses, the admen admitted defeat with honesty: “The dogs don’t like the dog food.”

So it is with de Blasio and his big-ticket solutions to every problem. People live in the here and now and expect City Hall to fix what’s broken. They want a mayor to fill the potholes, catch the crooks and clean the streets.

But that’s not enough for him. Like his idol in the White House, the mayor envisions himself as a Great Transformer. The city must be remade!

His problem isn’t a failure to communicate that vision. It’s that the public doesn’t share it because people don’t trust his leadership.

They see that the results so far are more disorder, chaos and polarization. They don’t like what he’s serving and certainly don’t want more of it.

NY Times putting on a front

Two thoughts about The New York Times boasting that its front-page editorial on gun control was the first time an editorial had been “fronted” in its paper since 1920.

First, that means the paper thinks gun control is more important than anything that happened in World War II, the assassination of JFK, the civil-rights era, Vietnam, the moon landing, the fall of the Berlin Wall, 9/11, Iraq and everything else in the last 95 years.

Second, the claim about making history isn’t even true. Editorials appear on the front page every day. They’re just mislabeled as news stories.

‘Common’ enemies

The easiest way to make sense of the complex recommendations from Gov. Cuomo’s panel on Common Core standards is to realize that the teachers union is celebrating.

That means the changes will be a disaster for education and taxpayers.