"In the past, hospitals have looked to control costs by actively attacking product cost," said ZS Principal Brian Chapman, leader of the firm's medtech consulting practice. "However, reimbursement changes have increasingly tied clinical outcomes to hospitals' bottom line. For medtech, this is great news. It is no longer a zero-sum game where medtech has to lose on price for hospitals to win. Forward-thinking companies are going beyond the traditional arsenal of products, reps and price to help hospitals improve patient outcomes and performance on quality metrics. This can help them to become hospitals' No. 1 ally."

Hospitals skeptical about partnerships with medtech

It is critical that medtech adapt to the new health care marketplace, but many hospital executives remain skeptical that medical device makers can help them improve on quality measures and clinical results, the ZS study shows.

While a majority of hospital departmental stakeholders believe that they can partner with medtech companies to utilize innovative medical technology as well as cutting-edge procedures and treatment methodology, only about one-third of departmental stakeholders believe that medtech can help boost performance on quality measures.

"Medtech companies must prepare for a strategic transformation to better align with hospitals' evolving needs," Chapman said. "Companies that take the bold steps necessary to reshape their portfolios, value propositions and go-to-market strategies will find new ways to effectively work with hospital stakeholders. Moving beyond the role of product supplier to outcome-oriented partner will pay long-term dividends for all involved."

For more information about the 2016 Hospital Leadership Study, download an infographic and a copy of the findings.

About ZS

ZS is the world's largest firm focused exclusively on helping companies improve overall performance and grow revenue and market share, through end-to-end sales and marketing solutions--from customer insights and strategy to analytics, operations and technology. More than 4,500 ZS professionals in 22 offices worldwide draw on deep industry and domain expertise to deliver impact for clients across multiple industries. To learn more, visit www.zsassociates.com or follow us on Twitter and LinkedIn.

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160406/352455-INFO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/study-affordable-care-acts-focus-on-outcomes-provides-opportunity-for-medtech-to-act-as-hospital-partner-not-just-supplier-300247557.html

SOURCE ZS

Related Links

http://www.zsassociates.com