Socialized Medicine: Members of New York’s cultural elite who voted for President Obama are learning that their health insurance plans are being canceled because of ObamaCare. Forgive us for not puddling up.

The New York Times reports that thousands of Upper West Side writers, musicians, actors, photographers, artists, doctors and lawyers are starting to get the same cancellation letters that middle-class Americans across the country have received.

And like other victims of ObamaCare’s unintended consequences, they’re discovering they’re going to have to pay more to get comparable coverage — if they can find it. Many can’t locate their doctors and hospitals on the ObamaCare exchange.

These are the same liberal elite who supported Obama and his takeover of the private health-care sector. During the 2012 presidential race, they derided “cold-hearted” Romney voters critical of Obama’s new big-government entitlements. Now they’re paying for their own idealism, and they don’t like it.

“I couldn’t sleep because of it,” said Manhattan lawyer Barbara Meinwald of her cancellation notice. Her group plan through the New York City Bar didn’t meet the ObamaCare mandates. So now she whines she has to pay $5,000 more for a plan covering fewer doctors.

“It is not lost on many of the professionals that they are exactly the sort of people — liberal, concerned with social justice — who supported the Obama health plan in the first place,” the Times said.

“We are the Obama people,” exclaimed New York writer Camille Sweeney, as if to say, “This shouldn’t happen to us!” She had her Authors Guild plan canceled. Now she is “dismayed,” the Times reports, that neither her pediatrician nor her general practitioner appears on ObamaCare’s exchange plans.

Yes, Ms. Sweeney, that’s what happens when the government tries to control the marketplace.

Many still don’t get it.

“At first they think it’s the association or the insurance company doing it,” an insurance broker said about the cancellations. “We have to explain that this is the Affordable Care Act; that’s what was put into law.”

Meinwald, the lawyer, told the Times she was a lifelong Democrat who supported “better health care for all.” But had she known what ObamaCare had in store for her, she said she would have voted for Mitt Romney.

Another bleeding-heart liberal mugged by reality.