You probably won’t believe me when I say this, but I read my email. And unless I can’t figure out what the correspondent is saying because of creative spelling, I usually respond. Sometimes, it’s just a “thank you” or a “take your meds.” But on other occasions, the writer is so engaged and engaging, I like to initiate an epistolary relationship, which gives me enjoyment, enrichment and every now and then, material for a column.

Which, in fact, brings me to this one.

There is a gentleman out there who makes it a point to engage with me almost every week, telling me where he thinks I’m right, where I’m wrong and where to get off (and I’m not talking about the Media-Elwyn.)

He’s clearly a liberal of the old school FDR mold, but he’s enough of a pragmatist that I’m able to deal with him at a level that is often impossible with the progressive ideologues whose vocabulary is limited to “Bush lied, people died.”

Advertisement

And it occurred to me that some of our conversations have been so good that they should be shared, allowing me to thrill half of you and send the other 50 percent into fits of apoplexy, solid work for a Sunday.

So here is the first in what promises to be a series of occasional “Point-Counterpoints” with my anonymous liberal friend, a lifelong Delco native, who loves his family, his country, his church, and his Wawa, much like your humble columnist. Each exchange will focus on one particular topic, providing at least one more perspective than you usually get in a Flowers column.

And I promise that not once will you hear, “Christine You Ignorant Slut,” except perhaps in the comments section.

This week: Obamacare, or as Antonin Scalia calls it “Scotuscare” (I so want to marry that man … which I’ll be able to when they legalize polygamy next term.)

•

Flowers: So the Supremes, in the person of John Roberts, seem to have put the nail once and for all in conservative attempts to derail the Affordable Care Act. The chief justice held that we need to look at congressional intent when deciding whether a grammatical glitch in the drafting of the legislation justified gutting the law altogether. Refusing to allow it to be undermined by a thesaurus, Roberts wrote that “Congress passed the Affordable Care Act to improve health insurance markets, not to destroy them …I f at all possible, we must interpret the Act in a way that is consistent with the former, and avoids the latter.”

The law as written provided for subsidies to those health insurance customers who purchased insurance on an exchange, but the words “established by the state” were seized upon by critics to try and undercut the law because less than half of the states have actually set up exchanges.

Frankly, I think it was an ingenious strategy by some smart lawyers, but ultimately doomed to failure. As the Chief wrote, consolidating his status as enemy number one in certain conservative quarters, you have to look at what Congress meant and not what they, in their linguistic ineptitude, actually said.

So I’m down with what he did in this case.

But hold on, friends. I’m not too crazy about Obamacare. While the intent was noble, the implementation has been flawed and there are an awful lot of people, me included, who have seen their premiums spike. Many were kicked off their old plans because the insurance companies were forced to include such “necessities” as birth control, which only qualifies as “preventative care” if you consider pregnancy a disease (and I know some feminists do, but that’s another column …)

Then there’s that whole idea that a 26-year-old is a “child” who gets to stay on Mommy and Daddy’s policy, which would be great if that “child” weren’t getting subsidized birth control under the same plan. Frankly, if you’re old enough to have sex, you’re old enough to get your own insurance policy.

What say you, my progressive friend?

•

Dear Counselor, I am sitting here at the Court Diner, on an undisclosed stool at the counter, left of center, keeping a low profile, while I quietly digest your message over my morning oatmeal - Justice Roberts did indeed get it right.

Think of it. All these young folks who might not have carried insurance now do, because otherwise they’ll be penalized. The low-risk pool pays into the system to raise the stakes for the insurance companies. Good for them. Gee, it sounds almost “Socialist” doesn’t it? If it weren’t for the people paying into the system, the insurance companies wouldn’t exist. As for rates that spike, or the policy one wanted to keep was cancelled, that’s nothing new. Perhaps those moaning about the loss of their old policy had a lousy one to begin with.

And what about that outrageous statement, “Health care is not a right.” Really? Tell that to the rest of the civilized world.

Those states that didn’t participate in the exchanges, basically took their ball and went home. Smells political, if you ask me.

I don’t want to get into the birth control debate with you, not over oatmeal. A rational person could say that birth control pills aren’t a medication. I’m no doctor, yet I do know birth control pills are sometimes used to treat medical conditions, like endometriosis (don’t ask how I know that, but I do …). Therefore it should be covered. Morality never stopped a drug company from coming up with a different pill.

I do agree the deployment of the ACA was flawed on many levels But as they say,”Freedom is messy.” Just trying to be consistent.

Oh, and your concern about those young ones able to stay on their parents plan - bravo! That’s the best part of the act. Young people today have a difficult time getting traction in this economy. Just look at how many jobs out there are hour-restricted, so that companies can avoid offering health benefits. These may be go-getters with multiple part-time jobs, but no coverage. They stay at home, save their money (hopefully), and remain on their parents’ plan. Makes sense when you’re one or two paychecks from financial disaster.

After all, if you get sick, you can’t work. Many of us 99 percenters are in that same potential position. Having access to affordable health care lends peace of mind. I cannot wrap my head around why this all had to become political theater. Boy oh boy - for all the attempts of the GOP to cut President Obama off at the knees, he managed to preside over some remarkable accomplishments! I know you have a pipeline to Reince Preibus, and get your daily talking points memo. He must be fuming. How can you top this? And what kind of name is “Reince” anyway?

I await the rabid commenters, those Cheetos-stained keyboard commandos. You know they are out there!

Regards,

Left of Lenin.

•

Well, LOL (Left of Lenin.) You make some good points, particularly about an economy that ties health care to employment. It shouldn’t be that way, and liberals aren’t the only one with compassion for the 99 percent. In fact, an awful lot of liberals are rubbing shoulders with Mitt Romney at the One Percenter Country Club, including Nancy “Don’t Read the Damn Thing Just Pass It” Pelosi.

And maybe the GOP has taken a particular amount of glee in going after the president. As they say, maybe they’re just not into him.

We can agree that no American should be without health care. But this law was put together in the darkness with about as much finesse as Victor Frankenstein’s baby. And conservatives shouldn’t be attacked as heartless for wondering why the poor get helped, the rich don’t need it and the middle class gets skewered yet again.

That would be you and me, toots. ‘Cause we’re in this together. Enjoy the oatmeal.

Warm regards,

Stalin’s Daughter.

Christine Flowers is an attorney and Delaware County resident. Her column appears every Sunday. Email her at cflowers1961@gmail.com.