The Senate Judiciary Committee took a major step last Thursday toward reforming overly harsh federal sentencing guidelines with a 15-5 bipartisan vote.

It took a long time for federal lawmakers to realize that the “get tough on crime” movement of the 1980s and ’90s, while helping push down high crime rates, had regrettable side effects. However, they’ve finally gotten the message.

Imposing tough mandatory minimum sentences is no doubt appropriate for a number of serious offenses, but not for relatively minor, nonviolent drug offenses.

Those sentences did not make the world a safer place and certainly did not reduce the availability of drugs.

Instead, the harsh sentencing for nonviolent offenders helped fill federal prisons. Today, there are 21 times more drug offenders in those prisons than there were in 1980, according to The Washington Post.

A large percentage of those offenders are minority and poor, leading critics to point out both societal and financial costs that have resulted from this punishment regime.

The legislation now moving through the Senate was crafted by senators of both parties, both liberal and conservative, who are disturbed by some of the consequences of the present law.

Specifically, the legislation would cut mandatory minimum sentencing to five years from 10 for some crimes and to 15 years from 20 for others. It also would reduce the “three-strikes” penalty to 25 years from life in prison for nonviolent drug offenders, according to The New York Times.

Some rules would be imposed retroactively, allowing 6,500 inmates sentenced under previous laws to petition for new sentences.

Judges would have more discretion in sentencing and the bill would allow for more programs to be created to help prisoners successfully re-enter society.

This legislation is not going soft on crime. It is being sensible on sentencing.

For too long we have punished nonviolent drug offenders who have little to no criminal past without regard to the individual circumstances of their cases. And the result too often has been punishment that observers across the political spectrum consider unfair and excessive.

The present legislation has been in the works for a few years, but finally appears to be headed for full congressional consideration. Even with a major election looming next year, Republicans and Democrats alike seem to realize that it’s time for this reform.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.