By

The Harvard Business School Club of Wisconsin plans to give four scholarships this year to nonprofit leaders to attend one of two Harvard Business School social enterprise courses.

The courses are "Performance Measures for Effective Management of Nonprofit Organizations," held May 26-29, and "Strategic Perspectives in Nonprofit Management," held July 12-18. Two scholarships will be awarded to each course.

"This is a tremendous opportunity for nonprofit executives to network with peers from around the world, and learn about effective management practices in the nonprofit sector from Harvard Business School faculty," said Art Smith, president of Keystone American Express Travel Services & Arthur Smith Insurance Agency/Farmers Insurance and chair of the Harvard Business School Club of Wisconsin Scholarship Committee.

To qualify, applicants must be the head of a nonprofit organization focusing on human services, health care, arts, education, community development, the environment or a related area.

Since 1998, the Harvard Business School Club of Wisconsin has provided 44 Wisconsin nonprofit leaders with scholarships.

Last year's scholarships winners were Christy Brown, chief executive of Girl Scouts of Wisconsin Southeast; Amy L. Lindner, president and chief executive of Meta House Inc., a provider of mental health and substance abuse treatment; Steven J. Schooler, executive director of Porchlight Inc., a Dane County homelessness organization; and John S. Solberg, executive director of Rawhide Boys Ranch, which provides intensive treatment for at-risk youth in Wisconsin.

This year's winners will be announced at the Wisconsin Business Leader of the Year dinner, sponsored by the Harvard Business School Club of Wisconsin and the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. Proceeds from the annual dinner are used to pay for scholarships.

For a scholarship application, log onto hbs-wi.com or call (262) 782-8767. The deadline for submitting an application is March 4. Winners will be announced by mid-April.