WASHINGTON — In the Republicans’ campaign for the grand prize of the midterm elections, control of the Senate, some party strategists say the key to winning a majority comes down to one word — competence — and voters’ perception that President Obama lacks it. Apparently, that is debatable, even among Republicans.

The year “2014 is going to be defined as a competency election, and which party does a better job of saying they can make the government function,” said Brad Dayspring, a spokesman for the National Republican Senatorial Committee. “Right now, the perception is that it’s doing everything wrong” under Mr. Obama.

To make that case, the Senate Republicans’ campaign committee has for months circulated memos to supporters and reporters with what it says is the latest evidence from polls, pundits and policy controversies attesting to the incompetence of the president and, by extension, the Democratic Senate majority. “The increasingly long list of scandals, crisis and government incompetence (from Benghazi to the I.R.S., Obamacare to the debt, Bergdahl to negotiating with the Taliban, the V.A. to the situation in Iraq) have created an extremely toxic environment for Democrats,” the committee said in a recent email.

There is little dispute that Mr. Obama is a significant drag on Democratic candidates given his low approval ratings, especially in Southern states where many competitive Senate races are unfolding. But even some Republicans say that Mr. Obama’s competence is not this election’s defining issue, or much of an issue at all except among conservatives who have never liked him.

“His problem is that too many people aren’t sure they like where he’s led us, or that they want to go further for two more years,” said Stuart Rothenberg, editor of the nonpartisan Rothenberg Political Report. “They think he’s smart. They do think he’s a little distant and a little detached. But is the problem that he’s incompetent? I don’t think that people think that.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Alex Castellanos, a Republican strategist, said that making competence a campaign centerpiece was “the fool’s gold of politics” — rarely successful.

“Do Republicans really want to make the argument that if only President Obama were a better manager, Obamacare would have been great for the country?” he said. “That our outdated and bureaucratic V.A. system would have run like a clock? Do we really want to make the argument that our sclerotic, paralyzed, overburdened government just needs one guy to manage it better?”

Another Republican strategist, who asked not to be identified criticizing party colleagues, said that raising the question of governing competence could be double-edged for Republicans. Indeed, many Democrats are reminding voters that the Republicans who run the House shut down the government last fall at a cost of $24 billion, according to the Congressional Budget Office, and have repeatedly been divided and dysfunctional, most recently in struggling to pass a bill to address the border crisis.

“Time and time again, House Republicans have shown they are completely incapable of governing,” said Matt Canter, a spokesman for the Senate Democrats’ campaign committee. “Nothing says incompetence like the Republican brand.”

Mr. Canter made the connection to Senate contests in a widely distributed email as House Republicans fought over the border crisis. “The debacle in the House this week is why we’re so excited the G.O.P. is running so many House Republicans for Senate,” he wrote.

Of House Republicans who are candidates in five Senate battlegrounds — Arkansas, Colorado, Louisiana, Montana and West Virginia — the two in Montana and West Virginia are considered all but certain to win seats currently held by Democrats, while the other three are in tight races.

Senate Republican strategists like Mr. Dayspring cite several recent polls as evidence that the results will turn on doubts about Mr. Obama’s competence, chiefly a late-June survey by Quinnipiac University in which 54 percent of registered voters said the president was not “competent in running the government.” In mid-July, 57 percent said “no” when asked in a CNN/ORC International poll if Mr. Obama “can manage the government effectively,” and 53 percent said in a Pew Research Center poll that he is not “able to get things done.”

Yet Andrew Kohut, founder of the nonpartisan Pew Research Center, is among those who say such findings do not suggest that the midterm elections will be a referendum on Mr. Obama’s competence. “The public is unhappy with the performance of both parties in Washington,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

What will shape the results? Mr. Kohut said that all elections were basically a referendum on the times and that, more than five years after the recession and 2008 financial collapse, “we’ve got a chronic case of pessimism.” That leaves Democrats at a disadvantage, he said, despite Republicans’ record-low popularity, since “Democrats are seen as in charge because Obama is the president. I don’t think it’s more complicated than that.”

Voters’ deep frustration with both sides explains why few election analysts, including people in both parties, predict a wave that would wipe out Democrats like in the 2010 midterms (or like 2006, when George W. Bush was president and Republicans lost their House and Senate majorities). Many Democrats argue that no single issue — certainly not Mr. Obama’s competence — is defining Senate races. Instead, they say, the contests are defined by the relative strengths of each candidate and local issues.

“We’re talking about a lot of different elections here, and they’re not all about one thing,” said Mark Mellman, a Democratic pollster whose clients include Senate candidates. Typically, the president’s party loses seats in midterm elections, he said, and to the extent that Mr. Obama is hurting Democrats among voters, “that does not necessarily mean their views of the president’s competence is the reason.” He added, “What it means is that people are much more partisan today.”

Joel Benenson, a pollster for Mr. Obama, said: “The issue in this election is going to be the economic contrast between Democrats and Republicans. And it’s a very strong contrast for Democrats, because Democrats have an agenda and a set of policies that demonstrate they are squarely fighting for working- and middle-class Americans.”

David Winston, a Republican pollster who advises House leaders, gave his party the edge, but he agreed that the midterm elections were “going to come down to one basic issue: jobs and the economy, and who the voters have more confidence in, in terms of what’s being proposed.”

“Competence plays into that: Can you get it done?” he added. “But it’s just a piece.”