BOULDER — Colorado has been waiting all season for somebody to step up and become a fourth scoring option.

After watching 6-foot-7 sophomore forward Dustin Thomas score a career-best 17 points Sunday in an 86-65 Pac-12 victory over Southern California, CU coach Tad Boyle hopes he has found that player.

“Dustin hasn’t shot the ball quite as well as he’s capable of until today,” Boyle said. “Hopefully this can be a springboard and confidence-builder for him. When Dustin shoots the ball well … it gives us another weapon and will make us a much better team.”

Thomas was recruited out of Texarkana, Texas, as a shooter, having averaged 20 points with 48-percent accuracy on 3-pointers as a high school senior. But Thomas connected on just 6-of-33 from behind the arc as a CU freshman and entered Sunday’s game shooting 34.2 percent from the field this season.

He looked like a different player against the Trojans. A highlight was bagging back-to-back treys during CU’s 14-0 run late in the first half that all but clinched the game as the Buffs took a 43-27 lead into the break.

Colorado (9-5, 2-0 Pac-12) delighted a Coors Events Center crowd of 9,866 with 55.2 percent shooting and the Buffs’ second conference victory without Josh Scott, a preseason all-league post player who, once again, watched from the bench because of back spasms. For most of the season, Boyle has needed to rely on his big three of Scott, Askia Booker and Xavier Johnson.

Booker scored a game-high18 points and Johnson added 17. But it was the shooting of Thomas that drew the biggest smiles.

His previous scoring high had been 13 points against Jackson State on Nov. 16, 2013.

“It was a good day for both my team and myself,” Thomas said. “I’ve been in a little slump shooting 3-pointers lately and today I got myself out of that slump.”

CU improved to 6-0 against Southern California (8-6, 0-2) since the Buffs joined the Pac-12 prior. The Trojans are young and were without their best scorer, Jordan McLaughlin (12.7), a flashy freshman point guard who injured a shoulder Friday night in a loss at Utah.

Forced to play “small ball” without Scott, Colorado spread the court, looked to fast break and substituted often. Nine CU players had scored by halftime.

Colorado, which defeated UCLA on Friday night, next plays Wednesday at 10th-ranked Utah. Boyle said he hopes Scott is able to play against the Utes.

“Two good wins without Josh Scott, that’s pretty good,” CU sophomore guard Jaron Hopkins said.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler