The inescapable evidence that the U.S. mental health care system is broken has generated a new burst of interest in mental health, including promoting discredited approaches in the search for easy answers to complex (but solvable) problems. One such proposed remedy is particularly worrisome, in part because of the prominence of a key proponent and its publication in a preeminent medical journal.

Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel was a principal adviser to President Barack Obama's White House (when his brother was chief of staff) in the crafting of the Affordable Care Act. As an oncologist and health policy expert, Emanuel subsequently founded a department of bioethics at the University of Pennsylvania. But here I ask that we turn our attention to a recent op-ed he co-authored in the Journal of the American Medical Association, titled "Improving Long-Term Psychiatric Care: Bring Back the Asylum."



[READ: A Secret Worth Sharing]

While Emanuel and his co-authors did a credible job of depicting the consequences of a broken mental health system (including human suffering, excessive and unnecessary costs, suicide and violence, and homelessness), their solution was to bring back the mental asylums that sprang up in the 1800s in Europe and the U.S. Asylums were then characterized as a method of so-called moral therapy.

Nearly four decades ago, as a young doctor, I wrote about the promise and the failure of these mental asylums of olden days. My paper described the inexorable loss of money, leaders and control over admissions and policy coupled with overcrowding and ideological drift that doomed these once-humane institutions. This unfortunate failure was repeated in the 20th century, leading asylums to become the "snake pits" of that time. We don't need to repeat our mistakes again in the 21st century.



[READ: A Crisis in Our Jails]

Today, I am a psychiatrist and the chief medical officer of the largest state-run system of mental hospitals in this country. New York has 23 longer-term psychiatric hospitals, with well over 3,000 patients in them – adult, child and forensic patients (criminally indicted or convicted people with a mental disorder). Not only do I know from history, I know from day-to-day experience the limits of longer-stay (months or longer) hospitals, even though they are necessary for some patients. And in April of this year, my friend and colleague Linda Rosenberg, CEO of the National Council for Behavioral Health, invited me to her organization's annual meeting to debate the value of bringing back asylums with Emanuel.

Romanticizing the asylum, when done by a prominent health care expert like Emanuel, risks diverting attention and vital resources (i.e. money) from the current, mounting efforts to build an adequate community mental health system, which has yet to happen in the wake of the 1963 Community Mental Health Act, signed into law by John F. Kennedy. We also need to develop alternatives to institutionalization for people (including incarceration) with mental disorders and to increase the supply of community housing, rather than warehousing the mentally ill in hospitals, nursing homes and adult homes. Let's be real – there is not sufficient new or additional money to build a responsible and responsive community based mental health system, but we might succeed by repurposing some of the huge sums we now spend on institutional care to finally realize the vision of the Community Mental Health Act.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Congress]