By Steve Grasty

Many of us in Eastern Oregon have invested thousands of hours in preventing a new endangered species listing — the greater sage grouse — that could be devastating to rural Oregon's communities. Many conservation groups, soil and water conservation districts and citizens have been involved. Private land owners have voluntarily designed and begun implementing conservation agreements with the federal government on more than 500,000 acres. Ranchers have committed to continue to manage their land in positive ways. The Bureau of Land Management has completed its plan, and the governor's grouse effort has worked towards a solution. We will end up with an Oregon plan doing the things that make healthy lands and healthy communities — a real success story for all.

The grouse will benefit from this collaborative effort. The threats in Oregon are described by the federal government as weeds, fire and juniper encroachment. In Harney County, a collaborative group worked with the BLM to address juniper encroachment. A plan was developed, the community and neighbors supported the project, investments were made and work started. In the face of this effort, one conservation group filed litigation arguing against the methods and size of the project. Seven years later, the juniper in the entire project is still awaiting removal. While the litigant acknowledged that the project was an ecosystem restoration project, it chose litigation over ecosystem restoration. The plan included the use of off-road vehicles for removal of juniper; the conservation group argued that mechanized vehicles should be banned. Apparently the group thought the project could continue without off-road vehicles. The sheer magnitude of equipment needed to be hand-carried into the site physically precludes or makes it uneconomical to do the project.

The community in Harney County had to question why. We collaborated, we identified the need to address the juniper encroachment, we had all the parties at the table and we were working to improve rangeland health, so why litigate? Is part of the issue for the group the involvement of a wilderness study area? Juniper removal will increase wilderness characteristics. Perhaps the group will suggest removing juniper with fire, but I caution not to suggest fire in Eastern Oregon in light of the recent loss of dozens of homes in Grant County.

The court agreed with the litigant and forbade the BLM from using mechanized equipment to remove juniper. Is this what Congress intended in the Steens Mountain Cooperative Management and Protection Act when it emphasized the need for juniper removal? Now 80,000 acres of juniper removal is unlikely to move ahead. Sage grouse habitat will not be restored.

Will litigants say "we won" in protecting wilderness when the real message is, "We have created so many special designations that we have effectively abdicated land management?"

Our communities, our landscape and our wildlife deserve better. Communities are maintaining the ecology we enjoy, and our residents are the ones doing the restoration work. Should single groups use litigation to control land management in opposition to science-based ecological restoration? In rural Oregon we need your assistance; we are overwhelmed by professional litigators who take away from communities and the environment. Please consider getting involved.

Two questions we might consider:

1) Is it time to demand Congress set a standard as to what actions can and cannot occur within wilderness study areas, particularly as we deal with endangered species?

2) Are we satisfied with a process where litigation is driving land management decisions on public land?

We are going to stop ecological restoration in the name of making a legal point. You have to be kidding me!

•

Steve Grasty is a Harney County judge.