Timothy Payne of Longmont, owner of Farmer Girl and the Tasterie Truck. (Courtesy photo)

Timothy Payne of Longmont buys and sells a lot of food. His Farmer Girl company is a food enterprise that has the goal of promoting and using local, organic and sustainable ingredients. He is also the owner-operator of The Tasterie Truck, a food truck that operates in Boulder County. In addition, Payne does catering and farm dinners. We caught up with Timothy to discuss farming and supporting the local economy.

1. Where do you get the bulk of the food for your businesses?

Farmer Girl relies very heavily on local farms. During the growing season, the menu for the truck tries to use local farms exclusively for vegetables. Farmer Girl uses local farms for beef, pork, chicken and eggs year round.

2. What are the reasons you prefer to go local as opposed to the larger markets in town?

There is a big difference between agribusiness produce and local farms and the farmers market. First, the relative "ripeness" of the produce is always better. The food does not have to be transported very far, so it can be picked and shipped when it is ripe. That is not the case for produce at the supermarket, it comes from several hundreds or in some cases thousands of miles away. To get it here, it cannot be ripe or it will be bruised or not in "aesthetically" pleasing condition. Secondly, there is a huge carbon footprint shipping produce like that.

3. So obviously local is very important to you...

I feel it is very important to support local farms. Local farms pay a more "liveable" wage than produce coming from agribusiness, which pays very low wages, mostly to migrant workers. You are keeping money in the local economy, and no I do not count supermarket chains in the same category as a local independently owned farm. These local farms take care of the land and the environment. This is very important in the long term.

4. Do you think there are enough local farmers in the county to support the demand?

This is a good question. I do think there are enough local farms to support the existing demand. I am not sure whether the existing farms could support the additional demand, but I do know if there is additional demand, more farms will start and many would expand operations.

5. Where do you get your product during the winter months?

During the winter, Farmer Girl primarily uses an organic produce company in Denver called Grower's Organic, which supplies organic produce year round in the winter most of it comes from the West Coast and northern Mexico.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel