Leading pro-life groups warned from the beginning that Obamacare would lead to rationing — whether it be through “death panels,” or a reduction in care for elderly or terminally ill patients, or higher costs for patients. Now, one man with leukemia is losing his health insurance entirely.

Moreover, his doctor may cost him as much as $26,000 to see — a sum of money this middle class man just can’t afford. President Barack Obama said Americans could keep their health insurance if they wanted to under Obamacare, but it appears that may not be the case.

From the story about this Arizona resident:

A Fountain Hills man says he may soon have to get another job just to pay for healthcare insurance under the new Affordable Care Act. Michael Cerpok, is a high school drop-out, one of six kids born to a school teacher, and doesn’t come from a wealthy family. He has run two businesses for more than 25 years and says he may have to do more to literally stay alive. “I’ve worked hard because I’ve had to, and I’ve had to, because cancer runs in my family,” says Cerpok, who picked his current health insurance based on that family history. His monthly premium is just about half of his monthly take-home pay. Back in 2006, he found out he had an incurable form of leukemia that requires ongoing treatment until he dies. In 2012, his treatment bill was more than $350,000. But because of his insurance, his out-of-pocket was only $4,500. That’s about to change because Michael just got a letter from his insurance carrier saying as of January 1, he would be dropped from coverage because of new regulations under Obamacare. His doctor at the Mayo Clinic may be gone as well. “Now it doesn’t mean I can’t go see my current doctor, but my $4,500 out-of-pocket, is going to turn into a minimum of $26,000 out-of-pocket to see the doctor that I’ve been seeing the last seven years,” he said.

Obamacare rationing will come from other places as well.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

This week, amid the government shutdown and the rollout of the Obamacare state health care exchanges, the health care law is drawing critics from all corners. In particular, organized labor, an initial supporter of the law, is now at odds with a provision of the law that will tax insurance plans less like to deny life-saving medical treatment and other health care – plans that they have long provided to attract members.

This tax on health insurance plans is a major component of the health law. The primary purpose is to discourage businesses from providing what Obamacare advocates view as too much health coverage. Starting in 2018, there will be a 40 percent tax on insurers — which would be passed on to employers — for any health coverage that goes beyond $10,200 for individuals and $27,500 for families.