Buy Photo Alesha Williams-Boyd of the Asbury Park Press presents a check from the Helping Hands program to the Seidle children .Accepting the check is Kirsten Seidle, the eldest daughter of the family. "Walking in Her Shoes" a group founded to bring attention to domestic violence, makes its way through Asbury Park ending with a service at Liberty Park. This event was held in honor of Tamara Wilson-Seidle. Asbury Park, NJ Saturday, August 29, 2015 (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

ASBURY PARK – Wearing T-shirts displaying a golden “tree of life” with branches dedicated to each of her nine children, community members marched in honor of Tamara Wilson-Seidle.

They walked the city’s streets Saturday and reflected on a devoted mother, friend and religious educator whose ex-husband, Neptune police Sgt. Philip Seidle, is charged with her murder.

“Even though she is gone, her life still lives on through those nine children,” said Gregory Jones, founder of the domestic-violence awareness organization Walking in Her Shoes, which hosted the march. “We are here to celebrate her life not her death.”

Wilson-Seidle was gunned down June 16 on Sewall Avenue. Witnesses and county officials say Philip Seidle used his service weapon to fire two volleys of gunshots at her as their 7-year-old daughter and police watched. Wilson-Seidle had alleged in a divorce complaint that her ex-husband physically abused her throughout their marriage.

MORE: Eyewitnesses saw woman shot by off-duty cop

About 60 people participated in the walk which started and ended at the city’s Library Park. Proceeds from the walk will go to the Seidle children.

On Saturday, the Asbury Park Press also presented the family with a $500 check that came from an anonymous donor who requested the newspaper donate to the cause of its choice.

Kyria Ferguson, a Seidle family friend, said she worked with Jones to pull the event together.

“I think it shows how the community comes together to help the kids moving forward,” Ferguson said. “It gives them strength, and they know they have support out here, they are not alone.”

Wilson-Seidle’s oldest daughter, Kirsten Seidle, thanked the community for their support at the march and other donations made to the family.

“It’s really been helping us to be able to stay together and grow through this experience,” she said.

MORE: Asbury-Neptune NAACP honors “an angel” in Wilson-Seidle

Charles Harris of Lakewood said his grandson played Neptune sports with some of the Seidle children. He recalled sitting at football games and wrestling matches with Tamara and Philip.

“We are all here to lend some kind of support to the family,” Harris said. “Practical, prayer, emotional support ... we are just part of a community that’s pulling together to help the family.”

Friends and community members spoke during the open-mic session at the event.

“Tami was a tough cookie; she was a strong woman,” said the Rev. Miguel Virella, pastor of Our Lady of Mount Carmel Church, where Tamara Wilson-Seidle was a religious educator. “She was a great mother and a good friend.”

Jones conducted a roll call of people across the country who have been killed in domestic violence incidents. In many of the cases, the women were killed by their partners with their children watching or in the same house.

Jones said Walking in her Shoes hosts walks and events nationwide to honor victims and share information about domestic violence.

“If we can save one person we have done our job,” Jones said. “Our slogan is ‘No one has the right to love you to death.’ ”

Nicquel Terry: 732-643-4023; nterry@gannettnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1F74bwk