It’s painful to see a hospital close its doors for good. Painful for patients, painful for workers and painful for the community it has long proudly served. But that pain, and the public outcry that always accompanies a hospital closure, doesn’t change the fact that sometimes hospitals simply reach a point where their survival is no longer financially tenable and their services are no longer essential.

That’s why the highly publicized efforts to save two Brooklyn hospitals that have struggled for years and are drowning in red ink — Long Island College Hospital, or LICH, and Interfaith Medical Center — are so misguided.

In addition to ignoring economic reality, the multiple court decisions and public demonstrations to keep these facilities open do nothing to improve care and everything to prevent true health-care reform.

Health-care delivery in America is evolving into a system marked by fewer hospitalizations and more community-based primary care, as well as myriad public-health innovations. As the decline of LICH and Interfaith so starkly demonstrate, the time has come for New Yorkers, especially those in vulnerable, low-income neighborhoods, to overcome their reliance on hospitals and embrace the rapidly shifting health-care landscape.

The change has been a long time coming.

In 2005, Gov. George Pataki created the Commission on Health Care Facilities in the 21st Century — better known as the Berger Commission, after me, its chairman. As chair, I was tasked with making recommendations to stabilize, improve and restructure New York’s health-care delivery system. Our ultimate goal was to begin a series of difficult steps and decisions to ensure that all New Yorkers have access to high-quality care.

The commission’s work confirmed what many health-care stakeholders long knew: New York had more hospital beds and physical plants than it needed. As our final report noted, “Health-care services are migrating rapidly out of large institutional settings into ambulatory, home and community-based settings.”

Our hospital “right-sizing” recommendations included “48 reconfiguration, affiliation and conversion schemes, and 9 facility closures.” We called for the hospital community to downsize by more than 4,000 beds.

In 2011, as part of Gov. Cuomo’s Medicaid Redesign Team, or MRT, initiatives, I headed the Brooklyn Health Systems Redesign Workgroup to assess the strengths and weaknesses of the borough’s hospitals and their future viability. In a summary letter to the state health commissioner, I wrote that six Brooklyn hospitals (including LICH and Interfaith) “are not currently positioned to seize the opportunities and manage the risks associated with the changes under way at the state and federal levels.”

All the while, hospitals in New York — especially “safety net” facilities that serve a disproportionate number of Medicaid and uninsured patients — have been losing money year after year. Too many New Yorkers were (and still are) using hospital emergency departments for routine primary care. Medicaid costs were skyrocketing. The system was rupturing.

We’ve come a long way. Since the Berger Commission formed, 18 hospitals across the state have closed, including 12 in New York City — yet health-care access hasn’t worsened.

The Affordable Care Act (a k a ObamaCare) and MRT reforms are helping New York pursue the “triple aim” of improving population health, enhancing the patient experience and reducing health-care costs.

As part of this transformation, New York state has requested a 5-year, $10 billion federal Medicaid waiver to enable hospitals and other providers to expand primary care and invest in public-health innovations. Ironically, this will give hospitals the resources to keep more patients out of their facilities.

Yet we’ve still got a long way to go, as the decline of LICH and Interfaith make clear. That’s why the developments in Brooklyn are so counterproductive.

Why are judges and politicians keeping these hospitals open when there’s no money to operate them? Whatever their motives, they’re ultimately harming the very communities that LICH and Interfaith can no longer effectively serve — communities that desperately need more primary care, not more inpatient beds.

They are also willfully ignoring the fact that Brooklyn and the rest of New York will always have enough high-quality hospitals to care for the patients who need them.

Their actions will also have a chilling ripple effect. Other hospitals on the financial brink will put off necessary downsizing or outright closure simply to avoid the chaos unfolding in Brooklyn, and healthier hospitals nearby will be reluctant to step in and help.

It is the human condition to be wary of change, and the loss of a longtime hospital is certainly an unsettling experience. But New York’s recent history has shown that allowing hospitals that have outlived their usefulness to close is a necessary step in the transformation of our health-care system.

For the good of all New Yorkers, let’s hope that certain judges and politicians recognize that soon.

Stephen Berger, the chairman of Odyssey Investment Partners, has advised the city and state on fiscal issues in a series of positions since 1976.