Jessy Briton Hamilton

Jessy Briton Hamilton

Website: jessyhamilton.com

Age: 33

Family: Did not respond

Professional background: 13 years in public education as a teacher and instructional specialist, 4 years as a small business owner, and 2 years as a banker.

Political/community experience: Adams County Cultural Council, Colorado Education Association, pro bono fundraiser for poverty and disaster relief organizations

Education: Master of Public Administration, University of Central Florida

Name of a person you admire and why: My mother. Growing up in a rural area, I was raised by a single mother who worked three jobs. Even working three jobs, we were still poor. That never held us back though. Mom never allowed having less to keep her from giving me more.

What do you think is the biggest issue you plan to address as a school board member?

We face significant budget challenges. Our facilities in the southern part of the district are older, many have pressing maintenance needs, and some should be renovated or replaced altogether. Teachers do not always have the resources educators in more affluent school districts take for granted. This is unacceptable. We have to think outside the box, and we cannot be afraid to ask for help.

Advertisement

How are you planning to handle the enrollment pressure and issues that arrive from overcrowded schools?

Our schools are overcrowded because we have inadequate funding to hire new teachers and retain the ones we have. It is unfair for school districts with the highest needs to work with the fewest resources. School funding structures similar to Colorado's have been found unconstitutional in other states, in part because they fail to provide equal access to a quality public education. I want to begin a conversation on what fair school funding looks like. As your school board director, I will reach out to our legislators, business leaders, and community experts to solicit ideas for the best and most practical way to secure the revenue Adams 12 needs to be a world class school district. Among the many options we will discuss in collaboration with our district's attorneys, is the constitutionality of the Colorado formula for funding public schools. We have to begin asking: are we getting our fair share?

How will you address the on-going funding issues the district has faced? The financial challenges facing our district are much larger than anything five school board directors can tackle on their own. With that reality in mind, I have tirelessly built relationships with our city council members and state legislators. Each of them has expressed to me a willingness to collaborate with Adams 12 to find ways to get the resources we need. Some council members mentioned specific programs (sports and extracurricular activities) that we might provide for students at a shared cost. Help exists. We need to begin asking. Our neighborhoods are only as strong as our schools. People in some relatively high places understand that, and they're willing to be a part of the solution. Likewise, we need to involve our nonprofit and business communities. We are all in it together.