Topics: 2004 Elections, 60 Minutes, cbs news, Dan Rather, Elections 2004, George W. Bush, Journalism, Media Criticism, News, Politics News

It’s no surprise that “Truth,” the new movie about the journalistic firestorm that took down Dan Rather, has caused so much controversy. In its retelling of the scandal that engulfed Rather, his producer Mary Mapes and CBS News after their botched story about George W. Bush’s time in the Texas Air National Guard blew up in their faces, “Truth” touches on one of the most politically and personally charged moments in recent media history. CBS is incensed enough about the film that it has refused to air any ads for it on its network. The people behind “Truth” have defended it as a movie that seeks to go beyond the particulars of the saga and raise broader questions about reporting and corporate America.

The reality is that neither side has covered itself in glory. CBS is guilty of, at the very least, massive corporate overreach, but “Truth” is so conspicuously one-sided that it was bound to provoke a heated reaction.

The outline of the story “Truth” tells is familiar enough to anybody who was around in 2004. Mapes, a star producer for Rather at CBS, got her hands on memos that seemingly confirmed rumors about the special treatment Bush had received during his military days, and built a “60 Minutes” report for Rather around them. The memos, however, were torn to shreds almost instantly, with both conservative bloggers and experts disputing their authenticity. CBS ultimately retracted the story, apologized, fired Mapes, made three other producers resign, and forced Rather out of his anchor chair at the “CBS Evening News.”

Ever since then, the toxicity of the scandal has lingered. Rather and Mapes insist to this day that the central contention of their story–that Bush shirked his military duties and got away with it because of his connections–is true, and that they were railroaded by a panicked team of corporate suits. Mapes recently said the errors fell within the range of “normal journalistic bungle.”

That, of course, is a quite generous reading of events. When you mess up on a highly damaging story about the president of the United States two months before an election, you’re out of the realm of normalcy, no matter how much you did or didn’t bungle. But that’s the story “Truth,” which was based on Mapes’s memoir, wants to tell. And that’s the biggest flaw in the movie.

Delve even slightly into the “Rathergate” scandal and you will tumble down several simultaneous rabbit holes. The story of Bush’s military service is decidedly murky. There’s a boatload of evidence to suggest that he received preferential treatment for years, but that evidence is tied up with so much history, hearsay and rumor that it’s a far cry from the tidy report that “60 Minutes” presented to the world.

“Truth” does not exactly shy away from detailing the mistakes Mapes and her team made in pursuing the Bush story, but it definitely soft-pedals them. There’s a central problem that, despite the film’s best efforts, it can’t overcome: The “60 Minutes” report was partially centered around documents that the producers couldn’t reasonably authenticate.

It’s all well and good for Rather and Mapes to complain, as they have done for over a decade, that the focus on the memos obliterated any consideration of the rest of their story, which included on-camera interviews with people who said they had intervened to help Bush out during his time in the military. But that is a problem entirely of their own making. All these years later, it remains a wonder that so much caution was abandoned on such a sensitive story.