The Eye

Katy Perry Super Bowl Performance To Feature Lenny Kravitz

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images/Bradley Kanaris, Thomas Niedermueller) Katy Perry will feature Lenny Kravitz on her Super Bowl 2015 halftime performance.

Katy Perry's Super Bowl 2015 halftime performance will feature a number of guests, according to E! News, and the first act the "Dark Horse" singer has revealed is Lenny Kravitz.



Speaking to NBC's Willie Geist, Perry said, "My first special guest is going to be an incredible rock n roll icon, a guitar god. I'm going to have Lenny Kravitz on the show!"



The "This Is How We Do" singer added, "He's got so much style. He's the coolest. He's the King of cool. He's going to make me so much cooler that day."



Perry's announcement comes days after Hollywood Life reported that the singer wanted to do the show by herself.



A source reportedly told the publication, "She was pressured to possibly add someone else but has stuck to her guns and has said that she will be able to deliver. She wants to make this her moment, she wants to prove to the world that she is the standalone force in pop music."



The report also revealed the set list for her Super Bowl performance had been leaked and that the singer had chosen to perform "Roar" and "Firework."



Apart from Perry's guest performers, another thing fans can look forward to is whether there really will be a part in the performance which will be directed towards Taylor Swift.



The two have been in a feud for quite some time now and InTouch Weekly reported Perry will address their beef during her performance.



"She wants to make a statement with her performance and show that she is the biggest female act in the world and she wants to show that to everyone inclding Taylor," the InTouch source said. "In Katy's eyes, no one can compete on her level."



Katy Perry's Super Bowl performance will be on Feb. 1, at the University of Phoenix Stadium in Glendale, Ariz.



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.