It was around Halloween of 2014 when Dr. Erica Zwernemann decided to learn how to eat.

“Even though I’ve always been a person who dutifully did my exercises, I just kept getting fatter,” the Keller pediatrician said. “I had a sense of desperation about what I was going to do.”

Zwernemann is 5-4, an inch short of the national average for women. She weighed 170 pounds — four more than the national average. Her body mass index was 29.2 — less than obese, but not by much.

Like tens of thousands of other workers across North Texas and the country, Zwernemann enrolled in a wellness program called Naturally Slim. Ten weeks later — after Thanksgiving and Christmas — Zwernemann dropped 20 pounds. Nearly nine months later, she’s managed to keep it off.

She’s happy, and so is her employer, Baylor Scott & White Health, because Naturally Slim is helping the hospital chain improve the health of its employees.

Baylor hopes that will lower its insurance bills.

“For me, it was just transforming,” Zwernemann said. “After trying so many things, I was successful at it. I’ve been able to maintain it. It makes sense to me. And it really sort of re-educated me on a lot of myths and things that even I as a physician was propagating about the ways of eating.”

Naturally Slim, a program offered by Dallas-based ACAP Health consultants, was developed by Marcia Upson, a Garland nurse practitioner, based on concepts learned in Shreveport, La., by her mother in the 1970s.

“One day, Mom said, ‘I’m going to quit dieting and start watching thin people,’” Upson said. “They don’t diet. They eat the things they like. They don’t obsess about food.”

The lessons formed the core of Naturally Slim, which Upson teaches through online videos. Some of what she learned: People should eat together, and not be distracted by videos or books. They should put their forks down between bites. They should drink plenty of water.

“You can eat whatever you want to eat. You can have it all,” Upson said. “Sugar — we’re going to reduce. ... But I’m going to change how you eat — the habits. And I’m going to change when you eat — just eat when you’re hungry.”

Zwernemann, for example, no longer eats breakfast. She gets through the morning drinking water and coffee.

This approach was combined with the science of obesity and its many chronic diseases by Dallas-based ACAP Health, with help from two veterans of the Cooper Aerobics Center.

ACAP Health pushed employers to start testing their workers for five indicators of “metabolic syndrome,” a cluster of conditions — excess body fat around the waist, increased blood pressure, a high blood sugar level, abnormal cholesterol levels — that increase the risk of chronic diseases like diabetes.

Most employee wellness programs measure success on the basis of how many employees participate, said Wally Gomaa, CEO of ACAP Health. Naturally Slim relies on bloodwork and observed measures of an employee’s height and weight.

A failing grade on three or more of the metabolic syndrome indicators makes employees a candidate for Naturally Slim.

Gomaa said a person with a healthy waist line and normal blood glucose levels spends about $2,739 a year on health care. A person with a waist circumference that’s more than an inch into the unhealthy level (above 40 inches for men, and above 35 inches for women) spends $4,451.

Unhealthy waist readings and high, unhealthy blood sugar levels translate into spending of $9,969 a year.

ACAP Health is so confident in the program that it guarantees at least a 25 percent reduction in the number of employees with metabolic syndrome — or the company gets its money back.

The program’s basic cost is $385 per employee for a 10-week course, and another $175 for maintenance programs.

Hilti, a power tool company with 2,700 employees based in Tulsa, has used Naturally Slim since 2009. The company saw its metabolic syndrome prevalence decline from 30 percent of its workforce to 16 percent.

BAE Systems, Inc., the U.S. subsidiary of a British aerospace and defense company, ran a pilot of Naturally Slim for 1,000 of its employees. Metabolic syndrome rates fell 43 percent, Gomaa said.

“The blood doesn’t lie,” Gomaa said of metabolic syndrome testing.

Southwest Airlines, Baylor University, SMU, Atmos Energy, Commercial Metals, Brinker International and Texas A&M are some of the state’s employers that have embraced Naturally Slim. The program was adopted by BlueCross BlueShield of Texas as part of its covered prevention programs.

Donna Spencer, a cargo specialist with Southwest Airlines, has lost 28 pounds on the program.

“Like most women, I’ve tried every diet imaginable since the 1970s, and they never worked,” she said. Naturally Slim, Spencer said, lets her lose weight while eating what she wants.

“I don’t monitor my calories. I pay no attention at all to my calorie count,” she said. “If I want a chili cheeseburger, I’ll go have a chili cheeseburger. Only eating when I’m hungry makes a lot of the difference.”

Starting this fall, the Affordable Care Act requires insurers to cover obesity wellness and counseling programs at no cost to insured individuals.

“Right or wrong, if we’re going to measurably improve the health of Americans, it’s going to have to be through corporations helping their employees,” said Todd Whitthorne, ACAP’s president and a former senior executive at the Cooper center. “They’ve got the most to lose, and a lot to gain.”