Buy Photo Construction on Interstate 39 is outlined in the 2015 state budget. (Photo: Corey Schjoth/Wausau Daily Herald)Buy Photo

The Wisconsin state budget was passed early Thursday with a 52-46 vote by the Republican-controlled Assembly. The $73 billion two-year spending plan was sent to Gov. Scott Walker for review, where he can use his veto authority to change or remove items in the budget before they are signed into law.

Controversial decisions from the proposed 2015-2017 budget, like cuts to the University of Wisconsin System and prevailing wage regulations, have already been heavily discussed, but here are some other ways the new budget will affect you in central Wisconsin:

Interstate 39 construction

Walker proposed borrowing $1.3 billion for road construction projects in the state, but the Legislature brought the total down to $850 million. While this means less debt for Wisconsin, it also means delays in highway projects.

Widening Interstate 39 is a major focus for the state's transportation plans, though a specific timeline was not announced. This means not only will Wausau and Stevens Point be seeing a lot of construction going up, but it'll also take longer than planned to get finished.

Factory workers may soon be able to volunteer to work seven days a week without break in Wisconsin. (Photo: AP)

7-day work week

More than 20,000 workers in Marathon County could be affected by a change to labor rules that require days off. This change would allow employees in factory and retail workplaces to voluntarily work seven straight days a week. (The law does not allow employers to require the extra work.) Currently, state law says that workers need at least 24 consecutive hours of break for every seven days of work.

While state lawmakers in support of this change say that this gives employees more freedom, Democrats who attempted to remove the provision argue that it violates workers' rights.

Buy Photo Going to state parks like Rib Mountain will become more expensive in coming years. (Photo: Dan Young/Daily Herald Media)

State parks

Going to Rib Mountain and Council Grounds is going to get more expensive. Fees for Wisconsin state parks are proposed to increase $3 for annual admission and by $1 for daily admission. Camping fees for Wisconsin residents will go up to $20 per night and up to $25 for nonresidents. Annual trail passes would become $25.

While this means it's more expensive to visit state parks, it also means Wisconsinites will have to pay less in taxes for the parks' maintenance.

Another budget change: A recreation center in the Chippewa Moraine State Recreation Area was renamed after David R. Obey, a former Wisconsin representative from Wausau.

Proposed changes to Medicaid include drug testing and a limit of four years use for childless adults. (Photo: Getty Images)

Medicaid changes

In response to last year's addition of childless adults to the low-income insurance program BadgerCare, Walker proposed only giving these recipients four years of coverage, in addition to adding drug testing and new premiums. The Legislature passed his recommendations, which may free up resources for benefits for children and caretakers, who receive the majority of care provided through the state's program in central Wisconsin. While this doesn't necessarily mean any increased care or reduced cost, it does mean that funds won't need to be diverted from children and caretakers to cover the expansion of childless adult coverage.

However, nearly 14,000 seniors in central Wisconsin using the state's senior care program could see their bill for medication increase from $30 a year to $60 dollars a month, if proposed changes go through. This change is expected to decrease state spending by $15.6 million over the next two years, but means that elders will be paying another $700 annually for medication.

Republican lawmakers voted down Democrats' proposal to accept federal funding for expanded Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act.

Buy Photo Brokaw could be absorbed by the town of Maine, according to a provision added to the budget earlier this week. (Photo: Gannett Wisconsin Media file)

Brokaw provision

An amendment added to the state budget last week would allow the town of Maine to become a village, which could clear the way for the struggling village of Brokaw to be absorbed by Maine. Brokaw, a village of about 250, is facing millions in debt.

Wausau-area grants

The budget includes a $150,000 grant to Northcentral Technical College to help establish a culinary arts program and a $100,000 grant to the Marathon County Economic Development Corporation to establish a loan fund for minority-owned businesses.

Robin Opsahl can be reached at ropsahl@wausau.gannett.com. Find Robin on Twitter at @robinlopsahl.

Buy Photo Northcentral Technical College (Photo: File/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1MnQYUd