Shares of health insurer Centene fell in early trading Friday before rebounding, a day after the Chicago Tribune reported that one of the firm's subsidiaries will lose a Medicaid contract with Cook County valued at up to $1.8 billion over five years.

Centene touched a low of $69.42 a share before ending regular trading at $71.51, up 1.45 percent on the day.

A spokeswoman at Cook County Health and Hospitals System confirmed Thursday that it plans to find a replacement for IlliniCare Health, a division of St. Louis-based Centene, to run its Medicaid managed care plan. The county posted a request for bids Tuesday.

William Scheffel, Centene's chief financial officer, attributed some of the company's 39 percent revenue growth in the second quarter ended in June to the Cook County deal, he said during an investors conference call last week.

Centene officials have not issued a statement about the Cook County deal and could not be reached for comment Thursday or early Friday.

The Tribune previously reported that the deal with IlliniCare, which began in July 2014, was worth up to $1.8 billion over five years. IlliniCare will continue to serve as the so-called third-party administrator during the search for a replacement.

The role is also critical for Cook County because the health system has taken on the risk of insuring more of its patients.

The health system started its own managed care plan in 2012 to enroll patients who gained insurance through the expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

The health plan, known as CountyCare, provides coverage for more than 170,000 Cook County residents, including traditional Medicare beneficiaries. And for the first time in its history, the health system has to compete for patients.

One of its competitors is IlliniCare, which runs a managed care plan for Medicaid recipients in Cook, DuPage, Lake, Kane, Kankakee and Will counties.

The competition became a conflict for the county. The health system "believes that CountyCare would be best served by a (third-party administrator) that does not operate a competing plan moving forward," spokeswoman Alexandra Normington said in a statement.

The timing of such a big change could be disruptive, as the health system finds itself on solid financial footing for the first time in decades.

The public system has long been the safety net for the low-income, uninsured population in Cook County, resulting in hundreds of millions of dollars in uncompensated care every year and becoming a drain for taxpayers.

In the last fiscal year ended Nov. 30, uncompensated care fell to $340 million, from more than $500 million the year before. Nearly two-thirds of county patients were insured last year, up from 45 percent before Obamacare.

To keep the momentum going, the health system has to keep a close eye on costs, and that's where a third-party administrator comes in, providing data analysis and risk management services. IlliniCare was the only company to bid on the Medicaid contract in 2013.

Cook County Commissioner Larry Suffredin, D-Evanston, said he was not bothered by the abrupt cancellation of IlliniCare's contract.

"In the long run this is probably good for our system because it will give us a little more control in what is a constantly changing market situation," Suffredin said. "I don't think we're going to lose ground."