Buy Photo GOP presidential candidate Ted Cruz greets supporters during his Sunday campaign stop at the 2510 Restaurant in Wausau. Along with Cruz were his wife, Heidi; former GOP presidential candidate Carly Fiorina; and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker. (Photo: T'xer Zhon Kha/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)Buy Photo

WAUSAU - Republican presidential hopeful Ted Cruz swung through Wausau Sunday, seeking to once again meet central Wisconsin voters and reaffirm support ahead of the state's primary on Tuesday.

The Texas senator stopped by 2510 Restaurant for about two hours, and brought with him a who’s who of Republican superstars: Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, former GOP presidential candidate Carly Fiorina and Sen. Mike Lee, R-Utah.

Cruz held a rally in Rothschild nearly a week ago; he is leading in numerous polls in the state race, well ahead of challengers Donald Trump and Ohio Gov. John Kasich, although Trump is polling ahead of Cruz nationally.

Even so, a bevy of Cruz backers turned out Sunday evening to wish him well.

Among them: Mike and Tessie Witt of Wisconsin Rapids, who traveled to Wausau specifically to see Cruz. He took a photo with the couple and signed a campaign flyer for them.

Mike Witt said he sees Cruz as an anti-establishment candidate who would curtail burdensome government regulations on individuals and businesses.

Buy Photo Mike and Tessie Witt. (Photo: Jonathan Anderson/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)

“You will be our future president,” Witt told Cruz.

Sharon Flannery of Wausau also stopped by the restaurant for the campaign event. She said she believes Cruz is a reliable conservative, pointing to his opposition of the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama’s signature legislation to reform health care, and his 21-hour filibuster on the Senate floor several years ago that sought to defund the law.

Flannery also took note of Cruz's experience as a litigator who argued cases before the U.S. Supreme Court.

“He’s a very, very smart guy,” Flannery said. “I think he is the best candidate in the race to uphold the Constitution and our rights as Americans.”

Cruz did not take questions from or make any statements to the media in Wausau. Rather, the event was an opportunity to connect with prospective voters. He shook hands, posed for photos and signed campaign materials.

Cruz also answered questions from restaurant patrons, not all of whom supported him. Samantha Wanner of Wausau told Cruz that she and her parents had attended a rally earlier in the day for Democratic candidate Bernie Sanders. Cruz responded by saying he would seek to reduce the size of government, while Sanders would do the opposite, Wanner said

The number of supporters who attended Cruz’s Wausau campaign stop was not clear, but 2510 Restaurant was brimming with people during the event, making it hard to move around.

Cruz’s wife, Heidi, also made the trip, and Rep. Sean Duffy, R-Wausau, was at the restaurant as Cruz visited.

Cruz’s motorcade left 2510 Restaurant shortly after 7 p.m. He was scheduled to travel to Eau Claire Sunday night, and then had multiple stops between Madison and Milwaukee Monday, according to a campaign official.

Jonathan Anderson: 715-898-7010 or jonathan.anderson@gannettwisconsin.com; on Twitter @jonathanderson.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1MMLVRX