What is the biggest mistake entrepreneurs make when dealing with angel investors?

DAVID KALT: As someone who has been both an entrepreneur and an angel investor, my experience tells me there are actually three equally significant mistakes entrepreneurs make when it comes to dealing with angels, all of which come from allowing the search for investment to affect their vision and effectiveness for that business.

First, entrepreneurs often give angel investors too much attention. As new businesses getting off the ground, entrepreneurs have many other stakeholders and operational demands more deserving of attention than investors. They need to amaze their customers, they need to build powerful and mutually rewarding relationships with partners, they need to recruit and retain the best possible talent, they need to lay the foundation of a corporate culture, they need to cultivate mentors and advisers, and they need to establish processes to keep costs low and productivity up. Those are all of the things that make up the machinery of a business. Angel funding should be seen as the oil that helps make the machine work.

The second critical mistake is that entrepreneurs often revise their business models to fit each angel’s unique profile or to reflect feedback from an angel as a possible condition of investing. The best angel investors are successful because they understand an entrepreneur’s vision, not because they force their vision on an entrepreneur.

Third, many entrepreneurs look to angels before they need to. If you believe in your idea, you should beg, borrow or steal before you take a dime from an angel. As an angel investor, one of the things that struck me was how rapidly and readily entrepreneurs would part with equity–and it made me wonder just how confident they were in what they were doing.

David Kalt is the founder of Reverb.com, a marketplace for musical instruments and gear, and the owner of the Chicago Music Exchange, a vintage guitar store in Chicago. He also co-founded and was the former CEO of online broker optionsXpress.

Read the latest Small Business Report.