JACKSONVILLE — Scattered between the war veterans in baseball hats and families with children in tow, a group of young people waited for Marco Rubio to arrive in Jacksonville, one of the first communities to support Rubio's 2010 U.S. Senate run, the presidential candidate would later say.

Among them were Florida State University at Jacksonville students Meghan Forbes and Lauren Sharp, who came to see the presidential candidate with looks “like Kennedy” and an agenda that wasn’t based on “promoting hatred,” as the two friends felt front runner Donald Trump’s campaign has.

“I think that there’s something more about him that candidates don’t offer — from his energy, from his drive, to actually having the balls to go after Trump and what America wants. I think we need him,” Sharp, 20, said.

After attending the Conservative Political Action Conference in Washington, D.C., Rubio returned to Florida on Saturday to convince Floridians of the same. The Florida primary is scheduled for March 15.

Introduced by Jacksonville Mayor Lenny Curry and New Mexico Gov. Susana Martinez, Rubio used the rally to reflect on priorities he has frequently shared on the campaign trail: his desire to enact term limits in Congress, to repeal President Barack Obama’s executive orders and Obamacare, to leverage a more aggressive war against terrorism and threats to America from Russia, China and North Korea.

He briefly acknowledged his Democratic opponents — he focused on Bernie Sanders’ embrace of socialist political ideologies and criticized Hillary Clinton in an oft-repeated bit about how her decision to use a private email server while serving as secretary of state “disqualifies” her for the presidency. And while Rubio did not devote the majority of his time talking about Trump, an anti-establishment candidate who has defeated Rubio in every primary thus far, there was a quiet urgency to remarks made by him and others who believe the future of traditional conservatism relies on a Rubio win.

“Conservatism is not an attitude. Conservatism is not how loud can you be, how offensive can you be, how many bad words can you say, how many ridiculous things can you say on television,” Rubio said to the crowd, before criticizing Trump's unwillingness to take sides in conflicts in Israel and comparing Trump to former Florida Gov. Charlie Christ, whom he told the crowd he had called out for “masquerading as a conservative,” during his 2010 run for U.S. Senate.

“It’s funny how history repeats itself,” Rubio said to cheers.

His most relatable moments were during a pledge to improve conditions for U.S. military veterans and the retelling of his parents’ journey from Cuba to Florida, where he said his "American Dream" was made possible.

It’s a story that appeals to young couple Mallory and Ruben Bosque.

“He relates to the people that are really working hard out there,” said Ruben Bosque, who comes from a Cuban family. “He’s been in our shoes. He knows firsthand how it is.”

Mallory Bosque said she appreciates Rubio's consistency on issues.

“I feel like Trump is all business,” she said. “He doesn’t have the background knowledge. Marco lays it on the line. Those are his goals. He doesn’t jump around.”

But what if Rubio lost the nomination to Trump as projected? Would they vote for Trump?

The couple looked at each other and grimaced.

“I wouldn't smile,” Ruben Bosque said. “I would go in there with a frown, but I guess I’d have to.”