Will the "invisible army" of caregivers find an ally in the next president? (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Finally!

Great news — presidential candidates are starting to seriously talk about issues that will at some point affect almost all of us: caring for our loved ones who are unable to care for themselves.

It’s been a long time coming. More than 25 years ago, a Congressional Commission issued a report that warned that the nation’s health and long-term care system was nearing a “breaking point” in its ability to meet the needs of aging Americans and people with disabilities.

Since that time, countless other Congressional committees and commissions, universities, non-profit and service provider groups, etc. have issued similar reports with similar warnings. All of the reports have had two things in common — they’ve offered solutions and they’ve called for action.

Sadly, instead of action, we’ve seen 25 years pass with little meaningful attention to the issues or the solutions. The excellent analysis performed and solid recommendations offered over the course of a quarter century have ended up on a shelf gathering dust. Waiting for attention. Waiting for leadership.

It looks like the waiting is over.

Last month, Senator Bernie Sanders convened a group of Iowa family and paid caregivers to learn more about the real world challenges. More recently, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton spoke at length about the caregiving crisis at a town hall meeting in Clinton. Both are offering ideas to deal with the challenges.

The challenges are clear:

People are living longer than ever before with more chronic health conditions

Those with chronic conditions need more help for longer periods of time to meet their daily needs

Fewer family members are available to provide that help

The shortage of family caregivers sparks greater demand for the paid caregiving workforce to assist, but that workforce is already in crisis — unable to effectively meet the existing demand for services, and hobbled by high annual employee turnover rates

There are high costs that come along with aging or disability, and too few have made the needed financial preparations. This is forcing more and more individuals and families into poverty, and to rely on Medicaid — a taxpayer funded program often called the program of last resort.

Medicaid budgets at the state and federal level are growing rapidly — at a rate that members of both political parties say is unsustainable.

It’s been estimated that more than 500,000 Iowans are caring for and supporting loved ones — helping them deal with things like medications, bill paying, scheduling doctor’s appointments and providing transportation, grocery shopping and meal preparation, chores in and out of the house, managing behaviors, handling medical procedures like wound care and injections, and navigating the complicated web of government agencies, insurance companies and providers of health and support services.

Aptly called an invisible army, they perform critically important tasks and are under great stress. Many juggle their caregiving responsibilities with other roles: parent, spouse or partner, grandparent, employee or business owner, sibling, student, community volunteer, etc. Many are dipping in to their own retirement and other accounts to support their loved ones.

Terri Hale (Photo: Special to the Register)

We are members of the caregiving army. We know the challenges, the heartache and special moments that come along with caregiving responsibilities. We lose sleep, feel guilty about what we have or have not done, worry about the future, get depressed, and feel overwhelmed. Few if any of us are prepared to be caregivers. We learn by doing, and by making mistakes.

It is a tough time for those involved. And it can and should be so much easier and better.

It is unbelievably gratifying that presidential candidates are recognizing the need for change.

It’s our hope that all candidates will discuss the issues, and say one simple thing: “If I’m elected president, the issues of aging and caregiving will be a priority. We will not just talk about them, we will act on them.”

John Hale (Photo: Special to the Register)

We, and hundreds of thousands of Iowans like us, are looking for this leadership. We hope that we’ll get it, and for it, we will be truly thankful.

JOHN AND TERRI HALE are family caregivers who live in Ankeny. They own The Hale Group consulting firm, and speak to a variety of audiences on the challenges of aging and caregiving. Contact: terriandjohnhale@gmail.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1XNOkvb