Getty Images/Andrew Burton

Viacom is, like many media companies, effectively controlled by one man. Though it’s publicly traded, 80% of Viacom’s voting shares are owned by Executive Chairman Sumner Redstone through his privately held National Amusements Inc.

Mr. Redstone is widely reported to have health issues. Viacom has said little on the subject, even as, according to The Wall Street Journal, shareholders are asking questions about who’ll control the company after the 92-year-old’s death.

This news might have sent you scurrying to look through the thousands of pages of disclosure documents Viacom has filed with the Securities Exchange Commission to see what would happen to control of Mr. Redstone’s shares—and, by extension, Viacom—if he should become incapacitated or die. That’s what I did.

But I couldn’t find such information. And that’s likely because of a gaping loophole in the SEC rules.

Shouldn’t Viacom and Mr. Redstone describe in their SEC filings details of these arrangements? After all, the SEC has strict rules requiring the disclosure of any “contracts, arrangements, understandings or relationships (legal or otherwise)” with respect to a public company’s shares for anyone who has acquired more than 5% of any class of them. And copies of the agreements and other documents relating to such arrangements need to be publicly filed, as well. When there is any material change in the facts, the filing must be amended promptly.

But they haven’t violated any rules because of an incredibly arcane exception. The rule requiring descriptions of arrangements and relationships relating to major holders’ shares doesn’t apply to those investors who owned their stake when the company went public and have not acquired additional shares since. These grandfathered stockholders fill out a much simpler form that basically indicates their names and the number of shares they own.

So when Carl Icahn or William Ackman or any other activist investor crosses the 5% threshold, any arrangements they have with respect to the shares must be quickly disclosed, even if they aren’t close to a controlling stake. But arrangements of Mr. Redstone and National Amusements for transition to a new way in which Viacom will be controlled need not see the light of day, at least in SEC filings.

It doesn’t make a lot of sense, and it needs to be fixed. In fairness to the SEC, the root of the problem is in the legislation Congress initially passed in 1968. In that law, the trigger for disclosure is based on acquisition of shares rather than ownership. But even without new legislation, the SEC has many avenues to require such disclosure. The agency writes the rules specifying the content of annual reports and proxy statements, and it could easily require disclosure of arrangements affecting control of shares in any of these documents. It would seem particularly relevant in the annual proxy when the controlling holder is a candidate for election to the board.

Although Mr. Redstone and Viacom may occasionally make general references to the succession plan in statements to the media, without such SEC-type disclosure, Viacom holders have relatively little access to solid, up-to-date information. Shareholders remain largely in the dark about what’s in store if there’s a management squabble once Mr. Redstone no longer pulls the strings.

Viacom shareholders knew when they bought stock that they would not have a say in management of the company; they knew Mr. Redstone controlled of 80% of the voting shares. But it’s a bit of a stretch to consider that a tacit agreement to remain in the dark as to what the plan is once Mr. Redstone is no longer in a position to assert that control.

Send questions, comments or story ideas to Dealpolitik@gmail.com and follow Ron on Twitter: @Dealpolitik.