Smells like TOWIE spirit! Sam Faiers sparkles in gold dress as she launches another fragrance



A s a former TOWIE star, she certainly has a nose for showbusiness.



But now it seems that Samantha Faiers has a skill for fragrances as the TV star made a personal appearance in Glasgow to launch her signature fragrance La Bella on Saturday.



The blonde personality cut a stylish figure and proved that - even after a period of ill health - she can come up smelling of roses.



Looking good: Sam impressed fans by wearing a dress from V label by Virgo's Lounge

Sam was wearing a dress from V label by Virgo's Lounge, which showcased her slimline figure.

Meanwhile, her hair was styled into a serious of casual ringlets and she sported a trademark Essex feature: a perma-tan.

There, at the Buchanan Galleries, she signed boxes of the perfume for a long line of fans.



Wow: The beauty stunned in a glittering gold dress at the launch of her latest scent

Glam: Samantha Faiers made a personal appearance in Glasgow to launch her signature fragrance La Bella

For the days leading up to the event she used Twitter to promote the event, which even included pictures of her from a local beauty salon.

But by the end of the in-store appearance she was clearly missing home, tweeting: 'Miss u @ JoeyEssex both always so busy ... Can't wait to see u next week. Xxx'.



Fortunately, her hard work is paying off. The star's debut perfume was this week crowned the number one celebrity fragrance launch of the year, according to The Fragrance Shop.

Coming up smelling of roses! Samantha sprays her scent at the launch

'It was pretty daunting putting myself out there with the release of the my fragrance La Bella as it was my first business venture since leaving TOWIE,' the reality TV star told the MailOnline.



'To hear it's the best-selling celebrity fragrance at The Fragrance Shop this year has put the biggest smile on my face!'



'I've been working on some really cool products to release later in the year and I want to keep them really affordable too,' she added.