World Cup fever continues this weekend, can you feel / handle it?

Good morning, RVA! It’s 72 °F, and blah blah blah heat (high of 85 °F), blah blah blah humidity, blah blah blah chance of storms (60% in the afternoon). Luckily, after this round of storms rolls through we’re looking at great weather for the weekend.

Water cooler

Julep’s is moving out of The Bottom and onto Grace Street, next door to Pasture. Great news for Grace Street’s growing Restaurant Alley, troubling news for The Bottom.

The General Assembly has passed a budget that includes language which makes “it harder to expand the federal-state healthcare program for the poor under the federal Affordable Care Act.” The budget now heads to the governor’s desk.

I’m no scholar of the Middle East, but the situation in Iraq seems pretty not good. If you’re out of the loop like I was/am, first read this and then this.

This Sunday is Father’s Day. Don’t forget to do whatever father-related things you deem appropriate.

If you’re looking for more stuff to fill your weekend or maybe a little something extra to do with your dad, look here, here, or here. Of course, if you just want to avoid the world (and the World Cup) by vegging out in front of the boob tube, I’ve got some suggestions for that, too.

World Cup

Despite scoring the opening goal on themselves, Brazil beat Croatia, 3-1. Today’s matches:

Mexico vs. Cameroon, 12:00 PM, ESPN2

Spain vs. Netherlands, 3:00 PM, ESPN

Chile vs. Australia, 6:00 PM, ESPN2

Sports!

The Squirrels fell in the final game of the series with Trenton, 3-4. They’ll return home tonight to take on New Hampshire at 7:05 PM.

fell in the final game of the series with Trenton, 3-4. They’ll return home tonight to take on New Hampshire at 7:05 PM. The Kickers host the Wilmington Hammerheads FC this Saturday at 7:00 PM.

host the Wilmington Hammerheads FC this Saturday at 7:00 PM. The Nats lost to the Giants, 1-7. They travel to St. Louis to face the Cardinals at 8:15 PM.

lost to the Giants, 1-7. They travel to St. Louis to face the Cardinals at 8:15 PM. The Spurs dominated the Heat, and now lead the NBA finals 3-1. Sunday’s game five could be all she wrote.

The Kings look to take the Stanley Cup tonight at 8:00 PM.

This morning’s longread

Mark Holmberg, writing on the back page of Style, says this:

Every Virginian should be arrested and charged with contributing to child endangerment because our tax dollars go to herding our poorest black people into these concentration camps.

Photo by: mr. Wood

This morning’s Instagram

— ∮∮∮ —

Email

Want to automagically get Good Morning, RVA in your inbox every morning? Sign up below!

Fill out my online form