Amanda Sears

Amanda Sears, of Wiggins, attended Western National Roundup, in January at the Renaissance Denver Hotel. She joined the nearly 1,000 people who came from around the nation, including the youth competing in fifteen national contests. The conference, now in its 94th year, is held annually in early January, coincides with the National Western Stock Show. Sears received the trip to Western National Roundup after she placed first at the Colorado State Fair 4-H Demonstration Contest in August. Sears competed in the Family and Consumer Science Presentation Event placing third.

Western National Roundup provides a place for youth to compete nationally while encouraging teamwork and self-confidence, and while focusing on the 4-H Mission Mandates: Science, Engineering, Technology, Mathematics, Healthy Living and Citizenship.

Each participating youth and adult participates in one or more contests and/or workshops. While each attendee receives a souvenir commemorating their time at Western National Roundup, individual and team excellence is rewarded at an award brunch and ceremony, building personal pride and reinforcing the benefits of setting goals. Leadership is developed at these events by encouraging decision-making and teamwork skills, critical thinking, and independence. Healthy Living is demonstrated at the workshops, the dances, the educational tours, and through the lifestyle that is shown through each contest.

Educational tours and entertainment provide service learning and community-based learning opportunities, focusing on the importance of each youth's citizenship within his or her team, community, and nation.

Advertisement

4-H and FFA members between the ages of 14 and 19 qualify for the conference either by winning their home state's contest or being chosen as a state delegate. The competitions held at Western National Roundup include horse and livestock judging, hippology, horse demonstrations and public speaking, parliamentary procedure, family consumer sciences presentations and bowl, consumer decision making, fashion review, public speaking prepared and impromptu, and meats judging. Workshops offered throughout the week provide a learning experience for the youth.

Youth participants develop a mastery of their respective subject matters, but more importantly, gain life-long skills. Such skills as public speaking, professionalism, and good sportsmanship along with the memories and new friendships will outlast the trophies and ribbons won this coming week.

Sears is an eight year 4-H member of the Travelers 4-H Club. She has taken projects in breeding and market beef, market swine, market goat, clothing, and veterinary science. In addition to competing at the Colorado State Fair in the demonstration contest, she has exhibited livestock at both, National Western Stock Show and the Colorado State Fair. Sears has been a club officer, a record book winner and a pacesetter. Her parents are Tom and Christine Sears of Wiggins.