DOL finds massive wage theft in New York - California pension reform coming in the lame duck - ALEC goes local on right-to-work

With help from Marianne LeVine, Mike Elk and Timothy Noah

DOL STUDY FINDS RAMPANT WAGE THEFT IN N.Y., CALIF. — A new Labor department study shows that between 3.5 and 6.5 percent of wage and salary workers in California and New York receive less than the minimum wage, the New York Times’ Steven Greenhouse reports.

Story Continued Below

“The study, which examined work force data for the two states, found that more than 300,000 workers in each state suffered minimum-wage violations each month,” Greenhouse writes. “Labor Department officials said that even if one assumed a violation rate half that nationwide, that would mean more than two million workers across the nation were paid less than the federal or state minimum wage.”

U.S. Department of Labor Secretary Tom Perez will speak on the findings today at the Center for American Progress. “When we crack down on unscrupulous employers, we send a strong message to similar employers about our vigilance,” Perez will say. “We create ripple effects, as a single investigation can resonate throughout that sector, influencing employer behavior and reforming a race-to-the-bottom culture.” http://nyti.ms/1yhefn4

MULTI-EMPLOYER PENSION CLIFF MAY BE AVERTED IN LAME DUCK — From In These Times’ Cole Stangler: “Reps. John Kline (R-Minnesota) and George Miller (D-California), the highest-ranking members on the House Education and Workforce Committee, have brokered a last-minute deal to reform multi-employer pensions…. They’re now urging party leaders to include the plan as part of an omnibus spending bill, just before the 113th Congress is set to leave Washington for good on December 11.” http://bit.ly/1rU18Xk

ALEC GOES LOCAL ON RIGHT-TO-WORK — The American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) has a new offshoot, American City County Exchange (ACCE), and it’s meeting today in Washington for a session called "Local Right to Work: Protect my Paycheck." Panelists will include the Heritage Foundation’s James Sherk and Andrew Kloster. Kloster recently wrote a paper outlining how cities and counties can pass their own local right-to-work ordinances (i.e., ordinances that free workers from any legal obligation to pay dues or their equivalent to labor unions that bargain collectively on their behalf).

Labor lawyer Moshe Marvit, writing for the Nation, explains how that would work: “The courts have long held that when Congress passed the NLRA in 1935, it intended to create a unified national labor law. However, in the Taft-Hartley Act, Congress created a narrow exception with regard to right-to-work laws, allowing only a “State or Territory” to pass such laws. The essence of Sherk and Kloster’s legal argument, as well as their co-panelists’, is that the phrase “State or Territory” is ambiguous as to cities, towns and counties, making these prime targets for right-to-work ordinances.”

More here: http://bit.ly/1rYgKU1

ILLINOIS SENATE PASSES MINIMUM WAGE LAW — The Illinois Senate last night passed legislation that would raise the state’s minimum wage to $11 an hour by 2019. The bill won’t have an impact on Chicago’s recent decision to raise its own wage to $13, the AP says. Illinois’ House speaker Michael Madigan, meanwhile, says he isn’t going to call legislators back to session before Republican governor-elect Bruce Rauner takes over in January, according to the report.

“But outgoing Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn — who has made raising the wage a focus in recent months — has the power to call the House back himself in an attempt to force a vote, if he wishes,” the report said. http://cbsloc.al/1yhX0wQ

LOW WAGE STRIKES TO MERGE WITH ERIC GARNER PROTESTS — Fast food and other low-wage workers are expected to go on strike today to press for union representation and to call for a $15 an hour minimum wage. In a sign of how the labor movement is working to forge alliances with the racial justice movement, the organizers are expressing strong support for simultaneous protests over a Staten Island grand jury’s decision not to indict a New York City policeman for using a chokehold that killed Eric Garner.

"People of color can't depend on fair wages or fair justice in this country,” said Working Family Party Executive Director Dan Cantor. “Tomorrow, protests against police violence will mingle with the fast food workers' fight for $15 and a union. The common issue is that black and brown lives still count for less in America.”

TOP DEMS CALL FOR TOUGH LABOR PROTECTIONS ON TPP — President Barack Obama yesterday pushed back hard against those in organized labor who oppose the Trans Pacific Partnership. Speaking at the Business Roundtable in Washington, D.C. , President Obama said “those who oppose these trade deals, ironically, are accepting a status quo that is more damaging to American workers.” While Obama ramps up his campaign for TPP, top Congressional Democrats, including Representatives Rosa DeLauro (D-CT), George Miller (D-CA) and Mark Pocan (D-WI), will today release a letter calling on United States Trade Representative Michael Froman to ensure “real and meaningfully enforceable labor protections.” Pros can read more from POLITICO’s Doug Palmer: http://politico.pro/1yhH79V

GOOD MORNING and welcome to Morning Shift, POLITICO's daily tipsheet on labor and employment policy. Send your praise, criticisms, corrections, and any hot tips you previously might have passed on to retiring New York Times labor reporter Steven Greenhouse to bmahoney@politico.com, tnoah@politico.com, melk@politico.com and mlevine@politico.com. Follow us on Twitter at @ politicomahoney, @ TimothyNoah1, @ MikeElk, @ marianne_levine, @ ProMorningShift and @ POLITICOPro.

COURT MULLS UPS PREGNANCY POLICY — The Supreme Court yesterday heard oral arguments in Young v. UPS, in which former UPS driver Peggy Young claims the delivery company discriminated against her when it denied her light duty during her pregnancy. “Oral argument turned into an hourlong, hypertechnical inquiry into statutory construction and, eventually, the precarious balancing of two clauses against a semicolon,” writes Slate’s always-delightful Dahlia Lithwick. More here: http://slate.me/11WNvdw

SUFFER THE LITTLE CHILDREN — While speaking yesterday at the Business Roundtable about regulations he might eliminate, President Obama said: “If it’s child labor law, I am probably going to hang out to them. We are going to keep that rule.” Workplace safety advocates wasted no time pointing out the Obama Administration’s hasty 2012 decision to drop, after a huge farm-state outcry, a proposed workplace safety rule protecting children who worked on farms. At the time, the Department of Labor said in a statement “ To be clear, this regulation will not be pursued for the duration of the Obama administration.”

“That’s what makes his later statement about child labor laws so jarring,” said Center for Progressive Reform Executive Director Matthew Shudtz. “He needs to do more than keep the laws on the books — he needs to be moving forward with new rules that address the many hazards that are currently unregulated."

WHITE HOUSE REITERATES SUPPORT FOR WELLNESS PROGRAMS — President Obama didn’t address the EEOC's legal challenges to wellness programs at yesterday's Business Roundtable talk. But White House press secretary Josh Earnest got asked about it. Earnest said the White House is concerned that the EEOC’s lawsuit "could be inconsistent with what we know about wellness programs … we know that [they] are good for both employers and employees." Earnest added that the Obama administration had worked closely with the business community to formulate wellness policies in the Affordable Care Act that would bring down health care costs. This past weekend, Reuters reported that U.S. CEOs were considering withdrawing their support for the ACA, based on three recent lawsuits from the EEOC alleging certain company wellness programs that penalize employees for not undergoing medical testing violate the 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act. In a letter to Secretaries Burwell, Lew and Perez, Business Roundtable President John Engler defended the programs, saying they educate and empower employees.

Whether health wellness programs actually lower costs, however, is up for debate. In a recent post on Health Affairs Blog, the authors concluded that wellness programs increased rather than decreased employer spending on health care and added no net health benefit.

TEXAS LEADS LAWSUIT FROM 17 STATES OVER IMMIGRATION: Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott filed a lawsuit in federal court yesterday on behalf of 17 states, alleging President Obama’s executive actions on immigration violate the constitution’s Take Care Clause ( Article II, Section 3: the president “shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed”) and the Administrative Procedure Act. This is the 31st time Abbott has sued the federal government since Obama took office, according to the AP.

COFFEE BREAK

— Scott Walker: Right to Work bill a "distraction," from the AP: http://bit.ly/1tPc2Yl

— Franchises see job growth in November, from Entrepreneur: http://entm.ag/1zRXU5p

— Labor leader cries foul over $250,000 Chicago mayoral fund, from Chicago Sun-Times: http://bit.ly/1ymm0qy

— NLRB files complaint against Pennsylvania hospital, from Philadelphia Business Journal: http://bit.ly/1voCCwU

— Male worker can’t bring sexual harassment suit over boss’ nipple squeeze, from Bloomberg BNA: http://bit.ly/11VOx9N

— Dallas County minimum wage rule could be illegal, A.G. says, from the Dallas Morning News: http://bit.ly/1FPtxAh

— Illinois House OKs employee retirement savings plan, from the State Journal-Register: http://bit.ly/1zS0OXN

THAT ENDS MORNING SHIFT. Try not to lift anything too heavy.