Topics: 1 percent, Money, Pacific Standard, San Francisco State University, University of California-Berkeley, Wealth, Business News, Life News

This piece originally appeared on Pacific Standard.

When you’re young and struggling, most everyone dreams of moving to a better neighborhood. While many eventually succeed, just-published research suggests this upward mobility comes with a price.

It finds living amidst wealth tends to breed materialistic attitudes, which in turn inspire compulsive spending and poor money management.

That’s the conclusion of three Bay Area psychologists: Jia Wei Zhang of the University of California-Berkeley, and Ryan Howell and Colleen Howell of San Francisco State University.

“It appears that individuals who are young, poor, and live around wealth may be most vulnerable to engaging in social comparison with idealized, wealthy individuals, and using their scant resources to accumulate possessions,” they write in the Journal of Consumer Culture.

“These findings suggest that the financial cues within one’s community may, indeed, signal one’s need to ‘keep up with the Joneses.’”

The researchers conducted a sizable survey of 2,702 people—half of them university students, the remainder recruited via social media. They first answered a series of questions about their financial situation, including their income, amount of savings, and credit-card debt.

Participants then completed the Materialistic Values Scale, expressing their level of agreement or disagreement with such statements as “I admire people who own expensive homes, cars and clothes.” Two additional sets of questions measured their tendency to make impulsive purchases, and their propensity to save money.

The researchers assessed their neighborhood’s socioeconomic status by looking at per-capita income, the poverty rate, and the number of financial institutions in their postal zip code.

Their key finding: “As a neighborhood becomes wealthier, individual materialism increases and, in turn, is associated with increased impulsive buying tendencies and reduced savings behaviors.”