<p><span class="text"><font color="#000000">January 24, 2015 - (left to right) Lottie Jones helps Rodney Nash get signed up for health insurance through the</font> Affordable Care Act<font color="#000000"> during a sign-up event hosted by Enroll America at the Kroc Center. (Kyle Kurlick/Special to The Commercial Appeal)</font></span></p>

By Kevin Mckenzie

The Supreme Court, in a 6-3 ruling released today, upheld the tax subsidies that are central to President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act overhaul.

Some 27,000 Shelby County residents who used subsidies to buy health insurance will keep that subsidy. Here's how Memphis residents and health care experts reacted:

“I think it’s wonderful. I am so happy that it went through like that. I really didn’t believe that they were going to do anything to it anyway, because there’s too many people depending on that now. So I kind of believed what happened today was going to happen.” -Betty Thomas, 65, a retired Methodist University Hospital secretary whose husband, Barry, a 64-year-old retiree, is covered by a subsidized health plan that costs the South Memphis couple about $72 a month.

“I was scared to death that I would be broke from paying out $400 a month, or $4,800 a year in premiums and almost paying out $5,000 a year in my deductibles – or $9,800 a year out of pocket -- while my health was declining.” -September Young, 58, a Memphis hair stylist receiving a subsidy for health coverage

"Today’s decision from the Supreme Court is a victory for the 155,000 Tennesseans who receive financial help to pay for their coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace. In fact, 85% of Marketplace enrollees in Tennessee receive these tax credits, and the average tax credit in Tennessee is $218 per month.

After finally being able to access quality, affordable health coverage, these consumers can now be certain that the promise of that coverage remains there for them and that they can get the care they need. Consumers should know that nothing has changed; financial help to pay for their plans will be available. And for those who remain uninsured, they should know that financial help for health insurance is available and here to stay."

-Jacob Flowers, the Memphis-based state director in Tennessee for Enroll America, a coalition working nationwide to enroll for health coverage

"The Supreme Court’s ruling today provides much-needed clarity for healthcare providers and patients in Tennessee. The uncertainty surrounding tax credits and federal and state health insurance exchanges jeopardized patient care and was a potential disruptor to our healthcare system, especially for the nearly 156,000 Tennesseans who currently use federal subsidies to purchase health insurance on the federal exchange. We can now all move forward with a continued focus on increasing access, delivering quality care and improving patient health." --Dr. John W. Hale Jr., family physician in Union City and president of the Tennessee Medical Association

"What it means is that, first of all, all the chaos that would have happened if they had made the other decision is not going to happen. So if you're somebody getting individual coverage, that's good, they're going to be able to keep their coverage. It also means though that other major aspects of the law are going to stay in place, so some people may not feel that this is such a great thing. So if you're an employer, especially a larger employer, you're still going to have to contend with the employer mandate and all the things that come about with that. If you are an individual that has individual coverage, but you don't qualify for subsidies, then you're going to have to deal with the higher prices." -Chuck Hudspeth, Memphis insurance agent known as the "Obamacare Answer Man" at family owned Hudspeth Benefits Group

“The subsidies are an essential component of the Affordable Care Act. If the subsidies in federally run exchanges had been eliminated, millions of people in the US (over 100,000 in the Mid-South), would have lost the insurance coverage that they recently gained.” “However, there are still issues that need to be addressed in the market, including getting more healthy people to sign up. I believe that this ruling should also create another opportunity to revisit Governor Haslam’s Insure Tennessee plan, which is designed to help those who are not eligible for subsidies to receive TennCare or a private insurance plan.” -Paige Powell, University of Memphis Assistant Professor of Health Systems Management and Policy

“Today’s Supreme Court ruling helps ensure that BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee can continue to provide the security and stability of health insurance to the people of our community, no matter who they are or how they purchase coverage. There remains much work to be done to make healthcare more affordable. At BlueCross we are partnering with patients, physicians and hospitals to transform the healthcare system to provide better coordinated, quality care that helps patients get healthy faster and stay healthy longer. We will continue to work with private and public partners to accelerate this transition to improve patient health and rein in costs for everyone.” - Statement from BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, the Chattanooga-based health insurer covering about two-thirds of the individuals in Tennessee who selected health plans on the federal exchange

The map below shows concentrations of people in Tennessee who have selected health care plans under the Affordable Care Act, charted by Zip code: