Letter to the editor (Photo: DesMoines)

I am compelled by my misrepresentation in the local media to write this letter to present the facts as they relate to my interest in the city of Des Moines chief of police position.

While it was reported in the Jan. 4 article, "Some question search for new D.M. police chief" that I resigned amid allegations of manipulating crime statistics and response times, some due diligence would have revealed otherwise. There was no allegation made regarding manipulating response times and the allegation about manipulating crime statistics was found without merit and baseless by an independent audit completed by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement and the FBI. That was an audit that I directed staff to request on Sept. 9, 2014, two days prior to my leaving the department. The audit results were provided to the city of Coral Gables prior to their December commission meeting. It was during that meeting that the interim police chief, himself, reported that the audit did not find any evidence of manipulation, and in fact, reported a very low error rate for the department's crime reporting process.

I'd like to highlight facts that relate to my time as chief with the Coral Gables Police Department and that supported my candidacy for chief of police with Des Moines:

Burglaries are the No. 1 crime of concern in Coral Gables. Between January and August 2014, burglaries in the city of Coral Gables decreased by more than 20 percent from the same period the year earlier, and were on track to be at their lowest level in more than 15 years.

During my tenure, the Commission on Law Enforcement Accreditation twice awarded "Accreditation with Excellence" recognition to the department; the last one with its very highest recognition: "Accreditation with Excellence, Gold Standard." This recognition is earned by only the most professional and well-managed police departments in the country.

I have an exemplary record of public service, both as a chief of police for nearly 20 years and as a twice-mobilized reserve U.S. Navy officer.

What transpired in Coral Gables leading up to my departure had nothing to do with crime statistics and had everything to do with the personal and political aspirations of a few. It is telling that the current interim chief is the only person on my executive staff of five that I recommended to the interim city manager, city attorney and commissioners not be considered for interim chief of police when I left office. With Florida's broad public records law, all the facts I've presented are easily verifiable.

I am honored to have been considered for chief of police with Des Moines, a city I believe to have a very high quality of life and traditional values. I thought the questions asked during the interview were probing and very relevant to issues facing police chiefs today. I am confident the city will find a capable chief of police from the remaining pool of candidates.

— Dennis Weiner, Jupiter, Fla., City of Des Moines Chief of Police candidate

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1IofSQd