With the open enrollment period for the second year of Obamacare closed, 168,816 Alabama residents now have health coverage through the federal government's online marketplace, officials announced Wednesday.

That represents a 72.5 increase from the 97,870 who signed up last year, and was up from 137,941 at the end of January. The final number figures to be somewhat higher; Some people who started to enroll but did not complete the process by Sunday's deadline will have additional time to do that.

In Mississippi, 103,601 have enrolled.

Nationally, some 11.4 million people obtained insurance though the exchange under the law, formally known as the Affordable Care Act. Of those, 8.6 million renewed plans they purchased last year. Kevin Counihan, the president and CEO of the marketplace, told reporters on a conference call set up by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services that more detailed information will be available in the coming days.

Counihan said officials are working on ideas to make the enrollment process smoother next year.

"We're very pleased with how things are going," he said. "We're not saying we're perfect. We have a ways to go. ... No one's waving the flag to say we're declaring victory."

Wednesday's conference call included three people who offered personal testimonials. That included Robert Mandler Jr., a Walton County (Fla.) resident who owns a bread distribution company.

"Originally, I wasn't going to get health insurance," he said, explaining that he intended to pay the tax penalty for not getting insured. "I was against it. And I didn't support Obamacare."

Mandler said problems with his tonsils in 2013 prompted him to sign up last year. Then, he said, he was diagnosed with cancer. He said radiation and chemotherapy treatments beat the cancer but cost $224,000. With his government-subsidized insurance, he added, he had to pay just a $2,000 deductible and $1,500 in co-payments, in addition to his $118 monthly premium.

"I've got to tell you, I was wrong," he said, adding that despite the fact that his premium is higher this year, "it's still affordable. Without my health insurance, I would have gone bankrupt or died."

Alabama sign-ups surge

In Alabama, Affordable Care Act supporters said the numbers announced Wednesday indicate that positive word of mouth is spreading despite a continued hostile reception most of the state's leaders have greeted the law.

"We wanted to have more than we had last year," said M.J. Ellington, a health policy analyst for the anti-poverty Arise Citizens' Policy Project in Montgomery. "We were thrilled that Alabama enrolled as many people as we did. ... Alabama's numbers look really, really good for a state this size."

Doug Hoffman, a volunteer navigator who has worked to enroll people in the Birmingham area, said the latest figures confirm a trend that has been apparent through the entire enrollment period.

"I haven't done much analysis on it. I think the 168,000 is consistent with our increase that has been higher than any state in the Southeast," he said.

Hoffman said the state's hospitals promoted the health care exchange much more aggressively in year two. And he said that the emergence of UnitedHealthcare as a second option that most marketplace customers did not have in the first year has helped. Independent brokers selling policies on behalf of the company reached a wider audience, he said.

Hoffman said that Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama, the state's dominant health insurance company, for the most part does not use third parties to see polices. But he said the company did help spread the word with its own advertising.

"Their TV coverage has been extensive," he said. "And they've got the resources to do it."

Hoffman said a dedicated network of volunteers also helped fill the void left by the state government, which has not promoted the health exchange. "Here, we have nothing officially," he said.

Most get subsidies

Although final figures are not available, it is clear that the vast majority of people who buy plans on the exchange get taxpayer help. As of Jan. 30, 89 percent of customers from Alabama received a tax credit, which averaged $268 per month. Almost 8 in 10 of them enrolled by December - 78 percent - had a health insurance option with a monthly premium of $100 or less after subsidies.

Advocates said people who qualify for subsidies who still have not enrolled either have not heard about the program, have received misinformation or still cannot afford premiums even with a tax break. Hoffman said some folks without income - and therefore not eligible on their own - do not realize that if they have lived with a relative for more than six month and appear as a dependent on the relative's tax return - they may be able to qualify for insurance using the relative's income.

Jim Carnes, policy director of the Arise Citizens' Policy Project, said that the remaining people who are uninsured are harder to reach in one sense. But he predicted many of them will be motivated next year when they get hit with a tax penalty.

"The consequences for not enrolling are just being felt now," he said.

Even if 100 percent of those eligible enroll, that still leaves up to 300,000 people who make too much to qualify for Medicaid but too little to be eligible for a subsidy for private insurance.

Although Gov. Robert Bentley has dropped hints that he might be open to some sort of compromise that would allow the state to accept federal funds to expand coverage to lower-income residents through Medicaid, he has thus far offered no concrete proposal.

Alabama remains one of 22 states that have declined to accept the expansion deal, which includes federal funds to cover 100 percent of the new beneficiaries through 2016, with the federal match eventually falling to 90 percent.