4-H events underway as opening of Larimer County Fair on Friday nears

Levi Carpman and Nick Giauque mount their rockets on two of the four the launch pads at the 2015 Larimer County Fair Model Rocketry Fly Day on Sunday. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

"Is the retrieval team ready?"

"There are no low-flying airplanes."

"Systems armed!"

"Do I have permission to launch? 5-4-3-2-1!"

"Good luck, see you in space," Davin Armstrong told his daughter, Mary Armstrong.

The weather was clear, hot and devoid of wind on Sunday as youngsters checked their rockets over, added wadding and engines, went through a security check, and launched from a "launch pad" in a field on the east side of The Ranch Complex.

That was nice, since many participants remember bundling up in blankets last year during a cold and cloudy day, and busting out the umbrellas the year before during a rainy morning.

Last year one rocket landed on the interstate and two others on the roof of the Embassy Suites.

The Rocketry Fly Day was the regional culmination of a rocketry project by 4-H children ages 8 to 18.

Children in five different units demonstrated how well they had followed instructions and tested their rockets earlier this year. For youngsters in unit 1, this was their first year creating and launching rockets. Units 1-4 are allowed to use instruction guides and rocket kits while unit 6 (there is no unit 5) design their own rockets and write up a blueprint telling how they did it.

Russ Rhoads, the superintendent of the rocketry program, demonstrated Sunday how to prep the rockets the students had prepared for launch. He showed them how to cut a large hole off the top of the parachute so it would glide down faster, use baby powder to coat the parachute to keep the generated heat from the ejection charge from melting the plastic, and how to add the wadding, engine and fuse.

Advertisement

"Rockets give you endless imagination," said Scotty Bowen, in unit 4. "When you're in unit 6 you can build whatever you want. It's just fun because I just love building things, especially wood."

Scotty, 13, said it took him two days to build his rocket and another two days to paint it in camo greens and browns. "This is 'The Military Dude," he said. "I'm not going to quit until I'm too old to do this and then I'm still going to do it at my house. I like to see how high I can get."

Grant Rhoads does a final inspection of Scotty Bowen's rocket before it's positioned on one of the launch pads at the 2015 Larimer County Fair Model Rocketry Fly Day on Sunday. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Scotty was quick to point out to his neighbors what he thought of their rockets. "Dude, that's not going to work" and "You'll probably be champion and I'll be reserve champion."

Scotty said there are only two members in his unit, himself and Caden Schwab, 11, which meant that even if he got second place, he would be the reserve if Caden couldn't make it to the state competition.

"This took me a few hours to paint," Caden said with a smile about his all-white creation as he and Scotty prepped their rockets for launch.

"His can be named 'Albino,'" Scotty added.

Next to them, Levi Carpman, with unit 6, added the engine to his craft, which he designed to look "kind of like a F-16 fighter jet."

"It took me about a week to build it," he said.

Scotty's launch charged straight up in a cloud of smoke and afterward he said excitedly, "I honestly was glad about how well it went. The smoke came right in my face. I made it within 75 feet!"

Carpman's F-16, however, flew up only a short distance before plummeting back down.

Brendan Stanley, 11, and his father, Matt Stanley, spent a couple of weeks on Brendan's rocket. They even designed a device involving a yardstick and tripod to measure the angle of the height of a rocket in lieu of an altimeter.

"We Googled how to do it to learn the distance and angle method," Matt Stanley said.

After the launch day, the pair planned to load the rocket with the biggest engine possible to see how high they could get it to go.

That wasn't a good idea on launch day because the rocket is supposed to land as close to the launch pad as possible. Brendan's rocket on his first try landed within 79 feet of the launch pad.

The young people received their record books and instruction manuals earlier this year, according to Grant Rhoads, model rocketry judge.

"They are judged on five categories," he said. "Construction, range safety, stability, parachute deployment and how close to the pad it lands."

As the students prepare their aircraft for launch, they run through security checks by making sure the system is unarmed before connecting their rocket to the trigger, making sure the recovery team is ready, checking the sky for low-flying aircrafts (especially since the launch set is not far from the Fort Collins-Loveland Municipal Airport), launching the rocket, and making sure the system is off afterward.

The champion from each unit will go to the Colorado State Fair to be judged in the same categories.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.