Nearly everything seized during a raid at convicted drug conspirator Jerry Tuttle’s Culleoka property, including $1.1 million in cash, was ordered forfeited to the state of Tennessee during a court hearing Friday.

Maury County Circuit Judge Stella Hargrove, who presided over Tuttle’s drug conspiracy and money laundering trial during the three days preceding Friday’s hearing, ordered that the cash and all personal property acquired by Tuttle since 2007 were to be forfeited as the products of illegal drug trade.

Hargrove exempted any personal property Tuttle acquired before 2007 as well as a credit union account in which he received about $600 a month in Social Security disability payments.

“Otherwise, everything else” will be kept by the state, Hargrove ruled.

Tuttle was released from prison in 2007 after serving four years for a conspiracy in 2000 to launder money and to possess more than 70 pounds of marijuana in a criminal enterprise led by his son, Christopher Tuttle, officials said. Christopher Tuttle was also convicted and served a prison term in the same case.

Maury County Assistant District Attorney General Brent Cooper, who prosecuted Jerry Tuttle last week, argued Friday that $1.1 million in cash seized during the raid at his home was buried on Tuttle’s property at 4571 Dugger Road for safe-keeping until he and his son were released from prison.

In 2000, the father and son “were moving, apparently, thousands of pounds of marijuana at that time in Middle Tennessee, in our community,” Cooper said. “And they got lucky back then because the officers only found a little over $100,000 that was at Jerry’s house.”

Cooper continued, saying evidence presented in last week’s trial was “overwhelming” that Jerry Tuttle had at least $1.1 million more buried on his property, dug it up about a year before his arrest during the April 24, 2012 raid at his Dugger Road trailer, and hid it in the trunk of a Honda Civic parked in front of his trailer.

“Proof is also overwhelming that when Chris and Jerry both went to prison for what they were doing back in 2000, that they weren’t rehabilitated, they didn’t learn their lesson, they didn’t decide to go straight,” Cooper continued.

“It appears that Jerry was siphoning off part of that money that wasn’t found back in 2000, the million dollars that I’m sure they dreamed about when they were laying their little heads on those thin prison pillows when they were in the penitentiary.”

When Christopher Tuttle was released from prison in 2011, Cooper maintained, he and his father went right back into the dope and money laundering business.

Jerry Tuttle’s attorney, John Colley, countered that there was no proof that the father and son continued their conspiracy while they were in prison, adding, “We don’t know when the criminal conduct occurred that led to those funds that led him to acquire these vehicles.”

The vehicles Colley referred to included dozens of cars, trucks and motorcycles, as well as expensive farm equipment that Jerry Tuttle said he used to earn his living as a farmer with a hay-mowing business.

As for the cash, Colley said to Hargrove, “Are we going to hand over all that money, including the 600 bucks a month that he got from (U.S.) Treasury, as drug proceeds?”

Except for the credit union account that received Jerry Tuttle’s Social Security payments, as well as any personal property and vehicles he purchased before his 2007 release from prison, Hargrove’s ruling answered Colley’s question.