health insurance sign (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

After 8 years, Wisconsin Rapids Public Schools teachers still do not see how they were "played" by their union leadership and administration. I recently talked to a few and it is clear they just haven't caught on.

When I ran for the school board in 2006, I was a critic of Other Post Employment Benefits and still am to date. OPEB is when WRPS pays for health insurance after teachers retire. The WRPS OPEB plan pays 70 percent of the family plan from age 57 to 59 and 90 percent of the family plan from age 59 to 65.

The local teacher union leadership wanted teachers to believe I was against teachers, but they were wrong. I was looking down the road at the financial future of our teachers and our district.

Those ready to reap the OPEB benefits were greedy and did not want to see the benefit eliminated (which I wanted). I feel this was why they rejected my request to meet with ALL the teachers to answer questions and they told teachers not to talk to me.

Consider these points.

An actuarial report said the OPEB benefit would cost our district $41 million over and above our regular operating costs. This was not free money, but had to come from the General Fund (Fund 10) or from the Fund 10 balance.

In 1999, WRPS had a $14 million Fund 10 balance, but now has to short term borrow each year because the balance is so small. Where did it go? OPEB.

WRPS had to change to a health insurance plan with less coverage. Why? To save money to continue the OPEB benefit for retirees.

How many classes have been cut because WRPS has to reduce funds each year?

How many teachers have been placed on layoff because WRPS has to reduce funds?

Last year some school board members started talking about eliminating the OPEB benefit. Obviously, they saw the extravagant costs.

I doubt teachers with more than a couple years to age 57 will ever see OPEB.

You were outsmarted by those you trusted!

Wayne E. Pankratz,

Wisconsin Rapids

Read or Share this story: http://wrtnews.co/1HloL1p