Louisiana once again commandeered the late-night spotlight Wednesday (June 18) as a result of its legislative debate during the recent session on the purported sport of chicken boxing.

This time, Jon Stewart's "The Daily Show" sent one of its comedian/correspondents from its filming location of New York City to the bayou to experience the mix of seriousness and absurdity surrounding the practice some lawmakers and animal activists claim is a spinoff of cockfighting.

The segment titled "Chicken boxing vs. cockfighting" on Comedy Central's long-running mock news broadcast features interviews with state Sen. J.P. Morrell, D-New Orleans, and Sen. Elbert Guillory, R-Opelousas, who at one point donned a camouflage cowboy hat for a tour of an apparent chicken boxing arena.

View "The Daily Show" chicken boxing segment here.

Guillory, a candidate for lieutenant governor, educated the world on chicken boxing this session when he tried to introduce an amendment to an anti-cockfighting bill, sponsored by Morrell, to decriminalize the less vicious version of chicken fighting. "It's a family sport," Guillory assured correspondent Al Madrigal, while also touting the tip-top medical care received by the "premier athletes." He then let Madrigal hold the rubber chicken boxing gloves, which Guillory once waved on the floor of the Senate in defense of the sport.

"So cockfighting -- vicious," Madrigal said. "But plus this...adorable."

Morrell, who fought successfully against the chicken boxing amendment to his bill, maintained it was wrong for people to make chickens fight for their entertainment. Asked by Madrigal what Morrell would tell him if Madrigal were a chicken, Morell said: "It's barbaric. It's stupid, and there's a better life for you."

"I'm a chicken, I didn't understand a word you (expletive) said," Madrigal responded, to which Morrell answered with an audible exhale.

Gov. Bobby Jindal has since signed into law the strengthened cockfighting penalties.

The segment ended with Madrigal, wearing a beanie and hooded sweatshirt, running up concrete stairs while cradling a chicken to the tune of "Rocky."

Wednesday wasn't Comedy Central's first crack at chicken boxing. Incoming host of CBS's "The Late Show" comedian Stephen Colbert also spoofed the Louisiana Legislature's debate of the sport in April on "The Colbert Report," a show of a similar format that follows Stewart's show. Colbert, a mock conservative, cheered Guillory for "trying to keep big government out of our chicken sporting events."