ATLANTA | As another federal spending year wraps up this month, Georgia remains near the bottom of states in terms of getting a share equal to its population.

That means it is effectively a “donor state,” something that Georgia voters might want to discuss with the various presidential candidates coming through looking for votes in the March 1 primary. The timing of the primary and the number of delegates up for grabs this election have given the state more attention than normal from White House aspirants, and a recent analysis of spending gives Peach State voters something to ask for in return for their support.

Georgia ranked 39th in per-person receipts from the federal government in fiscal year 2013, the most recent calculated by State Policy Reports, a publication of the Washington-based Federal Funds Information for States.

Among the different types of spending analyzed, Georgia ranked highest, 14th, in salaries to the thousands of federal employees, but below average in procurement, 26th, which is the category that accounts for the state’s smallest dollar amount.

Largest is direct payments to individuals, such as Social Security retirement and disability benefits, food stamps, unemployment checks and primarily Medicare coverage. Georgia is 30th.

The state’s lowest ranking, 46th, in terms of federal grants per person, is the money doled out for projects like highways, sewer projects, education and mostly Medicaid.

Gov. Nathan Deal decided not to take advantage of bonus grants if the state expanded its Medicaid coverage as part of the Affordable Care Act., but that didn’t take effect until after the period analyzed. However, that decision means Georgia most likely received less grant money per person than states that expanded their Medicaid health coverage for the poor.

Also in the category of grants is funding for transportation. The state has passed up offers of federal grants to build passenger-rail lines, but transportation leaders here complain that the state doesn’t get its share of road funding.

PHILOSOPHY, FUNDING

In fiscal year 2013, Georgia received $1,163 per person in overall federal grants compared to the national average of $1,600.

“In some cases, federal policymakers turn to intergovernmental grants to encourage state and local governments to adopt federal policy priorities,” said the Congressional Budget Office in its report on “Grants to State and Local Governments.”

The rejection of that approach by Georgia policymakers may explain why the state ranks where it does. Besides the examples of Medicaid expansion and passenger rail, there are dozens of other cases where the state has brushed aside federal incentives.

One oft-repeated argument for this year’s transportation-funding legislation in the General Assembly was to raise more funds within the state to gain independence from federal requirements and procedures.

“Through the governor’s leadership and the leadership of our House and Senate transportation committees, they worked very hard to come up with a solution that frees us a little bit from the federal handcuffs that we’ve been given,” said Georgia Transportation Commissioner Russell McMurry.

Similarly, Deal’s argument for rejecting Medicaid expansion was that the state would not have flexibility and that its own costs would rise.

Beside, Georgia’s leaders are fiscal conservatives.

That philosophy is reflected in the thinking of the Georgia Public Policy Foundation, a conservative think tank well respected among the Republican leaders in state government.

“Of course, we want our state to be fairly funded by the federal government, but it’s exactly this kind of thinking – trying to maximize federal funds – that contributes to our growing national debt,” said foundation President Kelly McCutchen. “We should spend more time encouraging Congress to devolve more programs to the states than fighting for greater funding.”

RIVER PROJECT

When you ask members of the state’s congressional delegation, they mostly agree with McCutchen. Some exceptions are their efforts to get the federal portion of the $700 million cost to deepen 40 miles of the Savannah River.

First District Rep. Buddy Carter, R-Ga., calls it a priority.

“Since I took office, it has been a priority of mine to ensure federal dollars are spent in a responsible manner on important projects that work like our military installations and the maintenance of our ports in the First District, including the Savannah Harbor Expansion Project [SHEP],” he said Friday. “SHEP will create thousands of jobs and increase our nation’s competitiveness while boasting an unprecedented $5.50 return on every $1 dollar invested. If that’s not a good investment, I’m not sure what is.”

The entire delegation has pursued the deepening funds, but each district has similar individual concerns. In the 12th District, Rep. Rick Allen, R-Ga., is focused on money for the Army’s Cyber Command at Fort Gordon, notes his spokeswoman Virginia Dent.

“He is also committed to working to ensure federal resources continue to support growth at Fort Gordon,” she said. “Congressman Allen was pleased that full funding requested by the Army was included in the FY 2016 NDAA, and with funding levels in the FY 2016 military construction and Veterans Affairs Appropriations bill and the House defense appropriations bill that passed the House, and will work to make sure these funds are included in future legislation.”

Georgia has two representatives on congressional budget committees, both members of the ruling Republican majority. Freshman Sen. David Perdue and Rep. Tom Price who chairs the House committee.

Perdue was elected last year on a campaign emphasizing his experience as a CEO of Fortune 500 companies concerned about runaway federal spending.

“Instead of allowing Washington to make excuses for spending more taxpayer dollars, we must make Washington more transparent and accurate in its overall budgeting and accounting of everything its spending,” he said recently.

He says that’s the reason he is pushing the U.S. Department of State to locate its training facility for security officers in Brunswick at the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, not trying to boost Georgia’s share of federal spending. Using the existing center would save $1 billion over 10 years, he said.

Price actually oversaw the writing of the House version of the budget. Instead of maximizing direct payments, the area Georgia ranks highest in, he vows to tamp them back.

“Federal spending is being driven in large part and increasingly so by the nation’s health and retirement programs like Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security while at the same time those programs are headed toward insolvency,” he said in response to a recent upward revision in the Budget Office’s projection of the annual budget deficit. “Positive, principled solutions are needed to save and strengthen these vital programs for current and future generations and to help restore balance to our nation’s fiscal outlook.”

Walter Jones: (404) 589-8424