As the global warming fraud continues to garner support from the world’s political leaders, who recently jetted to Paris by the hundreds to affirm their need to seize control and tax the world’s use of energy, the bogus nature of the “evidence” for it continues to be exposed.

“Ridicule is man’s most potent weapon.” There is no defense. It’s irrational. It’s infuriating. It also works as a key pressure point to force the enemy into concessions.

And who better to target than Al Gore, that fat profiteer, who has made a nine figure fortune off the con game, and who flies around in private jets, has multiple gigantic, energy-sucking houses, and is generally a pathetic excuse for a seer.

Back when the fraud was widely accepted, Al made a foolish prediction that Anthony Watts of Wattsupwiththat.com is holding him to:

On January 25th, 2006, while at the Sundance film festival, screening “An Inconvenient Truth”, Al Gore said this as chronicled in an article by CBS News: The former vice president came to town for the premiere of “An Inconvenient Truth,” a documentary chronicling what has become his crusade since losing the 2000 presidential election: Educating the masses that global warming is about to toast our ecology and our way of life. Gore has been saying it for decades, since a college class in the 1960s convinced him that greenhouse gases from oil, coal and other carbon emissions were trapping the sun’s heat in the atmosphere, resulting in a glacial meltdown that could flood much of the planet. Americans have been hearing it for decades, wavering between belief and skepticism that it all may just be a natural part of Earth’s cyclical warming and cooling phases. And politicians and corporations have been ignoring the issue for decades, to the point that unless drastic measures to reduce greenhouse gases are taken within the next 10 years, the world will reach a point of no return, Gore said. He sees the situation as “a true planetary emergency.” “If you accept the truth of that, then nothing else really matters that much,” Gore said in an interview with The Associated Press. “We have to organize quickly to come up with a coherent and really strong response, and that’s what I’m devoting myself to.”

That’s it. Three weeks from tomorrow, it is all over for us, because CO2 emission have continued to grow. Watts deploys the scientific data showing that the Gorepocalypse is not developing in surface temperatures, killer storms, and the other indicia of doom.

Make no mistake: if a prominent conservative, much less a former VP and GOP presidential candidate, had predicted doom by a certain date, the media the media would dog that person everywhere, asking where is the apocalypse?

Gore has been keeping a low profile of late. Hmmm. Perhaps he is diving into his money bin? Or getting hotel room massages?

I say we continue to highlight the countdown. We have only 22 days left, according to Al.

Gorepacalyspe now!