COLUMBUS, Ohio -- As the filing deadline looms less than two weeks away, many low- and middle-income Ohioans are eligible for free help completing their tax returns through the Ohio Benefit Bank.

The assistance is available to taxpayers with household incomes of less than $95,000 on their joint return and to individuals with annual incomes below $65,000, said Joree Jacobs, director of communications for the Ohio Association of Foodbanks.

The Association of Foodbanks, based in Columbus, represents 12 Feeding America food banks and 3,300 charities across the state, including food pantries, soup kitchens and shelters. It also is home for the Ohio Benefit Bank and runs the largest navigator program for the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act in Ohio.

The tax assistance is meant to be a free alternative to paid preparers, allowing people to keep all of their refund. As part of the process, the benefit bank checks for tax credits, including the Earned Income Tax Credit and Child Tax Credits, and allows Ohioans to electronically file their returns.

The Ohio Benefit Bank began providing the tax assistance in 2006 and has helped nearly 100,000 taxpayers file at no cost. The Association of Foodbanks estimates those filers received refunds of about $227 million.

“We want everyone to remember that your tax refund belongs to you,” Lisa Hamler-Fugitt, executive director for the Ohio Association of Foodbanks, said in a statement. “Whether you file on your own using our free online service, or you set up an appointment with one of our trained tax counselors, don’t give part of your hard-earned money away.”

Taxpayers get help filing on their own through an online question-and-answer based process. Trained tax counselors are also available through the site’s Benefit Bank Locator or by calling 800-648-1176.

The Benefit Bank helps connect people to a host of services, such as food and nutrition programs, health care assistance, student aid and senior programs.

In Greater Cleveland, it has more than 150 benefit bank sites, partnering with local United Way agencies, social service organizations, churches and government community service offices.