Douglas Graham via Getty Images

Former Sen. Scott Brown (R-Mass.) slammed Democrats' "stunning hypocrisy" on Obamacare in an op-ed published by Fox News on Tuesday.

"Hypocrisy and double standards are two things that disgust and infuriate all Americans, regardless of where they fall on the ideological spectrum," Brown writes.

"Nowhere is this more evident than in the implementation and implosion of ObamaCare," Brown continues.

Brown cites New Hampshire -- where he's hinted he may run for office -- as an example of the "catastrophe" of Obamacare:

For example, in New Hampshire, only 16 of the state’s 26 hospitals are available on the federal exchange, meaning patients must either pay more to keep their current doctor or seek inferior care elsewhere. Neither is a good option. New Hampshire is not alone. Across the country, some of the best hospitals are not available on plans on the exchange, leaving patients with difficult choices and unwanted sometimes, life threatening decisions.

Brown writes that "every single Democratic Senator" who "fell in line with their party bosses" is to blame for Obamacare.

"The hypocrisy is stunning. Saddling the rest of the country with complicated rules they didn’t want and don’t need in pursuit of a health care takeover that will hurt patient care, limit options and devastate our economy is no way to run a country," Brown writes. "Not only is President Obama to blame here, so too are every single one of the Democratic senators who forced this fiasco on the American people."

Brown has spoken out against Obamacare before, saying it "is wrong for jobs and the economy." After President Barack Obama alluded to the Massachusetts health care law while giving an October speech on Obamacare, Brown said it made his "blood boil."

"Two different plans. Our plan didn't raise taxes, didn’t cut Medicare. This one does," the former Massachusetts senator said.

Read Brown's full op-ed here.

Also on HuffPost: Health Care Reform Efforts Throughout History Health Care Reform Efforts Throughout History

1 of 17 1912 Former President Theodore Roosevelt champions national health insurance as he unsuccessfully tries to ride his progressive Bull Moose Party back to the White House. (Photo by Topical Press Agency/Getty Images) Share this slide:

Getty File