It was inadvertent Ibrahimovic magic — call it the “I-bronco-imovic.”

You might not have heard of Zlatan Ibrahimovic (ee-bra-heem-ovich), soccer’s suave Swede who scores goals with the most creative feats of feet. But he came to mind as I watched Tony Carter’s accidental awesomeness Sunday against the New York Giants.

If you recall, it was the first play of the fourth quarter, Broncos up 24-16, while the Giants had a second-and-2 from their own 28-yard line. Denver defensive back Carter cut in front of receiver Rueben Randle and batted the pass with his left hand. (“Randle allows Carter to come underneath him,” CBS’ Phil Simms said on the broadcast. “That’s a sin on those in routes.”)

But then, one of the highlights of the day was cooked up in a jambalaya of gravity, timing and luck.



As Carter lunged forward, the batted ball landed on the back heel of his left foot, which Carter kicked into the air — and into the arms of teammate Chris Harris for an interception.

It was Ibra-esque. The soccer wizard has scored numerous goals with his back heel over the years — here are a couple classics:



“It was definitely some luck right there,” Harris told reporters after the game of the Carter-Harris play, “but you’ve still got to catch it and I was able to be there in the right spot and make a play. Not every pick is going to come right in your hands. I was lucky it came my way.

“The tip that he made wasn’t luck. We knew from watching the Cowboys. … I mean look how many interceptions the Cowboys had off of tips and overthrows. … There are a lot of tips and overthrows, so we were getting ready for that.”

A lot is made about how the Broncos are thriving without the services of Von Miller, a top-three defensive player in the league, but Denver is without Champ Bailey too. Though Bailey told The Denver Post’s Mark Kiszla that he’ll try to play next Monday against the Oakland Raiders, other players are making plays, notably Harris with two interceptions in two games thus far. Denver totaled four INTs off Peyton’s little brother, though Denver defensive backs committed eight penalties in the game.

But Denver is 2-0, and while it waits for Champ to heal, it’ll seemingly rely on its heel. (See what I did there? Pretty bad.)

As for the most famous football-kick-that-wasn’t-an-actual-football kick? Probably Nebraska against my alma mater Missouri, back in 1997. Here it is:



Benjamin Hochman: bhochman@denverpost.com or twitter.com/hochman



Visit denverpost.com each weekday near quittin’ time for a heavy pour of sports commentary from Denver Post columnist Benjamin Hochman. Care for another round? Find previous Happy Hour installments at denverpost.com/hochman.