KOHLER, Wis. (WHBL) – Members of a local Veterans Auxiliary found out the hard way that even during a massive strike in a small town such as the Village of Kohler, Wisconsin, you cannot just organize a parade in the middle of a busy highway to show support. Not without a permit.

The Kohler Company reportedly filed an injunction against the veterans group and UAW 833 after they began to march along Highland Drive, blocking the flow of traffic.

Witnesses say the parade was disbanded by Kohler police, and both the vets and union members on the picket lines were issued warnings against being in the street. United Auto Worker local 833 are on strike against Kohler Company over failed contract negotiations.

-----

UAW 833 wrote the following open letter to WHBL Radio, detailing their version of what led up to the strike. The letter, in its entirety reads;

UPDATE -this is UAW LOCAL 833 Response to the contract proposal –

On Saturday November 14, 2015, Kohler Co. at its discretion released a copy of their last best final offer along with a cover sheet to the area media. Our intention here is to inform you of the “rest of the story”

HEALTH CARE RATIFICATION BONUS FOR ALL ASSOCIATES “Tier A associates will receive a $1,200 bonus and Tier B associates will receive a $1,000 bonus. This can more than cover the increase in the health care premiums in the 3 years of the agreement.” What Kohler Co. failed to explain is those bonuses minus applicable taxes fall short of picking up the monthly increase in premium in the majority of cases. Furthermore, again not released to the media, the Company made a plan design change to the current Legacy Health Care Plan that could potentially cost our senior

Tier A members an additional $1000 single and $2000 family per contract year over and above what their cost obligation is today. Tier B members currently only have one option for Health Care coverage, it is a high deductible plan that covers most expenses AFTER a deductible of $3000 for an individual and $6000 for a family are met, in short, the first three or six thousand dollars, are paid by the employee before the Kohler plan pays a dime. These individuals are also required to pay a monthly premium for the plan, and under the terms of Kohler Co. final proposal, that premium will double during the life of the contract. Keep in mind that these are the employees currently hired at 65% of the wage rate.

TIER A WAGE INCREASES “Our contract offer provides Tier A associates with an annual wage increase of 50 cents per hour in each of the 3 years of the contract” That is accurate; the Company’s last offer reflects a 50 cent increase in each year of the contract. Note the health care cost increases in both plan design and monthly premium stated above could elimate those increases and more. It is also worth noting that these workers have not seen a general wage increase in 5 years and during that time period, their monthly insurance premiums also increased by over 750% TIER A BENEFITS IMPROVED Company statement is correct; the Union was successful in bargaining increases in life insurance and accidental death and dismemberment benefits, increases in short term and long term disability benefits and improves dental coverage. None of the above increases were in the Company original proposal.

TIER B WAGE INCREASES

“ Tier B wages increase on average by more than 20% immediately with additional increases of 40 cents per hour in both the 2nd and 3rd years. Tier B associates also have the opportunity to advance and move into jobs that pay over $20 per hour.” The key word in that statement is average, the company picked and chose which classifications received an increase, and some classifications actually went below the 65% hire in rate. The Union and its membership believes that all employees should have a path to full wage, the current company proposal, although offers increases, still gives no path to full wage. It actually, after the first year, begins to move the tiers apart again by offering 10 cents more per year for Tier A senior employees. We have a proposal on the table to address this over a five year period which was rejected by the company. Summary The UAW wants nothing more than a contract that is fair and equitable for its members; we have contacted Kohler Co. and have offered to continue talks to reach that goal.

Sincerely, UAW Local 833 Bargaining Committee

by Areka Spencer, WHBL Radio-Sheboygan