What's your assessment of the Cleveland Clinic's performance? Tell us in the comments.

CLEVELAND, Ohio -- The Cleveland Clinic recorded $481 million in operating income in 2015, its best financial year ever despite reimbursement cuts related to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, according to a report released today.

In his annual State of the Clinic speech, chief executive Dr. Toby Cosgrove said the hospital network's positive financial results were driven by cost-saving measures implemented across its facilities and clinical programs.

"Over the last three years, we have reduced the cost of providing care some $600 million," Cosgrove said. "Had we not been able to make that reduction in our cost and efficiency, we would have had one of the worst financial years that we have ever had."

The $481 million in operating income -- on total revenue of $7.2 billion -- represents a 3 percent increase from 2014, according to the Clinic's report.

Cosgrove highlighted the success of a program to collect cost-saving suggestions from employees and a broader effort to standardize the delivery of care in a wide array of specialties and settings. For example, he said, the Clinic has been able to reduce the average cost of knee replacements by 16 percent, to $3,000, during the past two years.

Cosgrove noted that the length of stay for that procedure has been reduced by 27 percent, and that physicians have also been able to lower the rate of infections as well as the need for blood transfusions.

The efficiency efforts are largely being driven by changes in reimbursement implemented through the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare. The law has sought to tie reimbursement to patient outcomes – rather than volume of care – to force hospitals to become better and more efficient. The Clinic is now required to report to the federal government on some 115 quality measures.

in addition to cost savings, the hospital network is also seeing more patients, Cosgrove said. Outpatient visits increased by 13 percent, to 6.6 million, while admissions ticked up 17 percent, to 229,000. Emergency visits were also up 29 percent, to 640,000.

Those increases are partly due to the Clinic's continued expansion. Last year, it incorporated Akron General Hospital as a full member of the Clinic's hospital network. The Clinic is also building new facilities in Avon, Cleveland and London, and it is expanding its operations in Florida.

Cosgrove said the Clinic hired 500 new nurses last year to keep up with patient volume, and is also adding physicians and other caregivers. "To have more patients coming to this organization is good thing, both for us and for Cleveland," he said.

Cosgrove also noted some troubling trends for the organization, with physicians reporting that they are under more stress due to changes in technology and other pressures. Physicians are also spending an increasing amount of time in front of computers, due to increased reporting requirements and other internal information sharing rules.

Cosgrove said he intends to address caregivers' concerns through a series of upcoming town hall meetings.