Executive Briefing | by Sarah C. Threnhauser, MPA | May 22, 2015

The changes brought to the health care landscape by health care reform—a reduced uninsured population, more Medicaid managed care, the focus on primary care, increased consolidation—have left most stakeholder organizations reevaluating their role in the health care system, including the national system of federally qualified health centers (FQHCs).

The FQHCs as a group are expanding their primary care capacity and delivering more behavioral health services – with some evolving into a medical home role. FQHCs are the recipients of a continuing stream of earmarked federal funding. They also have some unique governance and service requirements – including serving as the “safety net” provider for uninsured consumers residing in medically under-served areas of the country.

Predictions of the future role of FQHCs depends on who you ask. As specialist organizations consider offering integrated primary care/behavioral health services, whether to work with or compete with FQHCs or one of the many FQHC-like organizations, is a big question. To answer that question, understanding the FQHC landscape is essential.

FQHCs are public, non-profit, community-based provider organizations that receive grant funding under the Health Center Consolidation Act (Section 330 of the Public Health Service Act). FQHCs are required to provide a comprehensive array of services including primary and preventative care; additionally FQHCs must provide or contract with other organizations to provide dental care, hospital care, transportation services – and mental health and substance abuse services.

Today, there are nearly 1,300 FQHCs at over 9,100 service sites, which serve approximately 21.7 million consumers. In addition to section 330 grant funding, FQHCs are reimbursed by Medicaid through a prospective payment system (PPS) or other state-approved alternative payment system, and, as of 2014, FQHCs are also reimbursed for Medicare through a bundled rate via a prospective payment system (PPS) (see Medicare Moving FQHC Reimbursement From FFS To Bundled Rates). Additionally, FQHCs can charge consumers an out-of-pocket fee for services based on a sliding scale fee.

While all FQHCs must meet certain requirements, there are different types of health centers. While there are no federal licensure categories for the types of FQHCs, there are different designations based on the types of populations that each center focuses on serving. These types include:

Community Health Centers (CHCs) – Provide preventive medical care services to several federally designated Medically Underserved Area/Populations (MUA or MUP). In 2013, there were 703 CHCs across the U.S.

– Provide preventive medical care services to several federally designated Medically Underserved Area/Populations (MUA or MUP). In 2013, there were 703 CHCs across the U.S. Migrant Health Centers – Provide preventive medical care services to migrant and seasonal workers. In 2013, there were 169 migrant health centers across the U.S.

– Provide preventive medical care services to migrant and seasonal workers. In 2013, there were 169 migrant health centers across the U.S. Health Care for the Homeless Programs – Provide preventive care and substance abuse services to homeless individuals or families. In 2013, there were 250 health care for the homeless programs across the U.S.

– Provide preventive care and substance abuse services to homeless individuals or families. In 2013, there were 250 health care for the homeless programs across the U.S. Public Housing Primary Care Programs (PHPC) – Provide preventive medical care services to residents of public housing. In 2013, there were 80 PHPC programs across the U.S.

In addition to these four types of FQHCs, there are two other types of federally supported health clinics that do not receive Section 330 grants – Rural Health Clinics and FQHC Look-Alikes.

The question is, what will FQHCs look like in the future? The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) allocated an additional $11 billion to FQHCs over a period of five years and that funding runs out in fiscal year 2016. On one hand, since Medicaid expansion and the opening of health insurance marketplaces in 2014, there should be fewer uninsured consumers to serve. On the other, this expansion increases the demand for primary care services – and will increase the number of economically disadvantaged beneficiaries looking for services.

To learn more about FQHCs, including details about funding, check out What Are The Types Of Federal Health Centers?: An OPEN MINDS Market Intelligence Report. This report is free to all premium members – and can be purchased for $495 in the OPEN MINDS e-store. This reference guide answers a number of key questions:

What are Federally Qualified Health Centers? What types of FQHCs are in operation? How are FQHCs funded? How many FQHCs are there in the U.S.?

For more on how health care reform is shaping the health care coverage map in the U.S., premium members can check out our other market intelligence reports, including: What Are The Behavioral Health Services Needs Of The Medicaid “Donut Hole” Population? and What Are The Behavioral Health Service Needs Of The Medicaid Expansion Population?.