Pin this on Pinterest Email this story

Do you have wine lovers on your last-minute Christmas shopping list? Do you want to serve wine at your holiday party?

If you fall into either category, you’re likely looking for affordable wine options that won’t burst your budget. After all, at this point in the holiday season your wallet’s likely tapped out from other gifts and travel expenses.

But don’t worry, you can find wine deals if you have the right inside scoop and we’ve got that for you.

Jeanette Pavini, two-time Emmy Award-winning reporter and Coupons.com Savings Expert, shares her tips on scoring the best deals on wine. She is currently the savings expert for Hallmark Channel’s Home & Family Show, as well as a columnist for The Wall Street Journal Sunday and MarketWatch.

Read on for her expert advice on finding affordable wine during the holiday.

Choose a Second Label

Find out if your favorite wine brand produces a second label. These lines utilize younger vines or grapes that weren’t up to the standards set for the primary line, and are often aged for a shorter amount of time. But, it’s still a wine from the same producer you enjoy, and at a lower price.

Score Warehouse Prices

Find some of the best prices on wine and liquor at warehouse stores. The good news is you can shop for alcohol at a warehouse club even if you don’t have a membership. Alcohol laws vary state-to-state, but in general it is against the law to charge a membership fee for alcohol purchases, so score deals on your holiday wine and spirits even if you’re not a member.

Expand your Horizons

If you’re stuck on wine from the Napa Valley, you’re probably going to pay a premium. But if you venture your taste buds outside of the United States, you can typically get a quality bottle of wine for less. Up-and-coming and/or less popular regions offer great value. This season, consider wines from places like Argentina, Chile, South Africa and Portugal and you may just get more bang for your wine buck.

Celebrate with Champagne

Champagne will see some great deals through New Year’s, but don’t limit yourself strictly to champagne. Only sparkling wines produced in the Champagne region of France can truly earn the “Champagne” label, making it rare. So consider less expensive sparkling wine alternatives like Italy’s Prosecco or Spain’s Cava.

Redeem your Rebates

Rebates are a common find in the alcohol aisle, and as long as you remember to mail them in, you can save a lot of money. Often it requires a food and alcohol purchase like a beer brand offering a $5 rebate when you buy a 12-pack and $5 worth of chips. Others will give you a certain amount off your groceries instantly. So when you buy eligible wine and spirits you get (for example) $30 off your grocery purchase.

Buy in Bulk

Many people know about the bulk discounts some grocers give on wine (commonly an additional 10% off when you buy 6 or more bottles). But many will let you mix and match wine and spirits to get this discount. So you can restock your bar and get a few bottles of the wine for your holiday party and still receive that 10% off.