WASHINGTON (CBS DC/AP) — A majority of Americans are not pleased with the job President Barack Obama has been doing.

A new CBS News poll finds that Obama’s approval rating has plummeted to 37 percent, a nine-point drop from his 46 percent rating in October. His disapproval rating is at the highest CBS News Polls have indicated, climbing to 57 percent.

The faulty Affordable Care Act rollout hasn’t helped matters as only 31 percent of Americans now approve of Obamacare, indicating a drop of 12 points since last month. It’s the lowest number recorded by CBS News Polls for the favorability of the law. A staggering 61 percent disapprove of the law.

Only 7 percent of Americans believe the law is working well and should be kept in place while one in 10 Americans believe the health care exchange sign-ups have been going well. Conversely, CBS News Polls found that two-thirds don’t believe enrolling for Obamacare is going well.

A majority of Americans also don’t believe the government will be able to fix the faulty HealthCare.gov website. Almost two-thirds believe the website will be fixed by the Dec. 1 deadline set by the administration, compared to 34 percent of people who believe it will be.

Last week, federal health officials revealed that just 26,794 people enrolled for health insurance through the federal website during the first, flawed month of operations, and a total of 106,000 nationwide — a small fraction of what they had projected.

Obama has apologized for the faulty rollout and for the millions of Americans who are losing their coverage due to the law. A CBS News analysis found that nearly 5 million Americans will lose their current health plan due to Obamacare.

In the wake of growing criticism over the cancellations, Obama tried to make good on a previous promise, saying those who like their insurance can keep it for one more year. However, the ultimate decision still lies with insurers and state insurance commissioners.

(TM and © Copyright 2013 CBS Radio Inc. and its relevant subsidiaries. CBS RADIO and EYE Logo TM and Copyright 2013 CBS Broadcasting Inc. Used under license. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. The Associated Press contributed to this report.)