The two conflicting rulings issued this week by separate courts about Obamacare subsidies "strike to the heart of the problem of Obamacare," Sen. Ron Johnson tells Newsmax TV , saying President Barack Obama's signature piece of legislation is "so sloppily written.""It just throws the entire healthcare law into disarray," Johnson said."What the written law says is not what this administration is implementing," the Wisconsin Republican told host J.D. Hayworth Wednesday on "America's Forum."

Note: Watch Newsmax TV now on DIRECTV Ch. 349 and DISH Ch. 223

Get Newsmax TV on your cable system – Click Here Now

Johnson filed a lawsuit in January, arguing that the subsidies given to lawmakers and their aides amount to special treatment and are against the law.The Affordable Care Act requires lawmakers and their aides to buy insurance plans through the Obamacare exchanges. The federal government helps cover the cost of the healthcare plans for members of Congress and their staffs.Johnson said the special treatment afforded Congress and their employees creates a "wedge" with constituents.This week, a federal judge dismissed Johnson's suit on the grounds that Johnson did not have legal standing to bring it. Johnson said he is considering an appeal. He accused Obama of "revising history" for political purposes by "unilaterally" changing the law.In this week's conflicting federal court rulings, one court said the IRS should not have offered subsidies to people who buy insurance in the federal exchange, while another court upheld the subsidies, according to Fox News "Both courts came to different conclusions, but you know, from my standpoint it's pretty clear. It says the subsidies can be paid to policies purchased on exchanges established by the state, and it's just very clear in its wording."What we're seeing repeatedly with Obamacare is President Obama, even though his allies wrote it, he signed it — this is his signature piece of legislation — [but] he continues to make changes to the law. He amends it, he delays it, and he does not have the executive authority," Johnson charged.He predicted the Affordable Care Act will end up back before the Supreme Court."Unless [Obama] is stopped, unless he is checked, unless the judiciary actually does engage in these separation of powers disputes, he will continue to be this arrogant," Johnson said. "He will continue to govern unilaterally, unconstitutionally, and that threatens everybody's freedom."