PsychBC, a Cleveland-based mental health care provider, is opening its first Kentucky clinic in Louisville next week, touting its somewhat unique practice of accepting most forms of health insurance.

Ren Scheuerman, a psychiatric nurse practitioner and Louisville native who worked with PsychBC in Cleveland, is moving back to open up the new clinic at 10200 Forest Green Blvd. in the Hurstbourne area. He tells Insider Louisville that while large providers such as Seven Counties Services, the University of Louisville and hospitals accept all forms of insurance, most smaller outpatient psychiatric providers do not, operating on a cash-only basis.

“It’s going to be great for the patients in Louisville, because most people have mental health coverage on their health insurance – we now technically have parity in mental health – but because so many providers don’t take insurance, it really creates a financial hardship for a lot of patients,” says Scheuerman. “$20 copays are affordable, but going every month or two weeks for $150 is just not affordable for most people… And most primary care providers don’t do psychotropics anymore, just because of legal liability.”

Scheuerman says most smaller psychiatric clinics don’t accept insurance because they do not have the staff to manage insurance companies’ red tape on claims, though PsychBC — with eight offices in the Cleveland area — has a large enough staff to do so. Alex D’Auria, PsychBC’s community relations director in Cleveland, says the Louisville clinic will accept a wide variety of private insurers, in addition to Medicaid managed care organizations CareSource and CoventryCares.

Sheila Schuster, executive director of the Kentucky Mental Health Coalition, tells IL there is a lack of private practice psychiatrists who take insurance in the Louisville area partly because reimbursement rates from insurance companies are so low — even though Affordable Care Act reforms beginning in 2014 expanded the ability of private providers to bill Medicaid, beyond just Seven Counties.

Gwen Cooper, the spokeswoman for Seven Counties — which serves over 34,000 individuals each year — adds that doctors “in private practice are not only not taking Medicaid, like some anticipated, but they are not taking the really difficult cases either.”

Dave Langdon, spokesman for the Louisville Metro Department of Public Health and Wellness, adds that this lack of private providers is especially noteworthy for the considerable number of individuals who gained coverage through the expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

“(The) ACA aims to give parity between medical health and behavioral health services, but there are few psychiatrists or psychologists who take Medicaid,” says Langdon.

Dr. Sarah Moyer, the interim director of city’s health department, is currently attempting to tackle the increase in Louisville’s suicide rate, along with the Safe & Healthy Neighborhood Department’s One Love Louisville initiative. While focused on early educational campaigns, advocates also have pointed to wait lists for those seeking care and overworked clinicians.

According to the Louisville Metro Police Department, there have been 83 confirmed suicides in Louisville through the end of September, compared to 65 at this point in 2014, in which there were 76 in total. Even with the recent uptick in murders, suicides still easily outpace them in Louisville.