The floodgates are open. Zuma Press/Xiao Yijiu

After a brief slowdown during the first quarter, private equity investors resumed selling everything that wasn’t nailed down, a trend that is likely to continue well into the next quarter.

U.S. firms racked up $125 billion of exits during the second quarter, the highest level on record and an 80% increase from first-quarter exits, industry trade group Private Equity Growth Capital Council reported, citing data from PitchBook.

The increase in dispositions comes as firms continue to hoard dry powder and the pace of investment remains subdued. Reluctant to compete against cash-rich corporates and risk repeating the mistakes of the past decade’s buyout boom, some firms have been biding their time, or exploring unorthodox transactions rather than jumping head-first into the mergers and acquisition frenzy.

PEGCC’s numbers focus on U.S. investments and exits, but a host of macro-economic concerns around the world are factoring into firms’ investment pace domestically and abroad. Bill Conway, Carlyle Group co-founder and co-chief executive pointed to the divergence of exits and investments Wednesday during a conference call to discuss the firm’s second-quarter financial results.

Citing high asset prices, uncertainty in Greece, volatility in China and the frothy credit markets, Mr. Conway said that across strategies, the firm had deployed $3 billion of capital so far this year versus an average investment pace of about $10 billion.

By contrast, the firm had $6 billion of distributions in the second quarter, 60% of which came from block trades of shares of its listed portfolio. Specifically within its private equity business, the firm realized five times more money during the second quarter than it invested.

A similar narrative played out during the quarter for Apollo Global Management. Although the pace of divestments has slowed in recent quarters for the firm, it still outpaced investment at a ratio of more than two-to-one in the firm’s private equity business during the second quarter.

This flood of cash is creating a conundrum for the pensions, endowments and other institutional investors that back private equity firms as they wrangle with asset allocations. The cycle of feast and famine with distributions also risks becoming magnified the longer private equity firms wait to invest their capital.

A few weeks into the third quarter, the exit machine shows no apparent signs of slowing as corporate acquirers clamor for deals. On Monday, McGraw Hill Financial agreed to buy SNL Financial LC, the data provider backed by New Mountain Capital LLC, for $2.2 billion. That came on the heels of a $2.35 billion deal launched by WPX Energy for First Reserve-backed RKI Exploration & Production LLC.

Concurrently, Bain Capital, Blackstone Group, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. and others have already tapped into the public markets to sell stakes in companies such as HD Supply Holdings, J.M. Smucker Co. and Michaels Cos., according to data provider Dealogic Ltd.

Write to Hillary Canada at hillary.canada@wsj.com and Amy Or at amy.or@wsj.com