No one knows the particulars of the great Adrian Peterson comeback better than Von Miller.

Peterson, the Minnesota Vikings star running back, tore the ACL and MCL in his left knee in December 2011.

Peterson returned in 2012 to rush for 2,097 yards and steal the NFL MVP award from Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning.

Miller, the Broncos’ star pass-rushing linebacker, tore his right ACL in December 2013.

How has that injury tempered Miller’s expectations for 2014?

“It hasn’t,” Miller said following the Broncos’ final mandatory minicamp session Thursday at the team’s construction-strewn headquarters. “I’m looking at the Adrian Peterson story every single day. It’s motivation for me. Not only Adrian Peterson but all those other guys you’ve never heard about coming off an ACL. I did a lot of research, a lot of reading into ACL surgery.”

Given his own knee surgery, Miller has looked surprisingly strong during the team’s offseason practices. He participates full speed in individual and position drills. He bows out when the team goes through its 11-on-11 set of plays, but continues to work on the side with cornerback Chris Harris, who is also recovering from a torn ACL.

“I’ve been getting after it,” Miller said.

Even when he shouldn’t. Apparently, no one has been playing harder during the team’s morning walkthrough sessions than Miller.

“They’ve been on me for going too hard, and temper it back,” he said. “But hey this is the only reps I get. Walkthroughs are more for me and hopefully when I get cleared I can start easing my way into live practice.”

Miller said he will be examined in a few weeks by his knee surgeon, Dr. James Andrews. The hope is for Miller to be cleared for limited contact by the first week or two of training camp and be fully ready to play in the Broncos’ season opener Sept. 7 against the Indianapolis Colts.

The Broncos have four more offseason practices — Monday through Thursday next week — then get a month off until training camp in late-July.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis

Updated June 12 at 3:59 p.m. The following corrected information has been added to this article: Because of a reporter error, the year Adrian Peterson tore the ACL and MCL left knee was incorrect.