WASHINGTON -- Conservative radio show host Sean Hannity will be at the State of the Union next week, thanks to Rep. Louie Gohmert (R-Texas).

Gohmert is bringing Hannity as his guest to the president's annual address, according to a Dallas Morning News report. Both are regular critics of President Barack Obama, with Gohmert even filling in for Hannity on his show on occasion.

Hannity may not want to leave Capitol Hill after this Tuesday's address. This week he said that's he considering running for office.

"The answer is yes. I’d think about it,” Hannity said during a Tuesday Twitter Q&A on Fox News. “It would be in either Texas or Florida.”

Hannity currently lives in New York, but said he's leaving "as soon as I can" because the state is anti-conservative and "[New York Gov.] Andrew Cuomo doesn't want us here."

Gohmert isn't the only Texas Republican bringing a contentious State of the Union guest. Rep. Steve Stockman is bringing Chad Henderson, a former Obama campaign volunteer who caused a stir in October when, amid Obamacare website enrollment woes, he told reporters that he successfully signed up, only to reveal later he did not.

“I look forward to giving Chad the opportunity to attend the State of the Union Address. Now when President Obama speaks about ObamaCare the media will have someone they can cut to,” Stockman said in a statement. “I encourage the President to acknowledge him and his story.”

Henderson told BuzzFeed last week that he expects Stockman to use him to mock Obamacare's troubled health care rollout, but said he couldn't turn down the chance to attend the State of the Union.

"I’m not going to pretend that I’m gonna be his friend,” he said. “I’m anticipating that he’s going to use me a whipping post and mock me, but I hope I’m wrong and we can all be adults and let me enjoy this honor.”

Also on HuffPost: Unforgettable State of The Union Moments Unforgettable State of The Union Moments

1 of 12 Justice Alito Mouths 'Not True' During the 2010 State of the Union, Supreme Court Justice Samuel Alito mouthed the words "not true," in response to President Barack Obama's statement that the Court's ruling in the Citizens United case had "open[ed] the floodgates for special interests -- including foreign corporations -- to spend without limit in our elections." Share this slide:

AP