By Jason Hart | Ohio Watchdog

Low job growth, productivity and population growth from 2003-2013 caused Ohio to come in next-to-last in state economic rankings released Wednesday.

Ohio’s economic performance was worse than every state except Michigan in the pro-growth American Legislative Exchange Council’s 2015 Rich States, Poor States report.

But the future looks brighter: because of recent income tax cuts and improving job creation, Ohio was 23rd in the report’s economic outlook ranking for the second year in a row.

ALEC’s report, the eighth edition of Rich States, Poor States, was authored by famed supply-side economist Arthur Laffer, Heritage Foundation economist Stephen Moore and ALEC Center for State Fiscal Reform vice president Jonathan Williams.

Laffer, Moore and Williams discussed their study’s focus on income tax rates and state-level reforms during a press call Tuesday.

“It’s not liberal versus conservative, it’s not left-wing or right-wing, it’s economics,” Laffer said. “It’s just basic economics: If you tax people that work and you pay people who don’t work, don’t be surprised if you get a lot of people not working.”

Republican Gov. John Kasich, elected to a second term last November, has been in office since January 2011. Kasich was preceded by Democrat Ted Strickland, who served from 2007-2010, and by Republican Bob Taft, who served from 1999-2006.

With the exception of the 2009-2010 Ohio General Assembly, both houses of Ohio’s legislature have been controlled by Republicans every year dating back to 1995.

Asked how Kasich’s implementation of the Obamacare Medicaid expansion and his increased spending factored into ALEC’s economic outlook ranking, Moore said Kasich’s cuts to the income tax have been “fantastic.”

“(Kasich)’s got a good record,” Moore said. “That is certainly a negative, that they’ve added so many people to the Medicaid rolls, but Ohio’s economy is doing better, too, there’s just no question about it, and that figures into these rankings as well.”

Kasich’s Obamacare expansion added 510,000 Ohioans to the Medicaid rolls in the past year. Spending for Ohio’s current fiscal year is expected to be 20 percent greater than when Kasich took office.

“What (Kasich)’s done is he’s trying to substitute a carbon tax for an income tax cut, which in my book is pretty smart,” Laffer said. “A carbon tax is one of the least-bad taxes, an income tax is probably the most-bad tax.”

For the fourth time since 2012, Kasich — with Republican supermajorities in the Ohio House and Senate — has proposed a tax hike on oil and gas drilling to help pay for an income tax cut.

Laffer said Ohio still has “some way to go” in reducing the income tax. He also pointed to the state’s lack of a right-to-work law, which would forbid mandatory union dues, as a drag on the economy.

“Ohio’s making progress, and John Kasich, you can see how much progress he’s making by the landslide victory he had last November,” Laffer continued, citing Kasich’s re-election win against a Democrat challenger who quit campaigning in August.

“Some of the leading indicators are starting to look a little bit better for Ohio, but I think it certainly could be a couple more years before we see significant changes on the performance side as well,” Williams said.