To the Editor:

When will Washington, D.C., wise up, especially our president?

He is letting drug dealers out of prison (by changes in mandatory minimum federal sentences) who contribute to the violence and illegality in our country.

He's also released key jihadists from our prison at Guantanamo, and he's advocated bringing in refugees from Syria — who may very well be ISIS-affiliated.

On top of it all, President Barack Obama suggests that immigrants who are here illegally be allowed to get jobs and assistance. Yet, our wonderful Congress claims that Social Security is an entitlement. Are you kidding me?

Americans of all ethnic backgrounds have to plead for assistance, can't find jobs, and get gouged with out-of-pocket health care costs, even with the Affordable Care Act. Now required to supply coverage to full-timers, employers take a 40-hour-a-week job and convert it into two part-time jobs. That gives the employers windfall profits from the insurance premiums they don't have to pay.

On top of it all, money is no longer available for the working man to spend, thereby causing drops in sales of consumer goods and price increases to make up for the loss.

MORE: Christie to Obama: N.J. won't accept Syrian refugees

Now, Obama wants to let 65,000 Syrian refugees a year into the United States, find homes for them, and keep them healthy and fed. Apparently, this is so the terrorists among them can be healthy enough to kill Americans.

This country is in sad shape, and is going downhill at a rapid pace. Wise up, Washington. Legislate for the people, and not for your own benefit. It's amazing how so many college graduates, most of them lawyers, have messed up this country badly.

Dominick A. Ruggiero Jr.

Sewell

ExxonMobil seeking an N.J. handout?

To the Editor:

Concerning the article, "340 Paulsboro jobs in limbo as ExxonMobil weighs move," published earlier this month:

ExxonMobil's announcement that it's considering shutting down its Paulsboro Research Facility in Gloucester County could be seen as a ploy to win a major tax break from the state Economic Development Authority. This is the group that has authorized more than $1 billion in state tax credits for businesses that move to Camden or expand there — with no apparent benefit to New Jersey residents and taxpayers.

With EDA benefits, ExxonMobil would be in good company with a strategy that would provide a nice windfall for its shareholders. Subaru of America has received $118 million in EDA credits to relocate from Cherry Hill to Camden, and Cooper University Hospital nabbed $40 million for an expansion.

I can see the "photo op" now: Gloucester County officials gather to make the announcement that ExxonMobil will stay in Paulsboro. The fine print carries the price tag of a multi-million-dollar tax break.

Carol Rhodes

Barnsboro

Send a letter to the editor of South Jersey Times at sjletters@njadvancemedia.com