'I think we have a real opportunity'

Fiske Planetarium Director Douglas Duncan explains the celestial equator to high school students on the University of Colorado campus on Tuesday in Boulder. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

It's not as if the 36 rising high school seniors currently attending the Summer Science Program at the University of Colorado spend every waking hour of the day at work.

"Just most of them," says program director Richard Bowdon.

They've got six hours of lecture on an average day, on such topics as spherical trigonometry, computer programming, differential and integral calculus and sky positioning as it pertains to astronomical observation. Between class, they've got as much homework as they can handle. And once the sun goes down, the real fun starts.

From 9 p.m. to 3 a.m., the students alternate observing asteroids from the telescopes at CU's Sommers Bausch Observatory. Working in teams of three, they're tasked with tracking near-earth asteroids by taking images and then measuring the position of their assigned asteroids with respect to the nearby stars. They analyze what they collect, then write computer program to calculate an orbit around the sun.

"They're used to taking a science course, learning about what dead scientists knew many years ago," Bowdon says. "That's not doing science.

"This is different. They get to own the entire project from beginning to end. They're not just helping somebody else's research."

Advertisement

At the five-week program's end, their findings will be added to the Minor Planet Center at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics.

"At school, we get to do some experiments, but SSP goes really deep," says Pranav Kalra, a 16-year-old from Bangkok. "It's quite nice because we have a bunch of concepts that if we learned in school we might forget because they wouldn't be that useful. But everything we learned here has this very immediate application and tangible usefulness."

The asteroids they're tracking aren't expected to hit our planet anytime soon, but some of them are on Harvard's "critical list" of those that must be monitored most closely. Suffice it to say the students have never seen anything like this before.

"It's very different than doing calculations on a blackboard," says Sonia Reilly, 16, of Maryland. "It's really cool to have something so applied, so detailed."

At SSP, they've been watching asteroids for 57 years. This summer, however, is the first time the program has been run out of Boulder. Erie's Isaac Ruble — the lone local among students — said the relocation is partly a testament to the quality of CU's astronomy and general science facilities and instruction.

"There's a lot to be said for the brand-name schools, and there's probably not as much of a draw to CU as there should be," says Ruble, who attends Peak to Peak Charter School in Lafayette. "I feel like it should have more respect than it does."

When SSP students graduate high school, their most common destinations, according to Bowdon, are MIT and Caltech. Many of the program's alumni go on to achieve success in the fields of science and medicine. For now, though, they're relishing their first exposure to this depth of instruction.

"There's this innate curiosity. We're really passionate about this," Kalra says. "It's tough, it's challenging and there are long hours, but the reason we go through this is because we enjoy it."

"I think we have a real opportunity," adds Ruble, "both to make observations of the asteroids, but also to develop our own skills. I wouldn't want to be anywhere else."

Unless, of course, an asteroid was flying toward the lab. But the students insist we're all safe.

"At the end of this five weeks," says Kalra, "we'll let you know if that changes."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness