Sure, the size of Movable's customer base has exploded over the past two years, but we can't describe it as “untethered” growth.







Roughly 900 companies and school districts have distributed Movable's wrist-worn activity trackers to their employees and students.







That's up from about 130 two years ago — a seven-fold increase.







Not bad. But if anything has restricted the company's growth, it's all those darn USB cords.







Next month, however, Movable will release a version of the Movband that will be able to sync with a computer wirelessly. The Movband 3, which still needs a USB cord for recharging purposes, should help the Brecksville-based company win more large customers, according to CEO Blake Squires.







Major corporations are often willing to spend more money for a better product. The Movband 3 should fit the bill, Squires said. In addition to the wireless capability, it's also “thinner and sleeker” than its predecessor, he said. Thus, it costs $60 — twice as much as the $30 Movband 2, but still less expensive than the standard Fitbit and many other activity trackers.









“It was really built to capture more of an enterprise environment,” Squires said.Thus, Movable is gearing up to go after those large companies.That's one reason why the company hired Jeff Scott at the end of March. Scott, who spent more than a decade working for KeyBank, is Movable's chief financial officer, but he's also tasked with helping the company sell to large clients.Movable has been adding more manpower in other ways, too. The company employs nearly 30 people today, up from about a dozen a year ago. And in December, it hired two other executives who have helped it accelerate the development of the Movband 3.Squires brought on one of his former colleagues, Mike Belsito, to lead product development and strategy. Belsito is best known for helping start a now-defunct funeral home comparison shopping website called eFuneral. He also was one of the first employees at Findaway World, a digital audio technology company that Squires helped start in 2004.Movable also hired chief technology officer Adam Hutcheson. He previously held that title at Mongoose Metrics, a local marketing analytics firm that was acquired last year.Movable needed a CTO. In addition to developing the Movband 3, the company also has been beefing up the software behind it, Squires said, again citing the company's effort to serve more large customers.Movable competes partly on price, but it also aims to win over businesses and schools by giving them software designed to help them manage fitness-related programs and analyze the data collected by their Movbands — and any other activity trackers they use.“Movable is really a data company,” he said.Administrators can use the software to build challenges and send messages to participants. For instance, if someone wearing a Movband has been sitting still for too long, the administrator could program the system to send them a text message reminding them to get moving.Or if the employee is wearing the Movband 3, the software can tell it to vibrate.Eventually, Movable will focus more on selling to doctors' offices and hospitals. Some doctors already are asking their patients to wear Movbands, Squires said, noting that doctors can track how much exercise patients are doing through the software.“The data will become more valuable as the Affordable Care Act ... becomes more outcomes-based,” he said.