Darin Gordon is director of the Bureau of TennCare. (Photo: Submitted )

Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government created the federally facilitated marketplace to serve as a central outlet where an individual could apply for government-subsidized health insurance, including Medicaid. This can be accomplished online through healthcare.gov, by telephone or by submitting a paper application. The federal government operates the FFM.

TennCare, Tennessee’s Medicaid program, operates a second outlet for Tennesseans to apply for subsidized health insurance, including TennCare. The idea was a “no wrong door” approach. In other words, regardless of whether a person applies through healthcare.gov or directly to TennCare, they would be assessed in an identical fashion and directed to the most appropriate coverage for which they were eligible.

To make this second outlet in Tennessee available to all applicants, an entirely new eligibility system is required. The ACA dramatically changed the eligibility determination process, but the lead time states were given to develop their new eligibility systems was extremely short. This was further complicated by constantly changing federal requirements. As a result of these factors, as well as other challenges encountered by our systems vendor, Tennessee’s new eligibility system is behind schedule.

This delay has not prevented Tennesseans from enrolling in TennCare. Indeed, record numbers have been able to enroll in TennCare — more than 125,000 individuals since Jan. 1. Challenges with the ACA implementation and problems with healthcare.gov have plagued state Medicaid systems across the country, and in many cases, these problems have led to substantial backlogs. No such backlogs exist in Tennessee as the result of the state’s implementation of a federally approved mitigation plan.

Plenty of help available

Under the plan, many individuals applying for TennCare do so through the FFM, either by applying at the healthcare.gov website, by phone or by mailing in a paper application. For anyone needing assistance, there are staff in every local Tennessee Department of Human Services office in each of Tennessee’s 95 counties who are available and specially trained to help. Contrary to recent reports, the availability of in-person assistance in each county with this new application process is a fact that has been known by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and by agencies and advocates throughout the state since the beginning of this year.

For reasons that are unclear to us, the federal government is now saying it is no longer acceptable for us to leverage the federal door. We disagree. This was always envisioned under the ACA as an acceptable door to Medicaid eligibility. While we are not satisfied with the speed with which our vendor has been able to deliver our new eligibility system, we believe our mitigation plan is working, and the alternative of implementing a system that has not been adequately tested would be foolish and fraught with the very problems the federal government encountered in its rollout last fall.

Furthermore, an idea that has recently been put forth by the federal government — that we implement a manual process — would be a disservice to Tennessee citizens, who would shoulder the cost of the significant increase in staff that would be required to implement such a process and who would be inconvenienced by having to produce paper verification documents that are accessed automatically online through the FFM door.

We don’t understand why the federal government no longer wants Tennessee to stay the course with a plan that is largely working — and certainly working better than the alternatives that have created significant backlogs of Medicaid applications across the country. If it is because the federal government seeks to divert attention from the flaws in healthcare.gov, it should fix those problems rather than attempting to force Tennessee into repeating the same mistakes made by the federal government during the rollout of the FFM and healthcare.gov last fall.

Darin Gordon is director of the Bureau of TennCare.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/opinion/2014/07/13/tenncares-enrollment-process-better-alternatives/12573579/