Topics: bill frezza, campus sexual assault crisis, college women, dudebros, Feminism, forbes, Fox News, Fraternities, fraternitiy life, it's on us, outnumbered, rape apologia, rape sexual assault, Sexism, victim blaming, Video, Life News, News, Politics News

On Wednesday, Forbes columnist and fraternity corporation president Bill Frezza found himself at the center of a social media firestorm over his inflammatory post — which was subsequently taken down — titled “Drunk Female Guests Are the Gravest Threat to Fraternities.” Backlash was so fierce that, before the end of the day, Frezza was fired. The piece stated that fraternities “have very little control over women who walk in the door carrying enough pre-gaming booze in their bellies to render them unconscious before the night is through,” and suggested that intoxicated women should bear some “personal responsibility” for getting sexually assaulted by frat boys.

Despite the suggestion being overwhelmingly panned, several of the hosts on Fox News’ Outnumbered agreed with Frezza. A fear of drunk girls holding fraternities liable for sexual assault is “legitimate,” according to co-hosts Andrea Tantaros and Kirsten Powers.

“I don’t know why this writer is taking so much heat, because this is actually a problem that goes on,” Tantaros said. “These girls show up at these fraternity houses, and the guys — what are they supposed to do? Lock them out? … It is a legitimate fear.”

Well, locking women out is “exactly” what co-hosts Kennedy Montgomery and Sandra Smith agreed should happen, but doesn’t because — as Frezza pointed out in his article — fraternities don’t have policies in place to prevent inebriated guests from entering their houses. “If you’re worried about liability, do what an airline would do,” Montgomery suggested. “They either don’t let drunk people on the plane, or, if you’ve already been served, they’re not going to serve you anymore.”

“Don’t let them in the door in the first place,” Smith added. “Call somebody, get some help, don’t let them in the door.”