By Sean Kean



The New Jersey Supreme Court recently decided that, as a result of the Legislature's failure to address affordable housing rules, it is now up to trial courts to determine how many affordable housing units a town must provide.



One thing is for certain: The ruling has the attention of our state's municipalities, which will be on the hook for hundreds of thousands of dollars in professional fees to fight developers in court.



Now is the time for the Legislature to develop a bill that is fair and takes the decision-making on housing growth out of the judicial system.



The 1985 Mount Laurel decision arose from a dispute over whether a town's zoning law was deliberately exclusionary to prevent lower- and middle-income families from living there. That ruling was the start of numerous court challenges concerning towns' obligations towns to build affordable housing and whether developers have the right to sue a town over its zoning laws.



Thirty years later, we appear no closer to a settled public policy. All that has been accomplished is that time and taxpayer money have been wasted.



It isn't fair to force a town to grow beyond the will of its residents. In May 2010, Gov. Christie announced his proposal to disband the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) and require one out of every 10 newly constructed housing units to be designated as affordable. If a town did not grow, it did not have a further affordable housing obligation.

Towns were also protected from the costly litigation of justifying their housing programs against builder's remedy lawsuits, where the objective of the builders was to construct more housing than permitted by a town.

Historically, municipalities have been able to protect themselves from builder's remedy lawsuits by taking affirmative steps to include affordable housing in plans for future development. These towns were beneficiaries of protective court orders or COAH certification if they were in compliance.

Towns responsible for meeting minimum affordable housing obligations dictated by the courts now face a perplexing dilemma: How can a town be expected to create a reasonable, workable master plan to satisfy housing quotas that do not exist?

In 2011, measure S1, which required 10 percent of all the housing units in every town in the state to be affordable, was passed. There are approximately 3.5 million housing units in New Jersey, which results in a quota of approximately 350,000 affordable housing units. Our state is already the most densely populated in the country. The bill was returned to the Legislature by Gov. Christie.



The governor disagreed with the bill's requirement that 10 percent of all housing units in any given town must be affordable housing. This condition would be a disaster for towns that do not have a substantial number of affordable units.



The governor also objected to the fact that the bill did not give towns protection against builder's remedy lawsuits.

All of the hard work and compromise to slow the growth of property taxes in our state -- they remain the highest in the nation -- has been jeopardized. Taxpayers cannot afford a step in the wrong direction.

According to the Supreme Court, a town must now prove to a trial court it has complied with adequate affordable housing unit mandates. This process will undoubtedly trigger costly builder's remedy lawsuits, which will expose towns to sprawl and overcrowding.



The Legislature should enact a bill that incorporates the governor's recommended amendments to the S1 measure from 2011 as the foundation for an affordable housing policy. The legislation should establish a pathway for municipalities that provide inclusionary zoning and affordable housing and provide protection from builder's remedy lawsuits. Without a legislative solution, towns such as Wall, Howell, Cherry Hill and Woodbridge may find themselves adding more units than their taxpayers can afford.



The basic argument is whether a town should be able to determine the number of housing units it desires, not what a court mandates. The Legislature remains the catalyst in this contentious issue. The issue of affordable housing rules is a problem we were elected to solve. The Legislature should act immediately on behalf of New Jersey's municipalities.

Follow The Times of Trenton on Twitter @TimesofTrenton. Find The Times of Trenton on Facebook.