Buy Photo Ed Skoudis, who works at the SANS Institute, leads a session of the Cyber Aces program at Brookdale Community College. The program teaches students how to detect cyber attacks on U.S. institutions and infrastructures. (Photo: By Mike DeSocio/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo Story Highlights A Pentagon program created a cybersecurity pipeline in 10 local colleges. Brookdale was first.

Aces have installed, configured, secured, tested Domain Name Server, critical to Internet operation.

Holiday Hacking: evaluated security of infrastructure controling weather at the North Pole.

It is no accident that there is a connection here to “Top Gun,” the iconic film about fighter pilots learning to excel in the wild blue yonder. While those post-Vietnam pilots reached new heights in the nation’s efforts to keep foreign predators in check, there now is another generation of “aces” hard at work at Brookdale Community College.

This new group also seeks to be the “best of the best” at securing this country’s ever fluid and expanding cyberborders, according to Professor Michael T. Qaissaunee, one of two volunteer instructors running the ground-breaking New Jersey Cyber Aces Academy at the Lincroft campus.

It is here that students — ranging in age from 17 to 56 — train as part of an elite inaugural class or “cohort,” a word chosen by organizers because it can mean “friend” or “colleague” or “warrior” or “soldier,” and for the work they are training to do, any of those labels works just fine.

CyberPatriots hail from Red Bank teacher’s class

These soldiers likely will never hike through deserts or jungles with 50-pound packs on their backs; rather, they likely will keep suburbia safe from cyber threats without ever leaving those environs. It is a wireless war that is coming but one just as potentially devastating, experts said.

It began here with cyber buster Ed Skoudis of Wall, who has an international reputation and contracts with the military to train its elite cyber soldiers. Skoudis built a miniature city for soldiers in cyber training. In CyberCity, Skoudis can poison the water supply or cause haywire at Main Street financial institutions or go with one of the classics: aim a missile into the heart of downtown. He watches as soldiers armed with nothing more than an Internet connection and a keyboard save the community.

How critical is the work going on at Brookdale?

Former Defense Secretary Leon Panetta warned of a “Cyber Pearl Harbor,” in which enemies of the U.S. could derail passenger trains or planes, contaminate the water supply or mess with the power grid or financial system, with a few keystrokes.

“Our most important investment is in skilled cyber warriors needed to conduct operations in cyberspace,” he said in 2012, kicking off a massive recruitment drive by the Pentagon.

Colin Mahns, 21, of Shrewsbury is one of those competitors who survived months of online applications to receive an invitation to the Cyber Aces competition where, curiously, he found his former teacher, Mandy Galante from Red Bank Regional High School, also competing. Both earned a place in the program.

“She is sort of the reason I started this,” said the student from the New Jersey Institute of Technology. Now at Brookdale, he can expand upon those lessons.

With so much of the cyber world focused on the young, it is both ironic and heartening that one of the best students in the cohort also is the oldest. Jack Ratigan of Chatham was an out-of-work Navy veteran when he took the tests that led to the scholarship offer. His scores alone attracted interest among employers, he said, and he now works full-time for IBM in a job he loves.

Funded through a two-year $300,000 National Science Foundation grant and the SANS Institute, the Cyber Aces Academy is public-private initiative that is the first of its kind anywhere in the nation and is meant to be a model for the program “Building a Pipeline of Cyber Warriors Through Education and Competition Offered Through Community Colleges.”

SANS Institute Research Director Alan Paller has compared the shortage of skilled cyber warriors to the shortage of airplane pilots during World War II. That is why the Cyber Aces program focuses so much on what he has described as “stick time,” a reference to fighter pilots and their critical time in the air.

In 2012, Paller emailed Brookdale President Maureen Murphy, suggesting they team up to establish a community college program to develop a career pathway for cybersecurity professionals. By shifting the training of the cybersecurity workforce to the community college and focusing on hands-on skills, cybersecurity workers get out of the training pipeline faster and begin the job of protecting the country sooner, officials say.

With Skoudis, a SANS faculty member and internationally known trainer, author and editor of all things related to cyber defense, making his home in Wall, it was not rocket science to locate the inaugural program nearby. Skoudis is volunteering his time.

Skoudis is the founder of Counter Hack, an innovative organization that designs, builds and operates popular information-security challenges and simulations. As director of the CyberCity project, Skoudis is an expert in hacker attacks and defenses, incident response and malware, which is hacker lingo for “malicious software” or any program that disrupts computer operations.

.

Skoudis said the program soon would send 14 highly trained, highly motivated “cyber warriors” into jobs in government or private industry, where they will work on the front lines to detect or stop crippling cyber attacks in which, officials say, the average take by cyber criminals is $600,000.

By contrast, those who protect the nation’s computer systems can expect to earn anywhere from $60,000 to $120,000 by the time they conclude the program, Skoudis said.

The shortage in such cybersecurity experts ranges from 10,000 to 30,000 and is likely going to grow worse, officials said. Headquartering the program at Brookdale — a college degree is not considered as essential for this work as hands-on experience — will make high-paying and secure jobs more readily available in the community, advocates said.

Carol Gorga Williams: 732-643-4212; CGorgaWilliams@

app.com.

For more information on Cyber Aces, go to http://sites.brookdalecc.edu/home/business-technology-division/nj-cyber-aces-academy/

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1tulraw