Belgian prosecutors said Saturday that a man arrested this week has been charged with terrorist offenses linked to the attacks on the Brussels airport and subway as authorities moved to clean up damage caused by the explosions.

Federal prosecutors said they have charged a man identified as Faycal C. with "involvement in a terrorist group, terrorist killings and attempted terrorist killings."

Prosecutors said he was arrested on Thursday but a police raid on his home turned up no weapons or explosives.

Belgian media are reporting that a man called Faycal Cheffou has been identified as the man suspected of fleeing Brussels' airport after two alleged accomplices blew themselves up there. Prosecutors refused to comment on those reports.

In a statement, prosecutors didn't identify the new suspect as the fugitive wearing a white jacket and black hat who was seen on airport security footage with the two suicide attackers.

Prosecutors also said two other suspects arrested Thursday and identified as Rabah N. and Aboubakar A. have been charged with "involvement in the activities of a terrorist group."A fourth man, taken into custody Friday after he was shot by police at a Brussels tram stop, was being held for at least 24 hours longer.

The developments come as Brussels airport officials moved to assess the damage caused by twin explosions at the terminal on Tuesday.

Authorities have wrapped up their investigation of the crime scene at the airport, and will allow engineers into the building to check its structural safety and information technology systems - and whether any damage can be repaired quickly.

Brussels Airport, which handles 23.5 million passengers annually, said it would be Tuesday at the earliest before flights resume.

The transport disruptions will do little to ease the worries of jittery Europeans, who are wondering how many violent extremists remain at large, and where and when they might strike again.

Two brothers who died as suicide bombers in the attacks in Brussels last week were known to police as petty criminals and potential terrorists, CBS News correspondent Allen Pizzey reports.

Ibrahim El Bakraoui, who blew himself up in the airport, had been arrested and deported from Turkey and labelled a "foreign terrorist fighter," Pizzey reports. His brother Khalid, who died in the subway attack, was subject to an international arrest warrant after the Nov. 13 bombings in Paris that killed 130 people.

Officials have told CBS News that the brothers were on the radar of U.S. law enforcement.

Authorities believe both the Brussels attacks and the Paris bombings were plotted from Belgium.

Heavily armed police swept into Brussels neighborhoods Friday in operations linked to the attacks. Signs of a large police operation remained visible Saturday at the quiet tram station in Schaerbeek district in Brussels where a man was shot.

The man, who was sitting with a young girl and holding a bag, was ordered by police "to put the bag far from him." After he did so, police shot him twice.

Local residents have mixed feelings about the intervention.

"The security services are doing their work," said Timotheee Bunkyezi, a 54-year-old student who believes that for such a large-scale operation, the intelligence the police were working on must have been solid.

But Marie-Madeleine Yamotia, a 40-year-old nurse who lives right opposite the bus stop, expressed concern for the child who was with the suspect.

"It's traumatizing for the little one," she said. "We don't know. Is he really a suspect? Here, we doubt it a little."