Lammey, Mary Hirste

Mary Hirste Lammey, 83, of Lakeview Road in Spruce Pine, N.C. passed away Saturday, May 21, 2016 at Rose Hill Assisted Living in Marion.Born on April 5, 1933 in Botetourt County, Va., she was the daughter of the late Hirst and Mary Aiken Carson. In addition to her parents, she was preceded in death by her husband, Rev. Gale Lammey who passed away in 2012. She was also preceded in death by her brother, Stull Carson.Mary was a member of the Grassy Creek Presbyterian Church. She attended Queens College in Charlotte, N.C. from 1951 to 1954 and received the Bachelor of Secretarial Science Degree. She was a member and treasurer of the Phi Mu sorority, was the editor of the Queen's College yearbook in 1954 and was voted a 'Queen' of Queens. While at Queen's College, she played on the basketball team and was on the volleyball team during her sophomore year. She was retired from North Carolina National Bank and on the Board of Directors of the Mitchell County Animal Rescue. She loved all animals and rescuing homeless animals. She enjoyed painting, art, and many local artists.Left to cherish her memories are her daughters, Mary Louise McGregor and husband, Danny of Virginia Beach, Va. and Sarah Webb of Fishers, Ind.; her son, Gale Lammey of Spruce Pine; her son-in-law, James Webb of Fishers, Ind.; her brother, Clay Carson and wife, Jean of Radford, Va.; her sister-in-law, Dorothy Carson of Buchanan, Va.; and her grandchildren, Mary Gale McGregor, Daniel McGregor, and Carson Webb.The family respectfully requests the honor of your presence at the funeral service honoring the life of Mary Lammey at 11 a.m. on Saturday, May 28, 2016 at the Grassy Creek Presbyterian Church with the Rev's. Wyatt Aiken, Bobby Justice, and Jim Taylor officiating. A time to support the family, share memories and receive friends will be from 10 a.m. until service time Saturday, May 28, 2016 at the church. Interment will be in the Fairview Cemetery in Buchanan, Va.The family would like to say; 'Thank You' to; the staff of Rose Hill Assisted Living, Hospice of Rutherford County, Grassy Creek Presbyterian Church and Bobby Justice.In lieu of flowers the family requests that memorial donations be made to; Mitchell County Animal Rescue, P.O. Box 308, Spruce Pine, NC 28777.Words of comfort may be e-mailed to the family by going to our website; www.webbfh.com., selecting Mary Lammey's name and then you may sign her guestbook. Webb Funeral Home in Spruce Pine, NC is honored to be assisting the Lammey family. Mary's obituary has also been posted on Facebook for viewing.