America’s favorite judge, Fox News’ Jeanine Pirro, knows how to barbeque – and President Obama is among her most effective targets to roast.

In her weekly common-sense blasting of the commander in chief, Pirro torched Obama for refusing to postpone a silly celebration marking the “five year anniversary of the near stock market crash,” even though blocks away, 12 unarmed people had just been massacred at a military installation.

Instead, Obama offered the victims a few brief words before carrying on as though the shooting was old news. Why? Once again, he had his own agenda on the brain. It seems as though he’ll celebrate anything at any time if he gets to go on a “political tirade” in the process. What’s next? A presidential address for the two-year anniversary of the invention of twerking?

Pirro’s theory on Benghazi is that the most powerful man in the world couldn’t be bothered with the attack as it unfolded. Many Americans agree. And it’s a disturbing image to picture the president sleeping or watching television during a crisis that would have had Ronald Reagan drinking pots of coffee and handing out orders. Is Obama plain lazy?

By the time Pirro got to the Internal Revenue Service being dispatched to the doorstep of Obama’s political opposites, viewers like myself were already hot under the collar. It’s the totality of these examples of routine blunder, attack and lying day after day that sticks in my craw.

All of this embarrassment comes under the umbrella of impunity that Obama’s skin color seems to provide in an era of diversity training and political correctness, above all else. But why isn’t the definition of “politically correct” to do what is right as a politician? Why should the definition have anything to do with holding your tongue or parsing words — especially when our nation, our security, our children’s future is on the line?

Obamacare is like your father threatening to move the family to Alaska when you’re 14 and just fell in love with the pretty girl next door. No one wants this thing. Small businesses are terrified. Yet, our president wants to force it on us. It’s the liberal way. Every issue is has to be forced. Big government means little room for choice.

And U.S. Rep. Nancy Pelosi calls Obama “brilliant.”