STEUBENVILLE - Graduating students of Franciscan University of Steubenville on Saturday received some general advice on life and some commentary on the battle by Catholic organizations against government regulations for health coverage of birth control under the Affordable Care Act.

The class included more than 660 students from many states, including (listed according to their representation): Ohio, California, Pennsylvania,Virginia,Illinois, Texas, New York, Michigan, Maryland and West Virginia.

To allow more family members and other supporters to witness the Class of 2016's graduation, two commencement programs were held: one in the morning for those who have earned graduate or undergraduate bachelor of science degrees, and another in the afternoon for those who have earned graduate or undergraduate bachelor of arts degrees.

Article Photos Leaders of Franciscan University of Steubenville welcomed the three guest speakers for the school’s commencement programs Saturday. Among them were: Daniel Kempton, vice president of academic affairs; the Rev. Richard Davis, chairman of the school’s board of trustees; the Rev. Terence Henry, past president of the university; Laura Meeks, former president of Eastern Gateway Community College; attorney Paul “Mickey” Pohl, a former member of the board of trustees; and the Rev. Sean Sheridan, the university’s president. - Warren Scott

As keynote speaker for one of two commencement programs held by Franciscan University of Steubenville Saturday, attorney Paul “Mickey” Pohl commented on Catholic organizations’ legal battle over health coverage of birth control and offered advice to the school’s Class of 2016. - Warren Scott



Offering remarks at the earlier commencement were Laura Meeks, former president of Eastern Gateway Community College; and the Rev. Terence Henry, former president and chancellor of the university.

Serving as keynote speaker for the latter commencement was attorney Paul "Mickey" Pohl, a former member of the university's board of trustees who is representing, at no charge, the university and 42 other Catholic organizations in a legal battle over the birth control issue.

Meeks told the students a tragedy at a young age impressed upon her the importance of faith.

She was 12 when the feed mill on her family's farm burned down, leaving them without an income. Distraught by the sight of her father crying, she bicycled to the home of her pastor. He prayed with her, which eased her despair.

The pastor's wife asked if she would iron some hankies for her and after Meeks did, the woman gave her some money.

"I left the parsonage with a prayer and money in my pocket and I felt better. That lesson became my secret of success - work and pray," she said.

"Hard work and education can help you have a better life, but that's not the answer to a successful life. The most important part, the part Pastor Zimmerman and his wife taught me, is to pray, to put your trust, your life, in God's hands."

She cited Psalm 127:1, which states, "Unless the Lord builds the house, those who build it labor in vain."

Meeks told the students Franciscan University of Steubenville has prepared them well not only by teaching them skills needed by the workforce but also how to use them to serve God.

Henry encouraged the graduates to learn more about the past to prepare for the future.

"People need to know their stories and the stories of their communities," he said, adding, "We're all in the middle of things. It didn't start with us and it won't end with us."

Henry drew upon historian Adam Goodheart's remark that the company of other troops is what caused soldiers in the Battle of Gettysburg to fight on.

"As long as you had elbows to your left and elbow to your right, you stayed," he said.

Henry told the students the support of family, friends and fellow classmates can serve as the "elbows" that encourage them on in their own endeavors.

Pohl said he was pleased to return to the university, where he was among board members who worked to establish the school's study abroad program in Gaming, Austria; and to see its current growth. He said he found inspirational the sight of students worshipping God at various places on campus.

"It is in you I find hope for the future. I thank you for inspiring me," Pohl said.

He said he's concerned that at a time when the U.S. is $19 trillion in debt, it's in danger not only of becoming financially bankrupt but spiritually bankrupt as well.

Pohl noted the first right guaranteed in the Constitution's Bill of Rights is the Freedom of Religion, which he feels some in power believe is limited to church worship only.

"Faith without deeds is dead," he said, noting many Catholic groups object to having any part in providing birth control for their employees.

"They know they can't stamp out religion entirely, so they want it contained within houses of worship," he said.

Pohl noted the graduates in a relatively short time will face many important decisions related to job, marriage and family.

He advised them to follow the example of the prophet Samuel and "ask God for direction, listen and be faithful servants of the Lord."

The three guest speakers were presented honorary degrees. Meeks was presented an honorary doctorate of educational leadership in recognition of her 30 years of leadership in higher education, including her part in more than doubling EGCC's enrollment and her selection to the National Summit on the Redesign of Developmental Education in Washington.

Also noted was Meeks' community service, including involvement in the Martin Luther King Community Celebration, Steubenville Kiwanis Club and other groups.

Henry also was presented an honorary doctorate in educational leadership for his past leadership of the university, including the school's part in the birth control suit, the establishment of its Institute of Bioethics and participation in pro-life marches in Washington.

Pohl was presented an honorary doctorate of Christian ethics for his work not only in the birth control suit but also in legal action involving product liability, antitrust, corporate governance, natural resources and corporate criminals.

For his distinguished service on the university's board of trustees, he was presented the Cross Pro Ecclesia et Pontifice, the Catholic Church's highest honor for laity, in 2013.

Franciscan University of Steubenville graduates:

Bloomingdale: Michael Sherman, Peter Herrmann, Hannah Eckley, Anthony Clements.

Brilliant: Alison Johnson.

Colliers: Joseph Shaw.

Hopedale: Gregory Downs.

Irondale: Alysanna Glenn.

Jewett: Shannon Starre.

Mingo Junction: Mycaela Stewart, Cathy Stoddart, Hillary Carney.

New Cumberland: Alyssa Mick.

Richmond: Ethan Tice, Mary Petrisko.

Steubenville: Joshua Cordes, Brady Mertens, Catherine Welker, Kolbe Spencer, Joshua Mazrin, Alexander Harris, Savannah Finger, Andrew Pudysz, Kalin Lippsmeyer, Kassandra Ice, Christopher Ice, Cole Viscichini, Jacob Popcak, Jordan Byrley, Christopher Orante, Alicia Boyle, Kaitlyn Simonsgaard, Joseph Martinez, Christina Pavlov, Sabrina Hanson, Jessica Looman, Melanie Seitz, Rosita Asawa, Sean Flynn, Katherine Ward, Joseph Dantona, Jessie Cornell, Joshua Rapavi, Johanna Almeida, Angela Sengenberger, Alexander Huff Sr., M. Rosalinda Drees, Michael Schmiesing, Ryan Fischer, Mark Hanrahan, Carlos Leyva, Christopher Heilman, Laura Booth, Christopher Irvin, Michael Fischer, Don Caldwell, Virginia Pawelczyk, Ryan Mullen, Kathryn Schmitz, Christopher Cortes, Christopher Norris, Marci Houle, Lauren Yanda, Loretta Donegan, Talina De La Torre, Kelsey Porada, Theresa Lee.

Stratton: Zachariah Zdinak.

Tiltonsville: Charles Sempkowski.

Toronto: Maria Recznik, Danielle Irwin, Melia Baker, Terri Rawson, Rachel Lewis.

Weirton: Liam Buck, Cheryl Brown, Kateri Buck, Paul Buffington, Brittney Oliver.

Wintersville: Jordan Yeater, Joseph Irvin, Patrick Pendleton, Rebecca Goedert, Michael Rankin, Thien Tran, Christopher McNamara, Joseph Beigel, Andrew Wilson, Maria Durbin, Timothy McNamara.