Buy Photo Dr. Robert Fields, a primary care physician with Mission My Care Plus-Biltmore Park in Asheville, prepares to look in the ear of 5-year-old Kailey Pike. (Photo: William Woody / wwoody@citizen-times.com / William Woody / wwoody@citizen-times.com)Buy Photo

Asking the doctor to prescribe antibiotics for a child's ear infection or cold is standard operating procedure in many families.

But experts say it could do more harm than good because increasing resistance to the drugs threatens the ability to treat a growing list of conditions, sometimes with deadly results.

"It's a very serious problem," said Dr. Zack Moore, an epidemiologist with the North Carolina Division of Public Health.

"Antibiotics are an important part of our medical care and defense against disease," he said. "And what we've seen over the past few decades is that we have more and more infections ... that are resistant to antibiotics. And we've reached a point where there are some infections that can't be treated at all."

More than two million Americans get an antibiotic-resistant infection every year, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. And at least 23,000 of them die.

And there's a greater risk for children, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics.

So the state Department of Health and Human Services has partnered with the North Carolina Hospital Association on an effort to raise awareness about the gravity of the problem in hopes that drugs will work when they're truly needed.

The program uses a three-pronged approach, said Julie Henry, vice president of communications for the North Carolina Hospital Association.

The first is an ad campaign to make people aware that this is a serious issue they should discuss with their doctors instead of just demanding antibiotics, she said.

The second tier asks hospitals to commit to develop or re-examine their antibiotic stewardship programs so they look at prescribing patterns. For example, she said, antibiotics are routinely given before surgery but hospitals need to look at how they're used and devise a standard protocol instead of having a shotgun approach.

So far, 90 of 130 hospitals have committed to the program, she said, adding that some haven't yet responded but that others already had programs in place.

The last piece, Henry said, is educating providers outside the hospital setting about their prescribing habits and about counseling patients that antibiotics aren't always the answer.

"We want to start the conversation," she said. "Our hope is those conversations will lead to a better understanding."

Use and misuse

Much of the antibiotic resistance is driven by overuse and misuse, Moore said.

While the drugs can help heal bacterial infections like strep throat and staph, antibiotics are ineffective against viruses like those that cause ear infections, colds and flu.

But patients are given the drugs anyway.

"Often, there's an expectation for a prescription to be written for relief of symptoms and a perception that antibiotics will treat whatever the person presents with," said Dr. Robert Fields, a primary care physician with Mission My Care Plus-Biltmore Park in Asheville.

"But the bulk of the time, they're not necessary," he added. "And ear infections are often one of them. Often, providers will prescribe antibiotics ... but when you look at studies, most resolve on their own over time."

About half of all antibiotics are unnecessary or ineffective as prescribed, according to the CDC, and the bacteria that survive develop resistance.

"If you expose a group of bacteria to an antibiotic, over time you kill the things that are most sensitive to that antibiotic, but leave behind those that are most resistant," Fields said. "And they stay around and continue to grow. That effect is cumulative and you develop a whole pool of bacteria that are more resistant."

In addition, up to 10 million children may suffer side effects from antibiotics that were inappropriately prescribed, according to DHHS.

"Nobody wants to stop them from being used when needed — they're lifesavers," said Moore. "We need to remind people that antibiotics are not always helpful."

Serious threat

The CDC calls antibiotic resistance a serious public health threat.

"Many of the advances in medical treatment — diseases such as diabetes, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis — are dependent on the ability to fight infections with antibiotics," CDC researchers said in their report on resistance last fall. "If that ability is lost, the ability to safely offer people many life-saving and life-improving modern medical advantages will be lost with it."

Among the urgent threats are Clostridium difficile, or C. diff, a severe intestinal infection, and Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae, which can kill up to half of those infected, CDC reports.

"CRE in some cases is resistant to all available antibiotics," Moore said.

And in North Carolina, hospitalizations from C. diff ballooned from 3,076 in 2000 to 10,271 in 2012, according to DHHS.

"C. diff is a major problem in the country and in North Carolina. (It) can be deadly and it's gotten more so," Moore said. "There has been more than a 900 percent increase in deaths from Clostridium difficile alone since 2001. That is an alarming statistic that should cause all of us to pay attention to this issue."

Other serious threats include Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA; Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus, and drug-resistant Salmonella.

MRSA, which has shown up in school locker rooms around the country, kills about 19,000 Americans every year, according to DHHS.

"MRSA has become commonplace in the community," Fields said. "We see children and adults alike presenting with abscesses on the skin. It's scary to think that this resistant bacteria has become so common that we accept it as just one of those things."

Know the dangers

These infections cost the health system more than $20 billion a year and experts say there are few new antibiotics in development.

The problem is being attacked at the highest levels of government.

In September, the Obama administration released its "National Strategy on Combating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria," a five-year plan to prevent and contain outbreaks of antibiotic-resistant infections, maintain the effectiveness of antibiotics, and develop new diagnostics and treatments.

President Obama also issued an executive order that establishes a national Task Force for Combating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria as well as a Presidential Advisory Council of leading non-governmental experts to tackle the problem.

And it calls for federal agencies to improve antibiotic stewardship at hospitals and other health care facilities and directs the FDA to move toward eliminating the use of medically important antibiotics for growth-promotion purposes in agriculture.

North Carolina emphasizes the need for providers to be good stewards of antibiotics to preserve their usefulness as long as possible, Moore said. That means prescribing the appropriate antibiotic for the infection and prescribing antibiotics only when they will be effective, he said.

"And it's a two-way street," Moore said. "Doctors feel patients expect an antibiotic when they're sick."

So providers need to have conversations with patients so they know the dangers, Fields said.

"It's important to know when an antibiotic is necessary," said Dr. Carol Koeble, director of NCHA's North Carolina Quality Center. "The truth is, for viruses like the flu, an antibiotic can do you more harm than good."

Want to learn more? Go to http://www.ncgetsmart.com/.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1qQQU9x