Buy Photo Kathie Obradovich writes and tweets about presidential politics and state government. She’s an Iowa native and a Cyclone fan who’s covered the past six Iowa caucus campaigns. kobradov@registermedia.com; @kobradovich (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

Few were terribly surprised two years ago when Congressman Steve King handily defeated Democrat Jim Mowrer. The 4th District was and is heavily Republican and Mowrer was running for public office for the first time.

Two years later, Mowrer is again running for Congress. He has more political experience, including time traveling the state as vice chairman of the Iowa Democratic Party. He was a friend of Vice President Joe Biden’s late son, Beau, and has national political connections. He’s already proven himself a capable fundraiser, with about $2 million donated last cycle. Meanwhile, King has ruffled some feathers within the GOP and attracted a Republican primary opponent with some deep-pocketed supporters.

But Mowrer isn’t running against King. After the 2014 election, he moved his family from Boone, where he was born and raised, to a Des Moines home he has owned since 2007. He announced last summer that he would run in the 3rd District, where Republican Congressman David Young is seeking re-election to a second term.

There’s a three-way primary race for the Democratic nomination that is becoming more active now that the filing deadline has passed. Mike Sherzan and Desmund Adams, both West Des Moines businessmen, have announced campaign events in the district this week. Young has also scheduled public events in the district this week and has a Republican opponent, Joe Grandanette, who sought the nomination in 2014.

Buy Photo Democrat Jim Mowrer campaigns for the the 3rd Congressional District nomination. (Photo: KATHIE OBRADOVICH/The Register)

Democrats in Iowa have been more focused on the 1st District, where the party holds nearly a 20,000 active registration advantage and Republican Rep. Rod Blum is trying to win a second term. In the 3rd District, Republicans outnumber Democrats by about 8,100 active registrations. But the Cook Political Report recently ranked both races as toss-ups.

I caught up with Mowrer last week at a campaign event in Des Moines. He was rolling out endorsements aimed at showing his strength in the primary, but he also telegraphed lines of attack against Young.

Buy Photo Jim Mowrer, candidate for Iowa's 3rd congressional district, gestures to the crowd at the 2014 Jefferson Jackson Dinner on Saturday, Oct. 25, 2014, at Hy-Vee Hall in Des Moines, Iowa. (Photo: Charlie Litchfield/The Register)

Here are some of his comments on the political climate and his candidacy:

Lessons from 2014: “I think you should learn something. If you don’t, there might be a problem. Just the amount of work it takes and how to go about communicating your message, what are the right ways to go about that. And so I’m very confident we’re going to run the strongest campaign, nobody’s going to outwork me. I don’t take anything for granted but I’m very confident that we’re going to win.”

Voter anger: “I would say that people are definitely frustrated and in some cases, angry. I mean, we have basically gotten nothing done in Washington over the past few years because of the obstructionism and the divide that exists. And so, I think what we need to focus on is changing that as we move forward and focus that energy on making a positive impact in the future. But we have a lot of people out there stoking that fear and anger. They want people to be afraid, they want people to be angry and that’s not what real leadership is.”

Targeting Young: “Just in the first year and a half in office, I think he’s provided a good look as to why he does not deserve another term. He’s voted twice against the equal pay act, he’s voted to repeal the Affordable Care Act six times … he’s voted to defund Planned Parenthood and shut down the government several times. He was one of only 64 members of Congress and the only member of the Iowa delegation to vote against the bipartisan highway bill. And there was just a report out a couple of weeks ago that said Iowa has the third most deficient roads and bridges in the country, and when we have a representative who is voting against the highway bill, basic funding for roads and bridges, I think that people are going to say that’s not representative of what we need in Iowa.”

U.S. Rep. David Young (Photo: Special to the Register)

Young response: James Carstensen, spokesman for Young, took issue in particular with Mowrer's comments that Young had voted to "shut down the government." Carstensen also pointed out that Young voted for the highway package on final passage. "David has never voted for a government shutdown — period. The other claims are also false. This candidate is clearly quite confused. He must be recycling his old talking points from his failed run for Congress just a few months ago in another part of Iowa."

Q: Are you at all kicking yourself that you’re not running in the 4th District this year?

“Well, you know, after the last election I moved back to the home I’ve had in Des Moines for about a decade and was not planning on running this cycle but there is so much at stake and so many important issues that I’m excited to represent the 3rd District and all Iowans and all Americans, of course, in Congress because you know, there’s so many issues that affect everyone and so I’m focused on the race here.”

Q: But you are kicking yourself, just a little?

Mowrer grins. “No, no, no. no. Not at all.”

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Mx6ZMb