STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. - This is what they mean by misreading the mandate.

Republicans in Washington, flush with their new two-house majority, are ramping up their battle against President Barack Obama's immigration policies.

Their plan? Close down parts of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).

Maybe they haven't heard that there's a war on terror going on.

It all goes back to immigration, one of the GOP's two major gripes against the president. The other, of course, being Obamacare.

Rightly angered that Obama circumvented Congress by issuing executive orders to protect millions of immigrants from deportation, Republicans set a midnight Friday deadline to fund DHS, home of the Border Patrol and other immigration agencies, or have it shut down.

Conservatives, particularly those in the House, are opposed to any DHS funding bill that does not repeal Obama's executive orders. Democrats want a clean bill, with no strings attached.

If no agreement is reached, 30,000 DHS employees would be furloughed, and another 200,000 would work without pay.

And while many are shrugging that nothing really bad will happen as a result of a DHS shutdown, the Washington Post reported that 14 percent of DHS workers could be furloughed.

That includes 12 percent of Border Patrol and Customs agents; 7 percent of Transportation Security Administration workers; 20 percent of Immigration and Customs Enforcement workers, and 12 percent of FEMA employees and members of the Coast Guard.

Those are some of the folks who guard the border, screen airline passengers, and help people hit by natural disasters.

But even if there are no repercussions, shutting down DHS is a dumb play politically for the party that touts itself as being the guardians of national defense.

These are the same lawmakers who have been screaming for weeks because Obama refuses to use the word "Islamic" when talking about the terrorist threat that radical Islamist groups like ISIS pose to the United States and the world.

And aren't these the same folks who have been complaining that Obama has prevented Border Patrol agents from patrolling federal lands?

And yet they would make the very agency in charge of homeland protection and immigration enforcement a pawn in a political game. And for what? To give Sen. Ted Cruz some talking points on the 2016 campaign trail? Surely there must be a better way to them to address their immigration grievances against the White House.

ISIS and its affiliated groups, as well as the lone-wolf attackers that they inspire, are on the march around the world. We've seen it in France, Australia and Denmark. We are seeing it on a regular basis in parts of the Middle East, with Christians and others beheaded and burned alive.

Now is not the time to be playing with national security in any way, shape or form. Surely this is not what voters had in mind when they gave the GOP control of the Senate as well as the House. Can't Republicans see the boomerang already heading back at them?

Not that Obama is blameless in all this.

The president was wrong to take such sweeping action on immigration through executive order. Whatever Obama's problems with Congress on immigration policy, it's too big an issue to just go it alone.

America has been confronted by big issues in the past. The debate over civil rights tore this country apart in the 1950s and 1960s, for example. But lawmakers have always managed to compromise, to come to an agreement, to pass legislation. Immigration must be no different.

The GOP is playing right into Obama's hands if they think that shutting down the DHS will teach the president a lesson.