With the Supreme Court poised to rule on same-sex marriage and the Affordable Care Act, some Illinois Democrats are urging the court to permit live audio to be transmitted from the courtroom when the historic decisions are announced.

Sen. Dick Durbin and Reps. Mike Quigley and Cheri Bustos were among 16 lawmakers who signed a letter Tuesday putting the request to Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts.

"Decisions made by the Supreme Court impact the lives of Americans in every corner of the country, but their proceedings often don't reach beyond the four walls of the courtroom," Durbin said in a statement Wednesday.

"Over the next several days, the Supreme Court will announce opinions in some of the most closely watched cases in a generation. People of reasonable minds may disagree on the proper outcome of these cases and others, but we can all agree that the American public deserves greater access to the opinions that will shape their society for years to come."

Quigley, in a statement, said the forthcoming opinions will "change the course of American history," and added, "Allowing live audio coverage will give more Americans the ability to closely follow the proceedings as they occur."

In the letter, the lawmakers said the court releases same-day transcripts and end-of-the-week audio and in limited cases, same-day audio. They said while Americans have access to government proceedings through C-SPAN and live streaming online, the high court "remains almost completely closed from the public eye."

Quigley is from Chicago and Bustos from East Moline. Only one Republican signed the letter: Sen. Chuck Grassley of Iowa.

Couples, clerks await gay marriage ruling Couples, clerks and opponents across the US are preparing for the Supreme Court’s upcoming ruling on same-sex marriage. (AP) Couples, clerks and opponents across the US are preparing for the Supreme Court’s upcoming ruling on same-sex marriage. (AP) See more videos

The lawmakers also said they favored cameras in the high court to allow live broadcasts in the future.

A Supreme Court spokesman could not immediately be reached for comment Wednesday.

kskiba@tribpub.com

Twitter @Katherine Skiba