Beginning today, Somerset Medical Center is no more.

The financially anemic Somerville hospital’s eagerly awaited merger with Robert Wood Johnson Hospital in New Brunswick is now complete.

The facility has been renamed Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Somerset, and big change is on the way.

Robert Wood has pledged to spend $53 million over four years for capital projects that will include a new cardiac catheterization suite, and another $3 million over three years for Somerset’s community health foundation, which will remain independent, according to a statement by Stephen K. Jones, president and CEO of the Robert Wood Johnson Health System.

The deal is the latest in a flurry of activity with New Jersey’s community hospitals. Somerset is the second merger or acquisition completed this year, and another six are pending. The hospitals have been hurt by outpatient treatment centers that have grabbed a big chunk of their inpatient care, and the Affordable Care Act’s authority to fine hospitals that don’t curb readmission rates.

On paper, the merger creates one 965-bed hospital between the two campuses, but to patients and employees, little will change right away. Physician arrangements will stay the same. There is no impact on the approximately 5,200 employees in New Brunswick, while Somerset Medical Center’s 2,200 employees "have been guaranteed employment at their current number of hours and salary for one year," Robert Wood’s spokesman Peter Haigney said.

"For more than a century, Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital has been committed to improving the health of Central New Jersey. Our expansion into Somerset County will provide direct access to the highest quality medical services and a wider array of health care opportunities, allowing us to better serve our communities and neighbors," Jones said. "While we’ve expanded, our mission remains the same — to improve the health and well-being of the patients and communities we serve."

Robert Wood takes control after a period of turmoil for the Somerset County hospital.

Moody’s Investors Services reported that the hospital had posted 10 consecutive years of operating losses through 2012. The hospital carried $80 million in state-issued bonds, and had Robert Wood not committed to buy Somerset in September, Moody’s said it would have downgraded the hospital’s bond rating.

"As is the case with many New Jersey hospitals, Somerset Medical Center faced financial challenges resulting from the competitive health care environment in our state and region," Haigney said. "We are confident that this merger will strengthen the hospital financially and position it for future growth."

A fresh start

The fresh start also allows Somerset to distance itself from the bleakest moments in its history. Somerset was the last hospital in the New Jersey-Pennsylvania area that employed Charles Cullen, the serial-killer nurse who pleaded guilty in 2004 to murdering 13 patients there by lethal injection and attempting to murder two more.

In April, U.S. Attorney Paul Fishman announced the hospital would pay a $435,000 a settlement to end a five-year investigation into allegations Somerset had improperly billed Medicare and paid kickbacks to a cardiology practice to get more patient referrals.

In anticipation of the merger with Robert Wood, Somerset CEO Kenneth Bateman and nearly his entire senior management team left Somerset two weeks ago. The sale was not contingent on the resignations, Haigney said.

Paul V. Stahlin, former chairman of Somerset’s board of trustees, said the two institutions have been working "to ensure a seamless transition for our patients and staff."

"Our organizations have had long-standing partnerships in many areas of clinical care and share many of the same physicians," said Stahlin, who with former board member Steve Kalafer, chairman of the Somerset Health Care Foundation Board of Trustees, are now board members of Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital and the Robert Wood Johnson Health System.

"This alliance enables us to offer expanded access to high-quality medical care close to home and strengthens our ability to serve our community for generations to come," Stahlin said.

Shared services

One example of sharing services is cancer care. Somerset’s Steeplechase Cancer Center will continue, but it will have a "strengthened partnership" with the Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey. Robert Wood is the institute’s flagship hospital.

Health care experts see the flurry of hospital sales and mergers over the last several years — as well as the closure of nine hospitals since 2007 — as part of a necessary trend to strengthen the industry. New Jersey has long been regarded as a place with too many inpatient beds.

"Each (closure) was very difficult for the impact on the community," said Heather Howard, director of the State Health Reform Assistance Network at Princeton University’s Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, who presided over some of the hospital closures when she was state health commissioner.

"We were reducing excess bed capacity, and that made the system stronger," Howard told industry insiders at a conference in Ewing on Thursday. "The ACA (Affordable Care Act) has only accelerated the pressure on hospitals to reinvent themselves."

RELATED COVERAGE

• Somerset Medical Center CEO, senior executives will leave before Robert Wood Johnson merger

• Somerset Medical Center agrees to pay $435K to settle federal kickback case

• Detective tells '60 Minutes' Somerset Medical Center lied during Cullen investigation

More Politics