About 23,700 poor parents to lose Medicaid coverage

About 23,700 low-income parents are slated to lose Medicaid coverage under the state budget passed last week.

Most of them will have until August 2016 to find alternative sources of medical insurance, but some 1,350 will go off the rolls Aug. 1, less than two months from now.

“The final decision to roll back eligibility certainly takes us back a step,” said Elizabeth Krause, vice president of policy and communications at the Connecticut Health Foundation. “We, as a state, have been a national leader in covering people.”

Gov. Dannel P. Malloy’s budget originally proposed cutting Medicaid coverage for about 34,000 parents, but the version approved by the Legislature last week trimmed that figure to 23,700.

Technically, the change was made by lowering the income limit for Medicaid eligibility from 201 percent of the poverty level to 155 percent, effective Aug. 1.

The majority of affected parents have earned income from paid employment, and under federal rules are therefore able to continue with Medicaid for a transitional year after that cutoff date. But those who have only unearned income, such as Social Security and unemployment, enjoy no such protection.

State officials have argued that parents in both groups will be able to buy health insurance through the state’s exchange, Access Health CT, at prices subsidized by the federal government under the Affordable Care Act.

“We have the best health-insurance exchange in the nation — so good that states across the U.S. are modeling theirs after Connecticut’s,” said Devon Puglia, spokesman for the governor.

“We are also proud to say that we are the only state — the only state — that subsidizes Medicaid to the levels we currently do,” Puglia said in a statement.

But critics predict thousands won’t buy insurance from the exchange because of the cost of premiums and out-of-pocket expenses.

“The reality is they are just not likely to buy a supplemental health insurance plan or pay out of pocket,” Krause said.

It would cost someone about $1,900 each year to buy a medical policy, according to a March report commissioned by the health foundation, which was released about a month after the governor proposed the 2016-17 budget.

The possibility of losing Medicaid was frightening to Julieta Flores-Bravo, of Bridgeport.

Through a translator, Flores-Bravo, 43, said she has asthma, high blood pressure, diabetes and anemia. She and her husband have a combined income of $39,000, which must provide for their 9-year-old son and 21-year-old daughter, who live with them. She said they wouldn’t be able to afford private health insurance through the exchange.

Because of situations like Flores-Bravo’s, health care advocates know they need to work with state and community agencies to make sure people get the information they need to stay insured.

“It’s going to take a concerted, collaborative effort to make sure they don’t fall through the cracks and that they stay covered,” Krause said.

She said the health foundation is calling on state agencies and nonprofit groups to create a multifaceted plan that addresses different insurance options.

Sharon Langer, advocacy director at Connecticut Voices for Children, said these groups will have their work cut out for them, given what has happened in other states that rolled back their Medicaid coverage.

For example, four months after Rhode Island tightened eligibility requirements in 2013, 11 percent of former recipients had enrolled in the state’s exchange, but 30 percent were left uninsured.

Langer said she worries children would lose coverage — a concern echoed by the health foundation.

In 2013, Maine reduced the income eligibility standard for parents.