Brocious appointed to position in January 2013

Carlette Brocious

Carlette Brocious has one full year as Fremont County Coroner under her belt, and she hopes to retain the position when voters cast their ballots in November.

Brocious, 56, was appointed to the position by the Board of Fremont County Commissioners in January 2013 to fulfill Dr. Dorothy Twellman's term when she retired. Twellman was in the position from 1995-2013. Brocious recently officially announced that she will run for the position, a four-year term, as a Republican candidate.

Prior to her appointment as coroner, she served as Chief Deputy Coroner for eight years.

"Everything I've done in my life has brought me around to this," she said. "I wouldn't be as good if I wasn't an ER nurse, if I hadn't been a hospice nurse, if I hadn't been a nursing director — if I hadn't done those things in my past life, I wouldn't trust me doing this job."

She said people generally don't understand that although it is not a requirement, the coroner should have a medical background. The coroner responds to natural, accidental, homicide and undetermined deaths, as well as suicides, and determines the cause and manner of death. She also tends to inmate deaths at the Department of Corrections and the Federal Bureau of Prisons in Florence. Typically, the coroner handles 150-170 deaths annually.

Advertisement

"I think having all of that medical behind me was the greater plan for me to come around where I am at," she said.

In addition to responding to death calls, Brocious educates the public and students on the job of the coroner, helps teach the Student's Emergency Response Team classes at Cañon City High School and assists law enforcement on various cases. There also is paperwork to keep up with, a budget to balance and four deputy coroners to oversee. Autopsies are conducted in El Paso County, and she sometimes attends those.

"Dealing with the families, that's my No. 1 priority," she said. "I find that some families need you a lot, they don't have somebody to talk to or ask questions of."

Brocious attends annual classes through the Colorado Coroners Association, and she attended the St. Louis University's medical college, where she became certified in death investigations.

Feb. 3 is the last day to update voter registration addresses to participate in the March 4 party precinct caucuses (http://sos.state.co.us). Voters must be a resident of the precinct for 30 days, and registered to vote no later than 29 days before the precinct caucus. The primary election is slated for June 24 and the general election is Nov. 4.