You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

— Kentrell Barkley doesn't usually say much.

The 6-foot-5 East Carolina recruit usually lets his playing do the talking, and it usually speaks loudly. The reigning PAC-6 Conference Player of the Year can fill a stat sheet quickly while packing the Northern Durham gym full of people waiting to see one of his highlight dunks. This year, however, that won't be enough.

With the departure of last season's senior leader Ricky Council, Barkley is seeing his role change on a Northern Durham team in need of a new leader. The Knights want to build on a 26-2 record and get back to the state playoffs, where the team suffered a crushing defeat on a buzzer-beater to Apex in the third round in February.

"I've been in the gym, lifting weights and trying to build chemistry with my team," Barkley said. "I know I have to talk a whole lot more than I did last year."

Last season, Council began the year as the unquestioned leader of the Northern Knights before Barkley broke out as one of the most explosive and talented players in the area. The teammates were co-players of the year in the conference.

So far this year, Barkley has lived up to his high expectations by helping his team to a 2-1 record through the first week of the season. In the Knights' opener against rival Southern Durham last week, he scored 30 points and added 11 rebounds to get his team its first win.

"He's a smart basketball player, and a smart guy can beat you any day," said Southern Durham Head Coach Kendrick Hall after the game.

Three days later, Northern suffered its first loss of the season to the Millbrook Wildcats. The Knights trailed by double digits after the first quarter and Barkley was held to just one point in the first half, but finished the game with 16 points and nine rebounds as the team fell short of a comeback.

Despite the early-season loss, Northern Head Coach Ronnie Russell is pleased with how Barkley has played up to this point, citing his defensive ability and basketball IQ as two areas in which the star forward has greatly improved over the offseason.

"He's always been a leader, as far as his personality and his character," Russell said. "Our guys look at him to lead, and he carries himself in a way to where guys want to follow."

Another big step for Barkley over the offseason was putting his college recruiting process to an end. Barkley committed to East Carolina in August, choosing the Pirates as the best of a dozen offers.

Appalachian State, Campbell, UNC-Charlotte, UNC-Greensboro, UNC-Wilmington, N.C. Central, Western Kentucky and Providence were all among the schools that had extended offers to Barkley, but he said the Pirates were the best fit.

"There was a quick connection," Barkley said. "We have a good bond and I feel like that's my family already."

Barkley utilized the early signing period to ink his National Letter of Intent on Nov. 13.

With a college decision, an increased skill of vocal leadership to go along with his athletic ability, and the memory of a difficult playoff loss still on his mind, Barkley is poised to help the Knights reach new heights in his final high school basketball season.

"A state championship is the ultimate goal," he said. "We have to take it game by game and everybody has to step up."

Northern will take the court again the day after Thanksgiving in the Bull City Classic in Durham.

Follow Zach Mayo on Twitter at @ZachMayoHSOT