Buy Photo A file photo Rochester Mayor Lovely Warren taken earlier this year. (Photo: TINA MACINTYRE-YEE staff photographer)Buy Photo

Mayor Lovely Warren had not yet been born when Rochester erupted in racial unrest 50 years ago, but she recognizes the three days of turmoil in July 1964 as part of the city's collective history.

"It should be remembered as a time we really turned the page and were able to deal with racism and issues surrounding it, face-to-face and where it touched us, skin-to-skin," said Warren, 37.

The riots, Warren noted, were fueled by despair. How to turn that into hope and vision is something the city has struggled with for the better part of the past 50 years. The daunting issues — from failing schools to a lack of jobs — are made more challenging by the concentration of poverty.

Riots revisited: 3 days that shook Rochester

More: Riots spawned FIGHT, other community efforts

Rochester has both the nation's fifth highest rate of poverty and third highest concentration of extremely poor neighborhoods among large metro areas.

The city, once proclaimed The World's Image Centre, also has the poorest upstate school district in a state that has the most segregated schools in the nation.

It also remains one of the most segregated cities in the nation, such that for every census tract to reflect the same diversity of the total metro area, 62 percent of white and black residents would have to move, according to the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research. The norm for similar-sized communities is 47 percent.

Then and now, median household income for African-Americans in Rochester is about two-thirds that of white city residents. The Hispanic population, which has grown significantly in numbers, shares some of the same problems, as do some of the other minority groups living in high poverty areas in the city. The differences between whites and non-whites show clearly in numbers on infant mortality, education, employment, homeownership, health — from the cradle to the grave, and those disparities are more pronounced in Rochester than state or national averages.

Timeline: Rochester's 1964 riots

D&C series: Unite Rochester

A shared stake

And the entire community has a vested interest in addressing these issues because the region, with its high-tech industries, needs a skilled workforce. Monroe Community College draws heavily from city residents and — with its training programs — is a pipeline to local industry, which needs workers for jobs that require technical skills.

The County of Monroe Industrial Development Agency directs 60 percent of benefits to the city. Yet problems persist.

"Government can't do this alone," said Monroe County Executive Maggie Brooks. "We need the engagement of the private sector ... our faith community has a huge role to play in changing the course and the dynamic we see in Monroe County."

An example of the interest in addressing such issues was the Facing Race, Embracing Equity Community Summit convened last month that drew more than 300 people and conveyed a clear sense of urgency about coming up with solutions on matters ranging from housing and jobs to education, health disparities and criminal justice.

Long-standing problems are being revisited with fresh eyes. Not that a host of solutions haven't been offered before.

The post-riot era was a time of innovation, community leaders said, as organizations and programs formed that were aimed at achieving greater opportunity and equality. Efforts ranged from job training to preventing lead poisoning from peeling paint. For a time, it seemed Rochester was moving in the right direction.

"I think we just lost focus on a vision. We still don't have a vision for the city," said Darryl Porter, who was 15 at the time of the riots and went on to lead the Group 14621 Community Association, serve as president of the city school board, and become an assistant to mayors Robert Duffy and Thomas Richards.

"When you finally come down to it, you say, 'What did you do about it?' " he said.

Orders of magnitude

Consider the depth of the problem.

To get Rochester's poverty level more in line with the national average, the options are to reduce the number of people in poverty, provide housing for the poor outside the city or attract more middle-class and affluent people into the city. There currently are no significant efforts to do any of those, said Ed Doherty, retired vice president of the Rochester Area Community Foundation who wrote an in-depth report in December on poverty in the nine-county region.

Taking each strategy individually, it would require moving 18,500 people out of poverty without seeing any others slide in, or providing 23,500 suburban homes for the city's current poor, or moving 83,000 new middle-class and affluent residents into the city. A combined approach would reduce those numbers.

"Solving poverty is huge," said Bryan Hetherington, chief counsel for the Empire Justice Center, which is based in Rochester and represents low-income residents on a variety of matters.

The community needs to make a commitment, he said, and continues: "What do you do? Invest in education. Make sure there is a good job in the community so that if kids get an education, they can get a job."

The topic of education runs through almost every discussion of where we go from here and has become tied to economic issues and the legacy of past discrimination.

Sixteen years ago, Empire Justice filed an unsuccessful lawsuit linking the high rate of poverty in city schools to low performance — with the goal of having the courts put limits on how many low-income students could be at a school.

Recently, a group of local concerned citizens — many long active in community affairs — visited Raleigh, North Carolina, to find out what can be learned from the Raleigh experience of consolidating city and suburban schools. The number of low-income students at any school was capped at 40 percent and that goal was achieved by a number steps, including the establishment of 35 magnet schools that drew both urban and suburban students. In Monroe County, talk of regionalizing services has been framed in financial terms and cost-savings, and those discussions have stalled, Brooks said.

Concentrations of poverty that the various initiatives are trying to break up result from racism of the past that left many African-Americans with no alternative but to live in certain neighborhoods. Such barriers, said Hetherington, are considered institutional racism. "It is the result of generations of legal impediments, social practices and stereotypes."

While the mayor said she is not wedded to a particular approach to moving forward, Warren did say: "We have to figure out ways to break up the concentration of poverty." Scattering low-income housing outside these pockets of poverty is a start, and something she wants to explore. For example, some of the housing slated for the Sibley Tower will fall into the affordable category.

Video: How the riots started

Several perspectives from police and witnesses on the start of the Rochester riots 50 years ago. Video story by Annette Lein

Some efforts underway

How to improve conditions in high poverty includes better outreach from colleges to city schools and youths. A prime example is the Rochester School District's recent establishment of a partnership with the University of Rochester to run East High School.

And MCC is launching an initiative this summer that will have mobile learning labs go into city neighborhoods to reach youths and interest them in careers.

"We can show them opportunities," said Anne Kress, who is MCC's president and is coordinating this effort with community-based organizations.

Making the most out of the limited resources available is a recurring theme among community leaders.

"What kind of tools can we tap into and deploy to really change the economics of these neighborhoods?" asked William A. Johnson Jr. who came to Rochester in 1972 to head the Urban League, and in 1993 was elected as the first African-American mayor of Rochester.

Few of the black-owned business that opened their doors after the riots survive today. And he sees a need for renewed advocacy.

"We started something that has such a brilliant potential," Johnson said, "and something happened along the way that caused it to fester and to die."

Many of those tools existed — including job training and placement programs — but "as funding dwindled, communities of color are the ones that are affected the most," said Hilda Rosario-Escher, president and CEO of the Ibero-American Action League, which formed in 1968. Micro-loan programs still exist, and the organization has built affordable housing and focused on less-costly efforts such as helping develop block clubs, neighborhood watch and other community connections.

"If we look at our neighborhoods, there are a lot of needs, there is housing, there is lack of employment, there is a lot of structural racism in the different systems," she said.

There also is overt racism, such as what Jerry Holley experienced, being among the African-Americans who relocated to Rochester before the July 1964 events — moving here from Tuscaloosa, Alabama, that January.

"I left Alabama to start a new life, a better life," said Holley, now 67 and still living in Rochester.

In the aftermath of the riots, Holley owned a business, Shabazz Restaurant, on Joseph Avenue. He tells of a racial epithet being shouted at him during his early years here. But Holley is hoping for change among those who can't see beyond bigotry.

"You have to change yourself, your attitude about how you see and look at people," he said.

Assemblyman David Gantt, who grew up in the Joseph Avenue area, sees an improvement in police-community relations since 1964 — saying "the city is a different place with young people and police, though that relationship clearly needs work."

But he worries about the economic conditions that caused the despair of 1964 persisting and causing new unrest.

"Yes, I do think it could happen again because it is the same situation, just a different year," Gantt said.

Whether the riots might happen again is the wrong question, said Verdis LeVar Robinson. The MCC professor, who is leading Joseph Avenue walking tours to mark the 50-year anniversary, said that if conditions are not improved, riots are the least concern. The overriding issue is generations being left out or lost.

As the community explores various options, it is clear that the racial unrest of 50 years ago, while making leaders aware of problems of race and injustice, has not solved inequalities or paved the way for equal opportunity.

"People were tired of just really feeling they were hopeless," Warren said. "I look at our community now and in some ways I still see that in some people's faces."

JGOODMAN@Democratand Chronicle.com

Twitter.com/Goodman_DandC

BDSHARP@DemocratandChronicle.com

Twitter/com/sharproc

Then & now

Census data from 1960 and 2010 reveal how much Monroe County has changed. In 1960, the county's population was almost evenly distributed between the city and the suburbs, but black people were congregated in the city. In all, 97.5 percent of black people lived in the city — and the census counted only 839 non-white individuals living in the suburbs. Today, there are nearly 60,000, or roughly one-third of the total minority population, living outside of the city. Also as of the 2010 census, there are more minorities in the city — 118,614 — than white residents — 91,951.

About Unite Rochester

• In dozens of stories, essays, images, videos and more, Unite Rochester seeks to raise awareness of racial issues and inspire inclusive solutions to persistent community problems.

• This is the fifth installment of the series for 2014, the 50th anniversary of racially charged riots that scarred the city. Throughout the year, Unite Rochester will focus on our community's diversity with a special focus on finding ways to overcome the obstacles that divide us.

• Participate at DemocratandChronicle.com/unite, on Facebook at Facebook.com/UniteRoc, or on Twitter by following @UniteRochester (and using #uniteroc).

About the reporters

James Goodman has a master's degree in history from Harvard University. He has been a reporter with the Democrat and Chronicle since 1983 and currently covers higher education. In addition to many other stories during his career, Goodman helped covered the 20th anniversary of the riots in 1984.

Brian Sharp received his journalism degree from the University of Nebraska in 1995. He has been a reporter with the Democrat and Chronicle since 2005 and currently covers local government.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1rskK34