More Video...

Saturday, September 14, 2013

UPDATE:

Police are investigating after a man was seriously injured in a shooting in east Wichita early Saturday morning.

Police cars with flashing lights and detectives going door to door after a violent crime is all too familiar in the 800 block of South Mission in east Wichita.

It’s the latest crime on the block: a shooting early Saturday morning, which police say is likely the result of a drug deal gone bad.

“The suspect became angry because the victim, who was selling the drugs, didn't bring enough drugs for him,” said Wichita Police Sgt. Bruce Watts.

After a physical fight, police say the suspect pulled a gun and shot the dealer who then drove down the street.

“He ran into a Wichita officer at Woodlawn and Douglas, almost literally ran into the police car, but he didn't. He missed the police car,” Watts said.

The 35-year-old victim was taken to Wesley Medical Center with a gunshot wound to the shoulder. He was listed in serious condition Saturday evening.

This shooting is at least the fourth violent crime so far this year on South Mission.

The first was in March in the 800 block. A man on his way to see his brother was shot multiple times in the chest.

Then in June, a man flagged down a woman on East Harry after he was stabbed in the foot and torso in the 900 block.

And in July, police responded to a report of gunshots in the 800 block and found a 20-year-old man lying on the ground with serious injuries after an alleged beating.

None on the residents we spoke with on South Mission would talk on camera, fearing retribution. But they says they’re tired of the crime and worried for the many children being raised on the block.

Previous story:

A man was critically hurt early Saturday morning in a shooting in east Wichita.

It happened near around 3 a.m. in the 800 block of South Mission, near Lincoln and Woodlawn.

Sgt. Dale Mattern said following the shooting, the 35-year-old victim drove to Douglas and Woodlawn before flagging down an officer, saying he'd been shot in an attempted robbery.

He was taken to a local hospital with critical injuries and is currently in serious but stable condition.

Police are still investigating. Suspect descriptions were not immediately available.

We hope to learn more this afternoon during a noon briefing with Wichita police. Check back for updates.