As with understanding Parts I and II of Deconstructing Donny, one must be aware of the subtle and nuanced rhetoric that Donald Trump uses in order to understand his approach to resolving the political and social issues of our country and to understanding the policies that he will implement in order to make America great again. This approach is nowhere more apparent that in the first Republican debate in Cleveland which will go down in political debate history as the "LeBron Smackdown." The form and content is uniquely Trumpian and regardless of what other Republicans (or Democrats) may say, his words ring with a truth can only be considered the provenance of God.

Trump on Women:

KELLY: Mr. Trump, one of the things people love about you is you speak your mind and you don't use a politician's filter. However, that is not without its downsides, in particular, when it comes to women. You've called women you don't like "fat pigs, dogs, slobs, and disgusting animals."

TRUMP: Only Rosie O'Donnell.

KELLY: Your Twitter account has several disparaging comments about women's looks. You once told a contestant on Celebrity Apprentice it would be a pretty picture to see her on her knees. Does that sound to you like the temperament of a man we should elect as president, and how will you answer the charge from Hillary Clinton, who was likely to be the Democratic nominee, that you are part of the war on women?

TRUMP: "I think the big problem this country has is being politically correct. I've been challenged by so many people, and I don't frankly have time for total political correctness. And to be honest with you, this country doesn't have time either. This country is in big trouble. We don't win anymore. We lose to China. We lose to Mexico both in trade and at the border. We lose to everybody. And frankly, what I say, and oftentimes it's fun, it's kidding. We have a good time. What I say is what I say. And honestly Megyn, if you don't like it, I'm sorry. I've been very nice to you, although I could probably maybe not be, based on the way you have treated me. But I wouldn't do that. But you know what, we -- we need strength, we need energy, we need quickness and we need brain in this country to turn it around. That, I can tell you right now."

In uniquely Trumpian fashion, he humorously tries to lighten up the mood by stating that those horrible things didn't apply to all women, just Rosie O'Donnell which is clearly his attempt at using anacoenosis (an appeal by the speaker to his opponents or to the audience for an opinion of the point). That rhetorical technique completely befuddles Kelly who then has to refute that statement by saying that based on his previous behavior he seems to be "part of the war on women," Trump counters by addressing a completely different issue; namely, political correctness. This rhetorical tactic avoids the real issue (i.e. respect for women) and moves the discourse to two critical areas beloved by Trump: 1) the notion of personal challenges and 2) the lack of time for "total political correctness." In other words, the statement implies that partial political correctness may be appropriate, but not total political correctness because he's too busy for that. He then repeats the word "time" in a completely different context. While one might think he's going to talk about political correctness related to the war on women, he subtly shifts the argument to the country not having time not for political correctness or respect for women, but China. To do that effectively, he links time with the country being in "big trouble" namely with trade issues with China and Mexico and then subtly incorporates immigration issues by alluding to the border issue with Mexico. Once again, it's a brilliant maneuver of avoiding the question and subtly turning the answer into what's totally inappropriate. Using his favorite rhetorical technique of aposiopesis (a sudden breaking off in the middle of a sentence as if unable or unwilling to proceed) Trump says, "And frankly, what I say, and oftentimes it's fun, it's kidding. We have a good time" but if it bothers Kelly he's sorry, then turns the argument back on Kelly by saying she's not been treating him very nicely and finally concludes his answer with "we need strength, we need energy, we need quickness and we need brain in this country to turn it around." This brilliant rhetorical shift from the initial issue of respecting women to being disrespected by women (i.e. Kelly) shows how gifted Trump is in this area. He concludes his answer by using epanalepsis (the repetition of the same word or phrase after other words have intervened) in a manner that would have made Horace proud.

Trump on Mexico and Immigration:

WALLACE: Mr. Trump, it has not escaped anybody's notice that you say that the Mexican government, the Mexican government is sending criminals -- rapists, drug dealers, across the border. Governor Bush has called those remarks, quote, "extraordinarily ugly." I'd like you -- you're right next to him -- tell us -- talk to him directly and say how you respond to that and -- and you have repeatedly said that you have evidence that the Mexican government is doing this, but you have evidence you have refused or declined to share. Why not use this first Republican presidential debate to share your proof with the American people?

TRUMP: So, if it weren't for me, you wouldn't even be talking about illegal immigration, Chris. You wouldn't even be talking about it. This was not a subject that was on anybody's mind until I brought it up at my announcement. And I said, Mexico is sending. Except the reporters, because they're a very dishonest lot, generally speaking, in the world of politics, they didn't cover my statement the way I said it. The fact is, since then, many killings, murders, crime, drugs pouring across the border, are money going out and the drugs coming in. And I said we need to build a wall, and it has to be built quickly. And I don't mind having a big beautiful door in that wall so that people can come into this country legally. But we need, Jeb, to build a wall, we need to keep illegals out.

WALLACE: Mr. Trump, I'll give you 30 seconds -- I'll give you 30 seconds to answer my question, which was, what evidence do you have, specific evidence that the Mexican government is sending criminals across the border? Thirty seconds.

TRUMP: Border Patrol, I was at the border last week. Border Patrol, people that I deal with, that I talk to, they say this is what's happening. Because our leaders are stupid. Our politicians are stupid. And the Mexican government is much smarter, much sharper, much more cunning. And they send the bad ones over because they don't want to pay for them. They don't want to take care of them. Why should they when the stupid leaders of the United States will do it for them? And that's what is happening whether you like it or not.

Trump has no time for being fooled by Wallace's question about "proof." Proof for Trump is what he believes and he believes that if it weren't for him no one would be talking about illegal immigration. One might think that Trump was falling into the trap of argument by assertion, the logical fallacy in which someone tries to argue a point by merely asserting that it is true, regardless of contradiction. But Trump does that to trap Wallace. Using aposiopesis again (his favorite method of convoluting the answer and befuddling the questioner) he states: "And I said, Mexico is sending. Except the reporters, because they're a very dishonest lot, generally speaking, in the world of politics, they didn't cover my statement the way I said it." In a brilliant rhetorical maneuver, Trump gets to the core of the issue which is not proving his assertion, but in blaming the reporters for reporting what he said erroneously and, thereby, making him to be a "victim." To support his victimization, he asserts that "in fact" (i.e. the proof he needs) "since then" (i.e. at the time he made those statements) "many killings, murders, crime, drugs pouring across the border, are money going out and the drugs coming in" which is the proof he posited at the outset of his statement. That should be patently clear even to Wallace. In order to stop the killings, murders (murders in this context are very different than killings), crime, drugs a wall needs to be built quickly with one big beautiful door so that people (i.e. Mexicans) can come into the United States legally. Trump cleverly concludes his answer in a way that dovetails with his opening comments about illegal immigration. The only way to stop illegal immigration is to build a 2500 mile wall (dimensions to be decided at a later date) with one door (in order to alleviate the possibility of people using multiple doors to enter) so those people can enter in an organized manner.

For some reason, Trump's answer didn't satisfy Mr. Wallace who once again asked for proof that the Mexican government was responsible for sending criminals across the border. In order to once and for all establish proof, Trump begins by stating and repeating "Border Patrol, I was at the border last week. Border Patrol, people that I deal with, that I talk to, they say this is what's happening." The reiteration of "border patrol" discussions should have been proof enough for Mr. Wallace since the border patrol people he talked to were patrolling the border and if they didn't know about what the Mexican government was doing, who would? To validate his assertion, Trump states:" Our politicians are stupid. And the Mexican government is much smarter, much sharper, much more cunning. And they send the bad ones over because they don't want to pay for them. They don't want to take care of them." By juxtaposing the "stupidity" of U.S. politicians and repeating the word "much," Trump clearly defuses any possible rebuttal Wallace may have about the issue. And he concludes his answer by re-emphasizing the stupidity of American lawmakers and asserts that is what's happening "whether you [Wallace] like it or not." The fact Wallace had nothing else to say, was a clear indication that Trump's answer vindicating his assertion about proof.

Trump on Healthcare:

BAIER: Gentlemen, the next series of questions deals with ObamaCare and the role of the federal government. Mr. Trump, ObamaCare is one of the things you call a disaster.

TRUMP: A complete disaster, yes.

BAIER: Saying it needs to be repealed and replaced.

TRUMP: Correct.

BAIER: Now, 15 years ago, uncalled yourself a liberal on health care. You were for a single-payer system, a Canadian-style system. Why were you for that then and why aren't you for it now?

TRUMP: First of all, I'd like to just go back to one. In July of 2004, I came out strongly against the war with Iraq, because it was going to destabilize the Middle East. And I'm the only one on this stage that knew that and had the vision to say it. And that's exactly what happened. And the Middle East became totally destabilized. So I just want to say.

As far as single payer, it works in Canada. It works incredibly well in Scotland. It could have worked in a different age, which is the age you're talking about here. What I'd like to see is a private system without the artificial lines around every state. I have a big company with thousands and thousands of employees. And if I'm negotiating in New York or in New Jersey or in California, I have like one bidder. Nobody can bid. You know why? Because the insurance companies are making a fortune because they have control of the politicians, of course, with the exception of the politicians on this stage. But they have total control of the politicians. They're making a fortune. Get rid of the artificial lines and you will have...yourself great plans. And then we have to take care of the people that can't take care of themselves. And I will do that through a different system.

Once again, in only a manner in which Trump can, he temporarily avoided the question by redirecting his answer to a previous question dealing with the Iraq war by stating unequivocally that he came out against the war a year after it had started. One might think he did that arbitrarily, but he wanted to go on record that he, like Obama, was against the war. Returning to the issue of health care, he calls the ACA, a "disaster" that it needs to be "repealed and replaced." To prove his argument, he alludes to Canada and Scotland (among other countries) where a single-payer system works well. In a brilliant rhetorical maneuver, Trump states: "It could have worked in a different age, which is the age you're talking about here. What I'd like to see is a private system without the artificial lines around every state." Trump states that, in fact, such a system could have worked in 2000 under G.W. Bush, but can't work today. To prove that point, Trump analogizes the United States with his company (this is also called the Walker Analogy of comparing ISIL to unions) by stating: "I have a big company with thousands and thousands of employees. And if I'm negotiating in New York or in New Jersey or in California, I have like one bidder. Nobody can bid." Though on the face of it this statement may appear irrelevant to the question Baier asked, it is clearly associative in that it shows how skillful Trump is in negotiating with one bidder and no more than one bidder since negotiating with more than one bidder wouldn't be the same as negotiating with one bidder. That should have been clear to Baier. He then alludes to the fact that insurance companies control politicians and by so doing have created fortunes. He cleverly dismisses that those politicians on stage are not part of the politicians to which he's referring and has proof of that based on the fact he said so. By removing the "artificial lines" he will create a policy that will take care of people that can't take care of themselves through a "different system."

It should be patently obvious, if not to the moderators of the debate, then to the public at large, that Trump continues to articulate his positions in a manner that is fundamentally understandable to the average American and in a clear and cogent veracity that speaks to the issues of the day in a way that will make America great again. One can only hope that he will repeat those things in future Republican debates.

More: Entertainment