- Advertisement -

If we're to believe polling data, America is becoming a much more liberal country. In fact, it's likely directly responsible for President Obama's epiphany that support of same-sex marriage was the right thing to do after all. It may even be the reason why many of the arguments against the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) were not fatal, as they were for Bill Clinton when he attempted the same thing in the '90s. It's interesting to note that a substantial portion of those who oppose Obamacare do so because it did not go far enough.

The result is lots of liberals talking about getting the popcorn ready as they sit and watch the train wreck that is the Republican primary. Liberals are behaving as if a Democrat is a shoo-in for the 2016 presidency. But Democrats had better be careful with their cocky assertions, and start digging a bit deeper beyond the façade of invincibility.

Republicans had similar turmoil in 1980, as you can see in the video above. Today's political charlatans are Donald Trump and Ben Carson. Back then they had an actor, who was an incompetent candidate running in a field that included a competent politician, war heroes, and others.

One must remember that the incompetent candidate won that election. The competent candidate that disparaged the actor's economic plan as voodoo economics became the vice president. And Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush cleaned the Democrats' clock.

Many will blame the Iran Hostage Crisis and the economic malaise of the time. But wait--isn't income inequality a malaise, and isn't the frustration with the Iran Hostage Crisis congruous to the ISIS crisis in the manufactured angst currently being presented to Americans?

Much is being made about the anti-immigrant and racist rhetoric emanating from the candidates. Yet, the Republican field is more reflective of America with a black man, a woman, two Latinos, a presumably gay man, and a South Asian man. Democrats offer a white woman pre-ordained to be the Democratic nominee and several white men. The ads are likely already being tested in focus groups.

By every metric Democrats should win the White House in 2016. Likewise, by every metric Democrats should control the Senate and the House of Representatives. They should be in control of more governorships and state houses. But that isn't the case.

- Advertisement -

The Vox article "Democrats are in denial. Their party is actually in deep trouble" should be a must read for every liberal Democrat.

"The presidency is extremely important, of course. But there are also thousands of critically important offices all the way down the ballot. And the vast majority -- 70 percent of state legislatures, more than 60 percent of governors, 55 percent of attorneys general and secretaries of state -- are in Republicans hands. And, of course, Republicans control both chambers of Congress."

In other words, the state Democratic parties around the country are decimated. Many do not even have a bench of candidates ready to run in order to reverse the trend.

Here is an inconvenient truth: Structurally speaking, the Republicans are in a much better position to continue winning state legislatures and the U.S. House of Representatives. The execution of the Powell Manifesto has already been successful. ALEC, the Heritage Foundation, and many other think tanks have sufficiently gotten laws passed and brainwashed enough American to control minds where necessary and to have laws when needed.

Republican Gov. Sam Brownback destroyed Kansas' economy. Brownback's self-described experiment failed. In the 2014 election his Democratic opponent Paul Davis got the endorsements of more than 104 Republicans. He was up in the polls on Election Day. And he lost by about 4 points.

- Advertisement -

Flawed Republican gubernatorial candidate Matt Bevin's anti-Obamacare platform will put more than 400,000 Kentuckian's at risk if he kills Kynect, the state's health insurance exchange. His Democratic opponent Jack Conway was up by several points. Instead, Conway lost by several points.

Maryland elected a Republican governor after the polls indicated the Democrat would win in this blue state. An unholy alliance between black preachers and the southern religious complex defeated a progressive equal rights ordinance in Houston, Texas. If you need to understand the job at hand, which is to inform fellow Americans of the reality that they ultimately need to save their own micro-economy, review the 2016 Generic Congressional Vote poll. Republicans lead by a point.

Republicans know that given the nature of Democrats and their base, they do not have much to worry about. They have the ability to make ISIS the Democrats' Iran Contra. They will make the immigration issue an inoculation against the immigration/refugee fiasco in Europe. And inasmuch as income inequality is a direct result of supply-side economics, a system we are still living under, they will make portray it as a failure of Obama's faux liberalism.

1 | 2