Share This Story 815 Tweet Share Email

She crossed the lot between tractor-trailers like a lifelong produce dealer, confident around the big rigs that filled the loading dock.

Dock #9 held this week’s gifts of onions, potatoes, carrots and watermelons. At 4’ 11,” Sister Michael Teresa Paratore has a commanding no-nonsense way about her. Begging for food is her life, her calling.

She is one of 12 Little Sisters of the Poor who operate the St. Joseph’s Home in Louisville. The Catholic religious order has a nearly 150-year history in Louisville, broken into two blocks of time. There are just over 2,200 sisters worldwide, with 181 homes in 31 countries. The sisters’ mission is to serve the elderly poor, as their founder, Saint Jeanne Jugan, did in post-revolutionary France.

Sister Charles Marie talks with St. Joseph Home resident Louis Mattingly after serving him lunch at the home.

(Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Sister Michael grew up suffering from epilepsy in San Jose, Calif., to Catholic parents. Because of her illness, she was unable to go to catechism or to Catholic schools.

“During my second year of college, I realized God was calling me to religious life," she said. "I was watching The Sound of Music at a Protestant’s home and when Mother Abbess says to Maria, ‘Climb every mountain, follow every stream and follow every rainbow till you find your dream.’ It hit me that God was calling me to be a nun. A priest asked me if I’d ever thought of the Little Sisters of the Poor. I had never heard of them even though they were less than a mile down the street. I spent the weekend with the sisters before holy week and I knew that’s where God was calling me.”

The sisters take a vow of poverty, chastity, obedience and hospitality to the elderly poor. Each home has a “begging nun,” which Sister Michael is proud to be.

“I feel privileged because Jeanne Jugan spent her life begging for the poor she’d taken in,” she said.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Follow along with Sister Michael Teresa Partore as she begs for provisions for the St. Joseph's Home in Louisville. By Pat McDonogh

The sisters believe in divine provenance, that God will provide. Her begging provides 40 percent of the groceries the home needs for its 77 residents. A newly donated refrigerated truck will allow her to reach her goal of 100 percent.

When there is a need in the home, the sisters will leave what they are needing at the foot of a statue of St. Joseph, the patron saint of the order. Divine providence played a part in a story told from the original St. Joseph’s Home on 10th Street in Louisville, many years ago. Each Sunday the sisters would make doughnuts and serve coffee to the guests after mass. The machine which formed the doughnuts had broken and all they had was the one-half piece. A sister at the home placed the half doughnut at the feet of the statue and before mass ended, boxes of broken doughnuts arrived from a nearby bakery, whose machine was breaking their product in half. Unable to sell the doughnuts the owner had them delivered to the home.

The St. Joseph’s Home offers low-income residents graduated levels of care from the independence of an apartment to skilled nursing. There is a three-year waiting list to become a resident.

“It’s not a sad place to be. The residents don’t come here to die, they come here to live," said Tina Contreras, development director at the home. Unlike a priest, a nun never retires. Even in advanced age, the sisters are in charge of administering the home, serving meals and caring for residents. If a patient is dying the sisters hold an around-the-clock vigil until the resident passes away.

“As long as they are able to do something in the home they do it,” Contreras said.

“We are treated here like no other place," said resident Bette Dorsey. "Each sister sees Christ in every one of us. It’s a wonderful place, a perpetual retreat.”

Fellow resident Ralph Hughes stated, “It’s a house filled with love.”

The nuns have recently been in the news due to a Supreme Court case involving their objection to the Affordable Care Act’s mandate that religious-affiliated organizations provide contraception to their employees. The Little Sisters and other challengers believe that forcing them to engage in morally objectionable health care coverage makes them complicit. If they refuse to comply, or the law not amended, the religious order could face crushing financial penalties.

“They are very humble women and don’t celebrate themselves," Contreras said. "They serve the Lord working in the trenches. Their gift to themselves is giving to others. A treat to them is a McDonald’s hamburger. All their care and love go to the residents. They feel like they are so blessed for being where they are."

To quote Jeanne Jugan, “Holiness is joy-filled, not long faces or plaster statue saints. God wants us to be happy.”

For the Little Sisters of the Poor, happiness and joy is in serving those in need.

Pat McDonogh can be reached at 502-582-4608.