<p>Gov. Buford Ellington, standing at right, introduces Dr. Edward J. Boling as the next president of the University of Tennessee on Dec. 19, 1969, at a Board of Trustees meeting. (News Sentinel Archive)</p>

Tennessee history, if not exactly repeating itself, has echoes today from matters including the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.’s assassination, the “Rocky Top” corruption scandal and coal mining when Lamar Alexander was governor. Taking those one at a time:

n The aftermath of an assassination in Memphis — 47 years ago Saturday, on April 4, 1968 — is subject of John Avery Emison’s recent book, “The Martin Luther King Congressional Cover-up: The Railroading of James Earl Ray.”

From a state historical perspective, Emison is the nephew of Harry S. Avery, who was fired as state commissioner of corrections in 1969 by Gov. Buford Ellington after publicly embracing the notion that Ray did not act alone in killing King and, in fact, was a rather stupid petty criminal duped into taking the fall. Avery interviewed Ray shortly after he was imprisoned; so did his nephew, some years later.

Emison takes up where his uncle left off, producing a meticulously researched book that goes beyond other King assassination conspiracy conjecture by tying it to Tennessee state government, both in the judicial and executive branches. One example: The Texas lawyer who maneuvered himself into representing Ray — convincing him to fire a Memphis attorney who wanted to go to trial and seek acquittal — allegedly assured Ray that, in exchange for the plea, he could get a commuted sentence from John Jay Hooker, who was expected to be elected governor in 1970. Hooker, who lost the 1970 race to Republican Winfield Dunn, says the notion is ridiculous.

Some of the book’s argumentative conclusions — the CIA-Lyndon Johnson-Buford Ellington relationship as a conspiracy, for example — seem a bit far-fetched. But the book’s central plea is that all records of a 1978 congressional investigation into the assassination should be made public now, not 2029, as presently ordained, and that seems reasonable. One document in particular — basically a TBI investigation of Avery’s contentions back in 1969 — was turned over to the congressional committee, then placed under seal. A Republican-sponsored state Senate resolution passed last year sought return of that document to the Tennessee Secretary of State for public release. U.S. Reps. John J. Duncan Jr. and Stephen Fincher also endorsed the idea. The request was ignored..

n The Rocky Top state government corruption scandal of the late 1980s led to the conviction of more than 50 people, and then-Secretary of State Gentry Crowell might have been convicted, too, had he not committed suicide just before a scheduled grand jury appearance. Most of the probe dealt with bingo, legalized by the Legislature in the 1970s as a means for fundraising by charitable organizations. The FBI found many of the charities were bogus, run by professional gambling operatives who were paying bribes to state officials.

Part of the legislative reaction was to explicitly outlaw gambling on bingo, a prohibition that remained in place when a state lottery and other forms of charitable gaming were legalized in 2002 following a state constitutional amendment.

This week, House and Senate committees will be voting to bring bingo gambling back on a limited basis for “nonpublic schools” with an IRS charity designation. State Sen. Frank Niceley. R-Strawberry Plains, is surely right in saying bingo is not inherently evil and history will not repeat itself if his bill is approved. But it still makes some lawmakers a bit queasy.

n In 1984, Gov. Lamar Alexander set aside advocacy of states’ rights to push through the Legislature a bill turning over regulation of Tennessee coal mining to the federal government. Pending legislation this year would reverse that move, which now-U.S. Sen. Alexander says was based on the “bureaucratic nightmare” created by federal officials second-guessing state regulators.

There would seem a chance of history repeating itself there, given that the feds would still be watching state coal regulators to make sure they’re following federal rules if the bill passes. But every other coal-producing state runs its own enforcement operation and Tennesseans should be at least as competent as, say, Kentuckians, right?

It should all be clear by around 2029.

Tom Humphrey, retired Nashville bureau chief, may be reached at tomhumphrey3@aol.com.