Tighter rules on reverse mortgages have reduced their popularity with seniors, something the industry hopes a new ad campaign can change.

Denver is one of three markets, along with Philadelphia and Seattle, where the National Reverse Mortgage Lenders Association is testing a new marketing approach, said Peter Bell, the association’s president.

“The theme is retire smart,” Bell said.

Reverse mortgages have long carried a survival-tinged message — “use your home to stay at home.” And while that still applies, tougher underwriting standards from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development have made it more difficult for the most desperate to get a reverse mortgage.

“It is now being pushed very heavily to financial planners and CPAs as a financial planing tool,” said Jim Spray, an independent mortgage broker in Arvada who specializes in reverse mortgages.

The campaign, which will stretch into October, features print ads, television commercials, public forums, brochures and a new website: reversemortgage.org.

Reverse mortgages allow qualified homeowners, age 62 or older, to tap their home equity in either a lump sum, monthly payments or as a credit line. The loans don’t have to be repaid until the borrower sells, moves out or dies.

Many borrowers turned to reverse mortgage during the financial downturn as a way to meet basic living expenses, but some were so strapped they couldn’t pay insurance and property taxes and lost their homes.

Those defaults, which coincided with a sharp drop in home values, not only took a toll on the Federal Housing Administration’s reputation, but also its finances. The response was to ratchet down on underwriting, limit lump sum withdrawals, and better protect consumers and the lending program.

After peaking at around 114,000 in 2007, reverse mortgage volumes are running closer to 60,000, Bell said.

Some financial planners advise consumers against piling on debts while retired. But Harold Evensky, a respected certified financial planner, gave reverse mortgages a boost when he advocated two years ago that they be taken out to serve as standby credit lines.

Credit lines can allow retirees to keep more of their money in higher-returning investments like stocks rather than low-yielding and safe alternatives like certificates of deposits. Access to a credit line can prevent retirees from having to tap riskier assets during downturns. And the higher returns, over time, will help retirees make it through the added years in retirement.

Of course, that assumes there are retirement assets. About half of U.S. households have a negative net worth. And Bell said of baby boomers who have saved, the average amount is only $125,000.

“We have this looming crisis,” he said.

Aldo Svaldi: 303-954-1410, asvaldi@denverpost.com or twitter.com/aldosvaldi