Jack Rowand/The CW Stephen Amell as the Arrow in “Arrow”

Even though viewers have yet to lay eyes on Barry Allen, or even hear his name uttered, he has already began his inevitable descent into Starling City. (Hint: think particle collider.)

The writer and creators of the CW Network’s “Arrow,” Greg Berlanti, Marc Guggenheim and Andrew Kreisberg, knew that to introduce an actual superhero, much less his superpowers, was going to be a delicate and slow endeavor, one grounded in real people in a real world, but with a heightened reality, according to Kreisberg.

“We’re still a little nervous but feel really good,” Kreisberg told the Journal, sitting in his office in Burbank, Calif. Posters of a shirtless Stephen Amell, who plays Oliver Queen, the billionaire playboy and the Arrow’s alter ego, are tacked up around the space.

Barry Allen’s alter ego, the Flash, will also be introduced in the sophomore year of “Arrow,” albeit not until the latter part of the 22-episode season.

To continue its reign as the network’s most watched show, “Arrow” is also bending its own rules. No longer are flashbacks strictly for the lead protagonist, in fact, Kreisberg alluded to Felicity (Emily Bett Rickards), Diggle (David Ramsey) and Laurel (Katie Cassidy) all flashing-back this season.

“A lot more is directly tied to what’s happening in present day, flashbacks will be more like memories,” he said.

Just down the hall, Berlanti, who moved the offices of “The Tomorrow People,” his newest CW show with longtime friend Julie Plec, is seated in a sparse office. Next to the sofa a small framed “Arrow” poster leans against the wall on the floor with a pink post-it attached that reads “A small thanks for a very big year – Andrew.”

“We’re speeding things up a bit this season, we’re working with six act structure, which means every six to seven minutes, there’s going to be a jolt, something that happens to the characters,” explained Berlanti.

That pacing also allows for a greater introduction of characters, several from the DC Comics universe like the Black Canary and the Bronze Tiger.

“There will be some people with meta-human abilities, grounded in science, but ones that normal people don’t have” Berlanti said. Think of it as a kind of baby-step towards a full superpower.

With those abilities also come the actions and reactions of the “normal people,” according to Guggenheim, whose office is splashed with sunlight and decidedly smaller than the other two.

“Just think of what we can do with Felicity,” Guggenheim said. “How we lay in the puzzle pieces, there’s a component of the show that will speak to the increased abilities with a real world explanation, and there’s reactions grounded in reality. You can buy someone being incredibly strong, teleporting, though, that’s a different kettle of fish.”

The trio is already looking to the third season of “Arrow,” talking about having events in Central City, where Barry Allen/the Flash hails from.

“We’re working with a much larger canvas than we were allotted last year, and we’ve got to keep growing our universe,” said Guggenheim.

For more entertainment and television coverage, follow @alexandracheney.