Gov. Matt Bevin on Tuesday issued five executive orders, many of which addressed hot-button issues that surfaced during Gov. Steve Beshear's administration.

Matt Bevin

Those five executive orders will affect marriage licenses, minimum wage, hiring practices within state government and the restoration of rights to felons and also a government council. Specifically, Bevin ordered the state to prepare new marriage licenses that do not include the names of county clerks and he overturned Beshear's action on felon voting rights.

Bevin also placed a freeze on hiring for all government positions so he could take more time to analyze the posts and determine whether they are truly essential. According to the Commonwealth of Kentucky Careers website, there are nearly 100 merit and non merit job openings.

“Today, I took action to uphold several commitments I made during my campaign so that we can implement real solutions that will help the people of Kentucky,” Bevin said in a release. “While I have been a vocal supporter of the restoration of rights, for example, it is an issue that must be addressed through the legislature and by the will of the people. As we move into the New Year and upcoming session, I look forward to working with legislators and stakeholders to build consensus and drive policy that makes a meaningful impact on the lives of all Kentuckians.”

WKYT reached out to Bevin's spokeswoman, but she did not return calls for comment.

Bevin said he has directed the Kentucky Department of Libraries and Archives to issue the revised marriage license forms to all county clerks. The new marriage licenses will not include the names of county clerks -- a request that was made by a handful of clerks this summer after the Supreme Court's ruling that legalized same-sex marriage.

Rowan County Clerk Kim Davis, who was jailed five days for refusing to comply with a judge's order, refused to issue marriage licenses because she said it was against her religious beliefs. Davis and several other clerks objected to their names being on the licenses. They made the trek to Frankfort to ask Beshear to consider making the licenses available or line or remove their names, but the governor refused to make those changes.

Casey County Clerk Casey Davis spoke with WKYT shortly after Gov. Bevin's order was announced Tuesday. Davis also refused to issue marriage licenses after the Supreme Court's ruling. Davis wasn't sentenced to jail time because he didn't face any federal lawsuits, as did Kim Davis.

"The issue with me was never to be unfair to anyone. The issue to me was as much of anything, to be fair to everyone," Casey Davis said, "I think Kim Davis would have never gone to jail should Governor Beshear acted in the same manner. And, he could've done it."

The ACLU released the following statement Tuesday: “Governor Bevin’s executive action has added to the cloud of uncertainty that hangs over marriage licensing in Kentucky. The requirement that the county clerk’s name appear on marriage licenses is prescribed by Kentucky law and is not subject to unilateral change by the governor — conceded by the previous administration in court filings. Today, however, a new administration claims to have that authority. The ACLU continues to work with loving couples who hold marriage licenses of questionable validity and for those who are waiting to legalize their unions until this is resolved. And the ACLU will continue to challenge government officials who disregard the law in favor of promoting their own personal beliefs to the detriment of the rights of others. Government officials, from the highest to the lowest, have a duty and responsibility to impartially administer the laws that exist, not the laws as they wish them to be.”

In June, Beshear announced that he was issuing an executive order raising minimum wage for some state workers. Beshear's order increased wages from $7.25 per hour to $10.10 per hour, affecting about 800 state workers. The increase affected workers in the executive branch of state government and was estimated to cost taxpayers about $1.6 million.

Bevin said his order would not affect those who have already received increases as a result of the executive order, according to his release.

In November, Beshear -- in one of his final acts as governor -- signed an executive order that restored the right to vote to certain felons who had served out their sentences. The order essentially provided some felons with an immediate opportunity to gain their voting rights after serving out their time.

Felons had to meet the following requirements to have their rights restored:

They complete all the terms of their sentences, including probation and restitution.



They do not have any pending criminal charges or arrests.



They have not been convicted of violent crimes, sex crimes, bribery or treason.



At the time, Beshear said there were likely 100,000 people who would meet the requirements.

Bevin's release said that while he is a "strong advocate for the reinstatement of non-violent felony offenders’ voting and civil rights," Beshear's order is "contrary to the Kentucky Constitution and undermines the very right it seeks to restore by circumventing elected representatives in the state legislature and the voice of the people at the ballot box."

"The Office of the Governor will continue to utilize the processes and procedures under current law in the same manner as the previous administration pending further study and consideration by the Kentucky General Assembly," he said. "This Executive Order does not affect anyone whose rights have already been restored by the previous Executive Order."