Prop. 122 purports to exercise Arizona's "sovereign authority" by rejecting any federal actions the state's leaders consider unconstitutional.

A mailer makes the caption "Will you help me please?" over the face of a sad child the face of Proposition 122, a ballot measure aimed at getting Washington off Arizona's back. (Photo: 12 News)

It might be one of the more misleading mailers you'll see this election campaign. It makes the caption "Will you help me please?" over the face of a sad child the face of Proposition 122, a ballot measure aimed at getting Washington off Arizona's back.

Business owner Jack Biltis is spending his own money -- lots of it -- on the mailers.

"I put a bunch of money in there," he said. "My wife still hasn't forgiven me."

He blew a million dollars two years ago on a failed ballot measure, and anted up $250,000 this year for Prop. 122 after mortgaging his home, he said.

"People feel disenfranchised and they need a voice," Biltis said.

Prop. 122 would give the legislature or voters that voice, and power to yank state money out of federal programs like the Affordable Care Act, environmental safety, or workplace protections, and somehow save the children depicted in the mailers.

A sad child on the back of the mailer. The proposition is actually about allowing Arizona to withhold funding from federal programs. (Photo: 12 News)

"If I vote for this, I won't be protecting this little girl from abuse?" I asked Dana Wolfe Naimark of the Phoenix-based Children's Action Alliance.

"No, this proposition has nothing to do with CPS," she said.

Naimark's job is fighting for the safety of children like those in the Prop. 122 mailer.

"Frankly the campaign is playing political games, and they're using kids to play political games," Naimark said. "It's very disappointing."

Naimark says Arizona already has a say over a federal law that keeps some abuse reports confidential.

"If people are hiding behind a federal program, we have to address the actual root problem," said Biltis.

House Minority Leader Chad Campbell says Prop. 122 is picking a futile fight with the feds.

"Let's stop debating these unconstitutional and, quite frankly, waste-of-money-type measures," Campbell said.

Biltis bets otherwise.

"The Supreme Court has multiple times affirmed that state has right and duty to decide where to spend its own money," he said.

The ballot measure is supported by Republicans Joe Arpaio, Russell Pearce and a host of other conservatives and was written by a Goldwater Institute attorney. I tried to get a comment from the Department of Child Safety but haven't heard back.

Follow Brahm on Twitter @BrahmResnik

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1wzxxAQ