Still waiting for your MNsure tax form? You’re not alone

Still waiting for your MNsure tax form? You’re not alone

Still waiting for your MNsure tax form? You’re not alone

St. Paul, MN – MNsure has been slow to provide its customers with necessary tax forms this year, irking some who have had to wait weeks for the documents.

Although the 1095-A forms were supposed to be mailed by Jan. 31, batches of several hundred weren’t sent out until the past few days, officials with the health insurance exchange said Friday. And, the officials said, about 1,300 forms had yet to be sent.

The 1095-A forms are sent to anyone who bought health insurance through MNsure or a similar exchange. Subsidies provided to eligible customers under the federal Affordable Care Act are based on income estimates and then revised based on the 1095-A.

Frustrated MNsure customer Karen Snedecor of St. Paul said the delay was “the last straw.”

“It’s not the end of the world,” Snedecor said. “It’s just another in a long list of irritating things that have been happening with MNsure over the last two years.”

MNsure spokespeople said the process has been slow because the agency is trying to ensure every form is accurate.

“We’re being careful with the information we’re sending out,” said Allison O’Toole, MNsure’s deputy director for external affairs. “Big picture, they are nearly all out. We are working hard to complete them.”

Though MNsure debuted in the fall of 2013, this year is the first year it has had to distribute the 1095-A forms.

In all, MNsure had to send out about 33,000 of the documents, including 480 on Wednesday and an additional 875 on Friday.

Snedecor said she has called repeatedly for help

“I started calling in February when I did not get the form,” she said. “Each time they assured me it had been sent out. The last time they said, we’ll send another one out.”

After nearly a month of calling, she said, the form arrived this week.

O’Toole defended the customer service staff, saying they are “skilled and specialized now” and in a “completely different place” from the problems MNsure experienced a year ago.

MNsure, a state-run exchange, is not alone in having problems with 1095-A forms. About 800,000 people who purchased health insurance through federally run exchanges were mailed incorrect forms.

In Minnesota, O’Toole said there are “no widespread reports of errors” in the 1095-A forms that have been sent out.

However, some Minnesotans have complained of errors, including Mark Waggoner, who cited problems with his form at a MNsure board of directors meeting Feb. 18.

MNsure spokespeople didn’t identify specific problems that have contributed to the delay in getting the forms out. Instead, they said it was a learning process and predicted better results in 2016.

“This is the first time we’ve gone through the process of issuing 1095-A forms,” said Jenni Bowring-McDonough, MNsure’s media relations coordinator.

“This is all work that will contribute to a better experience next year.”

The Pioneer Press is a media partner with Forum News Service.