WASHINGTON — The proposal by the top Republican on the House Ways and Means Committee to overhaul and simplify the nation’s tax code is already coming under scrutiny from fellow Republicans, with at least one party leader, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, saying the plan has no chance.

Mr. McConnell, the Senate minority leader, said efforts to pass the proposal — which is expected to call for a cut in the top corporate income rate to 25 percent from 35 percent, and a reduction of the seven individual tax brackets to two — would prove insurmountable against Democratic demands that any tax overhaul include $1 trillion in new revenue.

“The majority leader and the president have said they want $1 trillion in new revenue for the federal government as a condition for doing comprehensive tax reform, which we know we ought to do,” Mr. McConnell said Tuesday. “So I have no hope for that happening this year.”

The proposal, which is to be released Wednesday after nearly three years of behind-the-scenes efforts, is the work of Representative Dave Camp of Michigan, the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, and reflects goals long held by Republicans.

Under the plan, the tax rate for about 99 percent of Americans would be, at most, 25 percent, but the remaining 1 percent, whose income is above $450,000 or so, would also be subject to a 10 percent tax surcharge on certain types of income, according to congressional aides. The surcharge would affect salaried professionals, like lawyers and accountants, while excluding those whose income comes from industries that produce goods, like manufacturing and farming.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The current top tax rate for individuals is 39.6 percent. Under the new plan, the seven existing tax brackets would be collapsed into just two — at 10 percent and 25 percent, according to congressional aides

Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader, agreed with Mr. McConnell’s assessment that a tax overhaul will be difficult to push through Congress this year, but he blamed Republicans for the impasse.

“The truth is, we should have tackled tax reform years ago,” Mr. Reid said Tuesday. “It will be extremely difficult — with the obstruction that we get here from the Republicans on virtually everything — to do something that should have been done years ago.”

But he praised Mr. Camp for “coming forward with a piece of legislation.”

Mr. Camp said nonpartisan economists at the congressional Joint Committee on Taxation had estimated that streamlining the tax code would increase the size of the economy by $3.4 trillion over the next decade. “This will lead to nearly two million new jobs — and producing up to $700 billion in additional federal revenues,” he wrote in an op-ed article published online Tuesday night by The Wall Street Journal.

Photo

He went on to predict that families at the median income level — $51,000 for a family of four — would “have on average an extra $1,300 in their pocket at the end of the year.”

Mr. Camp is also set on Wednesday to shepherd a bill through the House that would stop new Internal Revenue Service regulations of political “social welfare” groups. That underscores a quandary facing House Republican leaders as they head into the midterm elections: Should they limit their agenda to political bills tailored to aid Republican campaigns like the I.R.S. bill, or should they take big risks on ambitious policy proposals, like simplifying the tax code?

Intraparty controversies were precisely what Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio had hoped to avoid this year when he shelved a broad immigration push, then whisked through an increase in the debt ceiling, relying almost entirely on Democratic votes.

Even those who believe that Mr. Camp’s proposal has little chance this year say that his so-called discussion draft will serve as a test of support among fellow Republicans who favor tax changes in theory but often balk at the trade-offs required. Those Republicans are especially hesitant to act on a bill that is unlikely to make it through the Senate, which is controlled by Democrats. If Mr. Camp’s plan fails to attract a Republican majority, it is coming early enough in the year that it is unlikely to have lasting ramifications in the midterm elections.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

House leadership aides told Mr. Camp in November that he needed to find a Democratic partner other than Senator Max Baucus of Montana, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee at the time, who had been working with Mr. Camp on a tax code overhaul. But Mr. Camp failed to do so — and now Mr. Baucus is ambassador to China. Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, now leads the Finance Committee.

Democrats are expressing their frustration with how the tax plan is being rolled out. Democratic aides say that unlike their Republican colleagues on the Ways and Means Committee, Democrats have not been briefed on any of the plan’s details, and they did not receive a letter that went out to all the Republican members last week alerting them of the draft legislation to be released on Wednesday.

In addition to the I.R.S. legislation — part of the House Republicans’ “Stop Government Abuse” push this week — Democrats pointed to the Ways and Means Committee’s focus in recent months on the Affordable Care Act as a sign of the panel’s partisan approach. The last full committee hearing on any topic other than the health care law, they added, was in July.

“There’s a real contrast here,” said Representative Sander M. Levin of Michigan, the ranking Democrat on the Ways and Means Committee. “On the one hand, Dave’s acting as chairman of Ways and Means, putting out a tax reform bill. On the other hand, he acts like chairman of the Republican campaign effort.”

Mr. Camp has been working to shore up support with business groups like the Alliance for Competitive Taxation.

“We think Chairman Camp’s discussion draft will provide a real boost to the tax reform discussions,” said Douglas Holtz-Eakin, a former director of the Congressional Budget Office and an economic adviser to the Alliance for Competitive Taxation.