— An appeals court has thrown out the harshest parts of the sentences against a man convicted of sexually battering a day care worker and later raping and brutally beating a teenager outside the Bloomingdale Regional Library.

Kendrick Morris, who turns 24 on Monday, was 15 when he sexually battered the day care worker in 2007. He was 16 when he raped Queena Vuong in 2008 and beat her so badly she is still unable to speak or walk.

Morris was convicted of multiple charges in both cases, with each charge carrying a separate sentence. Some of the most serious charges resulted in sentences of 65 years.

The 2nd District Court of Appeal on Friday ruled those sentences were too severe in light of recent court rulings that make it much more difficult to sentence a minor to life in prison for charges outside of murder.

The court ruling said the 65-year sentences were in essence life in prison for Morris and ordered he be resentenced on those charges.

Although Morris won the appeal and will be resentenced on those charges, he might not see less prison time. Because of clarifications of the law since his case went to trial, he could actually be resentenced to life in prison.

In the day care case, Morris was convicted of burglary with assault while armed, attempted robbery, sexual battery and attempted battery. He was sentenced to 65 years in prison on the rape and burglary convictions with lesser sentences on the other counts, all to run concurrently.

In the library case, Morris was convicted of kidnapping with intent to commit a felony, two counts of sexual battery and aggravated battery. He was sentenced to 65 years on each of the sexual battery convictions and 15 years for aggravated battery, all to run concurrently with the day care case sentences.

While Friday’s ruling by the appellate court ordered Morris be resentenced on the charges for which he was given 65 years, the ruling affirmed the convictions and all of the other sentences.

Prosecutors in Tampa were reading over the ruling from the 2nd District Court of Appeal on Friday, said Mark Cox, spokesman for the Hillsborough County State Attorney’s Office.

“It is welcome news in that the convictions were affirmed,” he said.

Prosecutors knew the sentences might be overturned on appeal, but in light of recent court rulings clarifying conditions under which juveniles can be sentenced to life, they will push for a life sentence, Cox said.

“We certainly feel at this juncture that (Morris) deserves life,” Cox said, “and we will ask for that.’’

The appellate court quoted the judge at Morris’ trial as saying “that if ever a set of facts called for sentencing a juvenile to life imprisonment, these were the cases.”

Cox said prosecutors don’t yet know whether the resentencing process could involve a full hearing, including family members of the victims testifying.

The April 2008 attack of Queena Vuong, then 18, outside the Bloomingdale library left her severely disabled. Morris also broke into a day care center in June 2007 and attacked a female employee arriving at work. The teenager wore a ski mask and held a knife, demanding money and then raping the woman.

The attacks and Morris’ eventual arrest created widespread outrage in the community and heavy media coverage of the attacks and trials.

Vuong’s family learned of the appeals court decision Friday afternoon. Their main concern is more on Queena’s recovery than Morris’ fate, said her sister, Anna.

“We’re just so focused on Queena getting better and with her therapy,” Anna Vuong said. “This never has been on the forefront of our minds.”

During the two trials, defense attorneys argued for leniency, saying Morris’ age and abuse he suffered as a child should be taken into consideration during sentencing.

Prosecutors argued the premeditated nature of some of the offenses and the severity of the crimes called for a lengthy prison sentence in spite of Morris’ age and background.

Charles Rose, a law professor at Stetson University, said it’s possible Morris could receive a life prison sentence when he is brought back before the trial judge.

“I believe they probably have to determine whether or not under Florida law (Morris) classifies as an adult as it pertains to sentencing,’’ Rose said. “There probably wasn’t enough on the record to make that clear.”

Resentencing will be another emotional experience for Queena’s family, said Anna Vuong.

“But we’ll stay strong and everything will turn out fine in the hands of prosecutors and the judicial system,” she said. ““We just don’t want to get our hopes up. In the end, whatever is fair will happen. We trust in that and it makes us feel better.”

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760