For the first time in nine years , all three Scranton hospitals ended the fiscal year in the red. Regional Hospital of Scranton posted a negative 9.72 percent operating margin in fiscal 2013 , while Moses Taylor Hospital — another Commonwealth Health facility located just blocks away — ended with a negative 0.87 percent margin, a report by an independent state agency found. Geisinger Community Medical Center , the city’s third general acute care hospital, posted a negative 2.31 percent operating loss.

The data, released Wednesday in Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council’s annual financial analysis, reveal a troubling trend among the state’s general acute care hospitals, as 35 percent of the 169 studied operated at a loss. The operating margin, an indicator of a hospital’s financial health, reflects the percent of operating revenue remaining after operating expenses, such as patient care and cafeteria services, are paid.

Half the state’s acute care hospitals had total margins below the 4 percent threshold, considered the minimum needed for long-term financial stability.

“In too many communities, hospitals are struggling financially,” said Andy Carter, president and CEO of the Hospital and Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania.

Mr. Carter pointed to rising uncompensated care costs, which jumped 35 percent during the last five years, and federal payment cuts as two reasons for the $400 million decline in statewide operating income from fiscal 2012 to 2013.

GCMC Chief Financial Officer Edward Chabalowski said the biggest challenge is the payment reductions stemming from the Affordable Care Act or sequestration. In fiscal 2013, it cost the hospital $2.1 million in revenues — a number that will jump to $3.5 million in fiscal 2015, he said.

Over 10 years, the cuts will equate to about a $52 million reduction in payments to GCMC, he said. The hospital’s annual total operating revenues is about $175 million.

With GCMC investing millions in capitol projects, including its $97.1 million expansion, officials also recruited 10 new physicians to expand services, which boosted expenses, Mr. Chabalowski said.

“Those investments pay dividends in the future,” he said. “We’re actually operating in the black right now.”

Among the six Commonwealth Health hospitals included in the report, only Berwick Hospital Center and Wilkes-Barre General Hospital landed in positive territory, posting 11.89 percent and 6.04 percent operating margins, respectively.

Mid-Valley Hospital, which will stop its inpatient and emergency department services in July, had a 7.47 percent operating loss. Although Regional Hospital remains in the red, its 2013 operating margin improved from fiscal 2012’s negative 15.92 percent.

“Each hospital’s financial performance can be affected by a number of factors, including the kind of services offered, patient acuity, payor contracts and physician availability,” said Renita Fennick, director of communications for Commonwealth Health in a statement. “... We are making significant investments in facilities to recruit new physicians and to expand services in both markets.”

Contact the writer:

miorfino@timesshamrock.com, @miorfinoTT on Twitter