Rogers Behavioral Health System plans to open an inpatient facility next week in Brown Deer at 4600 W. Schroeder Drive. This is an adult day room area. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

Rogers Behavioral Health System will open a hospital in Brown Deer next week that eventually could have 56 beds for patients who require acute care.

"We know the demand is there based on the number of calls we get to our intake staff," said Jim Kubicek, vice president of operations for the new hospital at 4600 W. Schroeder Drive just off Brown Deer Road.

Rogers Behavioral Health System also operates a hospital with 80 beds in West Allis.

The new hospital initially will employ about 120 people and is projected to employ 200 people when at capacity.

In 2013, Rogers bought the building, where it had provided outpatient care, for $2.15 million. It has since spent an estimated $13 million to convert it into a psychiatric hospital.

The health system bought a nearby building at 4555 W. Schroeder Drive for its outpatient services last year.

The hospital will have a mental health unit and a drug and alcohol unit. It also will have a child and adolescent unit.

It will provide intensive, short-term care with the goal of stabilizing patients, such as those with extreme depression or delusions. Most patients are hospitalized for five to seven days.

"We will be dealing with people in crisis," Kubicek said.

In contrast, outpatient care includes partial hospitalization, which consists of four to six hours of therapy a day, five days a week, and intensive outpatient, which consists of roughly four hours of therapy a day, three days a week.

The Affordable Care Act broadened coverage for behavioral health, requiring it to be the same as medical care for most health plans. Historically, health plans generally had higher cost sharing and more restrictions for behavioral health care.

Other psychiatric hospitals in the Milwaukee area are Aurora Psychiatric Hospital in Wauwatosa and the Milwaukee County Behavioral Health Complex.

Milwaukee County Behavioral Health Complex has the only psychiatric emergency department in the Milwaukee area.

Wheaton Franciscan Healthcare-St. Francis and Aurora St. Luke's South Shore Medical Center have psychiatric units, and Columbia St. Mary's is scheduled to open a 10-bed unit in July.

Rogers' new hospital will start at half capacity.

Hiring clinical staff has been a challenge, Kubicek said. And he acknowledged that starting a new hospital will bring other challenges.

"We have to learn by doing in some cases," he said.

The new hospital is part of ambitious expansion plans by Rogers Behavioral Health System.

The health system opened a treatment center in Tampa, Fla., last year and plans to open treatment centers for obsessive-compulsive disorder, or OCD, and anxiety in Chicago and Nashville, Tenn., this year.

Rogers Memorial Hospital, its main campus in Oconomowoc, has an inpatient hospital and residential treatment program and is known for its programs for OCD and anxiety disorders as well as eating disorders. The hospital also provides specialized outpatient services.

The behavioral health system also has clinics in Madison and Kenosha.

Rogers Memorial Hospital Inc., the parent corporation, had net income of $11.3 million on revenue of $96.3 million in its fiscal year that ended July 31, 2014.

Its revenue has increased 27% since its 2012 fiscal year.