Presidential candidate Ted Cruz brought his message of secure borders, American military might and social conservatism to St. Paul Thursday evening.

The Republican senator from Texas spoke in front of a crowd at the Harriet Island Pavilion.

In it, Cruz sped through topics ranging from U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East, to immigration, to health care, to domestic tax policy.

PSB Satellite put video of his talk up on YouTube.

A sampling of things Cruz said he wants to do:

Keep Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.

Repeal the Affordable Care Act (aka Obamacare).

Tell the U.S. Department of Education (“which should be abolished,” he added) to end Common Core standards.

Secure the U.S. borders and end the practice of “sanctuary cities” – places that choose not to always follow federal immigration reporting requirements because some considered the laws abusive, USA Today said. Hennepin and Ramsey counties are both considered “sanctuary” jurisdictions.

Deport and end welfare benefits for people in the U.S. illegally.

Rebuild the military and double down on the nation’s commitment to service men and women (including the “Constitutional right” they have to carry a firearm).

Make it clear to radical Islamists who pledge to fight America that they are “signing [their] death warrant.”

Take on the EPA and other government agencies that “destroy small businesses and jobs.”

Abolish the IRS and pass tax reform, including a flat tax that means Americans can fill out their taxes on a postcard.

His stop in Minnesota was part of a multiday trip dubbed “Take Off With Ted,” where Cruz is visiting seven states that are holding primaries or caucuses on Super Tuesday (March 1, 2016), according to a news release.

Cruz recently won a Minnesota GOP straw poll, and did so handily – it’s an early sample of how some dedicated members of the party may vote when it comes time to help pick the eventual Republican nominee on that Super Tuesday.

The Star Tribune says the Cruz campaign has been putting together a “grassroots” group in Minnesota for the past seven months. The paper also noted there were at least 500 people in the crowd Thursday.