"It actually is protecting a moral philosophy about the sanctity of life. - Judge Richard Leon

It is a controversial federal district court decision that has flown somewhat under the radar this week.

However, the decision by a 1971 Holy Cross graduate adds another layer of debate to the Affordable Care Act's mandate that most employers provide female workers with free coverage for federally approved methods of birth control.

Judge Richard J. Leon of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ruled Monday, in March for Life V. Burwell (pdf), that an organization may be exempt from such coverage on the basis of moral, rather than religious, beliefs.

In Burwell v. Hobby Lobby, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled a closely-held family business could be exempt from the birth control mandate on the basis of religious beliefs.

In the March for Life case, the plaintiffs, which include the organization's president who worked previously for the Catholic Church, argued that they were being denied equal protection from the mandate that they stated is against their pro-life beliefs. Leon agreed, rejecting the government's Health and Human Services' argument that the March for Life is, by its own admission, not a religious organization and therefore does not qualify for exclusion.

Leon said objections to providing women with contraception are "not confined to religiously affiliated employers."

"The characteristic that warrants protection — an employment relationship based in part on a shared objection to abortifacients — is altogether separate from theism," ruled Leon, a reference to debated arguments that some of the forms of contraception cause abortion.

"Stated differently, what H.H.S. claims to be protecting is religious beliefs, when it actually is protecting a moral philosophy about the sanctity of life."

Leon is a graduate of two other Massachusetts schools, Suffolk Law and Harvard Law, and has also been involved in other high profile cases including whether the National Security Agency violated the Constitution in keeping records of Americans phone calls, and the release of Hillary Clinton's State Department emails to the media.

The government is likely to appeal the decision to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.

Recent court ruling have generally upheld the government's efforts to guarantee women free contraception from employers. Houses of worship are automatically exempt, and accommodations, by setting up third-party payers, have been arranged for both non-profit religious organizations with objections.

However, legal challenges from Christian organizations remain. Massachusetts has set up a reserve fund for coverage.

The Becket Foundation for Religious Liberty is involved in a number of court challenges to the contraception mandate, including three that involve Catholic institutions, like Anna Marie College in Paxton.

One of the most high profiled cases is the Little Sisters of the Poor who recently won a reprieve that protects the order from the mandate's non-compliance fines until the Supreme Court rules on the case.

The Becket Fund's website includes accolades from a number of religious leaders, including the Most Reverend Charles J. Chaput, O.F.M. Cap., Archbishop of Philadelphia.

The United States Conference of Catholic Bishops have been vocal in their opposition to the contraception mandate, although the Catholic Health Association field a friend-of-the-court brief in the Supreme Court case of King v. Burwell that ultimately upheld the act's subsidies for qualifying individuals on either the federal or state run exchanges.

The bishops have has long advocated the striking down of Roe v. Wade, the 1973 U.S. Supreme Court ruling that made abortion legal.

The Catholic Church has long argued that life begins at fertilization, and that there should be no artificial barrier to the conception of life, or technology in its creation.