She rarely looks anything less than glamorous, and Catherine Zeta-Jones impressed as she stepped out with husband Michael Douglas on Sunday.

Catherine, 45, dressed in a flowing V-neck top and white trousers, as she visited the Red Bull Ring motorsport circuit in Spielberg, Austria alongside Michael, 70.

The Hollywood actress wore her sleek brunette hair tied back as she added to her daytime attire with a cream hat and large sunglasses.

Scroll down for video

Hollywood pair: Catherine Zeta Jones, 45, dressed in a flowing V-neck top and white trousers, as she looked elegant for her visit to the Red Bull Ring in Austria alongside her husband Michael Douglas on Sunday

Catherine flashed a glimpse of her diamond wedding ring, as she readjusted her bright yellow top while Michael pursed his lips into a smile.

Michael walked a few paces behind his wife, as he was seen holding a less glamorous cap in his hand.

The movie star also put his wedding ring on display, but Catherine outshone his plain silver band with her enormous rock.

Bad weather: Catherine was a ray of sunshine on an otherwise cloudy day, as she dressed for summer in her yellow top and bright orange bag

From May to November of 2013, Michael and Catherine underwent a trial separation but they have bounced back and are happier than ever.

He told the Daily Mail recently: 'We're closer than ever. I think that when both parties want to work something out, they can. It was mutual love that brought us back to each other – we've been back together for two years and it's all worked out just fine.

Speaking about Dylan, 14, and Carys, 12, Michael said: 'The kids are doing great, too. They had a clear understanding of what was going on – I don't think there were a lot of secrets kept – and they're fine now. To sum up, no news is good news, and that's what we have!'

Question time: Michael Douglas, 70, visited the Red Bull Ring during DTM on Sunday, as he spoke to a reporter at the event in Austria

Michael and Catherine met at the Deauville Film Festival in France back in 1998.

The actor suffered heartbreak recently after his beloved mother Diana lost her battle with cancer last month at age 92.

She was living in a care home for Hollywood stars in California.

Catherine took to Instagram, sharing an old photo of the actress along with her sadness at the loss but Michael has yet to comment.

She wrote: 'Diana we are so grateful to have had you in our lives. We will miss you everyday. Until we meet again...Love you very much.'

Diana appeared in dozens of movies and television shows, including Dynasty, a stint on ER and a starring role in Planes, Trains And Automobiles.