A roundup of notable gifts compiled by The Chronicle:

University of Miami

Phillip and Patricia Frost committed $100 million to support applied sciences and engineering.

Mr. Frost is a physician who has led a number of pharmaceutical companies. He was chairman of the Department of Dermatology at Mt. Sinai Medical Center of Greater Miami from 1972 to 1990.

The Frosts gave the university $33 million in 2003 for the Phillip and Patricia Frost School of Music.

Bucknell University

Bob and Doris Malesardi pledged $20 million for financial aid and to match contributions from other donors.

Mr. Malesardi ran an accounting firm and developed real estate. He is a former owner of the Four Seasons Resort in Palm Beach, Fla. He graduated from Bucknell in 1945.

Tulane University

David and Marion Mussafer gave $5 million to support a new student center that will house an academic advising center, career services, and other student services.

Mr. Mussafer is managing partner of the executive committee of Advent International, a Boston-based global private-equity firm. He graduated from Tulane in 1985 and serves on the university’s Board of Trustees.

University of Southern California

Leonard Schaeffer, who founded health insurance company WellPoint, gave $4 million to establish the Leonard D. Schaeffer Initiative for Innovation in Health Policy, a partnership between the Leonard D. Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics at USC and the Center for Health Policy at the Brookings Institution.

He is a trustee of both USC and Brookings.

The program will focus on the future of Medicare, the Affordable Care Act, and improvements in drugs and medical devices.

University of Chicago

Financier Guru Ramakrishnan and his wife, Anupama, donated $3.5 million for a professorship in Sanskrit Studies.

Mr. Ramakrishnan earned an MBA from the university in 1988 and is a founding partner at Meru Capital Group.

The couple has previously supported a scholarship program for Indian students at the university’s Booth School of Business

To learn about other big donations, see our database of gifts of $1 million or more, which is updated throughout the week.