Buy Photo Theresa Donatiello Neidich, FISH Hospitality Program executive director, talks about the program. The program helps families in a shelter program. Up to 14 people stay at a rotating list of participating churches, November 19 2014 Piscataway NJ. Photo by Kathy Jonson EST 1130 Needy Fish (Photo: Kathy Johnson/MyCentralJersey / Courier News)Buy Photo Story Highlights FISH Hospitality Program Inc., is a 14-bed shelter for homeless women and families in an interfaith network of about 13 churches in Middlesex, Somerset and Union counties for up to two weeks at a time.

FISH Hospitality Program Inc. allows guests to stay in the emergency shelter for 60 days during which Theresa Donatiello Neidich, the executive director, works with them to get food stamps, and other assistance, such as jobs, social services and resume preparation.

Needy Cases funds from last year were used to get a new computer for guests to use, especially since most job ads are on line.

Donations this year may be used for a new printer for the day center and a computer for the executive director's assistant.

A former North Brunswick woman, who has relocated to the Atlanta area with her husband and their three children, is on the path to a better life thanks to the helping hand her family received from the FISH Hospitality Program Inc. here.

For several weeks last year the family were guests of the program, a 14-bed shelter for homeless women and families in an interfaith network of some 13 churches in Middlesex, Somerset and Union counties for up to two weeks at a time.

"They got where they were going. They're thrilled. Everybody's got a job, everybody's in school. Everybody's good. So we're very happy about that," said Theresa Donatiello Neidich, FISH Hospitality Program Inc. executive director and social worker. "It's wonderful."

Donatiello Neidich said it makes her feel good.

"It's why we do what we do," said Donatiello Neidich, who has asked the woman to write a guest's corner letter for the organization's monthly newsletter.

FISH Hospitality Program Inc. allows guests to stay in the emergency shelter for 60 days during which time Donatiello Neidich works with them to get food stamps, and other assistance, such as jobs, social services and resume preparation.

Last spring, FISH Hospitality Program Inc. opened a new day center, down the street at St. Francis Episcopal Church in neighboring Dunellen. The Middlesex church that housed the former day center was sold and the center had been housed on an interim basis at the Rose of Sharon Community Church in Plainfield for more than a year, she said.

St. Francis Episcopal Church had supported one of the program's host churches in the past and now the church supports Christ United Methodist Church in Piscataway when guests are housed there.

"Literally you can walk, it's that close. They are wonderful," said Donatiello Neidich, who works out of an office on New Market Road in a building upstairs from Fish, Inc - Dunellen Area, a separate volunteer organization offering a food bank, clothing, blankets, bedding, holiday meals, and Christmas toys.

Donatiello Neidich said the day center is for guests who are not working, or have a day off from work, perhaps due to illness. The church offered its facilities rent free, and a business cell phone is available for guests to use.

A new computer for job search

She said community donations from the Needy Cases Fund last year were used to get a new computer at the day center for guests to use, especially since most job ads are online. She said a new printer is needed for the day center and her assistant needs a new computer.

The program currently has 13 guests, all of whom are working.

"We had a mass exodus. Everyone left at once in the last group. So we brought in everybody in the month of September and everyone has one kid. One parent has two children, the rest have one," she said.

The program has a waiting list of 132 family units — a sign the need is as great as ever. As of October, the program has seen an increase of about 84 calls from last year, 32 more from Middlesex County and 26 more from Union County. From Somerset County, the number of calls has doubled from 12 last year to 26 this year. Eight family units from Somerset County have been served this year, including one with a man as the head of the household. Last year only one family from Somerset County were program guests.

"In Somerset County they only serve people who are on welfare in their shelters so they have to have a voucher from the Board of Social Services. We take the working poor, we don't require them to have a voucher," said Donatiello Neidich, who feels welfare recipients are eligible for other forms of assistance.

"We can only serve 14 people at a time," said Donatiello Neidich, adding people are not just out of work, they are under employed. She said homeless people are not just those living on the street or in shelters, homeless people also are "couch surfing" with friends and relatives for a few weeks at a time.

Fish Hospitality Program Inc is connected with Family Promise, a program with about 186 affiliates including several in New Jersey.

As part of that affiliation Donatiello Neidich said FISH Hospitality Program Inc. will conduct a April 18, 2015 Box City fundraiser in which people can sponsor teens sleeping overnight in decorated cardboard boxes, symbolizing homelessness, on the lawn of The Presbyterian Church in Westfield.

It was through Family Promise that Donatiello Neidich learned about Recycled Rides, a National Auto Body Council community service program in which insurers, collision repair shops, paint suppliers, parts vendors and others collaborate to repair and donate salvaged vehicles to needy individuals, families or service organizations.

Buy Photo Theresa Donatiello Neidich, is the FISH Hospitality Program executive director. The program helps families in a shelter program. Up to 14 people stay at a rotating list of participating churches, November 19 2014 Piscataway NJ. Photo by Kathy Jonson EST 1130 Needy Fish (Photo: Kathy Johnson/MyCentralJersey / Courier News)

Donatiello Neidich extended the stay of the North Brunswick woman so she and her family would have a Recycled Rides minivan to make the trip to Atlanta.

She's looking to get another vehicle, a four-door sedan, and then decide which family gets it.

The need for more assistance

She also is looking to increase the number of volunteers, the number of churches hosting guests and the financial donations for operations and settlement assistance, the first month's rent and security deposit.

"Even though people save money ideally we don't want them to use it, so when it gets to second, third and fourth month they have something to dip into. We get them what they need to start. If they leave with a cushion, they are OK," said Donatiello Neidich, who has a graduate student from Rutgers who is doing a management and administration internship with her.

"We have eight people ready to move but can't move because they don't have enough money to move out. I really need like $6,000 immediately. The individual donations are not coming in like they use to," she said.

Donatiello Neidich added that the program lost a Plainfield hosting church in 2012.

"They were doing five weeks a year. We've been scrambling and stretching our churches to do more weeks," said Donatiello Neidich, adding with 52 weeks a year and 13 host churches, not all of them can do five or six weeks a year. Each church can only do 14 days in a row. "We have five weeks open in our (2015) schedule. Ideally we need two more churches."

If your church would like take part in the program, contact Donatiello Neidich directly at 732-968-5957.

Staff Writer Suzanne Russell: 732-565-7335; srussell@mycentraljersey.com

Get engaged, take action

From Nov. 30 to Dec. 7, we are highlighting the stories of eight organizations helped by the Needy Cases Fund. Through the words and photographs of the journalists of the Home News Tribune, you will see how these Central Jersey-based organizations improve the lives of your neighbors in need, and how you can help them accomplish their missions.

For the past 67 years, The Needy Cases Fund has collected donations from a caring community during the holiday season, and distributed the funds to local agencies. The community-service project has been sponsored by the Home News Tribune and its predecessor, the Daily Home News, working with the Lions Club of New Brunswick.

As you read these stories, we hope you will become engaged and take action by sending a donation anytime during the holiday season to help support the Needy Cases Fund and local community agencies. Donations should be sent to: Needy Cases Fund, Home News Tribune, 92 E. Main St., Suite 202, Somerville, NJ 08876. Please indicate with a note whether you want to be acknowledged in a wrap-up story about the program, scheduled to run in late December, or whether you wish to remain anonymous. The Needy Cases Fund is maintained in a separate account by the New Brunswick Lions Club, and distribution of the funds is apportioned by representatives of the Home News Tribune and the club.

For any questions, contact Carolyn Sampson at 908-243-6624 or csampson@MyCentralJersey.com.

And please know that every dollar you donate is appreciated, and will be used well.

Paul C. Grzella, General Manager/Editor

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1rLRHJm