You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Message: * A friend wanted you to see this item from High School OT: http://wral.com/14665721

— The Cardinal Gibbons Crusaders and the Lake Norman Wildcats faced off in the girl’s lacrosse state championship game on Saturday afternoon at WakeMed Soccer Park in Cary. The two equally matched teams needed extra time to crown a champion, but the Wildcats were able to outlast the Crusaders for a 17-15 victory.

Cardinal Gibbons (19-1) opened scoring early in the game on an unassisted goal from Jordan Lappin, her first of six on the afternoon. Erica Skowron scored for the Crusaders soon after, increasing their lead to 2-0.

Lake Norman (17-2) responded with two goals from Julianna Dworschak and one each from Michella Chester and Carly Vaccaro, giving the Wildcats a 4-2 lead.

Three goals from Cardinal Gibbons and one more from Lake Norman tied the game at 5-5 going into halftime.

The Wildcats took a lead early in the second half off a goal from Kieran Rinaldi, but Sarah Comstock quickly scored for the Crusaders and tied the game again, this time at 6-6.

The tie did not last long as Lake Norman quickly scored three unanswered goals. However, Gibbons equalized the surge with three unanswered goals of their own just minutes later.

Rinaldi broke the 9-9 tie, but the Crusaders stayed close. The two teams traded goals until the Wildcats were able to net two in a row, both from Vaccaro. But a yellow card to Lake Norman allowed Cardinal Gibbons to score twice and tie the game at 13-13 with just minutes remaining in the game.

With :24 left in the game, Cardinal Gibbons was given a yellow card and the Wildcats were able to capitalize. Rinaldi scored with just :19 left to give Lake Norman a 14-13 lead.

The Crusaders drove down the field after winning the ensuing draw. Dworschak scored as time expired to tie the game at 14-14 and send the championship game to overtime.

Just over a minute into the first overtime period, Lake Norman’s Vaccaro scored on a feed from Dworschak to give the Wildcats a 15-14 lead.

Cardinal Gibbons’ Comstock would tie the game again with just :25 left in the first overtime, but it didn’t last long. Rinaldi found the net again 15 seconds later to give the lead back to the Wildcats.

Kieran Rinaldi sealed the Lake Norman victory; she scored with 1:42 left in the second overtime, bringing the final score to 17-15.

This win marks the first girl’s lacrosse state championship for the Lake Norman Wildcats. Cardinal Gibbons’ Jordan Lappin was named the game’s MVP with six goals and two assists.