iStock

MIKE PIPER: One health insurance-related mistake that I’ve seen many people make this year is to fail to realize that they have some control over the size of Affordable Care Act subsidies that they can receive for purchasing health insurance on the new exchanges.

Assuming you meet the other requirements for eligibility (e.g., not having “affordable” coverage through your employer), your “household income” is what determines the size of the subsidies that you can receive.

Your household income is calculated as your “modified adjusted gross income” (MAGI) plus the MAGI of your spouse and dependents. For these purposes, MAGI is defined as:

Your adjusted gross income (the bottom line on the first page of your Form 1040), plus

Any foreign earned income that was excluded from adjusted gross income, plus

Any tax-exempt interest, plus

Any Social Security benefits that were excluded from adjusted gross income.

In short, through specific tax planning actions, you can minimize your household income, thereby increasing the subsidies you receive.

For example, if you’re still working, contributions to tax-deferred retirement accounts (e.g., a traditional IRA) reduce your household income. Conversely, if you’re retired and purchasing insurance on one of the new exchanges, you can reduce your household income by prioritizing spending from Roth accounts and/or taxable accounts rather than spending from tax-deferred accounts.

A key point to understand about Affordable Care Act subsidies is that they work differently from most income-based tax breaks. With most tax breaks (e.g., the ability to make Roth IRA contributions), your eligibility decreases gradually as your income increases above a certain threshold.

In contrast, while the premium tax credit (i.e., the subsidy that reduces your premiums) does gradually decrease as your income increases, it disappears entirely as soon as your household income exceeds 400% of the federal poverty level. In addition, the other Affordable Care Act subsidies (which affect things such as your out-of-pocket maximum or your deductible) decrease sharply at certain income levels (specifically, 300%, 250%, 200%, and 150% of the federal poverty level), according to the ACA.

In other words, there can be situations in which a single additional dollar of income can cause you to lose out on a subsidy with a four-figure value. As a result, it’s often advantageous to try to keep your income just below one of the applicable thresholds.

Mike Piper (@michaelrpiper) is the author of the blog ObliviousInvestor.com and personal-finance books, including his latest, “Social Security Made Simple.”

Read the latest Wealth Management Report.