WASHINGTON -- The Medicare Advantage program hasn't quite worked out as promised under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), according to healthcare policy experts.

They discussed the impact of the ACA on the program, as well as ways the Medicare Advantage delivery model could be improved, at the National Conference on Medicare and Medicaid and Dual Eligibles Summit, sponsored by America's Health Insurance Plans.

While designed to target the shortcomings of traditional fee-for-service Medicare, the idea that Medicare Advantage (MA) could reduce costs through better care coordination hasn't played out as intended, said Mark Miller, PhD, executive director of the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC).

Care coordination and quality improved in some communities, and certain MA plans even offered benefits at lower costs than fee-for-service Medicare, "but in aggregate, that never happened." Instead of saving money, the government was paying, at the highest point, 14% more than fee-for-service Medicare, he said.

"Managed care has cost Medicare throughout its history," Miller added.

One main reason MA costs skyrocketed was that the market of traditional Medicare plans varied by geographical region.

For instance, in Miami, where fee-for-service programs are less efficient, it is relatively easy for a Medicare managed care plan to demonstrate savings. But in Portland, Ore., where Medicare services operate more efficiently, MA plans struggled to offer benefits at or below the costs of competitors, he said.

Initially, Congress responded by paying more for MA in all markets.

In 2010, the ACA enacted a plan to lower benchmarks for MA incrementally to between 1 and 3 percentage points higher than traditional Medicare by 2017, Miller explained.

Congress also decided to tailor payments by region. It reduced benchmarks for bids in the less competitive markets, such as Miami, and set them higher than fee-for-service plans in more competitive ones, like Portland.

Initially, critics of the ACA believed these changes would sink MA, but that didn't happen. Enrollment increased annually at 9% and the plans are now available in 99% of counties throughout the country, Miller said.

Average bids for Medicare managed care are currently below fee-for-service, Miller said. However, health maintenance organization (HMOs) usually bid below fee-for-service while preferred provider organizations (PPOs) still bid above traditional Medicare, he added.

Tricia Neuman, ScD, director of the program on Medicare Policy for the Kaiser Family Foundation here, said one reason that enrollment hasn't dropped is the aging of Baby Boomers, who become eligible enrollees.

Also, beneficiaries are accustomed to private insurance and familiar with managed care. They also may prefer the convenience of a "one-stop-shop" over choosing multiple plans -- such as Medicare, Medicare Part D, and MediGap -- to gain the same benefits.

All of the panelists agreed that MA is a "work in progress," but Miller pointed out that ACA "did what it set out to do" which was rein in MA spending.

Douglas Holtz-Eakin, PhD, president of the American Action Forum here and chief economic policy advisor for Sen. John McCain in 2008, said he was impressed that even with a budget cut, enrollments in MA plans continued to grow. However, he was reluctant to declare the MA under the ACA a complete success.

"The question was 'Could you get a lower-budget cost while still having a quality system and actually generating greater health value underneath that?'" he said. "I'd say the jury is still out on that."

Whatever elements are retained or changed in the MA program in the future will have to be bipartisan, said Holtz-Eakin, who dubbed the program a "political football."

He added that "the community broadly has to demonstrate the value proposition and show that it can hit the budget targets and if it does, that's really the key."

Miller said MedPAC hopes to see the risk adjustment system rebalanced, so plans that include more beneficiaries with multiple chronic condition aren't penalized.

MedPAC research found that the risk adjustment system in MA underpaid for plans with lots of multiple chronic conditions, and overpaid if beneficiaries were relatively healthy, he explained.

The commission suggested including a very basic adjustment in the payment system that counts the number of chronic conditions.

"We think there's an effect that compounds when you have five, six, seven [chronic conditions], there's a cut point, where it starts to matter," he said.

Holtz-Eakin agreed that risk adjustment was critical and said his organization was also exploring whether Medicare's star rating system under-rewarded those who have more chronic care conditions.

He said he supports the somewhat controversial idea of shifting towards a defined contribution model, and believes that using an alternative bidding system for MA would be more effective than relying on fee-for-service benchmarks.

"Getting the risk-adjustment right, the stars right, and the bidding process right, I think are the three things that are essential to turning MA from a bridge to an actual future for the program," Holtz-Eakin said.