WASHINGTON — A federal district judge declared Thursday that the State of Missouri was illegally obstructing the activities of insurance counselors appointed by the federal government to inform consumers of their options under the Affordable Care Act.

The judge, Ortrie D. Smith of Kansas City, issued a preliminary injunction that prohibits Missouri officials from enforcing a state law, adopted last year by legislators who said they wanted to protect consumers shopping for health coverage.

“The state law obstructs the federal purpose” by imposing onerous restrictions and requirements on people who help consumers, including groups designated as “navigators” under federal law, the judge said.

Judge Smith’s ruling applies just to Missouri, but lawyers said it had implications for more than a dozen other states that had adopted similar laws or regulations, including Florida, Ohio, Texas and Wisconsin. The laws typically require licensing of counselors and navigators and limit what they can do.

Sidney D. Watson, a law professor at St. Louis University who supports the federal health law, said: “This is a very important decision. It means that certified application counselors and navigators can focus on helping consumers rather than jumping through bureaucratic hoops. They can do the important work that needs to be done to help people sign up for health insurance.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The state laws have been promoted by Republican state legislators and by some insurance agents who say the counselors do not have the training and education needed to steer consumers through the complexities of health insurance.

Plaintiffs in the case included St. Louis Effort for AIDS, a patient education and advocacy group, and Planned Parenthood of the St. Louis Region and Southwest Missouri.

Missouri stands out among states that have put up significant obstacles to President Obama’s health law. It declined to create an insurance exchange, leaving the job to the federal government. And it has forbidden state and local officials to cooperate with the federal exchange.

Judge Smith said that the plaintiffs had already complied with federal rules for insurance counselors, but that the state had imposed a number of additional licensing requirements.

“It seems obvious these additional requirements obstruct the federal government’s operation of the federally facilitated exchange,” Judge Smith said. For that reason, he said, the state law is pre-empted by the Affordable Care Act, which has supremacy under the federal Constitution.

The Missouri law, he said, prevents counselors from doing some of the very things they are supposed to do under the federal law, like providing consumers with information about the strengths and weakness of different health plans, including those sold in the private insurance market outside the exchange.

Chris Cline, a spokesman for the Missouri insurance commissioner, John M. Huff, said the department was reviewing the ruling.