Oh, doctor!

A Manhattan man is suing Empire BlueCross BlueShield for turning his simple search for a new doctor into an Arthurian quest of epic scope.

"Something is rotten in the Empire State," Jon Fougner’s lawsuit against the insurance giant begins.

“It's not just that beggars can't be choosers. With Empire, beggars can't even be beggars.”

Fougner, 31, says he started ponying up $620.69 a month for Empire's Platinum Guided Access health insurance plan in July because he wanted a new primary care physician, but the company "frustrated my every effort" to obtain one.

"Empire promised that its website would be available to find a PCP 'anytime.' Sadly, nothing could have been further from the truth," the suit says.

He says he used the “find a doctor” function on Empire's website to track down a doctor near him who was accepting new patients, and 30 names came up.

He called the first doctor, who turned out to be working at an HIV clinic and not accepting new patients, the Manhattan Supreme Court suit says.

The second listing had the wrong phone number for the doctor, and when he got the right number, the doctor never returned his calls.

Jon Fougner claims Empire failed to deliver him with a primary care physician. Jon Fougner created this pie chart to show the results of contacting 30 doctors through Empire. Jon Fougner seeks unspecified money damages and wants to stop paying $620 a month for health coverage until he gets a doctor. (Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images)

Doctor three turned out not to even work in Manhattan. Others had their phones disconnected, or said they didn't accept the insurance, says the suit - which includes a pie chart of the panoply of problems he had with all 30 listings.

He says he called Empire for help and to complain numerous times, and when he was finally able to get a human being on the phone, the person said he would send him a list of available doctors. He was eventually emailed a list of the same doctors and with the same bad contact info, the suit says.

And when he tried to find a physician on his own, the various doctors' offices he talked to were so confused by the plan information they couldn't figure out if they accepted it.

He finally got a check up on Sept. 24 by one doctor who thought she accepted the insurance — only to get a call later that day from her receptionist saying they actually did not take it. "The receptionist claimed that, in her years of experience, no other plan had ever caused her such confusion," the suit says.

The experience just left Fougner frustrated.

"You feel you're in some Dickensian nightmare, you've finally solved it, and then . . . no," he said.

Fougner said he started looking for a primary physician because he’s training for the New York City Marathon and wanted to have a doctor lined up.

He said what bothered him in his various communications with Empire staffers was "they didn't seem to really care."

Jon Fougner claims that finding a doctor through the Empire website turned into a nightmare. (byryo/Getty Images/iStockphoto)

"I don't know if they're doing this deliberately or because of an otherworldly degree of incompetence, but I imagine this happens to a lot of people," he told The Daily News.

The suit, which the Yale Law grad wrote himself, says Empire's strategy appears to be to "block all services behind a bottleneck, and then clog the bottleneck."

The court action charges the company with breach of contract, fraud and false advertising, and seeks unspecified money damages.

It also asks for Fougner to not have to pay the $620 a month until he's able to actually get a doctor.

Empire declined to strike back.

Sally Kweskin, a spokeswoman for Empire BlueCross BlueShield, said it “doesn't comment on pending litigation.”

She noted the company's "Pathway Network" is "comprised of nearly 49,000 physicians and 83 hospitals that are considered 'in-network' for Exchange or Affordable Care Act compliant individual and small group plans.”

dgregorian@nydailynews.com