With her marathon filibuster of an anti-abortion bill last summer, Wendy Davis got the whole country talking about women's rights in Texas; a year later, she's running for governor. But it's not just Davis who is trying to break up the Lone Star State Boys' Club. Leticia Van de Putte, a Texas state senator from San Antonio, famously tried to adjourn the proceedings the night of the filibuster and was ignored by the presiding officer. "At what point," Van de Putte asked, "must a female senator raise her hand for her voice to be recognized over the male colleagues in the room?" The chamber erupted in applause, helping to kill the bill by delaying a vote past the deadline. Texas governor Rick Perry later called a special session to pass the bill and signed it into law.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Now Van de Putte is running for lieutenant governor, making 2014 the first year that two women are running for the state's top executive offices.

Van de Putte, a Mexican-American with six generations of Texas roots, worked as a pharmacist for decades before being elected to the Texas House of Representatives in 1990 and then to the Texas Senate in 1999. She has come out strongly in favor of investments in education, infrastructure developments that will help Texas businesses, and the right of women to make their own reproductive decisions. If Van de Putte wins, she'll occupy the second-highest executive office in the state and one of the most powerful: The lieutenant governor is president of the Texas State Senate and controls the budgeting process, appoints committee chairs and members, and decides what comes to the floor for a vote. And with that kind of power, Van de Putte might just be the woman who turns this red state purple.

She spoke with Cosmopolitan.com at an Austin restaurant between meetings and fundraisers, detailing her commitment to public service, her historic candidacy, and why a woman's reproductive choices are none of the government's business.

What's the state of women's health care in Texas today, and how would you do things differently?

We are the state with the highest number of children and adults without health insurance. And we seem to be proud of that. The worst [women's health] budget cuts were done in 2011. Forty-some-odd clinics closed, mostly rural county health clinics or city clinics where there were no abortion services, there was no abortion counseling, but it was the only place where women could get a pap smear or a mammogram. That's pretty consistent with the treatment of women generally. The current governor vetoed the Lilly Ledbetter Act [which strengthened the ability of women to sue their employers for equal pay]. They don't care who is in the crosshairs.

I'm a pharmacist with 34 years across the prescription counter. I know how to talk to my patients. The number one thing you do as a leader is you listen first, then you help provide a framework and a structure so people can make good decisions about their health care, their quality of life, and their families. As presiding officer of the Senate, I would listen to the senators and to the needs of people of this state. I come from preventative health care. I know if women have access to family planning, they can space their families and their children, and that means better health outcomes for everyone. I would love for there to be zero abortions. But the way to do that is not to cut access, but to make abortion unnecessary in the first place. So I would do everything I could to make sure we have the type of women's health programs that allow women to plan their families.

The Republican candidate for lieutenant governor is state senator Dan Patrick. He is not just a Tea Party follower. He was the author of the TSA pat-down bill. He authored the sonogram bill in 2011 [which requires women terminating pregnancies to be shown a sonogram]. His education policy is vouchers and mandatory teaching of creationism in schools. He is anti-choice. His view is, "It was God's plan." He says he's a Christian first, then a conservative, then a Republican. He's a radio talk show personality. That's my opponent.

You're a Roman Catholic and a pro-choice Texas Democrat. Do you ever get pushback on that?

For me it's not a public question. It's a personal question. If you look at Leticia Rosa San Miguel Van de Putte, I'm Roman Catholic. I've lived my faith: I had six children in nine years. I had two miscarriages. I had an emergency hysterectomy. I'm highly insulted if someone says I am not Christian enough or I don't understand this issue.

I don't want abortions. The reason I don't is that I've never known any woman who does this casually. Women do not wake up one morning and say, "I'm pregnant; I forgot to get an abortion yesterday!" This is a huge personal decision that every woman needs to make on her own. I'm a health care provider, and I can tell you the most devastating things that happen across the prescription counter. I've seen the woman who comes to the counter with that look of desperation and says, "Is there anything I can buy? Is there anything that will bring my period down?" Usually these are women with children already. A lot of them don't even have the money for a pregnancy test.

My personal faith dictates one thing for me. But I also know that each woman needs to make this decision within her own faith and her value system, maybe with her partner, and definitely with her physician. Not with her government.

Wendy and I both supported a 20-week amendment [to ban elective abortion after 20 weeks] on a bill that we thought allowed an exception for the health of the mom, irreversible fetal abnormality, and rape or incest. We tried at every point to narrow it down to see what was acceptable to [Republicans]: Not health of the mom, OK; how about rape or incest? We know that one-half of one percent of abortions occur after 20 weeks. It's mostly women and their partners who absolutely want this pregnancy and something horrible has happened. My daughter is an ob-gyn, and she said, "Mom, it's an anencephalic baby that will not survive the birth, or it's a woman with cancer, or it's a motor vehicle accident." Do you really wake up at 20 weeks and say, "Oh, it slipped my mind"?