With the startup of Cover Oregon and the federal health law changes that spawned it, people have questions. Here are 20 of them, and the answers.

1) What is Cover Oregon?

Cover Oregon is the state's version of the health insurance marketplace, or exchange, mandated for all states by the Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as Obamacare. The law requires most people who can afford it to have coverage or pay a penalty, while banning discrimination against people with pre-existing conditions.

Cover Oregon will help individuals and small businesses comparison-shop between plans, enroll and apply income-based tax credits to reduce their monthly premium if they qualify. Its main feature will be a website, but a call center, and certified agents and application assisters, will also help people enroll.

2) Tax credits? It sounds like a lot of paperwork.

For most people, using Cover Oregon will feel a little like filling out a tax return, with lots of questions about expected income and deductions.

Also, the federal health law offers a sliding scale of commercial premium tax credits for people making under 400 percent of the federal poverty level - $94,200 for a family of four, or $45,960 for an individual. There are also increased tax credits for small businesses with fewer than 25 employees.

ENROLLMENT HELP Enrollment using Cover Oregon runs from Oct. 1 to March 31. Certified application assisters and partner groups can help you sign up, while certified agents can do that as well as give advice. Here are resources to help you evaluate plans and get help: ONLINE Coveroregon.com won't allow you to enroll yourself until later in October. But you can use the site immediately to compare plans, check carrier's quality ratings and get help. Later in the month the site will let you enroll by yourself and see whether you qualify for tax credits to reduce premiums. 1. Ehealthlink.com offers similar plan information, as well as an estimate of tax credit. 2. Healthpocket.com provides plan details, quality ratings and helpful tips on choosing a plan. BY PHONE Customer service staff at Cover Oregon can be reached at 855-268-3767 for enrollment help. IN PERSON Cover Oregon is referring the public to agents, application assisters, and local groups, or community partners, to provide assistance filling out applications. Some of the latter groups are mainly geared to work with uninsured or low-income people, or specific ethnic groups, and may not have resources to help the general public. Call Cover Oregon at 855-268-3767 or check the coveroregon.com website to get a list of insurance agents, community partners or application assisters near you.

In addition, people making less than about 250 percent of the federal poverty are eligible for cost-sharing reductions, meaning they pay less out-of-pocket.

People making less than 138 percent of the poverty level will be automatically enrolled in the low-income Oregon Health Plan.

3) I already have a policy I like. Why should I shop for new health insurance?

Most policies are going away Jan. 1 to make way for new ones that comply with federal law. A few are grandfathered, covering about 30,000 Oregonians, according to the state.

4) What happens if I don't get a policy?

People who spend 2014 without health insurance - whether it be Medicare, the Oregon Health Plan or something else - are subject to a tax penalty that starts at $95 for an adult in 2014 or up to 1 percent of household income, whichever is greater.

The penalty ramps up to an adult minimum of $695 in 2016 and up to 2.5 percent of family income. For purposes of the penalty, income is calculated as the number above the tax filing threshold of $10,000 for an individual or $20,000 for a family.

But if you don't make enough to file taxes, or insurance would cost you more than 8 percent of your income, you don't have to buy it. Also, Native Americans are exempt from the mandate.

If you have a single gap in coverage of less than three months, you won't be penalized. More than that, and the penalty will be prorated - in other words, an additional month without coverage could mean a penalty less than $14.

5) Can I just pay the penalty, and wait until I get sick?

That's what some opponents of the law have been telling people to do. But it's a risky move. You can only enroll during the open enrollment period. Outside of that, you can't sign up for insurance unless you've had what's called a "qualifying event," such as getting married or having a baby.

6) Will my premiums change?

Very likely, yes. People with pre-existing conditions can't be charged more for insurance. New rules mean people under 50 likely pay more than they used to. Not only that, but most people 30 and older won't be able to buy catastrophic plans to avoid paying a federal penalty.

Still, tax credits will defray premium costs for more than half of those buying their own insurance on the individual market.

7) I'm young and healthy. Do I have options?

A recent study by HealthPocket suggests the federal changes may be a pretty good deal for the young, thanks to tax incentives and low-cost catastrophic plans offered to people under 30. Not only that, but the law allows people 25 and under to stay on their parents' private insurance policy.

What the rankings mean State officials are unveiling a new rating system for health plans this year, classified by bronze, silver, gold and platinum levels of coverage. The levels are defined by how much of the health care costs consumers will pay. Bronze, silver, gold and platinum ratings mean consumers are responsible for 40, 30, 20 or 10 percent of their health care costs, respectively. A bronze rating bears the lowest premium, but members will pay more through co-pays, co-insurance and deductibles. In other words, sicker people could potentially save money overall by paying a higher premium. If you buy your own coverage on the individual market, your benefits are probably closer to bronze or silver. If your coverage is through an employer, it's more likely to be similar to gold or platinum. -Nick Budnick

8) When can I sign on to the Cover Oregon website?

The public will have access to a browse-only site starting Tuesday. The enrollment part of the marketplace will be limited to certified agents and other outreach specialists for the first couple of weeks. You can find someone to help you through the coveroregon.com website, or by calling the Cover Oregon helpline: 855-268-3767. The delay will let state programmers get the bugs out. After that, anyone will be able to use it to enroll.

9) Will using an agent cost me extra?

No. Their commission is built into your premium, whether or not you use Cover Oregon.

10) What is the deadline to enroll in a 2014 policy?

For people in the individual market, it's March 31, 2014. But since your previous policy will go away Jan. 1, it's risky to wait that long.

11) What can I do before getting access to the website?

If you can't find an agent or certified application assister to help you in early October, there are other websites that at least can help you look at insurers and plans, such as the nonprofit National Committee for Quality Assurance, at ncqa.com. Other options include healthpocket.com and zocdoc.com. They are for-profit companies, so read the fine print carefully.

John Gridley, an agent in Roseburg, has set up his own version of the state website that could help you figure out whether you're eligible for the tax credit, and what effect it could have on premiums: http://www.ehealthlink.com/

12) Once I'm on the Cover Oregon website, what will it look like?

You'll enter in information about your income, family and location. If you make less than 138 percent of the federal income level, you'll be directed to enroll in the Oregon Health Plan. Otherwise, you'll be able to select from private insurer plans.

In addition to bearing a sticker price, commercial plans are given a "metal" rating to reflect how much coverage it projects to provide for the average individual. The Bronze, Silver, Gold and Platinum plans cover 60, 70, 80 and 90 percent of expected costs, respectively.

There will also be "quality" ratings of one to four stars, compiled by the state using a variety of measures. Be aware that some of the information the state used is dated, and some measures may not apply to you.

13) I've seen headlines about federal delays to the new law. Will those affect me?

Probably not, though there's a slim possibility you'll be affected if you get insurance through a large employer, meaning 51 or more employees. The federal government delayed the mandate that large employers provide insurance or pay a fine. Also, a few large employer plans won't be subject to the new health law's caps on out-of-pocket payments: $6,350 for an individual and $12,700 for a family.

14) Do I have to buy dental insurance from my health carrier on Cover Oregon?

No. If you want, you can get dental insurance separately, and outside Cover Oregon. You can also buy a separate policy within Cover Oregon. But a stand-alone dental policy won't count toward your tax credit.

15) What if I get my insurance from an employer? Then you can't use Cover Oregon, with one exception. If your employer-based coverage is considered unaffordable under IRS standards, you can use the marketplace and apply for a tax credit. Call Cover Oregon for more information.

Otherwise, employees of businesses with more than 50 employees won't be subject to Cover Oregon. Small businesses can use Cover Oregon, though they are not subject to the same enrollment period.

If your small business employer has purchased a reference plan with Cover Oregon, employees may be able to choose plans or insurers there, with the employer setting their contribution at a certain level, the employee picking up the rest.

16) How will Cover Oregon affect veterans or Native Americans?

If you already get coverage through the Veterans Administration, you don't need to buy a second policy. You can, but you won't get a tax credit.

If you are Native American, you can use Cover Oregon, and open enrollment lasts all year: you can change plans whenever you want, instead of having to choose one plan and stick with it. Also, several tribes are considering setting up accounts with Cover Oregon that would pay recognized tribal members' premiums.

17) What if I'm on COBRA or have a portability plan?

All portability plans are going away next year. If you're on COBRA, you can keep your plan, but you may find it cheaper to shop on Cover Oregon or in the open market.

18) Will all commercial insurance plans use the same prescription drug formulary or preferred drug list? If not, will Cover Oregon have that information?

Commercial insurers will continue to keep their own formularies, and Cover Oregon won't have that information. You'll need to check each insurer's website, and understand that they are subject to change during the year.

19) Do I need last year's tax return to get tax credits?

You should have your 2012 return and pay stubs to apply though Cover Oregon, but tax credits are based on your estimate of your 2014 income. If your estimate is more than 10 percent different than your 2012 reported earnings to the IRS, Cover Oregon will ask why. If you can't provide documentation, the state will adjust your tax credit accordingly.

20) What if I end up making more than I projected, and get a subsidy larger than I deserve?

When you file taxes, your estimated tax credit will be reconciled with your real income, and your taxes adjusted accordingly. There is no penalty or interest paid for miscalculating. Cover Oregon will send out quarterly notices asking you to update changes in income.

-- Nick Budnick