Lookin' fit and fine, Palm Beach County. You're in the Top 10.

The 2015 annual County Health Rankings, released March 25, scored Palm Beach County 10th among Florida's 67 counties on factors that predict how healthy a community will be in the future.

Our residents are smoking far less than the national median, are less likely to have babies as teenagers, and have plenty of places to exercise.

Palm Beach County also ranked 10th statewide on health outcomes, which are defined as indicators of how healthy and happy people are now. Only 12 percent of county residents rate themselves as being in poor or fair health.

"People in general seem to think of themselves as healthy, which makes me optimistic," said Linda Quick, president of the South Florida Hospital & Healthcare Association, which covers four counties including Palm Beach County. "We have more than enough emergency departments, doctors and clinics to serve them."

Despite these positives, however, the rankings — a collaboration between the University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation — suggest there's plenty of work to be done, Quick said.

For example, the analysis shows that even if Palm Beach County residents have access to health care, they may not be able to afford it because a fourth of them are uninsured, Quick said.

She also noticed that 33 percent of county residents were driving alone on commutes at least 30 minutes each way. The county's severe post-recession housing problems, affecting 25 percent of residents, contribute to the commuting factor, as families often need to live far from workplaces if they want safe and affordable homes, she said.

So how are cars and houses connected to bad health, sickness and premature death?

Poor-quality housing can lead to neurological disorders caused by lead-based paint, and it can aggravate asthma and breathing disorders, according to the rankings report authors.

More cars on the road means more air pollution that can spark respiratory disease, health experts said. A long commute is stressful: Palm Beach County residents reported 3.4 "poor mental health days" monthly, higher than the state average. Drivers logging a lot of miles are more likely to have an accident, the main cause of death in adults younger than 34.

And the car culture contributes to a sedentary lifestyle, which lays the groundwork for obesity — affecting almost one-fourth of Palm Beach County residents — and contributes to a host of diseases from diabetes to heart failure.

"How we live, work, learn and play influences how healthy we are. And where we live matters," said Dr. Roderick King, CEO of the Florida Institute for Health Innovation based in West Palm Beach, which worked with the rankings coordinators. "Much of our health is determined by what happens outside our doctor's office."

Researchers drew from multiple data sets, some stretching back to 2006, to create the rankings. Sources included the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Census and the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care.

The rankings report, in its sixth year, should be a "call to action," King said, allowing counties to track health trends and make improvements. Roadmaps to Health, a project connected to the rankings, provides community coaches that help build local partnerships to tackle a problem.

Jan O'Neill, a University of Wisconsin community coach with the County Health Rankings & Roadmaps program, said she encourages individuals and organizations to look at how social, economic and environmental factors affect health.

"Look around your neighborhood. Are there sidewalks? Is there a playground? Do you feel safe to let your kids go to the playground?" O'Neill said. "Is there a grocery store close that carries healthy food? If not, advocate for that."

The rankings are designed to help communities gather legislative and financial support for programs that can reduce preventable deaths from accidents or illnesses.

The Quantum Foundation, a private grant-making organization that funds projects to improve health care in Palm Beach County, checks the rankings annually for local emerging needs. Mindful of the large number of uninsured patients, Quantum has invested about $3 million over several years into Affordable Care Act insurance enrollment assistance, said Randy Scheid, vice president of programs.

Foundation spokeswoman Kerry Jamieson said many people are unaware that in the same county where the rich and famous relax in oceanfront mansions, there are people who are getting chronic illnesses because they don't have enough to eat or don't have the money to see a doctor. The rankings "aren't a competition between counties," she said. "They are telling us what we should be compelled to do."

The Florida Health Department's county offices monitor the rankings as well, officials said, as they regularly update their required health improvement plans. Among the current Palm Beach County priorities: easing a shortage of primary care doctors and dentists; lowering obesity rates; and creating more services targeting mental and behavioral health.

Overall, there was little change in the 2015 rankings from the previous year, said King, of the health innovation institute. St. Johns County retained the top spot for health outcomes and health factors.

King said there were two areas, however, where Florida steadily is losing ground: low birth-weight babies and children in poverty. Both factors can lead to lifelong health problems as these youngsters grow into adults.

"Taking charge to improve the health of communities can be a messy process," King said. "But we all must have a role to play. It's hard to have a healthy life if you live in an unhealthy place."

To read the full report, go to countyhealthrankings.org.

dlade@tribpub.com or 954-356-4295