On a Monday night in mid-February, administrators at the Pines of Sarasota elder community got the kind of call they dread: A pipe had burst in the assisted-living section of the campus, making two-thirds of the building uninhabitable.

This part of the Pines is home to 47 residents who are mobile, but need varying degrees of help with daily tasks. Evacuating them was not the physical challenge it would be for nursing home residents, but it was an unsettling experience for the elders, and staff members rushed to the Pines to help.

Tuesday, Feb. 17, was a scramble to find safe places for 30 residents to camp out while their rooms on the first and second floors were being repaired. Fortunately, CEO John Overton knew a number he could call — Harry Hobson, CEO of the Plymouth Harbor community and a leader on the "Day-After" committee.

This mutual-assistance pact among area continuing-care centers was formed in 2008, Overton said, "to address a significant disaster, or emergency event, like a hurricane. We all contractually agreed to help one another."

That morning, he said, Hobson "immediately went into action and conducted a conference call."

At the height of Sarasota's season, there were no hotel rooms to be had. A mass email went out from seniorsbluebook.com, appealing to the region's long-term care providers. A number of communities rose to the occasion, offering their available spaces, and plans were made to handle the logistics.

Then around midday, Kathleen Coughlan, executive director of Bahia Oaks Lodge, offered a solution. Because her facility had just finished hosting residents from a Brookdale sister community in Venice, Bahia Oaks could offer rooms to all 30 of the Pines residents.

"We had just moved them out," Coughlan said Friday. "They also had to relocate because of a burst pipe."

The ability to have one location where Pines staffers could assist the residents was a near-miracle, Overton said.

"But what the members of the Day-After committee did was also remarkable," he added. "By Tuesday afternoon, I had buses as well as trucks from as far away as Village on the Isle, Sarasota Bay Club and Sunnyside. Everybody — including drivers from our thrift shop — helped to tear down beds, because Bahia Oaks had available rooms, but didn't have furniture. By 4 o'clock that day, we had the residents on the way."

For the next three weeks, some staff members were reassigned to Bahia Oaks, while drywall hangers and painters took over at the Pines. When it came time to move the residents back this week — half on one day and half the next — the same players rallied to their assistance, with facility director Kristen Biggins handling the logistics.

Hobson of Plymouth Harbor said that when he drove a carload of Pines residents back across town on Monday, "we hit the gravel in the parking lot, and a cheer went up. They were so excited to be home."

Coughlan, Hobson and other local facility leaders, as well as Pines staffers and volunteers, gathered Friday for what Overton called an "appreciation, thank you and welcome home ceremony," with cake and a steel drum player. Residents applauded all the staffers and volunteers who had done so much to keep them comfortable through their ordeal.

"After three weeks, everybody is back, and everybody is healthy and happy," declared David Sylvester, nursing home administrator, who is slated to replace Overton when he steps down this year from the CEO post.

The coordinated effort, Overton said, "helped me understand that this pledge of support by the group to help out in disaster situations really does work. I just can't put into words what it means to have the show of support and the compassion that was poured out for the folks who were adversely affected by this."