Dance team members work on their routine Thursday, Nov. 13, 2014, at The Studio in downtown Loveland in preparation for their performance during the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade in New York City. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

A group of Loveland and Fort Collins teens have danced their way into a time-honored tradition - the Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade.

Sixteen dancers from The Studio in downtown Loveland will perform with 484 other dancers across the United States in the staging area set up in front of the Macy's store. About 8,000 performers, exquisite floats, giant balloons and an atmosphere of joy will delight an estimated 3.5 million live viewers and another 50 million watching the event on television.

"I'm really excited," said Emma Salas, a 14-year-old from Loveland who will be joined by 11 family members from three states.

"I'm just excited to experience the city with my favorite people. I get to go on a trip with my friends and my family, and I get to dance."

If you watch What: Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade. When: 9 a.m. to noon, Thursday. Where: NBC.

The dance troupe earned the invitation to join Spirit of America after a performance two years ago at the Holiday Bowl.

Then three weeks ago, they received a video of the choreography and devoted five hours per week on top of their regular dance practices to learn the special performance. Each girl has learned each of the parts because they do not know in advance which part they will be assigned.

Their instructor Jennissa Voorhees (Asay) said the girls have worked hard to learn the dance, which blends modern movements to the music from classic video games including Mario Cart and Pac Man. The high-energy performance takes the viewer into a world where video game movements come to life.

"We have to use a lot of team work," said Sarah Carter, 16 of Loveland. "It's really fun. It's high energy."

The group will spend seven days in New York City to really experience the pulse of the city. Their agenda includes taking in a performance by the Rockettes, ice skating at Rockefeller Center and serving dinner to homeless residents on the west side.

And of course they will dance.

"I lived in New York City and danced professionally for years," said Voorhees. "To bring them to my home to dance on a big stage, it comes full circle.

"My heart couldn't be fuller"

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, @RHPamelaJ.