The Séka Hills Tasting Room is open and welcoming visitors, just in time to experience the flavors of the harvest season with the freshly milled olio nuovo. A very limited amount of this new extra virgin olive oil, noted for its bright, fresh flavor, is now available in the Tasting Room in the heart of Capay the Valley in California.

Owned and operated by the Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation, the Tasting Room offers an insider’s view of how the Tribe’s olives are grown, milled and finished into the world-class, award-winning Séka Hills extra virgin olive oils. The Tasting Room also showcases the agricultural bounty of the region and is a stopover for shopping and a light snack or lunch. Guided tastings of Séka Hills olive oils offer visitors a chance to experience the growing line of fine agricultural products from the Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation that now includes Séka Hills Wildflower Honey as well as seasonal nuts and produce. Wine tastings and sales of Séka Hills wines are expected to begin in mid-January.

RELATED: Oil Boom! Séka Hills Marketing Great Extra Virgin Olive Oil Nationwide

The Tasting Room is inside the 14,000-square-foot Séka Hills olive mill facility, and its giant windows offer visitors close-up views of the workings of the mill. Ample and comfortable patio seating provides views of the surrounding olive orchards and the scenic blue hills that inspired the name Séka Hills in the Tribe’s native Patwin language.

The Tasting Room will help “strengthen the agritourism that is happening in the Capay Valley,” said Marshall McKay, chairman of the Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation. McKay, noting that the Tribe is dedicated to the Native American tradition of land stewardship, added, “If you take care of this land, this land will take care of you.”

The building also reflects the Tribe’s commitment to sustainability and environmental responsibility. The design of this active, working agricultural complex, reminiscent of a large barn, blends into the surrounding farmscape. The interior maximizes the use of local materials and reclaimed wood, combining old and new with the latest eco-friendly technology. An adaptable space, the Tasting Room is available for community meetings, classes and special events.

The Tasting Room will periodically offer regional culinary goods and feature high-quality artisanal products from other Native American tribes. Pantry staples, cookbooks, and gifts for the home and kitchen make the Séka Hills Tasting Room a destination for Capay Valley visitors and residents alike.

Tasting Room hours are Wednesday – Sunday, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. The Séka Hills Olive Mill and Tasting Room is located just across from Cache Creek Casino and Resort on Highway 16 in Brooks, California at 19326 County Road 78.

For more information visit SekaHills.com and call 530-796-2810.

Séka Hills is the line of agriculture products from the Yocha Dehe Wintun Nation. The Tribe named these products Séka Hills in their native Patwin language after the blue hills where they farm their ancestral lands in Northern California’s Capay Valley. Dedicated stewards of the land, the Tribe sustainably manages more than 13,000 acres, farms a dozen crops, partners with organic growers, and grazes a growing herd of 300 cattle on tribal rangeland.