ASHEBORO — Barry Morris, director of Spiritual Care and Community Integration at Randolph Hospital, has been named Chaplain of the Year for North Carolina.

He received the prestigious honor on April 28 at Fort Caswell on Oak Island during the annual Spring Conference of the National Association of Professional Chaplains, a professional organization whose purpose is continuing education, support and education advocacy.

Six letters of nomination were sent to the association on Morris’ behalf detailing his excellence in service and especially his work in the faith health movement in Randolph County.

Beth Jackson-Jordan, director of Spiritual Care and Education of Carolina HealthCare System Northeast, sent one of those letters.

“Currently, Barry is leading a new initiative of his hospital to develop relationships with community clergy and congregations to increase support for persons who are discharged from the hospital to prevent readmissions and manage chronic illness more effectively,” she wrote. “Barry has extended compassion and support to his colleagues as well as to the staff of his hospital. He reaches out to those going through losses or transitions offering support and care.”

Morris, who has been a chaplain since 1991 and a member of the association since 1995, explained his duties go beyond the traditional aspect of chaplaincy — the in-house responsibilities of a minister in a medical setting. They have now expanded to include community integration of the faith health movement which has come about since the Affordable Care Act.

“We collaborate with the faith community by ensuring that when people leave the hospital they are part of a faith community, a church,” Morris explained. “We want to make sure there is a set of eyes on them. Many are elderly with children living out of town. When these patients leave the hospital they may think they are getting along pretty well, but do need that set of eyes on them.

“This new program is designed to work with people at local churches to know how to care for these folks and to work with us when they are released from the hospital. If a patient is not associated with a local church, they become a part of the faith community and the trained people at the local church are notified to check on them and work with the hospital to ensure their continued healing.”

Morris, who has worked at Randolph Hospital for 14 years, said he has been challenged by this new position and credits his background with giving him a unique perspective on how to make all the pieces work.

A graduate of Mars Hill College (now Mars Hill University) and the South East Baptist Theological Seminary, he pastored a a small mission start-up in Delaware. Later, while pastoring a church in South Carolina he started his clinical training at Baptist Hospital in Columbia, S.C., which is where he found his passion for the chaplaincy in a medical setting.

An active man who enjoys cycling, hiking and gardening, Morris said his upbringing also gave him an appreciation for dealing with many different kinds of people.

“I am the child of a career military man, born in Europe and living in Germany as a dependent and a soldier for a combined seven years may have influenced my passion for working with a diverse group of people. Helping people individually, through a broad look at spirituality, is a large part of the diversity that is expanding into the community that I really enjoy,” he said.

In June, Morris will travel with colleagues to Florida and give a presentation to chaplains on Randolph County’s integrated health care approach.