If you are pregnant, plan to be or have anyone close to you who is, it is vital you understand the dangers of antidepressants and the harm they cause – in anyone – but tragically in the unborn or newly-born child through birth defects.

Most mothers want to take the best care of themselves while they are pregnant, understandably. However, the pharmaceutical industry has other intentions for mothers-to-be.

The powerful and profit-driven motives of the giant industry has raked in billions of dollars pushing dangerous drugs on pregnant women, taking full advantage of the common occurrence of depression during pregnancy.

Amy Philo J.D. tells her experience on her website, www.uniteforlife.org. After her baby was born, her doctor gave her Zoloft for postpartum depression. She breast-fed her baby and he became very lethargic and sedated. If she didn’t eventually feed him formula instead, he would have died. Not that formula is necessarily very good for a baby but it’s certainly miles ahead of a psychiatric drug.

In a study done by Kimberly Yonkers, professor of psychiatry and obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive sciences, it was determined that antidepressants cause birth defects, not depression. In women who were depressed but not on these drugs, there were no or very little birth defects.

She says, “However, the good news is, for discerning moms, the information is available, if you can sort through all of the conflicting , confusing contradictions from doctors who are just flat-out in denial when it comes to drugging pregnant mothers.”

When taking these SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors), brand-named Prozac, Paxil, etc, in their third trimester, babies were more likely to have seizures after they were born and if the mother took three or more prescriptions during the third trimester, that figure jumps to five times the chances.

Even the FDA has updated their labels on psychiatric drugs to include the warnings that they may cause abnormal muscle movements and withdrawal symptoms in infants.

The Citizens Commission on Human Rights has listed several studies that were done in various countries on the effects of these drugs on pregnant women.

One done Jan 12, 2012, In The British Medical Journal, it said drugs taken late in pregnancy, caused persistent pulmonary hypertension.

On July 1, 2011, in the journal, Obstetrics and Gynecology a Finnish study was done on babies exposed to Prozac and Paxil. It was shown, they were born smaller and had a definite risk of heart defects.

In Australia and New Zealand, a study on May 1, 2010 showed babies were born prematurely and had an eight times higher chance of birth defects.

In Canada on April 26th, 2010, studies showed an association between maternal bupropion (an antidepressant) and heart defects in the newborn.

In Sweden, written in “Psychological Medicine,” pregnancy complications were evident. Paxil caused heart and urinary tube defects.

In the U.S, in “Current Drug Delivery”, it says there is a greater risk of spontaneous abortion, especially with Paxil and Effexor.

In Canada on Sept 1, 2009, in “Current Drug Safety”, it says if these drugs are taken when the fetus’ organs are forming, there is a greater risk of heart malfunction.

In Drugs.com, it tells of a study which shows when mothers take antidepressants, there is a higher chance the infant ends up in intensive care, suffering from “…seizures, jitteriness, infections, respiratory problems and jaundice…”

SSRIs do cross over from the placenta and appear in the umbilical cord.

The Mother’s Act was not passed in 2009, even after a very heavy campaign. What it involves is mandatory mental screening for every pregnant woman with the inevitable result of drugging most of them.

However, it is now, unfortunately, part of the Affordable Healthcare Act (Obamacare) in its original mandatory form – a very good reason to repeal it.

Dr. Mercola, holistic medical doctor, has many good solutions for prenatal and postnatal depression. He says the very most important thing, which most people lack, is omega 3 fatty acids but many people eat too much omega 5 fatty acids which are not good for the body.

Not only is this great for everyone but it is excellent for the child’s nervous system development and also prevents premature delivery. Taken especially in the third trimester, it creates better brain growth and also helps greatly to prevent diabetes in the child later in life.

The best source of this valuable supplement is krill oil, he recommends, since there’s so much mercury in fish. Also, fish oil supplements can go rancid but krill oil does not.

The next thing is grass-fed beef, a great source of omega 3.

Vitamin D is very important and sunshine is the best way to get it. If that’s not real, then supplements are very good.

Exercise and eating organic food, especially lots of greens are fantastic for handling depression and for creating a healthy body for mom and baby.

Those are some of the major and natural ways to have a happy, successful pregnancy.

Antidepressants should have no part in the miracle of birth because they are not designed for life. The natural, God-given means to create a healthy baby are quite the opposite; they do not cause sickness and birth defects.

Written by Lucille Femine

Source 1

Source 2

Source 3

Source 4

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr