Cheryl Chumley, author of “Police State USA: How Orwell’s Nightmare is Becoming Our Reality,” will be featured in a two-hour interview on the popular “Coast to Coast AM” program late Tuesday night and early Wednesday morning.

The interview will air live starting at 1 a.m. Eastern Time on Wednesday, 10 p.m. Tuesday Pacific.

Chumley will provide the “Coast to Coast AM” audience with an understanding of how America got to the point of being a de facto police state, what led to it, and how we might overcome it and recapture our freedoms as envisioned by the Founding Fathers.

“Coast to Coast AM,” or “C2C” as it’s often called, has more than 500 affiliates reaching an estimated three million to five million Americans seven days a week.

Chumley’s “Police State USA: How Orwell’s Nightmare is Becoming Our Reality,” marshals the terrifying evidence to show the world of Big Brother is much closer than we want to admit.

Chumley, a full-time writer with The Washington Times, writes about politics and government for various newspapers, Internet news sites, and think tanks. She is a journalism fellow with The Phillips Foundation, a prestigious conservative organization in Washington, D.C., where she spent a year researching and writing about private property rights.

From traffic light cameras to phone tapping, from militarized police forces to huge purchase orders by departments of the federal government for billions of rounds of ammunition, the government is unfettered in its desire to control the American people. “Police State USA” chronicles how America reached this point.

Chumley’s timely book makes the clear case that we now live in a total surveillance society far more frightening than the one Orwell wrote about in his work of fiction, “1984.”

Order your copy now of Cheryl Chumley’s Police State USA.

In the foreword to Chumley’s book, Gohmert writes:

Look at what we know the government already has accessed. Under Obamacare, the federal government now gets complete documentation of your deepest, darkest, most personal secrets in your medical records that only your doctor once knew until the government decided to help you.

Your revelations to your doctor were completely secret, and our courts used to protect that precious doctor-patient relationship with full-blown privacy rights. Now, without a single Republican vote, the Democrats in the House and Senate decided that those full-blown rights should be fully blown up because the omniscient, ubiquitous, all-knowing, all-caring federal government needs to be in full control of our lives.

Those Democrats are hoping that the governmental god in whom they trust will be more trustworthy in controlling our lives than it is in controlling and operating a website,” he said.

The coming signs of tyranny are all around us. Fortunately, they can be stopped before it is too late, but not without a courageous effort. This nation’s founders risked absolutely everything to secure the blessings of freedom. We only risk some belittling by the mainstream and government harassment for preserving those freedoms. Bottom line, the data in Chumley’s book concerns me and it should concern you.

The book describes the case of a former Marine living in Virginia.

It was August 2012, and he “was taken into custody, thrown in jail, and forcibly transferred to a hospital located nearly three hours from his home and family to undergo a psychiatric evaluation, all at the order of law enforcement officials.”

“His crime? He posted on his private Facebook page messages that painted the government in a poor light.”

Then there was the July 2013 case of a University of Virginia student. She was “swarmed by state Alcoholic Beverage Control agents who thought the carton of bottled water she was carrying across the parking lot of a grocery store was really a 12-pack of beer and she was an underage buyer.”

“She said one drew her gun, another jumped on the hood of her SUV, and still others shouted conflicting orders and flashed badges she couldn’t read. Terrified, she tried to flee in her SUV, but agents halted and arrested her, charging her with two counts of assault.

“Even the commonwealth’s attorney who investigated the incident found the case ridiculous and refused to prosecute. But the 20-year-old still spent a night in jail – for the crime of purchasing water.”



Media wishing to interview author Cheryl Chumley may contact media@wnd.com.

See a trailer: