A bereaved family’s patience for justice was rewarded in a courtroom yesterday morning when a Jersey City man convicted of killing a 21-year-old man was sentenced to 55 years in prison, the maximum allowed for his charges.

“Now my son rests in peace,” said Nilsa Lopez, 59, while hugging Hudson County Assistant Prosecutor Michael D’Andrea, shortly after Judge Joseph Isabella handed down the sentence.

On Nov. 9, 2012, Quaheem Johnson, 27, was convicted of the April 19, 2008, aggravated manslaughter and robbery of Ramon Morales, 21, of Jersey City.

Johnson was also convicted of the armed robbery of a second victim that night and resisting arrest with force.

He was arrested about 10 minutes after the crimes, a short distance away at Duncan and Olean avenues. Following his arrest, Johnson’s bail was set at $1 million.

Yesterday morning, Johnson chose not to speak before he was sentenced, but Morales’ family did, approaching the judge armed with a poster of Morales’ photos and wearing T-shirts printed with the words “Justice Has Been Served.”

They wept together as Lopez, Morales’ mother, spoke of a long-awaited justice finally realized.

“I’ve been waiting for this justice for six years,” she said, her voice often breaking off because of overwhelming emotion. “I love my son, I love my son, I love my son.”

Johnson, who was represented by attorney Raymond Beam Jr., must serve at least 46 years in prison before he is eligible for parole, or when he is 73

He did not show any emotion as Isabella delivered his sentence, even when Isabella said at one point that his actions spoke to his “complete lack of humanity and respect for our laws.”

Johnson, who grew up without parents starting at 5 years old, was first arrested at 8 and had a total of 27 juvenile run-ins with the law, Isabella said, noting that his record was “horrendous.”

Isabella did not say what Johnson was arrested for at 8 years old.

After getting his first adult conviction handed to him at 17 years old, Johnson spent most of his life in prison, Isabella said. His crimes included attempted murder, robbery, weapons offenses and aggravated assault, he said.

Johnson’s sentencing yesterday morning came after a long, arduous string of legal twists and turns.

His first trial in May 2011 ended in mistrial when a juror told the judge he feared for his life after three men the juror associated with Johnson showed up at his home.

After Hurricane Sandy knocked out power to the courthouse in October 2012, the second trial was delayed, but ended with Johnson being convicted of aggravated manslaughter and robbery in the shooting death of Morales, the armed robbery of a second man and resisting arrest.

The jury was hung, however, on the more serious charges of murder and felony murder.

In February 2013, a motion for yet another trial was made by Johnson’s then-attorney, Janet Costello, but was ultimately denied, D’Andrea said yesterday.

D’Andrea said he also made a motion to try Johnson again on the murder and felony murder, but that motion was also denied by the appellate division of the court.

The two motions by the defense and the prosecution, along with other post-verdict motions, delayed Johnson’s sentencing to nearly two years after the date of his conviction, D’Andrea explained.

In the meanwhile, Morales’ family waited patiently for the day justice would come.

“Do you know how many times I was crying, saying ’I miss you’?” Lopez told The Jersey Journal shortly after the sentencing. “But I’m happy today. Finally, finally, finally. I know he’s here with us. I feel that he was holding me.”

Lopez said she was devoted to taking care of Morales’ two sons, now ages 6 and 8. The older son, who was old enough to remember what had happened to his father, had told his mother, “Mommy, when I grow up, I want to be a police [officer], I want to arrest the monster who killed my daddy,” Lopez said.

Morales’ sister, Jessica Martinez, 34, and her two daughters, Amy Castoire, 14, and Emily Lopez, 17, cried with Lopez as they all reflected on the kind of person Morales was.

“His happiness,” said Martinez, when asked what she remembered most about Morales, eliciting both laughs and tears from the family. “He was always smiling, always dancing.

“Now it’s done, so now it’s time for me to find myself again,” she said.