Your skin is your largest organ, taking care of it from the inside out is key to beautiful glowing skin.

You’ve probably heard the phrase: "You are what you eat." If you’re eating fatty, fried foods, or not drinking enough water, chances are your skin will be affected in some way. Previously researchers deemed diet habits irrelevant — that they had no effect on skin. However, research has shown that what you eat can sometimes affect your skin. So before you decide to spend hundreds of dollars on products meant to mask the issue, start from the inside. Here are the best foods to help calm, soothe, and make your skin glow. While there might be deeper issues when it comes to the appearance of your skin, starting off with the right types of food might improve your overall appearance and complexion.

Acne-Prone Skin:

1. Stay away from dairy: It has been linked to acne because of the way it affects our hormones. Dairy boosts male sex hormones (various forms of testosterone or androgens) and increases insulin levels just as foods that quickly raise blood sugar (sugar and starchy carbs) spike insulin,” Dr. Mark Hyman wrote in The Huffington Post.

2. Eat foods rich in antioxidants: Fruits and vegetables rich in antioxidants will decrease the amount of inflammation in your body, decreasing the amount of acne flares. According to Yahoo Health, “Acne sufferers had significantly lower levels of two other antioxidants—vitamin C and beta carotene—and low blood levels of two crucial co-factor minerals that regulate activity of antioxidant enzymes in skin: zinc and selenium.” Antioxidant rich foods include: strawberries, raspberries, red beans, and prunes.

3. Carbohydrates: foods that are higher on the glycemic chart are usually processed foods. The glycemic index measures how fast your blood sugar rises after eating things like carbohydrates and sugary foods. According to NPR, a study conducted found that, "after the participants followed a low-glycemic-load diet, researchers documented decreases in inflammatory acne lesions. The studies were small, but the findings were significant.”

Oily Skin:

1. Almonds: They're rich in vitamin E, which is great for maintaining healthy skin. Flavonoids, which are found in the skins of an almond, are also great for skin, too. “Flavonoids to absorb ultraviolet (UV) light and modulate signaling pathways that influence cellular function appears to underlie their beneficial effects in skin health,” according to Oregon State University.

2. Grapefruit: It is high in fiber and vitamin C, and a powerful antioxidant. It also helps to flush out fat from your system.

Dry Skin

1. Water: This might seem obvious, but many folks don’t get enough of the recommended daily intake.

2. Spinach: With high amounts of vitamin A, the compounds in the leafy greens help to keep your skin hydrated.

3. Avocados: They are filled with important and hydrating nutrients such as vitamin C and E, which help to promote hydrated and healthy skin. However, eating them might not be the best way to make use out of the avocados. Dr Wu says that, "Avocadoes are more effective when applied directly to your skin… because they contain fatty acids that help replenish the skin's natural protective barrier."