At stake are laws regarding same-sex marriage, health insurance and tax subsidies

Heading into the final month of its annual term, the Supreme Court will need to render decisions on 13 very important cases that will dramatically affect the American way of life. The high court will decide whether same-sex couples have a right to marry nationwide, ending a two-decade legal and political fight for marriage equality.

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - Another awaited decision is whether the Obama administration may continue to subsidize health insurance for low and middle-income people who buy coverage in the 36 states that failed to establish an official insurance exchange of their own to use a federally run version.



If the court rules against the Obama administration, about 8.6 million people could lose their subsidies under the Affordable Care Act.





The court will hand down more than two dozen decisions on matters such as politics, civil rights, free speech and air pollution.The major cases on deck for decisive action include:The court has said the right to marry is a basic liberty protected by the Constitution. Same-sex couples, some of whom are raising children, say that as a matter of equal rights, states may not deny them a marriage license. The states of Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio and Tennessee say the decision should be left to the states and their voters.The Affordable Care Act said Americans must have health insurance, and the law promised to help pay part of the cost for low and middle-income people. One clause said these subsidies go for insurance bought through an "exchange established by the state" - where only 14 states established an exchange of their own. A small conservative group sued, alleging that subsidies in the 36 states are illegal.A case involving the passport of a 12-year-old American boy born in Jerusalem raises a major question: Does Congress or the president have the final word on foreign policy? Congress in 2002 passed a law giving U.S. parents a right to have "Israel" listed as the birthplace for a child born in Jerusalem. Presidents George W. Bush and Obama refused to abide by it, saying the law interferes with a president's "exclusive authority to recognize foreign states" and handle a sensitive matter of foreign policy.It is illegal to transmit "any threat" on the phone or the Internet, but it is unclear what the government must prove to win a conviction. Anthony Elonis was sent to prison after he boasted on Facebook of how he could kill his ex-wife. Elonis vs. U.S. has been pending since early December.One of this term's most important civil rights cases will decide the reach of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, which forbids refusing to sell or rent to people because of their race, religion, sex or national origin. Judges have said it forbids more than blatant acts of bias, but also zoning, lending rules and housing policies that have a discriminatory effect based on race.The court will decide whether the voters or politicians can set the election districts for members of Congress. At least once a decade, new census data prompt states to redraw their districts. Party leaders can use this power to draw safe seats for their members. Voters in Arizona and California opted to create an independent commission to draw congressional districts. Arizona's Republican legislators want the Supreme Court to strike down these commissions and rule the Constitution reserves this power for "the legislature."The Environmental Protection Agency is set to force power plants to sharply reduce emissions of mercury, arsenic and other hazardous air pollutants. The coal and power industries say the nearly $10 billion a year required to abide by the rule is too high.The case of a 17-year-old Muslim girl who wore a black head scarf and was turned down for a sales job at an Abercrombie & Fitch store calls on the court to clarify the rules for religion in the workplace.The court will decide whether it is an unconstitutional taking of private property for a government-backed raisin board to seize as much as one-third of a farmer's annual crop. The case could unravel one of the last New Deal-era programs that allows farmers to band together with government backing to prop up prices.The court will decide whether specialty license plates speak for the state or its motorists. At issue is whether the 1st Amendment forbids states from refusing to produce plates because of their message, such as a Confederate battle flag.The court will also decide whether Los Angeles may require motel owners to keep a guest registry that is always available for immediate inspection by the police.Sharply divided, the high court differs on how states such as Oklahoma carry out executions. They will decide whether prison authorities, lacking access to sodium thiopental, may use a less effective sedative, midazolam, which has been blamed for several botched executions.The court will decide whether a child abuse suspect can block the trial testimony of a preschool teacher who reported what a three-year-old told her. Young children are usually shielded from testifying. The 6th Amendment gives the accused the right to be "confronted with the witnesses against him."

---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.