Food delivery apps are supposed to make your life easier, but unless you know exactly what you crave, using Seamless or Delivery.com can quickly become overwhelming.

Two new apps have sprouted this week in Manhattan, including Arcade and Maple, and UberEATS, is available in three cities. All simplify the “what’s for lunch or dinner?” process and reduce the number of clicks you have to get a meal.

Related: The Silent Society: How Americans Have Replaced Words with Clicks

Here are three apps that will change the way we order food:

UberEATS

Uber, the rideshare company, has launched its on-demand meal delivery service in Chicago and in New York City. The service was already piloted in Los Angeles and in Barcelona.

UberEATS works just like Uber. Instead of picking a customer, a driver delivers lunch or dinner to that customer. You simply need to enter your address into UberEATS, visible only in your Uber app when in the coverage area, and tap view menu. It changes daily and features only a couple of dishes. You’ll then select your meal, place your order and your driver will be curbside within 10 minutes or less.

Arcade

Making food ordering even simpler and targeting the indecisive, Arcade sends you a text message every morning at 10 a.m. with only one dish from one New York City restaurant they have picked for the day (the dish changes daily). You simply have to reply “yes” by 11 a.m. if you want that dish for lunch. Your food will be delivered by 1 p.m.

The dish is typically priced between $8 and $15, including delivery fees and tip. “We wanted to simplify this whole business to a level where nothing could be simpler,” Arcade Founder Shaunak Amin told Food Republic.

Related: 5 Food Delivery Apps for the Hungry and Lazy

Maple

Maple operates like a restaurant. It has a kitchen staff of 22 cooking a daily menu of only three fresh dishes for $12 each, including tip and delivery. The menu is curated by rock-star chef David Chang of Momofuku fame. The only difference is that it’s not a restaurant but a food delivery app that delivers within 30 minutes.

Maple is so far only delivering in the Lower Manhattan’s Financial District but plans to open a kitchen in every neighborhood it serves to minimize the delivery time, according to Wired.

Top Reads from The Fiscal Times: