Lawrence T. Locklear has been hired as the project coordinator for University of North Carolina Pembroke’s Southeast American Indian Studies Program. He was formerly the university’s web publisher and is co-author of Hail to UNCP! A 125-Year History of the University of North Carolina at Pembroke.

RELATED: Hail to UNCP: New University History Published

SAIS was founded in 2012 with the goal of establishing UNCP as the premiere teaching and research center for the study of American Indians in the Southeastern U.S. SAIS links UNCP’s Department of American Indian Studies, the Museum of the Native American Resource Center and the university’s other Native-related programs.

A part of the College of Arts and Sciences, SAIS is lead by Dr. Alfred Bryant, founding director. “SAIS is very blessed to have Lawrence on board.” he said.

“Lawrence has a considerable historical understanding of UNCP and its American Indian roots. He brings many unique and useful skills to his current position,” Dr. Bryant continued. “He is a great researcher, writer, communicator and ambassador for Southeast American Indian Studies at UNCP. His passion for this field and for UNCP makes him a perfect fit for the position. SAIS will prosper with him as its program coordinator.”

Locklear will work to develop a consortium of programs, data and experts on historical and contemporary American Indian tribes of the Southeast. Scholars, academic institutions and governmental entities will be resources for SAIS.

Locklear will also work with the Department of American Indian Studies to support the annual Southeast American Indian Studies Conference. He will also implement a program of fundraising and grant writing.

A native of Pembroke and citizen of the Lumbee Tribe, Locklear has deep roots at UNCP that go back to its origins. He is the great-great-great grandson of Isaac Brayboy, a member of the institution’s first Board of Trustees.

Hired as a computing consultant with the Division of Information Technology in 1999, Locklear served as the university web publisher with University Communications and Marketing between 2000 and 2014. He managed the university’s online presence and lead the redesign of the university’s website in January 2014.

In April 2014, Locklear, in collaboration with Dr. Linda Oxendine, co-authored Hail to UNCP! A 125-Year History of the University of North Carolina at Pembroke. Earlier, in May 2013, he was named a co-recipient of the university’s inaugural Chancellor’s Award of Excellence for his leadership of the university’s 125th anniversary celebration.

Locklear brings a wealth of knowledge and experience to the position. He has held various elected and appointed positions within North Carolina’s American Indian community. Between 2005 and 2008, he served on the Lumbee Tribal Council, including two terms as speaker. He was a member of the Board of Directors for United Tribes of North Carolina (2007-2011) and American Indian Women of Proud Nations (2007-2013).

With expertise in Lumbee tribal history, Locklear, in 2007, appeared in The History Channel’s documentary “Aftershock: Beyond the Civil War” where he provided historical commentary about Lumbee hero Henry Berry Lowrie, his multi-racial gang and their fight for social and political justice in Robeson County between 1864 and 1874. He also holds a national office with Phi Sigma Nu, serving as the Chief Dean of Ma’enos. Phi Sigma Nu, founded at UNCP in 1996, is the nation’s oldest and largest American Indian fraternity.

Locklear expressed his enthusiasm for the new opportunity. “I am honored and excited to work with Dr. Bryant to develop a program that will simultaneously support Native nation building and UNCP’s efforts to continue its historic mission of service to American Indian peoples.”

Locklear received a Master of Public Administration degree in 2005 and a Bachelor of Arts degree in American Indian Studies in 2012, both from UNC Pembroke. He received a Bachelor of Arts in history from NC State University in 1996.