Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge and former Louisiana Senate GOP candidate Rob Maness are among a large group of politicians who received campaign donations from Earl Holt, head of the Council of Conservative Citizens. That's the group Dylann Roof, the 21-year-old white man accused of killing nine people at an historic Charleston, S.C., church, said inspired his contempt for black people.

According to Federal Election Commission reports, Holt gave $1,000 to Cassidy's Senate campaign on Nov. 6, 2014, and two $500 donations to Maness, one in 2013 and another in 2014.

Aides to Cassidy and Maness said the money from Holt would be donated to help the families of the nine killed in the South Carolina shootings.

Spokesmen for Sens. Rand Paul, R-Ky., Ted Cruz, R-Texas, and former Sen. Rick Santorum, R-Pa., all three Republican presidential contenders, also received donations from Holt, which their campaigns said would be returned.

Roof reportedly told police Holt's group alerted him to "brutal black-on-white murders," which he said eventually led him to go to the Emanuel AME Church in Charleston during a Bible Study, where he shot to death nine people, including the church's pastor, the Rev. Clementa Pinckney.

President Barack Obama eulogized the pastor Friday (June 26), at a funeral attended by House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson and Rep. Cedric Richmond, D-New Orleans.

Cassidy working again at LSU, but not getting paid

Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La., says he been back working since being sworn in to the Senate in January at the LSU Health Sciences Center. The gastroenterologist says he's seeing patients, consulting on patient care and meeting with medical students.

But Cassidy said he's not being paid as he awaits approval from the Senate Ethics Committee.

"It would be nice to have it formalized, but I'm awaiting LSU to complete negotiations with the committee," Cassidy said.

During his run for the Senate, incumbent Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., whom Cassidy defeated, suggested his Republican challenger might not have been doing all the work at LSU for which he was being paid. But a review by LSU concluded, that while record keeping should have been better, "sufficient facts and information exist to conclude he provided services equal to at least that of his compensation."

During his tenure in the House of Representatives, Cassidy was paid $20,000 a year, close to the limit for part-time work by a member of Congress. Cassidy said he wanted to continue his part-time work at LSU, even though he isn't being paid.

"It has always been a labor of love," he said.

Dems suggest GOP secretly happy High Court upheld health law

Some Democrats are suggesting that despite Republican statements condemning the Supreme Court's decision upholding a key provision of the Affordable Care Act, GOP congressional members are secretly relieved.

"The only people happier, I think, than we are, are our Republican colleagues because they've been saved from having to come up with an alternative that they do not have, and they've never had, notwithstanding all of their actions to repeal," said House Democratic Whip Steny Hoyer, D-Md. "They have never come up with a workable alternative. So, the Supreme Court served America today, and I congratulate them for that."

Rep. Charles Boustany, R-Lafayette, appearing on MSNBC, said the GOP was ready to offer a transitional plan -- had the Supreme Court ruled that subsidies were illegal in the 34 states, including Louisiana, that refused to create a state-run marketplace under the Affordable Care Act.

Asked by MSNBC host Chris Hayes whether the GOP leaders had agreed on an alternative to the 2010 health law, Boustany said Republicans had an alternative back in 2009 and 2010 when Democrats passed the Affordable Care Act without a single Republican vote. It would have kept costs down an increased access to health insurance, though not as much as the Affordable Care Act, Boustany said.

Others, including Gov. Bobby Jindal, a newly declared GOP presidential candidate, and Cassidy, have offered recent health overhaul legislation, but neither has been embraced as the official GOP alternative to Obamacare.

Boustany: Make sure welfare doesn't discourage full-time work

Republicans led by House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, R-Wisc., are considering changes to the food stamp program, which operate under rules that some Republicans say discourages people from working full-time.

Boustany, R-Lafayette, chair of the committee's Human Resources Subcommittee, presided over a hearing Thursday on how to adjust food stamps and other human welfare programs so they don't discourage full-time work.

"What we will explore today is one of the worst side effects of current welfare program rules -- the fact that getting a job or working more doesn't always make families better off," Boustany said. "This poverty trap may be unintended, but for those in its grip, it is all too real. We need to review how we got here, how real people are affected, and how we can reform this system to help people go to work and earn more, instead of making them worse off when they do just that."

House has its own chemical safety bill

The House voted 398-1 Tuesday (June 23) to update the 1976 Toxic Substances Control Act, which regulates chemicals.

It would authorize the Environmental Protection Agency to require safety data from chemical manufacturers if the agency determines they pose a risk to health or the environment.

Unlike a Senate bill sponsored by Sens. Tom Udall, D-N.M., and David Vitter, R-La., it doesn't pre-exempt new state chemical regulations, and for that reason, Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., suggested the Senate pass the House bill.

But Vitter wants his measure to get a vote, which would set up a conference between House and Republican negotiators. Udall and the Republican sponsor of the House bill predict it would be relatively easy to resolve differences between the two bills.

"I am confident that the Senate will soon pass the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act, which currently has 41 Democrat and Republican cosponsors," Vitter said. "The momentum to reform our nation's broken chemical safety law is reaching a critical point, and we are on the cusp of passing bipartisan, bicameral-supported environmental legislation for the first time in decades."

House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, said the House bill upgrades regulations for the chemical industry, which has a large presence in Louisiana.

"The House took decisive action today to improve protections for public health and the environment while giving manufacturers and other job creators the clarity and certainty they need to do business and grow a healthy American economy," Scalise said.

Staffing Jindal's Super PAC

So, who is heading up the fundraising efforts for Bobby Jindal's Super PAC, which his campaign hopes will supplement his official presidential campaign?

The PAC, called Believe Again, is chaired by former Rep. Bob Livingston, R-Metairie.

Staffers include senior advisers Brad Todd and Guy Harrison, partners with OnMessage, a Virginia-based firm that has done a lot of political consulting work for Jindal. Harrison said the PAC has raised more than $4 million.

Also staffing the political action committee are Blaise Hazelwood, described as a get-out-the-vote expert, and Don Hazelwood, who is overseeing mail operations.

Jindal isn't alone in having a Super PAC. Most major presidential candidates also formed them.