<p>LISA MCKINNON/THE STAR</p><p>Winners in the second annual Best in Fest beer competition organized as part of the Casa Pacifica Angels Wine, Food & Brew Festival are, from left, LAB Brewing Co. of Agoura Hills, Pure Order Brewing Co. of Santa Barbara and Institution Ale Co. of Camarillo.</p>

SHARE LISA MCKINNON/THE STAR Judges for the Best in Fest beer competition filled out a separate form for each of the entries. LISA MCKINNON/THE STAR Beer judge Joby Yobe checks the color of an entry in the Best in Fest beer competition organized as part of the Casa Pacifica Angels Wine, Food & Brew Festival. LISA MCKINNON/THE STAR Beer judge Erin Peters, aka The Beer Goddess, snaps a picture of an entry in the Best in Fest beer competition organized as part of the Casa Pacifica Angels Wine, Food & Brew Festival. LISA MCKINNON/THE STAR Beer judge Lisa "Monie" Wickenden tallies her scores during the Best in Fest beer competition organized as part of the Casa Pacifica Angels Wine, Food & Brew Festival.

By Lisa McKinnon of the Ventura County Star

Four judges tasted through eight beers by as many breweries Sunday in the second annual Best in Fest competition organized as part of the Casa Pacifica Angels Wine, Food & Brew Festival.

When the scores were tallied and the finer points of beer styles discussed, the top-three results highlighted breweries from throughout the tri-county area.

Taking first place with a barrel-aged oatmeal stout was LAB Brewing Co. of Agoura Hills.

Pure Order Brewing Co. of Santa Barbara came in second with Santa Barbara Pale Ale, its version of an IPA.

Third place went to Delusions of Grandeur, a barleywine from Institution Ale Co. of Camarillo.

LAB Brewing Co. operates at Twisted Oak Tavern just over the Los Angeles County line. Its head brewer is Roger Bott.

Bott and LAB Brewing Co. will be honored with the presentation of a Best in Fest trophy when the 22nd annual festival takes place June 7 on the CSU Channel Islands campus in Camarillo. The event will include an appearance by celebrity chef Duff Goldman as a judge for the Yummies Top Chef Competition.

In addition, LAB's oatmeal stout will be served to attendees of the pre-festival Yummie Top Chef Dinner on June 5.

Judges for the Best in Fest competition this year were Erin Peters, also known as The Beer Goddess; Lisa "Monie" Wickenden, beer specialist for Wine Warehouse; Zachary Rosen, a Santa Barbara-based beer educator, and Joby Yobe, owner of Barrelhouse 101, where the competition took place.

For Yummie Top Chef Dinner tickets, $200, click here.

For festival tickets, $125 general admission or $250 VIP admission, click here.

Proceeds from the Casa Pacifica Angels Wine, Food & Brew Festival benefit the Casa Pacifica Centers for Children and Families. For more information, call 805-366-4021, or click on cpwineandfoodfestival.com.

Lisa McKinnon is a staff writer for The Star. Her Cafe Society columns appear in the Sunday Life section and Fridays in the Time Out section. For between-column updates, follow 805foodie on Twitter and Instagram and “like” the Facebook page VCS Eats. Please send email to lisa.mckinnon@vcstar.com.