PA-11: Ostrowski Announces Candidacy

Written by Vincent J. Smith, Contributing Writer

Andrew Ostrowski (D-Dauphin) announced that he is running for Congress in Pennsylvania’s 11th Congressional district. The seat is currently held by incumbent Lou Barletta (R-Luzerne).

Ostrowski intends to make job creation and government reform his top priorities while campaigning for the seat.

“I want to make sure that every Pennsylvanian has the opportunity to pursue their dreams, whether that means raising a family, opening their own business, or working for one of the many great employers in Pennsylvania in a free and open system where their rights are fully protected,” said Ostrowski.

The Dauphin resident is a career lawyer who specializes in the field of civil rights. He personally established the Pennsylvania Civil Rights Law Network (PCRLN), which is an organization devoted to providing equal access to justice for all Pennsylvania citizens.

“I established this organization as the cornerstone for the development of a nationwide advocacy system, dedicated to upholding the United States Constitution in our courts. This network has provided support for victims of judicial misconduct and court deficiencies all over the country that have violated their civil rights.”

Ostroski will campaign against Rep. Barletta who is seeking his third straight victory in PA-11. Barletta currently chairs the Economic Development, Public Buildings and Emergency Management subcommittee.*

Barletta is coming off a sweeping victory in 2012 over Democrat Gene Stilp and was also the beneficiary of favorable redistricting that same year. Although the incumbent only retained 35 percent of his former district, he gained deep red pockets located in the center of the state and lost left-leaning areas in northeast Pa.

Barletta has been outspoken against both Obamacare and the current administration’s attempt at immigration reform.

*Correction made

February 13th, 2014 | Posted in Congress, Front Page Stories, Top Stories | 10 Comments