Fifteen people who were on aboard a boat that capsized at a Southern California lake were expected to be OK, officials said. Some of the people who were treated for injuries included two infants. Kate Larsen reports from Lake Piru for the NBC4 News at 11 on Sunday, June 15, 2014. (Published Monday, June 16, 2014)

Fifteen people, including several children, were treated for injuries after the boat they were aboard capsized at Lake Piru on Sunday afternoon, Ventura County fire officials said.

Download: Download the NBCLA app

Boat Capsizes at SoCal Lake, Leaves 15 Injured

Fifteen people were hurt when a boat capsized at a lake in Southern California, leaving everyone on board injured, including several children, officials said. Kate Larsen reports from Lake Piru for the NBC4 News at 6 on Sunday, June 15, 2014. (Published Sunday, June 15, 2014)

The victims, most of whom were wearing life jackets, were pulled from the water by rescuers who rushed to the lake in the Los Padres National Forest before 4:30 p.m., officials said.

At least nine children were on board, including two infants, officials said. One of the babies was in a car seat and was not wearing a life jacket. He was kept afloat by two adults.

All of the victims ingested water, but were breathing after being rescued, officials said.

Nine people were taken to the hospital with mostly minor injuries, officials said. The rest declined medical assistance.

All 15 people were expected to be OK.

Read: Man Drowns in SoCal lake During Father's Day Picnic

Fire and lake officials said the boat likely capsized because there were too many people on board.

According to fire officials, a ranger who was surveying the lake noticed that the boat appeared to be in distress. Rangers then called 911, prompting a multi-agency rescue operation.

At least three ambulances, a park ranger vessel and a Ventura County Sheriff's Office helicopter were part of the rescue.



One person was cited for having a child without a life jacket on.

Kate Larsen contributed to this report.