LAKEWOOD — Community projects benefit neighborhoods and make life better for residents. Lakewood recognizes this, and every year the city awards grants totaling $160,000 to help along good ideas as part of its Neighborhood Participation Program.

Two recent projects that received grant money are testament to the power of homegrown ideas: A rain garden was built at Morse Park to collect and filter stormwater, and Hodgson Park got new playground equipment.

The city is accepting new proposals through Sept. 12. Each grant is capped at $50,000.

To be eligible, projects must provide a general benefit to the neighborhood and must be located on public property. An organized group representing the neighborhood also must submit an application to the program.

“We look to see if it’s in compliance with Lakewood’s comprehensive plan and the community resources master plan,” said Holly Boehm, a principal planner for the city. “We’re also looking for projects that don’t have a significant impact on city maintenance requirements.”

At Hodgson Park at 9404 W. Morrison Road, the playground equipment had become dilapidated, unsafe and was not easily accessible for users with disabilities.

A community group noticed and made a grant application that would benefit the kids who came to play.

Across town, rainwater once ran off side streets along Morse Park, picking up pollutants and debris before making its way into a concrete drainage basin next to the park’s tennis courts.

From there, it was pumped to 20th Avenue and into Sloan’s Lake.

“The concrete drainage basin was originally built in the ’70s to control localized flooding, but it was an incredibly ugly cistern,” said Dave Hajoglou, president of the Morse Park Neighborhood Organization, which applied for and received a grant to transform the concrete into a water-filtering garden.

From the surface, the rain garden doesn’t look like the workhorse it is. It looks more like a pretty neighborhood pocket park. The low areas are planted with water-loving native grasses and blooming flowers surrounded by gravel walkways.

Underneath the garden is a few feet of sand that acts as a water filter, and some of the plants’ roots extend 10 feet underground to help absorption. Run-off collection points throughout the park are designed to collect sediment and debris before it comes close to the rain garden.

Pollutants are filtered out of the water as it seeps through the garden, where an upgraded underground pump brings the filtered water to Sloan’s Lake.

“This is a neighborhood project that the city decided to undertake, and it got turned into something bigger than originally envisioned,” said John Paliga, landscape architect for the city. “Newer water quality regulations now require you to somewhat treat water before you release it.”

With both the rain garden and the new playground equipment, the city ponied up more money than was initially proposed. Two-thirds of the funding for the $150,000 rain garden project came from Jeffco Open Space funding. The city ended up awarding the maximum $50,000 for Hodgson Park upgrades.

“The city went above and beyond what was proposed,” said Lisa Turner, who spearheaded the Hodgson Park project. “I would say for anyone interested in improving their neighborhood to go for it, do your homework and talk to your council rep and other city employees to get their help.”

Austin Briggs: 303-954-1729, abriggs@denverpost.com

Neighborhood participation program

Info: Call Holly Boehm at 303-987-7507 or visit lakewood.org /npp.