MEDFORD, Ore. (AP) - The owners of secondhand shops urged the Medford City Council to take a second look at a new law that requires them to photograph all their merchandise.

The council approved the ordinance in December and it’s scheduled to take effect March 22.

If it’s not amended, pawn shops and secondhand stores must take photos of thousands of items each month, upload them to a police database and then store the items during a 15-day holding period.

The ordinance doesn’t specify a minimum dollar amount, so even a pair of children’s socks would have to be photographed.

Kori Forney owns Kid to Kid of Medford, a store that sells used children’s clothing. She told the Mail Tribune newspaper (http://is.gd/sspjeC ) the average price for an item purchased by her store is $1.12, and she can receive up to 10,000 items a month.

Forney said she understands the desire of police to catch more crooks but points out that she doesn’t have the staff to handle the law’s requirements.

The council passed the ordinance to curtail retail theft. Though primarily aimed at pawn shops, it affects all businesses that purchase used goods for resale or put them on consignment. It does not apply to organizations that resell donated items, such as Goodwill.

“What they’re really trying to do is hit those big-ticket items like guitars or guns,” said Brandon Cox, owner of Runway Fashion Exchange.

Medford police Chief Tim George said secondhand stores sometimes unwittingly assist thieves who want cash rather than store credit for stolen goods. George said methamphetamine and heroin addicts often steal new items from retail stores and then try to sell them elsewhere to pay for their habit.

“You have to ask yourself, who would sell brand-new stuff at 10 percent on the dollar when they could return it to the store for full credit?” he said. “Cash is the reason, and drug addicts need cash.”

Councilman Daniel Bunn said laws sometimes have unintended consequences, and the city is agreeable to amending the ordinance.

“The good thing is, we should be able to fix it for them; I would bet we see an amendment coming in short order,” said Bunn, without specifying what the change might be.

___

Information from: Mail Tribune, http://www.mailtribune.com/