Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., and Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-La., greet each other before the start of their final debate for the Senate election runoff on Monday in Baton Rouge, La. Gerald Herbert/AP

Louisiana Democrat Mary Landrieu is likely in the final throes of her U.S. Senate career, but she scored one last victory in the closing debate with her Republican opponent Monday night.

With polls showing her down double digits to Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-La., ahead of Saturday’s runoff election, Landrieu turned in a scrappy, pugnacious, unrelenting debate performance. This campaign extended into December when neither candidate acquired more than 50 percent of the vote last month.

[READ: After Keystone, Landrieu Faces Tougher Re-lection]

Whereas Landrieu was poised, well-prepared and aggressive, Cassidy was stiff, repetitive and at times, plain awkward.

There were a few moments where the three-term incumbent gazed over at Cassidy while he answered questions, as if to convey: “I can’t believe I’m losing to this guy.”

Yet she is losing. But it may have more to do with changing demographics in the Bayou State, the deterioration of the Democratic Party’s brand in the South and President Barack Obama’s dreadful unpopularity than anything Landrieu could have done.

It’s hard to know how she could save herself from this year’s crushing midterm GOP wave. It’s questionable that even renouncing her vote for the Affordable Care Act – a consistent critique of Cassidy’s – would have made a difference.

But Landrieu pulled out all the stops she had left in their final and only faceoff since the November election.

Above all else, she repeatedly smacked Cassidy for collecting a salary from Louisiana State University while serving in Congress. Landrieu charged that Cassidy, a physician, received thousands of dollars from the school for undocumented work.

“He is not a doctor for the poor, he is a doctor for himself,” she slammed, predicting Cassidy would be wrestling with legal troubles in the Senate if voters chose to elect him. “He’ll be doing a lot more than fighting President Obama. He will be fighting subpoenas.”

[ALSO: Landrieu's Biggest Hurdle in Louisiana? Obama]

Cassidy didn’t directly respond to the accusations, only saying that his work helped the poor and uninsured and that he loves treating patients and teaching.

Landrieu also knocked the congressman for supporting raising the retirement age to qualify for Social Security to 70 years old. She accused him of suggesting recipients of government subsidies are drug abusers, calling the supposition “outrageous.” She even attempted to mask her support for abortion rights, declaring “I do not promote abortion and never have,” a statement that caused an outcry from conservatives.

But she made it her calling card to come back to the questions surrounding the work Cassidy performed for LSU, dubbing him a “congressman padding his own payroll.”

“He’s the only doctor in the Congress that has this sweetheart deal,” she said, noting her opponent collected dual salaries.

When presented with her own political liability – that she improperly billed flights for political events with government funds – she came armed with records ostensibly detailing her travel expenditures, calling the previous mistake “a bookkeeping error.”

[ALSO: Mary Landrieu Is Not Pleased. Can You Blame Her?]

A stunt? Sure. But she answered the thorny question head on while deftly turning the attention to Cassidy’s own personal financial situation.

On more than one opportunity, Cassidy used his response time to note Landrieu voted with Obama “97 percent of the time,” a refrain that has served as the guiding principle to his campaign.

“If he didn’t have this issue to talk about, he wouldn’t have any issue to talk about. That’s all he talked about this whole campaign,” Landrieu responded.

As tough and firm as Landrieu was, she noticeably kept a warm smile on her face when she was being attacked, even as she kept her eyes trained on Cassidy during their exchanges. Cassidy, for the most part, looked straight ahead. He relied on the strange refrain “We can tweet that” in several of his answers.

When Landrieu was preparing to pose her direct candidate question to Cassidy, he oddly blurted out: “I think this is Dr. Double Dip. I saw your notes.”

The twittersphere exploded with shock, awe and, of course, jokes.

But the twittersphere isn’t the Louisiana electorate. And the early signs show Republicans are winning the race on the ground. They are commanding the early vote and are enjoying a sizable spending advantage on the air along with a significant polling lead. Louisiana looks to be the ninth pick-up for Republicans in the Senate this cycle.

Landrieu’s the far superior politician and the more effective communicator in the race, but that hardly guarantees victory anymore in low-turnout campaigns that have become thoroughly nationalized.

In the closing moments of the debate, the candidates were asked to recall the biggest mistake in their professional life. Landrieu cited an unspecified speech she made as a young legislator that revealed her to be unprepared.

“I’ve never forgotten to be prepared,” she said. “Know your material. Show up and debate.”

Landrieu delivered on that life lesson Monday.