SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico — Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s 20-hour trip to this island territory, meant to show solidarity with its financially struggling government, focused attention on the critical role the federal government will play in resolving the crisis.

Cuomo, who can do little directly to help Puerto Rico beyond raising the issue to policymakers in Washington, is loaning the island some of his top health-policy experts. They plan to make several return trips to see if they can improve the health care system, which is losing money, doctors and patients in a vicious cycle that threatens to undermine one-fifth of the economy.

The governor was joined in Puerto Rico by more than a dozen New York lawmakers and public health leaders who offered advice on how to restructure an economy burdened with $72 billion of debt that Puerto Rican leaders do not believe they will be able to repay.

State Assembly Speaker Carl Heastie, a Democrat from the Bronx, said he planned to introduce a bill that would appropriate $5 million toward a joint tourism campaign. This would be based, loosely, on the "I Love NY" campaign that increased tourism to upstate New York, and include special travel packages between New York and Puerto Rico, Heastie said during a roundtable discussion at the University of Puerto Rico's Medical Sciences Campus in San Juan.

Carl McCall, the SUNY board chairman, offered a summit bringing together Puerto Rican businesses with New York investors.

Cuomo also spoke of offering guidance to Puerto Rico on how to become more energy independent.

But the sobering reality — acknowledged by Cuomo and several other officials in between promises and platitudes — is that little will be resolved without action by Congress or the Obama administration.

“I don’t believe we will solve any big problems today,” Cuomo said.

That's why state Medicaid director Jason Helgerson said his goal is to help Puerto Rico present a more attractive case for why it should receive new federal money.

To do that, Helgerson wants to assess how Puerto Rico can remodel its health care delivery system, a move that might persuade the federal government that investing is worthwhile.

Helgerspn and other New York health officials will return to Puerto Rico within the next few weeks, one of several trips planned. Helgerson said he will stay two or three days on his next trip so he can tour the island and better understand what it has and what it needs.

In the meantime, New York health officials can help examine Puerto Rico’s insurance claims data to see if there are areas in which costs can be reduced by finding efficiencies in the system, which is crucial because more than two-thirds of the population rely on either Medicaid, Medicare or Medicare Advantage.

If the health care cost curve can be bent, Puerto Rican officials might have more leverage when negotiating with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and the Department of Health and Human Services for waivers or reforms. Helgerson said he will help Puerto Rico write its proposal to CMS, and, if necessary, travel to Washington with the Puerto Rican delegation to advocate the Obama administration on its behalf.

New York officials pointed out several times during the trip that they had successfully negotiated a waiver with the federal government that brought back $8 billion to reinvest in the state’s Medicaid program.

But Puerto Rico, unlike New York, doesn’t have anywhere near the infrastructure in place to make the kind of health care transformation that would be as attractive to the federal government as New York’s plan.

The other problem is Puerto Rico doesn’t have a lot of time. Negotiating with CMS, as New York officials well know, is a multi-year process, and it may take even longer as Obama officials turn over in anticipation of a new administration. The Puerto Rican government says it needs to restructure its debt or receive federal help within the next year if it is to remain solvent.

That’s why Cuomo, who promised to return to Puerto Rico for a rally on Nov. 7, said it was imperative for Congress to act.

On Monday, Cuomo called on Congress to allow Puerto Rico the option of declaring bankruptcy, following similar calls by presidential candidate Hillary Clinton and City Council Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito, who joined Cuomo on the trip.

On Tuesday, Cuomo used even stronger language, accusing the federal government of being “abusive” and indifferent to the crisis.

“We believe the federal treatment of Puerto Rico, when it comes to Medicaid, when it comes to bankruptcy protection, when it comes to tax treatment is unfair and abusive,” the governor said. “We think it’s wrong.”

Cuomo also wants Congress to change how Medicaid dollars are apportioned to Puerto Rico.

The island receives 55 percent reimbursement for its approximately $2.5 billion Medicaid program. But those federal dollars come from a $6.4 billion pot that was set aside as part of the Affordable Care Act. That pot of money was supposed to last Puerto Rico through 2019. But cost overruns mean it will likely run out by early 2017. Once that money is gone, the federal contribution toward Puerto Rico’s Medicaid program is capped at $400 million. Given the size of the program, that’s an effective rate of 16 percent.

If federal officials instead used the same formula for Puerto Rico as used for the states — which takes into account per capita income — then Puerto Rico would receive closer to 83 percent of its Medicaid dollars from the federal government.

That discrepancy, if it is not addressed, leaves Puerto Rican officials, with only two options.

They could change the eligibility rules for the Medicaid program, kicking about one million people off the roles, and increasing the uninsured rate from roughly 7 percent to 30 percent, or they could drastically cut benefits, eliminating covered items such as prescription drugs.

But changing the Medicaid appropriation formula to bring it in line with the United States would require Congressional approval, and Congress has shown no inclination to take on the issue.

That leaves only administrative options, which don't require congressional approval but won't be as helpful.

Representatives from the state, the Greater New York Hospital Association and the Puerto Rico Healthcare Crisis Coalition, led by former 1199 SEIU president Dennis Rivera, have been meeting with HHS officials over the past few months to see what roads are available.

One avenue would be to persuade HHS to postpone or eliminate the 11 percent cuts to Medicare Advantage benefits, which are expected to take effect in 2016. The concern from Puerto Rican officials is that the benefit cuts will force even more doctors to flee the island, further destabilizing health care in Puerto Rico, a sector that employs 100,000 of the island's 3.5 million people.

But the Medicare Advantage cuts represent only a small piece of the problem, and Medicaid reforms, while helpful, won’t make any difference unless the federal government decided to take action.

New York Democratic Reps. Charles Rangel and Nydia Velasquez said they would put pressure on their colleagues to act, but everyone understood the political realities dictate a solution come from the White House.

“Barack Obama can either continue to be a leader in health care,” said Bronx Borough President Ruben Diaz Jr., “or if he doesn’t help out Puerto Rico he can leave behind a legacy of hypocrisy."