Boehner's 'stupid' comment stokes Amtrak crash debate

Speaker John Boehner’s said Thursday it’s “stupid” to blame federal funding of Amtrak for the deadly train crash in Philadelphia.

Democrats responded, in so many words, that the comment itself was dumb. And at least one safety expert said that federal investment in train-speed technology would have prevented the accident that killed eight people.

Story Continued Below

“Are you really going to ask such a stupid question?” Boehner said at a news conference, cutting off a reporter as she asked about criticism that railways aren’t adequately funded.

The back-and-forth was part of a Republican drive to push back against the notion that inadequate funding contributed to the crash, either through faulty tracks or old equipment. The debate focused sharply on whether money would have helped Amtrak install Positive Train Control, a safety technology that was not activated on the stretch of track where the derailment occurred.

Some GOP aides and conservative news outlets seized on comments by Amtrak CEO Joe Boardman suggesting that the passenger rail service had in fact installed the equipment on that section of track. But the National Transportation Safety Board was unequivocal in a Wednesday briefing that the technology was not yet active there.

Boehner had a harsh response Thursday to the allegations of congressional stinginess.

“Listen, you know, they started this yesterday, it’s all about funding, it’s all about funding. Well, obviously it’s not about funding,” Boehner added. “The train was going twice the speed limit. Adequate funds are there, no money’s been cut from rail safety and the House passed a bill earlier this spring to reauthorize Amtrak, and authorize a lot of these programs. And it’s hard for me to imagine that people take the bait on some of the nonsense that gets spewed around here.”

Democrats called the speaker’s logic nonsense. They pointed out that speed-control technology, known as positive train control, exists and said it could have prevented the crash that killed eight people — echoing a National Transportation Safety Board member’s take a day earlier.

“Speaker Boehner’s comments are patently false,” Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) said in a statement. “Experts have made clear that positive train control [technology] could have prevented the tragedy in Philadelphia. It is simply a fact that insufficient funding for Amtrak has delayed the installation of PTC, and to deny a connection between the accident and underfunding Amtrak is to deny reality.”

Under a 2008 law, positive train control technology needs to be installed on railroads by the end of this year, but some Democrats maintain that more funding could have sped up its installation.

National Transportation Safety Board member Robert Sumwalt argued that the technology would have prevented Tuesday’s crash.

“Based on what we know right now, we feel that had such a system been installed in this section of track, this accident would not have occurred,” Sumwalt told reporters Wednesday evening. Sumwalt, who is leading the crash probe, spoke hours after the House Appropriations Committee voted down a Democratic amendment that would have offered $825 million for the technology known as positive train control.

On Thursday, some conservative outlets tried to steer the attention back to Amtrak’s equipment. The Washington Examiner ran a story saying the railroad had the technology installed on the tracks where the derailment happened, but that it “wasn’t switched on.”

Amtrak has acknowledged that the equipment has indeed been installed, but that it hadn’t been activated because testing is still required before it can go live.

President Barack Obama, speaking during a press conference at Camp David on Thursday, said the fatal accident shows the need for investment in infrastructure.

While Obama said it’s still not clear what caused the crash, he said the United States is a growing economy that needs infrastructure funding “not just when bad things happen, like a bridge collapsing.” ?

This year has already seen a series of deadly passenger rail accidents, including a rush-hour collision between a commuter train and an SUV that killed six people in Valhalla, New York, a deadly train-truck crash in Oxnard, California, and an Amtrak crash with a tractor-trailer in North Carolina that injured dozens of people. Railroad fatalities have also been on an upswing: Last year’s preliminary total of 813 deaths was 20 percent higher than just three years ago, partly reversing a sharp decline since the early 1990s, according to statistics from the Federal Railroad Administration.

Congress is just 18 days from the expiration of the law that authorizes federal spending on highways, bridges and mass transit — and the biggest debate in the Capitol is whether to provide patchwork funding to either July or December. The latest “report card” from the American Society of Civil Engineers gives the nation a D-plus on the state of its transportation infrastructure.

In the meantime, the debate over federal funding and train safety is likely to intensify. Earlier this week, Rep. Mike Simpson (R-Idaho) accused Democrats of exploiting the crash for political gain by invoking the funding argument. “You have no idea, no idea, what caused this accident,” he said. “Don’t use this tragedy in that way. It was beneath you.”

But Democrats say it’s common sense that more robust funding for train safety would make a difference.

“You could certainly say that if you had positive train control, this wouldn’t have happened, and if you had enough funding … you would have put in positive training control already,” said Rep. Jared Huffman (D-Calif), who sits on the House Transportation Committee. “You can certainly connect those two.”

Heather Caygle and Kathryn A. Wolfe contributed to this report.

Authors: