Cervical cancer was the last thing on Lindsay Smith’s mind when she was pregnant with her son Jaxson in 2012. But when a cancer diagnosis forced her to undergo chemotherapy 10 days after her son’s birth, Smith began a long battle to survive.

WHAT: Golf tournament for Lindsay Smith WHEN: 8:30 a.m. Sunday WHERE: Cypress Head Golf Club, 6231 Palm Vista St., Port Orange ADMISSION: $75 INFORMATION: Register online by Thursday at cypressheadgolf.com or call 678-982-8621.

The Stetson graduate learned last month the cancer returned for a third time. She is now undergoing another aggressive round of chemotherapy. Since aging out of her mother’s insurance plan at 26, Smith, now 28, said she has struggled to obtain continuous health coverage through Medicaid, the state’s insurance program for the poor.

“I don’t want free coverage. All I want is continuous coverage,” Smith said. “I don’t want to keep going on this merry-go-round. It’s a constant struggle and a fight.”

Young adults are a key to the success of the Affordable Care Act, with the system needing them to help offset the costs of insuring those who need it most. Smith’s story illustrates how quickly the need for insurance can turn, even for the young and seemingly healthy — and how cracks in the system still leave those most in need vulnerable.

Smith’s urgency to obtain health care differs from the so-called “young invincibles” who are more likely to rely on their good health instead of purchasing health coverage. As the Dec. 23 deadline to sign up for benefits by the first of the year approaches, it’s unclear how many uninsured young adults will sign up for the exchanges or choose to pay a penalty instead. Those who do not sign up by March 31 will be subjected to pay $95 or 1 percent of their income — whichever is greater.

Options for the young

Angel Johnson, 21, doesn’t have health insurance because she can’t afford it. And even if she qualifies for federal subsidies for the health insurance marketplace, she isn’t sure she will sign up.

“I could maybe afford $30 to $50 per month for a plan,” said Johnson, who works part-time at Bethune-Cookman University in Daytona Beach where she is a student. “It’s a problem for me. If I can’t afford to pay for health insurance, I’m not sure how I would pay the penalties.”

Christopher Rivera, 22, wants health insurance but will likely put his faith in finding a job that provides those benefits when he graduates from Bethune-Cookman in May.

“Right now I’m in my senior year of college and I just pray nothing happens to me,” said Rivera, a criminal justice major who works part time as a security guard. “I am hoping that I will be able to get health insurance once I get a good job.”

The longterm affordability of the exchanges will largely rely on the amount of adults ages 18 to 35 who sign up. Health officials have set a target goal of at least 2.7 million new enrollees within that age range to keep health insurance rates low.

Organizations such as Enroll America and the Planning Council of Northeast Florida are ramping up efforts to reach young adults by hosting educational events at local colleges, such as Bethune-Cookman. But it’s too early to tell if those efforts are paying off. Ericka Kaelin, a certified navigator through the Epilepsy Foundation of Florida, said she has yet to schedule an appointment with any young adults who are interested in signing up for the marketplace.

Young adults have several options. Unlike the federal law that requires providers to allow young adults to stay on their parents’ insurance until age 26, Florida allows single, childless dependents to remain on their parents’ insurance plans until age 30. But young adults may be able to find more affordable plans on their own through the marketplace, said Lisa Farrah, an insurance broker in Ormond Beach.

“I have some clients who let their children stay on till age 30, but the majority of them don’t do this,” Farrah said. “Parents are quick to want their children off their plan because it’s expensive to keep them on.”

Not invincible

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services released a report last month claiming that about 46 percent of healthy young adults who qualify for tax credits could get coverage through the marketplace for $50 or less per month. Single adults in Florida who make between $11,490 and $45,960 qualify for tax credits.

Because Florida did not expand its Medicaid program, single adults like Smith who make less than $11,490 will not qualify for state coverage but will be exempt from paying a penalty for not having insurance.

A catastrophic plan is available to adults under 30 who do not qualify for subsidies and would be about $132 per month for a 27-year-old adult, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

But even $50 a month might be a hefty price tag to many young adults, Farrah said.

“The thing is, they don’t think that they need it,” Farrah said. “You could offer health insurance for $10 a week and many young people still would not take it. When you are just starting out in life, money is always tight.”

Despite qualifying for financial assistance, Smith said she has $200,000 in medical debt. To help ease her financial burdens, family and friends are hosting a charity golf tournament Sunday at Cypress Head Golf Course in Port Orange.

State law requires Smith to reapply for Medicaid every few months. When she has been well enough to work bartending shifts and supplement her monthly Social Security check, Smith said that has often put her over the income requirement to stay on Medicaid. She has also struggled to find answers when her Medicaid benefits were unexpectedly dropped. Looking for better coverage, Smith tried to log into healthcare.gov last month but technical glitches prevented her from finding a solution through the marketplace. With doctors predicting a 30 percent success rate for her current chemotheraphy regimen, Smith said she is trying to focus on what matters.

“It’s not worth it to sit on the phone on hold for an hour when that’s valuable time that I could be spending with my friends and family,” Smith said.

Because Florida did not accept federal funding to expand its Medicaid program, people like Smith will likely be left in limbo, said Joyce Case, director of the navigator program through the Planning Council of Northeast Florida.

“She is going to be one of those individuals who are going to struggle with care,” Case said. “It’s unfortunate for those who are the poorest and the sickest because the program isn’t really set up to help them.”

Smith said she learned she wasn’t invincible the hard way, but despite her illness she is determined to keep fighting. She plans to pursue a master’s degree and launch her career as a child life specialist.

“I think no matter who you are, I feel that people need to equip themselves with insurance whether it’s through Medicaid or through the Affordable Care Act,” she said. “Pap smears are important. Mammograms are important. Keeping up with abnormal pap smears are important. If you don’t, you are going to end up in trouble.”