Monika Rittershaus A scene from ‘St. Matthew Passion.’

The Berlin Philharmonic will play Bach’s “St. Matthew Passion” in New York next year, but it will likely feel right at home: a stage designed to reflect its hometown theater will be built within the Park Avenue Armory.

The concert is part of an eight-day series, starting Oct. 1, for the German orchestra that will include a season-opening gala concert at Carnegie Hall and three subsequent performances, followed by the “Passion” at the Park Avenue Armory as the kickoff event for Lincoln Center’s annual White Light Festival.

Carnegie Hall, Lincoln Center and Park Avenue Armory announced the series on Monday, but the collaboration began brewing as far as 2010, when the Philharmonic played the “Passion,” with the Rundfunkchor Berlin choir and conducted by Simon Rattle, at its local concert hall, the Berliner Philharmonie. The production, led by director Peter Sellars, features singers who interact with each other on a minimalist set as they dramatize the last days of Jesus Christ.

“You feel like you’re in a theater production,” said Lincoln Center’s artistic director, Jane Moss. “It does not remotely feel like a staged concert. I was so knocked out.”

Monika Rittershaus Mark Padmore as the Evangelist in the Berlin Philharmonic’s production of ‘St. Matthew Passion.’

After seeing the production in 2010, she began talking to the Philharmonic about bringing it to New York, and it turned out the orchestra was scheduled to open Carnegie Hall’s 2014-2015 season. The venue, however, is not big enough to contain this version of the “Passion.”

“It is not a production that can be done in a concert hall,” said Clive Gillinson, executive and artistic director of Carnegie Hall. “This is a properly theatrically produced event.”

This blockbuster version of the “Passion” can, however, fit within the Park Avenue Armory’s 55,000-square-foot Wade Thompson Drill Hall. This production, created by Mr. Sellars, who also directed John Adams’s 20th-century opera “Nixon in China” met it came to the Metropolitan Opera in 2011, calls for singers and some orchestra members to walk around.

In some cases, they perform with dramatic movement on a round, central stage, with a few blocks as props. This makes it unlike most staged concerts, where soloists stand in one place.

To achieve the unusual staging requirements, organizers will build an arrangement of the orchestra’s hall in Berlin—“a stage installation inspired by the Philharmonie,” said Ms. Moss—for the two-night event.

Most of the lead roles will be sung by artists who performed this production already in Berlin, with the notable exception of Eric Owens, a critically lauded American baritone who sang the part of Alberich at the Met.

For the Carnegie Hall portion of the Philharmonic’s series, the orchestra will perform on the first night with the violinist Anne-Sophie Mutter. The following concerts will include a complete cycle of Schumann symphonies and the U.S. premier of a new work of composer Georg Friedrich Haas, who was jointly commissioned by Carnegie Hall and the Philharmonic.

The full programming for the concerts and Carnegie Hall’s 2014-2015 season will be announced in January.