Breast biopsies are good at telling the difference between healthy tissue and cancer, but less reliable for identifying more subtle abnormalities, a recent study found.

Because of the uncertainty, women whose results fall into the gray zone between normal and malignant — with diagnoses like “atypia” or “ductal carcinoma in situ” — should seek second opinions on their biopsies, researchers say. Misinterpretation can lead women to have surgery and other treatments they do not need, or to miss out on treatments they do need.

The findings, reported this year in JAMA, challenge the common belief that a biopsy will resolve any questions that arise from an unclear mammogram or ultrasound.

In the United States, about 1.6 million women a year have breast biopsies; about 20 percent of the tests find cancer. Ten percent identify atypia, a finding that cells inside breast ducts are abnormal, but not cancerous. About 60,000 women each year are found to have ductal carcinoma in situ, or DCIS, which also refers to abnormal cells inside the milk ducts and not considered invasive. Experts disagree about whether DCIS is cancer.

“It is often thought that getting the biopsy will give definitive answers, but our study says maybe it won’t,” said first author Joann G. Elmore, a professor at the University of Washington School of Medicine.

Her team asked pathologists to examine biopsy slides, then compared their diagnoses with those given by a panel of leading experts who had seen the same slides. There were important differences, especially in the gray zone.

An editorial in JAMA said the findings were “disconcerting” and that the study should be a “call to action” for pathologists and breast cancer scientists to improve the accuracy of biopsy readings, by consulting with one another more often on challenging cases and by creating clearer definitions for various abnormalities. The editorial also recommended second opinions in ambiguous cases.

A second opinion usually does not require another biopsy; it means asking additional pathologists to look at the microscope slides. Elmore said doctors could help patients find a pathologist for a second opinion.

Abby Howell, 57, who lives in Seattle, had some calcifications show up on a mammogram, which are sometimes a sign of cancer. She was given the option of just mammograms every six months, or having a biopsy. She chose the biopsy, thinking it would be definitive. Instead, it showed atypia.

Surgery was recommended, but she decided to watch and wait instead. So far, her mammograms have been normal, but the experience has shaken her peace of mind.

“If I had to do it all over again, I wouldn’t have jumped for the biopsy,” Howell said. “I really regret it. In a way it’s made more anxiety in my life.”