'Obamacare is escalating the cost of healthcare at a breakneck pace,' Scott's latter said. Scott pushes health care agenda at budget meeting Governor seeks to block Medicaid expansion, possibly eliminate certificate of need requirements.

Florida Governor Rick Scott is continuing his push to block Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act, to allow the sale of insurance across state lines and possibly to eliminate certificate of need requirements for hospitals.

As the Social Services Estimating Conference wrapped up its meeting Tuesday morning, the governor’s Health and Human Services policy coordinator Mary Beth Vickers unexpectedly said she was going to read a letter from Scott reiterating his health care agenda.

Story Continued Below

“Obamacare is escalating the cost of healthcare at a breakneck pace. We must immediately implement all options available to us to offset the new Medicaid costs and work to produce more saving in every part of our healthcare system,” his letter read.

Scott also said in the letter that he had asked Agency for Health Care Administration secretary Liz Dudek to look for ways to offset those costs that would not pass them on to taxpayers.

To that end, he said, his Commission on Healthcare and Hospital Funding is considering eliminating the certificate of need, or CON, regulatory program for hospitals as well as allowing insurance to be sold across state lines.

Vickers’ reading of the letter came just after conferees had met to discuss current and future Medicaid expenditures, as well as spending for hospitals, nursing homes, prepaid health plans and more.

The prepared remarks didn’t reflect what the conferees had been discussing, said two budget conferees, Florida’s chief economist Amy Baker and the House Health Care Appropriations Subcommittee’s budget chief Eric Pridgeon.

Scott’s proposals would also require legislative approval, Pridgeon noted.

The letter won’t be included in the official budget documents the conferees prepare.

The battle over health care and the expansion of Medicaid under the A.C.A. brought Florida’s 2015 regular legislative session to a standstill and forced lawmakers to meet in special session to pass the year’s one must-pass bill, the General Appropriations Act.

The Florida House of Representatives embraced parts of Scott’s health care agenda, like eliminating CON, while the Florida Senate rejected them.