Q: What is Lewy body dementia?

A: This little known, oddly named, debilitating illness afflicts an estimated 1.3 million Americans; the actor and comedian Robin Williams was among them.

It is often misdiagnosed because its signs, such as hallucinations and body rigidity, do not seem like those of dementia, but in the end it robs people of themselves even more painfully.

Although Lewy body dementia is the second-most-common type of dementia after Alzheimer’s, it is often misidentified. It is caused when abnormal protein particles called Lewy bodies (named after Frederic H. Lewy, who discovered them in 1912) accumulate in the brain.

Lewy body protein deposits disrupt the brain’s normal functioning.

According to the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Lewy body dementia has three distinguishing features that eventually become apparent:

■ Fluctuating alertness and attention that can resemble delirium.

■ Visual hallucinations.

■ Parkinson’s-like symptoms, such as balance problems, rigidity and tremors and a flat affect. (Lewy bodies also show up in people with Parkinson’s, though they affect a different area of the brain.) There are no known therapies to stop or slow the progression of Lewy Body dementia, according to the institute.

Average survival after the time of diagnosis is similar to that in Alzheimer’s disease — about eight years — with progressively increasing disability.

“Lewy body dementia is characterized by a mixture of symptoms” that can make diagnosis difficult, says Sonja W. Scholz, a at Johns Hopkins Hospital neurologist and researcher who specializes in the illness.

Lewy body dementia patients can typically “have a bad day when they are poorly responsive and confused about time and place,” Scholz says, “and the next day they are their normal self again, able to discuss the plot of their favorite TV show and childhood memories.”

As a result of its fluctuating symptoms, Lewy body dementia is often mistaken for Pick’s disease — a rarer form of dementia — or Parkinson’s.

“Most patients develop signs that look like Parkinson’s disease: balance problems, flat affect, rigid muscles, tremor or falls,” Scholz says.

Although hallucinations can occur in Alzheimer’s disease, they are more common in Lewy body dementia, she says, and “can be quite disabling for the patients and upsetting for family members and caregivers.”

Misdiagnosis of this disorder is not only frustrating; it can even be a fatal mistake. People with Lewy body dementia are much more sensitive to many of the medications prescribed for Alzheimer’s patients, like antidepressants and antipsychotics.

Occasionally, those meds “can be life-threatening,” Scholz said.

– Candy Schulman, The Washington Post