Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell campaigned on forcing the president to bend to the will of Republicans, but it is the Kentucky senator who is now on bended knee asking Obama to reconsider his promise to veto the Keystone XL bill.

On the Senate floor, McConnell said:

The Keystone Jobs bill is just common sense. That’s why this bipartisan legislation already passed the Senate with support from both parties. That’s why labor unions support it. That’s why the American people support it.Americans know that construction of this infrastructure project would pump billions into the economy and support thousands of good jobs. They also know that America could achieve this with, as the President’s own State Department has indicated, minimal environmental impact. So Americans are urging President Obama not to interfere in the review process for political reasons any longer. Americans are urging the President to finally heed scientific conclusions his own State Department already reached. “Let American workers build this infrastructure project, Mr. President. Sign this jobs and infrastructure bill. Powerful special interests may be demanding that the President veto Keystone Jobs, but we hope he won’t. If the President does ultimately bow to these special-interest demands, that’s a discussion we can have then. But either way, Americans should know this: the new Congress won’t stop pursuing good ideas. This new majority is committed to refocusing Washington on the concerns of the middle class. And the passage of bipartisan bills like Clay Hunt and Keystone Jobs shows we’re doing just that.

McConnell promised to repeal Obamacare, combat the president’s policies, and to break Obama. So far, he is 0 for 3. Obamacare repeal is DOA. McConnell’s efforts to engage in combat with the President have resulted in defeat after defeat, and the man who promised to make the president do the GOP’s bidding is now “hoping” that that Obama will reconsider his planned veto of Keystone XL.

Obama will veto the bill because Republicans are trying to hijack the process. The President and many others have pointed out that this bill is neither a jobs nor an infrastructure bill.

McConnell’s attempt to sell his few jobs creating gift to the Koch brothers and Big Oil as a jobs bill would be funny if it weren’t so sad.

McConnell was forced to announce yesterday that the Senate can’t pass the House’s Homeland Security funding bill that also overturned President Obama’s executive actions on immigration. President Obama is having his way with the Republican congressional leadership, as Mitch McConnell has found out that the imaginary Obama that he promised to take down bears no resemblance to the man who is currently residing at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.