Although the Affordable Care Act (ACA) was enacted 5 years ago, 2014 was the first year of implementation for most of the health law's major provisions. In fact, it turned out to be a glitch machine. Defying the expectations of even the law's most ardent critics, Obamacare's rollout of the federal online health exchange was a disaster, combined with the cancellation of millions of private health insurance policies (if you "liked" your plan, too bad), a delay in reporting requirements of the employer mandate, and new administrative exemptions from the individual mandate penalty.

Nonetheless, the Obama administration's allies insist that the law is "working" and that it will even become popular with the majority of Americans with the passage of time. The law's congressional supporters, they hope, will reap political benefits rather than political retribution.

Not all of Obamacare's allies, however, have been so sanguine. Jacob Hacker, PhD -- professor of political science at Yale University and a stalwart champion of the law -- observed in the July 2010 edition of The American Prospect, "Reformers won the war in 2010, but they lost the battle for public opinion. Americans were convinced that reform was needed but not that government could do it. Reformers cannot afford to lose the second battle for public opinion."

Hacker's "reformers" are already losing the "second battle" of public opinion. That is not surprising. Consider the biggest health policy items: Cost, coverage, and competition.

Cost: Looking at the big picture, the law locks in massive entitlement spending, last estimated at $1.7 trillion over the next 10 years, while depending upon revenues from 18 taxes and unprecedented savings provisions (mostly Medicare payment reductions) that are either profoundly unpopular or politically unreliable, or both.

Once again, Hacker made a prescient observation: "Financing is the soft underbelly of health reform. The healthcare bill relies on a grab bag of revenue sources. Over the long term, if costs grow more quickly than these sources, federal deficits and the pressure to cut subsidies for coverage will grow. Both outcomes would undermine the ability of reform to achieve its promise and public confidence in the law."

When the law was enacted in 2010, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) dutifully said it would cost less than $1 trillion, and -- with upfront revenues and back-end payouts -- would reduce the deficit by $124 billion in the first 10 years. Indeed, President Obama famously declared that the reform would not add "one dime" to the deficit now or in the future.

Well, the CBO now says that it can no longer determine the budget effects of the law. But the spending is locked into place. The administration has already softened the impact of its politically inconvenient Medicare Advantage payment reductions with special spending on that program from 2012 through 2014. It has forgone tens of billions in scheduled revenues with its cancellation of the law's unworkable long-term care program (the CLASS Act), and the revenue projections from the weakened employer and individual mandates (tax penalties) are declining.

Congressional opposition to the unpopular medical device tax is securing rare and robust bipartisan cooperation, and the so-called "Cadillac" tax -- a 40% excise tax aimed at expensive health plans -- enjoys the mutual disdain of Big Business and Big Labor alike. Certain spending and uncertain revenues and savings is no prescription for fiscal stability.

The president repeatedly promised that health reform would reduce the typical family's healthcare costs by $2,500 a year. Of course, that promise was absurd on its face. But what's worse is that the law's flawed policies have actually increased costs.

This was abundantly evident in 2014, the first year of implementation for the law's benefit mandates, insurance regulations, and rating rules. Consumers then experienced sharp, double-digit premium increases, combined with breathtaking increases in their deductibles.

For 2015, a Heritage Foundation microsimulation analysis shows that the premium offerings of health insurance exchange plans did not reverse the sharp price spike in 2014. Exchange premiums rose on average 5% this year -- modest compared with 2014, but a long way from a premium reduction.

Coverage: At the early stages of the health reform debate in 2008 and 2009, it was not unusual to hear the soaring rhetoric of "universal coverage." Now, no one seriously believes that that goal will be achieved by the ACA.

The administration recently announced that 11.7 million people had signed up for coverage, though that number will surely erode throughout the year as did the initial sign-up numbers last year. Regardless, health insurance coverage has clearly increased and that is a good thing. But for the vast majority of middle-class Americans, the more interesting question is how their employers, large and small, will respond to the law's complex set of new mandates, penalties, and subsidies in the public exchanges.

Employer- sponsored coverage has been declining for decades. But the question is how much ACA will accelerate that decline, forcing more and more employees into the public exchanges and increasing taxpayers' subsidy costs. Based on an examination of real insurance enrollment data for the first 9 months of 2014, the concern over an accelerated loss of employer-sponsored health insurance appears to be justified.

According to the latest market data available, 5.83 million people gained coverage in the individual market and approximately 4.93 million individuals lost employer coverage during the same period. The biggest jump in coverage was in Medicaid enrollment, which grew by nearly 7.5 million people. In other words, for that period in which raw data are available, almost 90% of coverage gains were in the Medicaid program.

Medicaid coverage does not automatically translate into broad access to high-quality care, nor does a public exchange program full of plans with narrow networks and limited access to physicians and other medical professionals guarantee patient satisfaction. Enrollees get what the authorities give.

Competition: In 2009, President Obama correctly criticized America's health insurance markets as being noncompetitive, with 75% of the insurance markets controlled by five or fewer carriers in 34 states.

Did the ACA broaden insurance competition? No. A comparison of the number of insurers selling coverage in the public exchanges in 2015 with the number of insurers that sold individual coverage in 2013 shows the exchanges are 21.5% less competitive. At the county level, many Americans are finding their range of insurer choice is even more constrained. For example, 58% of the nation's counties have only three or fewer insurers offering coverage in their exchange.

Another way in which the ACA restricts consumer choice is by fueling narrow provider networks. As the cost of coverage and deductibles rise, insurers offering exchange plans are using limited provider networks as a tool to lower their prices. According to a McKinsey analysis, almost half of all exchange plans in 2014 had narrowed networks, meaning the patient choice of in-network providers was reduced for those enrolled in those plans.

Americans increasingly understand that the current debate about healthcare and the ACA is not just about cost, access, and quality of care. It is about power. In this respect, the main political achievement of the law is that it enshrined a massive transfer of regulatory power from the states to the federal government.

Personal choice, real market competition, state experimentation, insurer innovations in benefit design, as well as the professional independence of physicians and other medical professionals are subordinated to this concentrated federal power; an intricate system of detailed coercion, enforced through mandates, fines and penalties, subject to administrative, and often arbitrary discretion.

Underlying the ACA is a narrow ideological conviction that superior wisdom is somehow invested in Washington's ruling class, and that they will properly superintend the financing and delivery of healthcare in a fair and rational fashion. In the meantime, it is up to the rest of us to have faith in that wisdom, get with the program, and cease our stubborn opposition.

The Secretary of Health and Human Services, aided by the Internal Revenue Service, will make sure that we get what we should get and do what we should do. At the end of the day, they know what is best for us. What we like or don't like, what we prefer or don't prefer, including "junk" insurance or a different benefit package, is irrelevant.

The debate over whether or not the ACA is "working" will continue well into the 2016 presidential election. One can expect that, even if things don't go quite right, the law's champions will urge us to embrace Obamacare. It will just need more staff and better software. It is tackling inherently complex problems, and its political champions really "care." Sober folks will look at results.

Robert Moffit, PhD, is a senior fellow in the Center for Health Policy Studies at The Heritage Foundation.