Ben Carson is scheduled to speak at a rally on behalf of his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination at the Anaheim Convention Center Wednesday, “addressing the pressing issues facing our nation,” his campaign announced.

Doors open at 1:30 p.m. and the event is set to start at 2:30 p.m.

Orange County Supervisor Michelle Steel and her husband, Shawn Steel, a member of the Republican National Committee, will serve as masters of ceremony.

Orange County Republican Party Chairman Fred Whitaker will also speak and introduce Carson, a retired pediatric neurosurgeon best known for his pioneering surgeries in separating conjoined twins.

Carson is also scheduled to conduct a fundraiser in Bel Air tonight. Tickets for a reception are $1,000 per person and $2,700, the maximum individual contribution for a candidate seeking his or her party’s nomination under federal law, for a dinner, which includes a photo with Carson.

Carson spoke at The Commonwealth Club of San Francisco on Tuesday, saying “you can’t even begin this debate” on immigration “without securing the borders and we have the ability to do that.”

Carson also called the Affordable Care Act flawed.

“Our health and health care is being put in the hands of the government,” said Carson, who is making his first run for public office. “That’s not America.”

Carson said he is opposed to abortion on demand and would be “looking to appoint people who respected human life” to the Supreme Court.

Carson also supports a balanced budget constitutional amendment; keeping open the Guantanamo detention camp; and a “fairer, simpler and more equitable tax system” that would allow taxpayers to complete the form in less than 15 minutes.

According to biographical material supplied by his campaign, the 63-year- old Carson was raised by a single mother in a poor section of Detroit. Carson’s mother, who only completed third grade, instilled a love of reading and learning in her two children.

Carson graduated from Yale University, then worked as an X-ray technician, a bank teller, school bus driver, a supervisor for highway cleanup crews and a crane operator in a steel factory before being accepted into The University of Michigan School of Medicine.

Carson and his wife, Candy, established the Carson Scholars Fund in 1994 to reward young people of all backgrounds for exceptional academic and humanitarian accomplishments. The fund operates in all 50 states and the District of Columbia and has awarded scholarships to more than 7,500 students.

The program has also established more than 130 reading rooms across the nation to encourage young students and their families to discover the pleasure of reading and to recognize the power of learning.

Carson’s honors include the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation’s highest civilian honor, and the Spingarn Medal, the highest honor bestowed by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.

Carson was portrayed by Cuba Gooding Jr. in a 2009 made-for-television movie, “Gifted Hands: The Ben Carson Story.”

—City News Service

>> Want to read more stories like this? Get our Free Daily Newsletters Here!