'It doesn't fall easy on the ear'

About 200 people crowded under a shelter at Roosevelt Park on Saturday to take in the drums, horns, bass and piano of the 17th Annual Longmont Jazz Festival, the occasional rumble of thunder and rain drops accentuating the music.

Organizers expected anywhere between 1,000 and 1,500 to show up throughout the course of the day.

Bill Fairchild, treasurer and long-time member of the Longmont Jazz Association said the festival draws mostly local jazz musicians, but they have brought in a national act before.

"Denver has a big jazz scene," he said. "We get some people from the University of Northern Colorado. They have a jazz program."

Fairchild said jazz has been eclipsed by rock music, partly because the genre — which is vast and encompasses many styles — takes more concentration and time to master.

"It doesn't fall easy on the ear," he said. "It's more complex. You have to understand forms and chords to some extent. It takes years."

LJA President Kristin Anderson-Bohan said it is harder to get children involved in music at young ages, because it is not always taught in schools anymore.

She added that one of the bands playing on Saturday, the Longmont Jazz All Stars, is entirely made up of Longmont area highschool students.

Anderson-Bohan plays in two groups, mostly Dixieland and Swing, but said that jazz as a genre is continuing to evolve.

Advertisement

"There are younger players out there who are incorporating jazz into other things, trying new things," she said.

Laura Hale, who is a board member of Boulder Friends of Jazz, said she has brought young relatives to jazz shows to introduce them to the genre, saying that "you never know when you will trigger a music career."

"I don't think they hear it on the radio," she said. "You have to bring them to things like this."

New Orleans native, physicist by trade and trombonist Allen Hermann plays with the MHQ Sextet, which was nominated for a Grammy Award this year. He said his heart and soul goes into his music.

"It's an exhuberant feeling when you're playing," Hermann said. "You're celebrating life, and it makes you want to dance."

Longmont resident Thomas Crouch said he has come to the jazz festival numerous times, and although he considers himself more of a country, folk and rock kind of guy, he appreciates jazz.

"I'm not an avid fan," he said. "But I appreciate the orchestration and skill it takes. It's good music, easy and fun."

Crouch said he and his wife like to come to the free music at the park whenever they can, and he called it "one of the amenities of living in Longmont," where he has lived for 13 years since retiring.

"Longmont is a great town to live in," he said. "It's the best town I've ever lived in."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme