LAS VEGAS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--A new reporting requirement by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) mandates the electronic submission of staffing and census information1 in an effort to promote greater accountability for long-term care facilities (both skilled nursing facilities and nursing facilities). Kronos Incorporated today announced that its workforce management solutions and services can help long-term care organizations comply with this new requirement.

News Facts

Section 6106 of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires long-term care facilities to electronically submit direct care staffing information, including agency and contract staff, based on payroll and other auditable data. The data, when combined with resident census information, provides visibility to the level of care that can be expected.

Based on this requirement, the CMS set forth the “Payroll Data Submission – Payroll Based Journal (PBJ) Reporting”, a system that allows staffing and census information to be collected on a regular and more frequent basis than before and eliminates self-reporting by ensuring that the data is auditable for accuracy. This reporting requirement becomes mandatory beginning on July 1, 2016.

Long-term care facilities can more effectively meet PBJ electronic staffing data reporting requirements by uploading PBJ data produced by the Kronos time and attendance solution. The Kronos solution also offers a complete, automated source of work hour and work type, inclusive of audit trails.

Kronos also offers a robust data configuration and conversion tool, allowing workforce management data to be converted to the appropriate format, quickly and reliably, transferring data fields such as employee ID, total hours worked, and more, from Kronos to a destination system. The Kronos solution also accommodates inclusion of resident census data, which the PBJ reporting system requires.

Supporting Quotes

Carol D. Hess, MBA, vice president, human resources, SpiriTrust Lutheran Home Care and Hospice

“Kronos has always addressed industry needs with development of solutions and services that deliver results. After seven years of working with Kronos, we are confident that we will be ready to meet the new requirements set forth by the CMS with an automated, accurate, and easy to create reporting system.”

Susan M. Reese, MBA, RN, CPHIMS, director, healthcare practice group, Kronos

“When it comes to meeting the PBJ-based data collection regulations, manual processes will simply fall short. Kronos, as a source of complete workforce management data, not only automates data collection but provides an auditable history to ensure accuracy and consistency in reporting. Helping our customers manage new and evolving regulatory reporting requirements on an ongoing basis is a top priority for us.”

Supporting Resources

Kronos made this announcement from the HIMSS Annual Conference & Exhibition being held in Las Vegas from Feb. 28-March 4. Kronos is exhibiting in booth #4921.

Connect with Kronos via Facebook, Twitter, Google+, LinkedIn, and YouTube.

Subscribe to our workforce management blogs.

Take a look at the lighter side of workforce management in our Time Well Spent cartoons.

Learn about the Kronos WorkInspired culture and check out Kronos job openings.

About Kronos Incorporated

Kronos is the global leader in delivering workforce management solutions in the cloud. Tens of thousands of organizations in more than 100 countries — including more than half of the Fortune 1000® — use Kronos to control labor costs, minimize compliance risk, and improve workforce productivity. Learn more about Kronos industry-specific time and attendance, scheduling, absence management, HR and payroll, hiring, and labor analytics applications at www.kronos.com. Kronos: Workforce Innovation That Works™.

© 2016 Kronos Incorporated. All rights reserved. Kronos and the Kronos logo are registered trademarks and Workforce Innovation That Works is a trademark of Kronos Incorporated or a related company. See a complete list of Kronos trademarks. All other trademarks, if any, are property of their respective owners.

Footnote 1: Staffing Data Submission PBJ, CMS.gov, last modified 01/14/2016