The arrival of spring brings warmer temperatures and rain — and an increase in snake bites.

Specialists at the Oklahoma Center for Poison and Drug Information work closely with physicians around the state to provide the best treatment for people who are bitten by venomous snakes.

While most poisoning deaths are due to the misuse and abuse of legal and illegal drugs, poisonings occur in many ways, experts say.

In 2014, almost 80 percent of the exposures reported to poison centers involved people who swallowed a substance. Besides medication, other things that cause poisoning include consumer and household products, plants, mushrooms, pesticides, insect stings — and snake bites.

Oklahoma has three types of venomous snakes, all pit vipers: the copperhead, cottonmouth (also known as a water moccasin) and several species of rattlesnake.

The poison center also receives calls about snakes not native to Oklahoma because many people keep exotic snakes as pets.

Venomous snakes native to Oklahoma have slit pupils, a triangular-shaped head and a heat-sensing pit on each side of the head between the eye and the nostril.

“Most pit viper bites are painful and swelling can occur rapidly,” Scott Schaeffer, managing director for the poison center, said in a news release.

In addition to the swelling, which can be severe, the venom from these snakes can cause problems with blood clotting, leading to internal bleeding.

Schaeffer said people who are bitten by a snake should not attempt to treat the wound themselves. That can cause additional harm. Wash the area immediately with soap and water and call the poison center, he said.

Pharmacists and registered nurses at the poison center are available 24 hours a day, seven days a week at (800) 222-1222.

Avoid snake bites

The Oklahoma Center for Poison and Drug Information, a program of the University of Oklahoma College of Pharmacy at the OU Health Sciences Center, offers the following tips to help prevent snake bites this spring:

• Don't handle or play with snakes. Even dead snakes can bite reflexively.

• Keep your landscape or campsite well-manicured.

• Walk on clear paths. Wear boots and long pants in areas known to have snakes, and avoid walking alone in these areas.

• Watch where you step and place your hands when outdoors. Do not put your hands or feet into places you cannot see. Carry a flashlight, and wear shoes when walking outside after dark.

• Avoid sleeping on the ground. Place your sleeping bag away from caves and rock piles.

For more information, go online to www.oklahomapoison.org.

Source: The Oklahoma Center for Poison and Drug Information.