Incoming TennCare Director Dr. Wendy Long and her predecessor, Darin Gordon, attend a health care task force meeting on Tuesday in Nashville. The panel was appointed by Republican House Speaker Beth Harwell to come up with proposals to expand access to health coverage after the defeat of Gov. Bill Haslam’s Insure Tennessee proposal last year. (Photo: Erik Schelzig / AP)

The presidential race, lessons learned from other states and finding a plan that would allow for a gradual expansion to provide health insurance to as many as 400,000 Tennesseans were among the topics discussed during a two-hour meeting between lawmakers and TennCare officials on Tuesday.

The conversation came as part of the inaugural meeting of the “3-Star Healthy Project” — a newly formed task force established by House Speaker Beth Harwell to work on improving access to health care coverage.

Outgoing TennCare Director Darin Gordon and his successor, Dr. Wendy Long, provided lawmakers with a crash course on the state’s health care system.

Long said the state of health care in Tennessee is a result of the Affordable Care Act. Some states, including Tennessee, didn't expand Medicaid under the federal legislation, and that created a coverage gap.

"When the Supreme Court made it optional whether states would do that expansion, it created this coverage gap," she said.

Those who are in the gap do not qualify for Medicaid coverage and don't make enough to qualify for tax credits to buy insurance from the federal government, Long said.

She said the group largely consists of employees in the food service, construction and transportation industry, as well as an estimated 24,000 veterans.

"We estimate that there's between 200,000 and 400,000 uninsured individuals," Long said, adding that not everyone would either be eligible or choose to become covered should the committee advance a Medicaid expansion plan.

Lawmakers raised questions about what has gone wrong in other states, such as Arkansas and Kentucky, which have seen problems with their roll out of health care expansion.

"You have a little bit more information than you did before," Gordon said, pointing out that today there are better tools to help determine what would occur in Tennessee.

During his portion of the presentation, Gordon largely focused on what the state would need to incorporate in a plan in order to remain eligible for federal funding.

Such requirements include covering all childless adults making up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level and anyone considered "medically frail," Gordon said.

Among the lawmakers present were Reps. Cameron Sexton, R-Crossville; Matthew Hill, R-Jonesborough; Steve McManus, R-Cordova; Roger Kane, R-Knoxville; and Rep. Karen Camper, D-Memphis. The group was also joined by Sen. Richard Briggs, R-Knoxville.

Finding ways to implement a measured approach — which is expected to include incentives and "circuit breakers," or enrollment thresholds — was a central topic of discussion.

Hill said he favors a tiered rollout of a pilot program "so we can keep the hand on the wheel" as long as possible.

Briggs said another idea is allowing the state to annually expand its coverage to individuals based on income levels and the federal poverty line.

"Year one we're going to go from 100 to 120 (percent)," he said. "That gives you a chance to learn about the program."

McManus questioned Gordon about the fact that Republican presidential candidates Donald Trump and Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas have threatened to dismantle the Affordable Care Act.

"Trying to predict what will happen in the next administration — I don't dare go there," Gordon said.

Although Tuesday's meeting was simply to set the task force's groundwork, Sexton said he plans on taking the discussions across the state to engage physicians, hospitals and insurance carriers before wrapping up efforts in June, when the state will engage in discussions with the U.S. Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

The gathering comes two weeks after Harwell, R-Nashville, announced the task force's formation. The initiative seeks to generate proposals that will be given to federal health officials in an effort to implement pilot projects throughout Tennessee aimed at providing increased access to care for the working poor.

Since Harwell's April 12 announcement, Camper has joined the group. Her addition came after Democrats, including Rep. Mike Stewart, D-Nashville, branded the task force a “political charade” and a “pathetic” attempt to direct attention away from Insure Tennessee, Haslam’s controversial health care plan that failed to gain traction in the legislature in 2015.

Although Tuesday’s discussion remained between lawmakers and TennCare officials, future talks will involve various stakeholders, including Vanderbilt University, which is expected to be a part of Wednesday's discussion.

Harwell, who is not a member of the task force, said she has been engaged in discussions with Vanderbilt University's School of Medicine since last year.

The formation of the committee came after Harwell faced increased pressure to expand Medicaid coverage to the state’s uninsured. Throughout the 2016 legislative session — beginning on the first day and continuing through the end — supporters of Insure Tennessee pressed lawmakers on the issue by launching a billboard campaign, which included involvement from Nashville philanthropist Martha Ingram, and regularly holding protests.

Before announcing the task force, Harwell and Haslam said the speaker did not unilaterally have the power to advance Insure Tennessee. In the early part of the session, Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey said lawmakers should wait until after the fall presidential election to take action on health care.

Reach Joel Ebert at 615-772-1681 and on Twitter @joelebert29.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1SHPBE3