Photo

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• Closing loopholes on guns.

President Obama, bypassing Congress, will announce limited executive actions today intended to tighten federal enforcement of the nation’s gun laws and to expand background checks.

The changes are particularly meant for online gun merchants, who often avoid conducting background checks despite making high-volume gun sales.

• Where insurance falls short.

A detailed study out today shows that about 20 percent of Americans under the age of 65 and with health insurance say they have problems paying their medical bills.

The data reflects the high costs of health care in the U.S., the most expensive place in the world for medical services. Even under the Affordable Care Act, health plans often require hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket payments.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• The new Mideast crisis.

Iran’s leaders were hoping to emerge from nuclear talks as a global player, but they again face isolation today after being blamed for allowing last weekend’s attack on the Saudi Embassy in Tehran.

In Washington, the administration has an increasingly tense relationship with Saudi Arabia, and it will not publicly condemn the execution of a dissident Shiite cleric who challenged the royal family. The killing by the Sunni-governed country is what enraged Iran, a Shiite power.

• Iowa forecast: Blizzard of ads.

Donald J. Trump’s first TV ad, set to begin airing today, focuses on themes like banning Muslim immigration. His opponents have their attack ads ready, too, for the sprint to the Iowa caucuses next month.

Bernie Sanders takes on Wall Street and big banks in what he’s calling a major policy address today in New York on financial overhauls.

And here’s a look at questions that could shape the 2016 race.

• On Capitol Hill.

The House opens 2016 with plans to send a repeal of the Affordable Care Act to President Obama’s desk, even if it is unlikely to override his veto.

Congressional Republicans will also try, once again, to ban federal funds for Planned Parenthood with a vote this week.

• No rush on armed protest in Oregon.

Law enforcement agencies are taking a low-key approach toward the armed group that has taken over a federal wildlife sanctuary in Oregon.

The government is wary of repeating confrontations that turned violent. No one has been hurt in the standoff, and no one is being held hostage. On social media, some are asking: What if the armed men were Muslim or black?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

BUSINESS

• Global indexes are calmer today after Monday’s rout. Wall Street stocks are higher.

And the price of crude oil is stabilizing, with slight gains, after a volatile Monday.

• Connected cars, virtual reality gadgets and even higher definition TVs are expected to headline at the International CES show in Las Vegas this week.

• Manhattan apartment prices hit record highs again last year, according to new reports today.

The average price, bolstered by sales of ultraluxury units, was just short of $2 million, but the median price was also a new high, $1.15 million.

• General Motors’s board unanimously gave Mary Barra, its chief executive, the additional job of chairwoman after she successfully pulled the company through a damaging recall over ignition switches.

NOTEWORTHY

• Update your periodic tables.

Scientists in Japan will soon add to chemistry’s most fundamental catalog. They’ll get to officially name Element 113.

Elements 115, 117 and 118 will also receive official names. Teams from Russia and the U.S. discovered those elements.

What would you name them? Our science editors are taking your emailed suggestions. Elements can be named after a mythological concept, a mineral, a place or country, a property or a scientist.

• Raises in the minimum wage.

California and Massachusetts move to $10 an hour from $9, the highest rate among the 14 states and several cities that increased the minimum wage at the start of 2016. The federal minimum is $7.25.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

On Jan. 5, 1914, Henry Ford, head of the Ford Motor Company, introduced a minimum wage scale of $5 per day.

• Fresh read.

In “The Past,” a novel released today in the U.S. by Tessa Hadley, three sisters, a brother and their children gather at the English country house where their mother grew up to decide whether they should keep it.

• Primetime spotlight.

The two-hour documentary “Netanyahu at War” follows the Israeli prime minister’s political career and chronicles his relationship with the U.S. (9 p.m., Eastern, PBS, but check local listings; streaming at pbs.org/frontline).

• Coaching carousel.

Zinedine Zidane, the French former superstar of soccer, was named Real Madrid’s coach, and Tom Coughlin stepped down after 12 years of coaching the New York Giants.

• Fashion’s power couple.

Tory Burch, chairman and chief executive of the Tory Burch fashion brand, which was valued early last year at $3.25 billion, and Pierre-Yves Roussel, the chairman and chief executive of the LVMH Fashion Group, are engaged, unofficially uniting two major fashion empires.

BACK STORY

He came from a lower-middle-class family in Freehold, N.J., and played in Jersey Shore bands before becoming the local kid who made good.

On this day in 1973, at the age of 23, Bruce Springsteen released his debut solo album: “Greetings From Asbury Park, N.J.”

Photo

It sold only about 25,000 copies in its first year, and The Times didn’t even bother reviewing it.

But Rolling Stone did write, months after the album’s release, about the lyrics: “Hot damn, what a passel o’ verbiage! He’s got more of them crammed into this album than any other record released this year, but it’s all right because they all fit snug. …”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The magazine proclaimed him “a bold new talent.” The album wasn’t completely a solo effort, though. You can hear many of the musicians, including the saxophonist Clarence Clemons, who would go on to join him in the E Street Band.

That first Springsteen record, and the 17 studio albums that followed, often refer to his home state, where he is revered.

E Street itself comes from a Belmar, N.J., address that was home to a band member’s mother. The guys sometimes practiced there before taking the name to global fame.

Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.