AREA RANKINGS

1. DSHA (9-0) 1 (last week)

2. Burlington (15-1) 2

3. Brookfield Central (8-2) —

4. Oconomowoc (10-2) 10

5. Greendale (11-2) 5

6. Catholic Memorial (9-6) 3

7. East Troy (4-2) 4

8. Arrowhead (11-3) 8

9. Homestead (7-1) —

10. Mukwonago (8-2) —

NOTABLE

PLAYERS OF THE WEEK: Cassie Peters and Abby Hamilton, Hartford. The Orioles' duo has given the squad a formidable 1-2 punch during its 8-2 start. On Thursday, Hamilton, a sophomore, had 12 kills and a .367 hitting percentage, and Peters, a senior, had 10 kills and a .364 hitting percentage in a 26-24, 25-19, 25-22 victory over Slinger.

The efforts raised their season averages to 2.6 kills per set for Hamilton and 2.5 per set for Peters.

TEAM OF THE WEEK: Whitnall. The Falcons (9-0-2) have put together a great start to the season. On Saturday they went 6-0 and scored a 25-19, 23-25, 15-8 victory over Lakeside Lutheran to win the Germantown Invite.

"This is a starting point," coach Todd Smith said. "The girls are really jacked for this season. I have eight seniors on the team, four of them who were around as freshmen on the varsity, and they're really jacked about their chances this season for conference and going on beyond the regular season."

Whitnall has a nice mix of strong hitters in the front row and vocal leaders in the back. At the top of the list is senior Kendall Stribling, a middle blocker who posted a hitting percentage of better than .500 Saturday and team-highs in kills (14) and blocks (three) in the tournament final.

"She's kind of a dominating force and not just in her ability to put the ball away but rather emphatically so it kind of lifts the team," Smith said.

Stribling is averaging a team-high 3.9 kills per set, followed by junior Lilly Naumann, who is averaging 2.8 per set with a .394 hitting percentage. Defensively senior Becca Treuer (5.0) and freshman Haley Wynn (3.1) are 1-2 in digs and are among the team leaders in serve receive, setting the stage for senior setter Mackenzie Murray, who averages 8.1 assists per set.

"We've got such good athletes that we can move them around. Our middles can play outside and our middles can come to the outside. We try to give teams different looks with different approaches and different personnel....," Smith said. "What we need to work on is getting on the same page, making sure that we are executing."

PANTHER POWER:Fresh off winning the Silver Bracket at the Homestead/St. Thomas More Joust, Greendale won the New Berlin West Invite on Saturday. The Panthers beat Union Grove, 25-22, 25-22, as freshman Kayce Litzau had six kills and hit a .625.

The victory was their fourth straight-set victory in five matches at the tournament. The exception was a 25-21, 23-25, 15-7 victory over Cedarburg in pool play. Senior Lauren Litzau had nine kills with a .400 hitting percentage in addition to a team-high nine digs in that match.

ON THE RISE: Brookfield Central was quite productive during the first two weeks of the season. The Lancers reached the semifinals of Gold Division of the Homestead/St. Thomas More Joust Aug. 29 and finished second at the Muskego Invite Saturday.

During that stretch the Lancers defeated Catholic Memorial, Kenosha Tremper, Nicolet and Muskego. Their losses came to DSHA at the Joust and Burlington at Muskego.

"We're in a position where we have nice balance on our team," Central coach Scott Spiess said. "I don't think we have the one superstar player that maybe some other teams have, but we have nice balance and we have kids who have a lot of experience with the three seniors that have been starting on varsity since (they were) freshmen."

Those seniors are playing key roles so far. Outside hitter Shannon Kebisek leads the team with 2.9 kills per set. Libero Aileen Herman has a team-high 4.9 digs. Abigail Strebig leads the team with 19 kills for the season.

They've been complemented by junior setter Marissa Zepecki and a couple of sophomores: Miranda Wucherer and Cami Herman. Wucherer has added setting to her duties after focusing on just hitting last year; Herman has been the team's most efficient hitter.

They've been part of a team that showed progress against the area's best. After getting beat handily by DSHA, the Lancers had a better showing against Burlington Saturday, losing 25-17, 26-24, in the final.

"Saturday when we played Burlington, more than anything, we wanted to be competitive and I think the kids bought into that," Spiess said. "They understood they kind of got embarrassed by DS and it was never really a match. We just really had to work hard and when we made mistakes move on, just try to play one play at a time. I think we did a pretty good job of that against Burlington."

COMING UP

Germantown at Homestead, 6:30 p.m. Tuesday: Homestead can build on its fast start with a victory over the defending North Shore champion.

Mukwonago at Muskego, 7 p.m. Tuesday:This match will help establish the pecking order in what appears to be a very balanced Classic 8.

Milwaukee Languages at Milwaukee King, 4:30 p.m. Wednesday: Defending City champion Languages opens the conference season against its chief rival.

Lancer Invitational, 8:30 a.m. Saturday at Brookfield Central and Brookfield East:Divine Savior and Brookfield Central, two semifinalists from the Homestead/St. Thomas More Joust last weekend, are the top two seeds followed by Greendale and East Troy. The Gold Division finals will be played in the afternoon at Central; the consolation bracket will be played at East.