Insurance policies range by provider but are necessary for many things.

Auto and home insurance, workers' compensation, property insurance and other types of insurance are available for business owners, people and families.

One firm in the Greater Lehigh Valley that provides many services and insurance options is Miers Insurance Inc. of Allentown.

Here to answer this week's “Behind the List” questions is Rocky Gencarelli, employee benefits manager at Miers Insurance.

Lehigh Valley Business: How long has Miers Insurance Inc. been operating in the Greater Lehigh Valley and what are its primary services?

Rocky Gencarelli: We're proud of the long history and footprint our insurance agency has made in the Lehigh Valley. We've been located in Allentown since our beginnings in 1892 – that's 123 years ago.

We began as specialists in boiler and machinery insurance for the utility and railroad industries and have evolved over the years into providing all forms of insurance for families and individuals needing homeowners and auto insurance – and Lehigh Valley businesses and institutions who need workers' compensation, commercial auto or commercial property insurance.

Over 30 years ago, we included employee benefits and life insurance into our product mix, and today we operate to provide a full range of insurance and risk management services to our clients.

LVB: What have been some of the biggest hardships and opportunities that Miers has encountered throughout its years in business?

Gencarelli: As an independent agent, representing a number of insurance companies, we've managed to navigate through what seems to be the continuous consolidation and the cyclical nature of the insurance business.

To counter these ups and downs, we've been very fortunate to have an extremely loyal, professional staff, many of whom have been with us for 20 years or longer. It's these loyal employees who have helped establish the many long-term relationships we have with our clients, many from generation to generation.

And through our employee stock ownership plan, our employees enjoy the benefits of company ownership.

Finally, we see a great opportunity to educate our clients to the nuances of The Affordable Care Act. Our employee benefits division has the tools necessary to help our clients make informed decisions in the employee health care arena.

LVB: Does Miers provide its services solely to the Greater Lehigh Valley, or does it expand into other markets?

Gencarelli: Most of our clients are located throughout the Greater Lehigh Valley, central Pennsylvania, the Poconos, Philadelphia five-county region and New Jersey.

Pennsylvania businesses often have other offices or subsidiaries in other states and we are capable of working with and administering their “out of Pennsylvania” insurance program.

LVB: With rules and regulations in health care constantly changing, how does Miers position itself to manage these changes and stay current on the newest trends?

Gencarelli: I hold positions on the Greater Lehigh Valley Chamber's legislative committee, along with the Pennsylvania Association of Health Underwriters local chapter, which keeps me at the forefront of legislative changes and discussions.

We've made a commitment to leverage technology in an effort to communicate and supply tools to our clients to help keep them compliant and organized as it relates to such an ever-changing environment in health insurance regulations.

LVB: How does Miers directly stimulate the local economy?

Gencarelli: By providing insurance, our clients are able to buy or build a new home, buy a new car or provide for their family's future. Without insurance, our business clients would not be able to obtain the capital necessary to expand or continue their business.

Our employees all live, work and give back to Lehigh Valley businesses and charities.