Tax season kicks off this week...and as you're filling

out your forms.

you'll notice some changes.

This is the first year tax filers will be required

to disclose their health care status.

News 8's Keely Arthur joins us now with what you need

to know before you file.

Accountants have spent long hours preparing for what

I-R-S officials say could be the most confusing tax

season yet.

This year tax payers will have to fill out more forms

than ever depending on their health care status.

I have an appointment with Jason Steinhoff.

For Darlena Kline filing taxes is a complicated task.

I'm afraid I might miss something or there is something

I didn't put in there right.

That's why she goes to a certified public accountant

at Franke & Turnball in La Crosse to help her properly

declare income, withholdings...and now health insurance.

I don't even know what form your supposed to used

for that.

Thanks to her status...

Can you tell me did you have health insurance the

entire year for 2014?

Yes.

Kline and most people insured through work...will

simply have to mark it down on a tax form.

they'll check the box , they've had employer health

care coverage their families covered.

However.

for those who don't have health insurance or bought

it through the Market Place...there will be more

paperwork to fill out.

It's a pretty big change I would say.

Those who got insurance through healthcare.gov will

need to fill out a 1095-A form...showing that they

have coverage, and what kind.

If their income changed...or they wrote down the wrong

amount when applying for insurance...they will have

to fill out an additional tax credit form.

If you estimated incorrectly you might be paying back

some of that credit or you might be expecting a little

credit back.

Those who are completely uninsured will have to a

pay a penalty of about $95 dollars or 1 percent of

their income...whichever is greater.

that's per person and per month.

Kline is releived she is not in the same boat as the

millions people who aren't insured and will have to

fill out additional forms.

I've thought about that because I have friends that

have to do that as of right now we are lucky.

Now if you aren't insured because you truly couldn't

afford it....

You could be exempt from having to pay penelties...by

going to healthcare.gov filling out a form and submitting

it to the IRS.

Thanks Keely,

If you still need health care coverage.

open enrollment is still available through Febuary

15-th.