The Senate wants the House to vote first on the governor's Insure Tennessee plan, a scheme the majority leader in the lower chamber says is "silly" and "preposterous."

"I think they want us to carry the load for them," said Gerald McCormick, the House majority leader.

"That's just silly. We won't do that. I'm not going to put my members on the spot like that. If [Senators] don't want to do it, they just need to tell us and we'll go about our business going to regular session. We're not going to go through an exercise of futility if they're not serious about considering this legislation," he told reporters Friday morning.

His upper-chamber counterpart, Majority Leader Mark Norris, told fellow Republicans in a caucus meeting Thursday that Senate floor action would wait until after the House has acted on the governor's plan to expand health care coverage. The governor's proposal would expand health care options to an estimated 200,000 Tennesseans who make less than 138 percent of the federal poverty rate, contingent on legisalative and federal approval.

"If that is their intention, that will not work," House Speaker Beth Harwell told the Post, contending the game plan was for the legislation to work its way through both bodies together as a concurrent resolution.

"Misery loves company," she said.

Debate over which chamber should take the first crack at the health care proposal comes as the legislature -- with Republican super-majorities in both chambers -- prepares for a week-long special session Feb. 2. The General Assembly, with members who vocally oppose the Affordable Care Act, will decide whether to allow the governor to move forward with a market-based Medicaid expansion plan to capture federal health care dollars that leans on personal responsibility and subsidies by the hospital industry.

The measure could pass in the House if it gets to a floor vote, McCormick said. "Don't know if we'll ever get there, but if we do, I think we can pass it in the House. And I really don't know if they can pass it in the Senate. If they can't, I'd rather them let us know and not waste our time."

Norris asserts that the votes are not there in the Senate, but are more likely to come if the House passes the proposal first. Norris, who sponsors legislation on behalf of the governor, has criticized the governor's office for a lack of information about the proposal and has yet to agree to carry it.

Moments after talking briefly with media, Harwell was exchanging words with Norris and Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey on the side of a stage. In the War Memorial Auditorium after a photo-op with the governor as lawmakers packed food for Tennessee food banks, she debated the issue with the two Senate leaders, at times smiling and laughing with the two of them and later with all three looking cross.

"I think the House needs to go first," Ramsey said after their impromptu meeting. "I thought we had an agreement on this. So, this is something I think we'll get worked out, I'm not 100 percent sure."

Ramsey argues opposition to the House moving first is ironic given criticism that his upper chamber has a reputation of "cramming things down their throat," like redistricting maps or gun legislation.

"We're giving them the opportunity to go first and they don't want to, so it's interesting," he said.

Haslam said he's confident the two chambers will come to an agreement on how to move forward, but also said his understanding, like Harwell's, was that the legislation would move through both chambers at the same time.

"Obviously, we want to make sure everybody gets on the same page. Again, I think they'll work it out. I think the people of Tennessee want this to be heard. They don't want some procedural issue to stop this from being heard," he said.

Lawmakers will return to the Hill in a little more than two weeks to begin the special session, although officials both chambers expect to begin some committee meetings to prep for the special session.

Asked what he said to Harwell on the stage, Ramsey said he told her they'd get something worked out.

"We'll figure out some way of doing this, but I still say they're going first. Don't get me wrong, I've been adamant about that," he said. "We're figuring out some way to make this work, at least get a fair hearing."