In the News

MetLife Inc. (NYSE:MET), the largest U.S. life insurer, released its first-quarter fiscal 2016 (1QFY16) earnings results. The company recorded a 3% increase in its net income, to $2.20 billion for the reporting quarter, from $2.13 billion for the same comparable period last year. The net income includes the after tax gains of $868 million in net derivative, reflecting changes in interest rates, equity markets, and foreign currencies. The company fell below the FactSet consensus estimates of $1.38 per share, and reported adjusted earnings per share (EPS) at $1.20, down 17% from $1.44 per share, reported in the same period. last year.

U.S. health insurer Humana Inc. (NSYE:HUM), which is due to be acquired by Aetna Inc. soon – is said to be contemplating to conclude its Obamacare individual business in some U.S. states in 2017. The company operates its individual business in 15 states, and sells plans under the Affordable Care Act. This has been inconvenient for the company’s financial results, as it recorded a 46% decline in 1QFY16 earnings, due to increased costs related to individual plans, including Obamacare, and direct-to-customer Medicare Advantage plans. The company expects to incur losses for the year as well, because of individual business. UnitedHealth Group Inc. disclosed financial losses due to individual plans earlier, and expects to withdraw its plans in 34 states.

Wells Fargo & Co. (NYSE:WFC) reported a 62% rise in its potential bad loans, mainly related to oil and gas companies. According to the company's 1Q regulatory financial filing, the loans defined as “criticized” increased to about $30 billion at the end of 1Q, from about $18.5 billion recorded by the end of 2015. The company’s commercial and industrial loan portfolio worth $290.5 billion was categorized as “pass”. Wells Fargo’s total energy related bad loans, including funded and unfunded ones, declined $317 million, to $43.5 billion, during the 1QFY16. JPMorgan Chase & Co. also recorded more than double increase in criticized loans, to $9.7 billion, in its quarterly earnings report, while its overall criticized loans increased 45%, to about $21.2 billion at the year-end 2015.

Chubb Ltd. (NYSE:CB) released its 1QFY16 earnings results today. The company recorded a 52.8% increase in reported property and casualty (P&C) net premiums, written to $5.48 billion for this period, from $3.59 billion for the same period a year ago. Chubb’s operating income grew 36.8% to $1.02 billion for 1Q, from $745 million in the same quarter last year. The company beat the analysts’ consensus earnings per share (EPS) estimates of $2.20, having reported operating EPS at $2.26.

British banking giant Barclays PLC is said to have raised £603 million ($874.1 million) by selling a 12.2% stake in Barclays Africa Group, to a group of institutional investors, bringing down its holdings in the unit to 50.1%. The bank’s African unit was providing services to over 12 million customers across 12 nations in Africa, however, the business was severely hit by the region’s weak economic growth. The bank aims to cut its stake in the unit to below 20%.

Today, B. Riley Financial Inc. (NASDAQ:RILY) said it is looking to offer and sell up to $20 million shares of its common stock shares in a public offering, contingent on market and surrounding conditions, under an effective shelf registration statement. The company is also expected to allow the underwriter the sale of up to another $3 million shares of the stock. It wants to utilize the money to support the consideration to be paid to United Online Inc. (NASDAQ:UNTD) stockholders, which is connected to its proposed acquisition by the company.

MetLife Inc. (NYSE:MET) said it has named Marlene Debel as US executive vice president and CFO. She currently serves as executive vice president and treasurer. Once she takes over the new post, she is likely to oversee the financial management of the U.S. business region. The company named John McCallion as Ms. Debel's replacement. Mr. McCallion currently serves as senior vice president and CFO Europe, Middle East and Africa (EMEA). MetLife has named Ed Spehar as Mr. McCallion's successor. Mr. Spehar currently serves as senior vice president and head of investor relations. The company’s organizational changes are effective July 1, 2016.

Pacific Mercantile Bank, a unit of Pacific Mercantile Bancorp (NASDAQ:PMBC), said today, that it has extended a $2 million line of credit to Segue Corporation, in a bid to support its growth. Additionally, Segue is likely to utilize a full range of Pacific Mercantile Bank cash management services.

M&A

Deutsche Asset Management, an arm of Deutsche Bank AG (NYSE:DB), said its Alternatives and Real Assets (ARA) business has acquired 405 Park Avenue (405 Park) located in New York City’s Plaza District. The business acquired the 17-story office and retail building alongside MRP Realty.

B. Riley Financial Inc. (NASDAQ:RILY) said it has entered a definitive agreement and plan of merger, pursuant to which it will acquire United Online Inc. (NASDAQ:UNTD). B. Riley Financial will acquire United Online for total considerations of approximately $170 million, which carries approximately $48 million in cash as consideration from B. Riley Financial. United Online's communications segment includes the Internet access brands, NetZero and Juno, which generated approximately $90 million in revenue, and $29.1 million of adjusted EBITDA in 2015. The company expects to close the deal, subject to customary closing conditions, including a favorable vote by stockholders of United Online, by the end of 3QFY16.

Analyst Actions

Deutsche Bank upgraded XL Group plc (NYSE:XL) to hold from sell with a price target of $34.00

Morgan Stanley downgraded On Deck Capital (NYSE:ONDK) to equal-weight from overweight with a price target to $7.00

Raymond James downgrades Triangle Capital (NYSE:TCAP) to underperform

Morgan Stanley assumes American International Group Inc. (NYSE:AIG) at equal-weight with a price target of $63.00

Market Overview

Today’s early morning futures indicators point to a high opening for the US market, as the three major indices, S&P, Nasdaq, and Dow Jones remain in the green.