Topics: AlterNet, America, Europe, Marriage, Life News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Here are some odd facts and recent revelations about that very interesting state, matrimony.

1. If the wife likes her marriage, her husband feels better about life. But the reverse is not true.

A new study from Rutgers University analyzing data from nearly 400 long-term married couples shows that a wife’s contentment in the marriage is the critical factor in a satisfying arrangement, more so than the husband’s.

To assess their state of happiness, individuals were asked how often the spouse got on their nerves, how often arguments occurred, how they felt doing chores, and whether they felt appreciated. Overall, men felt slightly more happy in their marriages than women. A wife’s dissatisfaction spelled less contentment for her husband, though interestingly, the husband’s lack of contentment didn’t have the same impact on his spouse. Deborah Carr, a professor in the Department of Sociology, School of Arts and Science, suggested this is because “when a wife is satisfied with the marriage she tends to do a lot more for her husband, which has a positive effect on his life.”

Guess it doesn’t work the other way around.

2. Wives become unhappy if their spouses become ill, but husbands not so much.

The same Rutgers study found that women’s contentment in their marriages dropped when their husbands got sick, but men’s attitudes didn’t seem to change when their wives fell ill. What gives? Researcher Deborah Carr divined the answer: “We know that when a partner is sick it is the wife that often does the caregiving which can be a stressful experience….But often when a women gets sick it is not her husband she relies on but her daughter.”

3. Short men tend to stay married, and compensate for their shortness by earning a higher relative share of income.

According to researchers Abigail Weitzman and Dalton Conley of New York University, height has a significant impact on marriage. They found that tall men tend to marry more educated women, older women and women of the same race, but are more likely to divorce. Among short men, however, the rate of divorce was significantly lower than among average and tall men. Men of shorter stature were also more likely to marry much younger women, and earn more than their spouses.

So what’s going on? The authors stated that their research “further confirms an existence of height-based status exchange in which short men compensate for their lower physical status with higher proportional earnings, while tall men appear more likely to use their status to attract women with higher relative earnings.”

4. A big wedding seems to boost the odds of a successful marriage.

Psychology researchers from the University of Denver studied 418 people as part of their Relationship Development Study, with a goal of sussing out elements that contributed to a successful marriage. Eleven percent of participants had no formal wedding ceremony, and of these, only 28 percent of the couples reported having a high-quality marriage.