The San Francisco 49ers begin their offseason workout program Monday, but eyes will be fixated on one guy.

If he shows up.

Quarterback Colin Kaepernick will collect a $400,000 workout bonus if he arrives at the 49ers’ facility in Santa Clara, Calif., for rehabilitation or participates in 90 percent of the team’s workouts. And his appearance could shed more light on his status with his team and the Broncos’ push for a trade.

A Kaepernick sighting Monday could be an indicator talks have stalled with the Broncos, or that the 49ers remain intent on keeping him. His absence could be a sign of two things: that the 49ers told him to stay away to avoid distraction as trade negotiations continue, or that he has no desire to return to the 49ers in 2016 and discussions on a revised contract with Denver will continue.

Kaepernick met with Broncos general manager John Elway in Denver on Thursday, the day his $11.9 million salary was guaranteed. The chance the 49ers would release him ended at 2 p.m. that day, but the possibility of a trade remains open.

It’s likely the Broncos and 49ers could reach an agreement on draft pick compensation, but the sticking point is Kaepernick’s contract, specifically his pay for 2016. The Broncos want him to restructure his deal or take a pay cut to clear up salary cap space. Denver has only $1.62 million in cap space, and Kaepernick carries a $15.9 million hit for 2016.

Broncos outside linebacker DeMarcus Ware revised his contract by converting part of his guaranteed money into a signing bonus and adding incentives to lower his base salary. Kaepernick has been asked to do the same.

To clear up additional cap space, the Broncos could release offensive tackle Ryan Clady, who is due $9.5 million in salary this season.

Since last November, Kaepernick has undergone three surgeries and has been rehabilitating in Vail for much of the offseason. It’s not publicly known whether he has been cleared to participate in workouts. But his $400,000 return for rehab Monday could speak volumes.

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or @NickiJhabvala

Updated April 4, 2016 at 10:30 a.m. This story was updated to clarify that Colin Kaepernick must attend rehabilitation or 90 percent of the team’s offseason workouts in order to receive the $400,000 bonus.