SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Government-approved immigrant jihadis have attacked and killed another 14 Americans, but GOP politicians are ignoring the obvious fix demanded by the American public—reduce Islamic migration into the United States.

The Senate’s GOP leader doesn’t want to talk about immigration, according to a statement he issued a few hours before the president’s national address on the jihad threat.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“As we approach the last year of President [Barack] Obama’s term, Americans understand that the terrorist threat has evolved but not vanished—and it has certainly not been ‘contained,’” said the statement from GOP Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.

“The President has the opportunity tonight to tell the American people how he is willing to adapt to the threat and how he can better prepare our nation for a fight that will inevitably be passed on to his successor,” he declared, before avoiding the most obvious, popular and effective anti-jihad strategy—reducing Islamic settlement in U.S. communities and neighborhoods.

He should tell us what legal authorities he needs to defeat encrypted online communications, and what is needed to reestablish our capture, interrogation, and surveillance capabilities. He should tell us how the coalition or NATO will forge a ground force capable of not just attempting to “contain” ISIL within its interior lines in Iraq and Syria—even as the group expands its reach into other countries—but actually driving it from Raqqa. He should tell us the force structure and funding our commanders will need to rebuild so we can continue and expand this fight while facing other threats around the globe. And he should explain why he won’t use the secure facility at Guantanamo Bay to safely hold and interrogate newly captured terrorists in order to help prevent the next plot against innocent Americans.”

GOP donors and the party’s business-wing don’t want immigration to become another casualty of immigrant jihadis. That’s because immigration provides business with more than one million extra lower-wage customers and taxpayer-funded customers each year, which boost profits and stock values.

In 2013, Obama used his legal powers to up the annual immigration of new workers to 2.1 million, even as 4.4 million Americans turned 18. Unsurprisingly, the rush of new workers flatlined wages, boosted profits, and spiked Wall Street wealth.

House Speaker Paul Ryan is following the same don’t-mention-immigration course and is even deep-sixing the House’s Nov. 19 vote passage of a bill to curb the inflow of Syrian refugees. Obama wants to bring in at least 10,000 more Muslim migrants from Syria in 2016.

On Dec. 3, Ryan embraced his inner progressive, downplayed the possibility of a jihad attack and described mass-shootings as an issue of “mental health.”

“You can’t help but watch this on TV and yell at the TV and say, ‘What can we do to prevent this from happening?’” he said on CBS.

This particular shooting in San Bernardino—there’s just too much unknowns before we speculate about the origin of this one. But what we have seen—and a common theme among many of these mass shootings—is a theme of mental illness. And we need to fix our mental illness laws, our policies. They’re outdated. And that is something that we are working on right now. We are moving a bill through the process here, the Murphy legislation, because we think that’s one of the more consistent and common themes—people with mental illness are getting guns and conducting these mass shootings.

That determination to avoid the issue of immigration is also why Ryan delegated the Speaker’s Dec. 5 weekend speech to a deputy, who obligingly talked about the uncontroversial need to tighten oversight of visitors—including Brits, Germans, and French—who have visited areas near the Islamic State’s mini-Caliphate in north-eastern Syria. The visa issue is so uncontroversial that even the Democrats are willing to help fix the problem.

“The next terrorist to attack our country could be only one flight away. And that’s why the House is preparing to act on legislation to prevent our enemies from entering this country through our visa-waiver program,” said Rep. Candice Miller, the chairman of the House Administration Committee, which handles various lesser issues, such as funding the Capitol’s operations.

Throughout her speech, she did not talk at all about the House’s lopsided Nov. 19 vote to curb Muslim refugees.

Huge majorities of Americans strongly oppose the migration of Muslims to the United States. Muslim migrants tend to be unskilled, heavily reliant on taxpayer-funded welfare programs, reluctant to integrate into Americans society, are under intense internal pressure to preserve their own mix of religion, culture, and politics, relatively likely to join jihad groups—56 Muslims were indicted on jihad charges in the first 11 month of 2014, and to support pro-jihad political groups.

Yet the federal government is set to increase their population in the United States up to 6.2 million by 2030. For example, a record 680,000 migrants from Muslims countries were granted green cards from 2009 to 2013. Also, two million people from Muslim-majority countries were admitted to the United States since the jihad atrocity on 9/11/2001.