CHICAGO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Pritzker Group Private Capital today announced it has named three vice presidents to its operations and investment teams. The firm has added seven professionals to its world-class team in the last 15 months, expanding its capacity to source and support companies in its three targeted industry sectors: manufactured products, services and healthcare.

Adam V. Milakofsky, 32, was promoted to vice president from senior associate. Milakofsky has worked at Pritzker Group for six years, primarily within its private capital group, assisting with sourcing and executing investments with the firm’s services and manufactured products teams. Based in Chicago, he works with the management teams of several Pritzker Group companies, including PECO Pallet, Entertainment Cruises and Milestone AV Technologies. Milakofsky holds a Bachelor of Arts from Duke University and an MBA from Northwestern University’s Kellogg School of Management.

Ceron J. Rhee, 30, joins as vice president-healthcare from TPG Capital, where he sourced, evaluated, executed and managed private equity investments across various segments of healthcare. Rhee previously held positions at The Blackstone Group, focused on healthcare private equity investments, and the healthcare investment banking division at Credit Suisse. Rhee also served in the White House following the signing of the Affordable Care Act. Rhee will be based in Pritzker Group’s Los Angeles office. He will work with Michael Dal Bello, the firm’s new healthcare investment partner, and Michael Lynch, the firm’s new healthcare operating partner. Rhee received his BA, BS and MBA degrees from Stanford University, where he was an Arjay Miller Scholar.

Bradley W. West, 30, was named vice president-operations and will provide legal and financial services across Pritzker Group Private Capital’s companies. West, who is based in Chicago, comes to Pritzker Group from Vedder Price, where he served as an associate in the law firm’s finance and transactions practice. Prior to joining Vedder Price, West was an associate in Mayer Brown’s corporate and securities practice. West is a graduate of the University of Minnesota Law School and received an accounting degree from the University of Wisconsin.

Pritzker Group has a 10-year history of acquiring leading middle-market companies, and most recently acquired Milestone AV Technologies from The Duchossois Group. Pritzker Group’s permanent, proprietary capital base makes it particularly attractive as a partner for family- and entrepreneur-owned businesses in its target industry sectors.

“Pritzker Group has assembled a world-class team to drive growth and operational excellence. These talented professionals share our focus on value creation and long-term growth and are great assets to the team,” said Paul Carbone, managing partner of Pritzker Group Private Capital.

About Pritzker Group

Pritzker Group, led by Tony and J.B. Pritzker, has three principal investment teams: Private Capital, which acquires and operates leading North America-based companies; Venture Capital, which is the largest technology venture investor based in the Midwest; and Asset Management, which partners with top-performing investment managers across global public markets.

Pritzker Group Private Capital acquires North America-based middle-market companies with leading positions in the manufactured products, services and healthcare sectors. The firm’s permanent, proprietary capital base allows for efficient decision making, broad flexibility with transaction structure and investment horizon, and alignment with management teams focused on creating long-term value. Pritzker Group brings significant resources, expertise and credibility in building businesses and is an ideal partner for entrepreneur- and family-owned companies. For more information, visit http://www.pritzkergroup.com.