Lauren Shinault, right, can routinely monitor her 3-year-old daughter’s blood glucose levels by means of a continuous glucose unit donated by the Diabetes Foundation of Mississippi. (Photo: Monica Land for The Clarion-Ledger)

For the past 18 years, Barney Shepherd, an 87-year-old World War II veteran from Philadelphia, has purchased a box of 22 glucose test strips to check his Type 2 diabetes for $25.

When he wanted to increase the count to 50, the cost was $90.

“That’s too high. And I don’t understand how they can do that,” Shepherd said. “A box of 50 should have been less than $50. I’m disabled. I can’t go to Meridian. I can’t go to Carthage. I can’t go nowhere else.”

But where in Mississippi he buys those strips doesn’t really matter.

In the state with the second-highest incidence of diabetes in the country, the cost of diabetes-related medication is the same from the Tennessee line to the Gulf Coast. And it’s true across the country.

Many individuals on a fixed income, like Shepherd, have no choice but to pay what the retailer wants.

“We have people that make too much for Medicaid and others who can’t afford the Affordable Care Act,” said Irena McClain, associate director of the Diabetes Foundation of Mississippi. “Between the rapid increase in some of the insulin analogs … and some of the newer oral medicines … people are really struggling to make ends meet and take good care of themselves.”

High incidence rate

In its 2012 statistics, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Mississippi had the second-highest rate of diabetes in the nation with 11.7 percent. The Diabetes Foundation said that’s about 280,000 people who know they have the disease and 93,000 others who don’t.

And yet, with a staggering number of residents on meds for some form of diabetic or renal disorder, the costs of diabetic supplies seems higher in Mississippi than in many other states.

McClain said in the last 30 years, genetic engineering has taken over and insulin is no longer taken from cows and pigs but is genetically engineered “human” insulin.

“These engineered insulins are the ones that we’ve seen a dramatic increase in the cost,” she said. “And I can’t figure that out. They work really well. And we’re creating these in yeast and bacteria. So it’s not like it takes some special animal to create these insulin analogs.”

When these rapid-acting insulin analogs were first introduced in the late 1990s, the cost was $45 a vial, McClain said, and that was considered extreme. Today, those same analogs are nearly $300 a vial.

“Medicaid will cover those analogs,” she said. “And so will Medicare, provided you’re not already in the ‘donut hole,’ or beyond your coverage limit.”

Individual pharmaceutical companies set the cost of prescription meds. The Food and Drug Administration and Federal Trade Commission regulate those costs.

While the pharmaceutical companies argue their prices help fund research and product development, naysayers insist the majority of their capital is being spent on marketing and administrative costs, according to the Professional Staff Congress, the union that represents more than 25,000 faculty and staff at the City University of New York.

However, the Bureau of Competition, a division of the FTC that protects consumer interests, said it has examined the issue several times and found the reason for the increase or decrease of a drug is often the result of “normal market forces.”

“One common cause of a sudden spike in the price of a drug is the development of a supply problem, such as an ingredient shortage,” Alan Friedman of the FTC said in a blog.

Affordability factor

As medical technology continues to produce even better medications to treat Types 1 and 2 diabetes, the affordability factor remains a constant barrier for many.

The Diabetes Foundation of Mississippi, which for 50 years has worked to help individuals and families throughout the state to cope with, adjust to and manage diabetes, in a large percentage of cases, donates and pays for diabetic supplies for those unable to do so themselves.

Lauren and Wayne Shinault of Batesville were baffled by their then 2-year-old daughter’s lethargy. Kristen was thirsty all time, urinating throughout the day and night, and, at 24 pounds, was losing weight. Kristen was on the verge of diabetic coma when she was finally diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes. Insulin injections brought back their playful child.

But keeping her blood sugar regulated was another story. While Shepherd, who has Type 2 diabetes, checks his blood sugar once a day, Kristen Shinault’s needs to be checked several times a day.

“The doctor wrote her prescription for 300 test strips a month, and Medicaid would only give her 200 and she would always run out,” Lauren Shinault said. “So, we had to do fundraisers to pay for her medical expenses because we didn’t have the money. I’m a stay-at-home mom. I homeschool my kids, and my husband works. He has a full-time job and he works really hard, but we didn’t have the extra money to pay for all of the medical supplies.”

McClain said people with diabetes need the ability to check their blood sugar as often as they want.

“The gold standard used to be four times a day,” she said. ‘But I’d be happy if people had access to their test strips to check it twice a day. And people with Type 1 diabetes often check their sugar six, eight or more times a day to keep it tightly controlled.”

The problem with programs like Medicare and Medicaid can be whether they cover a particular product, and when Medicaid stops covering the person.

“Kids will be on Medicaid until they turn 19, and Medicaid will cover the pumps, the insulin and the strips for those with Type 1 diabetes,” McClain said. “But when the child turns 19, they’re off Medicaid.”

McClain said not only is blood sugar better managed with an insulin pump — which costs about $6,000 plus $300 a month for supplies — but a patient can use it in smaller increments.

Medicaid can change its drug policies and has a committee of 12 physicians, nurse practitioners and practicing pharmacists who conduct clinical evaluations and recommend appropriate drugs for preferred status on the Division of Medicaid’s preferred drug list and/or drugs for prior authorization.

Another option to help defray high drug costs is generics.

“We understand that drug prices have a direct impact on the ability of people to cope with their illnesses as well as meet other expenses,” said Eric Pahon, a press officer with the FDA in Washington, D.C. “And while FDA does not regulate the price of drugs, we will continue to make safe and effective generic drugs available to the public as quickly as possible.”

But Dr. Wayne Woo, the sole practitioner at the Diabetes and Endocrinology Institute in Flowood, said in some cases, generics are not always better when it comes to diabetes management.

“Medicare prefers we do generics,” Woo said. “But some of these generics are very old and are not safe, especially in the elderly. If patients understood how these new medications work, they would understand why we should use the newer meds.”

Some pharmaceutical companies have patient assistant programs that offer prescription drugs for free or for a fraction of the cost. But in the end, organizations like the Diabetes Foundation of Mississippi, continue to reach out to as many as they can.

“It really does scare me to think about some of the people we help,” McClain said. “We’re actively telling doctor’s offices to go to the insulin assistance pages online so they can get samples for the patients because the need is huge. There are free clinics around the state where people can go and get assistance. But we’re the only diabetes group, that I know of, that buys the supplies for people.”

What is Diabetes?

Diabetes results from an inability to use and/or produce insulin, a hormone made by the pancreas. Insulin helps get glucose — a form of sugar from the foods we eat — into our body cells to burn for energy. After eating, blood glucose levels rise, and insulin is produced to help get glucose into cells. If the body cannot produce insulin (Type 1 diabetes) or cannot use it properly (Type 2 diabetes), blood glucose levels build up in the blood. Diabetes is diagnosed based on elevated blood glucose levels.

Type 1

Type 1 diabetes is usually diagnosed in children and young adults and was previously known as “juvenile diabetes.“ Only 5 percent of people with diabetes have this form of the disease.

Why it occurs

The body’s immune system attacks part of its own pancreas. Scientists are not sure why. But the immune system mistakenly sees the insulin-producing cells in the pancreas as foreign and destroys them. This attack is known as “autoimmune” disease. A person with Type 1 diabetes must take insulin daily.

These cells are the ones that sense glucose in the blood and, in response, produce the necessary amount of insulin to normalize blood sugars. Insulin serves as a “key” to open the cells, to allow the glucose to enter — and allows for the glucose to be used for energy.

Without insulin, there is no key. So, the sugar stays — and builds up — in the blood. The result: The body’s cells starve from lack of glucose. And, if left untreated, the high level of blood sugar can damage eyes, kidneys, nerves and the heart and can lead to coma and death.

Type 2

The most common form of diabetes is Type 2 diabetes, or noninsulin-dependent diabetes. This is also called “adult onset” diabetes, since it typically develops after age 35. However, a growing number of younger people are now developing Type 2 diabetes. Ninety to 95 percent of people diagnosed with diabetes have Type 2.

Why it occurs

Type 2 diabetes is most often associated with genetics and lifestyle and has even been nicknamed a “disease of lifestyles.” The body does not use insulin properly. At first, the pancreas makes extra insulin to make up for it. But over time, it isn’t able to keep up and can’t make enough insulin to keep your blood glucose at normal levels. This is called insulin resistance. This usually occurs with excess weight and physical inactivity.

Type 2 diabetes has a higher inheritance risk Than type 1. Common factors associated with Type 2 diabetes include obesity, family history of diabetes, prior diagnosis of gestational diabetes, physical inactivity and race/ethnicity.

Type 2 diabetes is serious, controllable and preventable. Moderate diet and exercise that results in a 5 percent to 7 percent weight loss can delay and possibly prevent Type 2 diabetes.

Sources: Diabetes Foundation of Mississippi, Mississippi Department of Health, American Diabetes Association, Diabetes Research Institute.

Type 2

The most common form of diabetes is Type 2 diabetes, or noninsulin-dependent diabetes. This is also called “adult onset” diabetes, since it typically develops after age 35. However, a growing number of younger people are now developing Type 2 diabetes. Ninety to 95 percent of people diagnosed with diabetes have Type 2.

Why it occurs

Type 2 diabetes is most often associated with genetics and lifestyle and has even been nicknamed a “disease of lifestyles.” The body does not use insulin properly. At first, the pancreas makes extra insulin to make up for it. But over time, it isn’t able to keep up and can’t make enough insulin to keep your blood glucose at normal levels. This is called insulin resistance. This usually occurs with excess weight and physical inactivity.

Type 2 diabetes has a higher inheritance risk Than type 1. Common factors associated with Type 2 diabetes include obesity, family history of diabetes, prior diagnosis of gestational diabetes, physical inactivity and race/ethnicity.

Type 2 diabetes is serious, controllable and preventable. Moderate diet and exercise that results in a 5 percent to 7 percent weight loss can delay and possibly prevent Type 2 diabetes.

Sources: Diabetes Foundation of Mississippi, Mississippi Department of Health, American Diabetes Association, Diabetes Research Institute.

Patient Assistance Programs

Various drug companies have assistance programs. A doctor, medical social worker or patient advocate can help set up longer-term assistance.

•Lilly Assistance Program: 1-800-545-6962 (Humulin or Humalog); www.lillytruassist.com

•Bristol Myers Assistance Program: 1-800-332-2056; www.bmspaf.org

•Pfizer Assistance Program: 1-800-646-4455 (Glucotrol); www.phahelps.com

•Takeda Assistance Program: 1-877-825-3327 (Actos); www.takeda.us

•Amylin Patient Assistance: 1-800-330-7647 (Byetta, Symlin); http://careers.amylin.com

•Glaxo Smith Klein: 1-800-722-9294 http://us.gsk.com/

•Sanofi-Aventis (Apidra, Lantus): 1-800-221-4025; www.sanofi.us

•Novo Nordisk Assistance Program: 1-866-310-7549 (Novolin / Novolog / Levemir); www.novonordisk-us.com

•www.needymeds.com

Source: Diabetes Foundation of Mississippi

Diabetes in Mississippi

•In 2012, Mississippi ranked second in the nation for overall diabetes prevalence, with over 276,000 adults with Type 2 diabetes. An estimated 93,000 others don’t know they have the disease.

•Four of every 1,000 Mississippi deaths were from diabetes in 2012, the latest year for which statistics were available.

•In 1990, 440 death certificates listed diabetes as the underlying cause of death. By 2012, it was 1,039.

Sources: State Department of Health, Diabetes Foundation of Mississippi

Read or Share this story: http://hatne.ws/1MoW7et