AT A lunch given by a Republican women's club outside Augusta, Georgia last month, Ralph Hudgens, Georgia's Insurance Commissioner, shared his thoughts on the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The subject of his ire, curiously, was the requirement that insurers cover pre-existing conditions—a provision of the ACA that even his fellow Republicans have little problem with. To Mr Hudgens, however, having a pre-existing condition and expecting insurers to cover you anyway is no different than getting into a car wreck that's "your fault". It's callous, cruel and, of course, wrong: the human body breaks down, and it breaks down in ways that are neither predictable nor fair. Mr Hudgens also shared his thoughts on the ACA a couple of months ago: to a round of applause he told his audience that "the problem is Obamacare", and reassured them that "we are doing everything in our power to be an obstructionist." Now, the ACA isn't perfect, but it is at least a good faith effort to make sure that nobody dies or goes bankrupt from lack of insurance. One would expect the Insurance Commissioner of Georgia to at least mention, if only for appearance's sake, his concern for the hundreds of thousands of Georgians that might suffer those fates. But no.

I was thinking of Mr Hudgens as I read this month's cover story in Commentary. It's a plea from John Podhoretz and Michael Medved to Republicans: stop the infighting, the primary challenges, the insistence on ideological purity, because "the truest beneficiary of the intra-Republican civil war will be the Democratic Party". In that assessment, they are, of course, correct. The Democrats hold 53 seats in the Senate, and three of them are occupied by Chris Coons, Joe Donnelly and Claire McCaskill: a trio of empty suits who owe their positions largely to the repellant candidates (Christine O'Donnell, Richard Mourdock and Todd Akin) they ran against. Lindsay Graham, Thad Cochran, Pat Roberts, Mitch McConnell and Mike Enzi—all solid, savvy, experienced Republican senators with sterling conservative records—face tea-party primary challengers this year. All may prevail; they come from far more Republican states than Delaware, Indiana or Missouri. But they may prevail at great cost to themselves and the party.

Messrs Podhoretz and Medved are also correct in identifying a second batch of beneficiaries of Republican infighting: "a new class of political activists" who rely on "emotion—often negative emotion". It worked for the left in 2004, they say; and it's working for Republicans now, at much greater cost to the party (not to mention, you know, the country). Here's the thing: policy is hard, and not terribly sexy. In a partisan democracy, nobody gets his way all the time; compromise is essential; and in the long run the best one can hope for is not to screw things up too irreparably. The legislature is not God's perfect kingdom on earth, just awaiting redemption; it is a combination preschool recess and sausage factory (I mean no disrespect to preschoolers or butchers). That's one reason why America is a republic rather than a direct democracy: not everyone has the stomach, patience, temperament or skill to spend their lives immersed in intricate policy details. But politics is easy. Anyone can yell at the TV. Anyone can get outraged at an email accusing someone of perfidy, treason, dishonesty or failing to honour campaign promises. Anyone can fork over money to someone who promises that they and they alone can save America. I am still on the email lists for various failed Republican presidential candidates from 2012, and they still send me emails: Biblical secrets to investing! The weird trick about retirement income the government doesn't want you to know! It's the same marketing strategy, just with grifts rather than candidates.

Where I think Messrs Podhoretz and Medved err—and how this connects to Mr Hudgens—is their assumption that if Republicans would just stop the infighting, they'd win. In their entire article they have not one policy idea, just an exhortation to "attract votes and voters". The unstated assumption, which I think is pretty common among Republicans, is that Barack Obama won through some combination of chicanery, anti-white racism and his "cool" factor. He sliced up the electorate into hyphenated identities and brought out a different, obviously inauthentic self to appeal to each group, when in fact both of his victories hinged on stark policy differences. One candidate favoured universal health care, higher taxes on the rich and a relatively non-bellicose foreign policy; the others opposed all three. True, opposition to the ACA fueled Republican victories in 2010, and may well do so again in 2014, but voters in 2012 seemed to favour universal health care. Or, at the very least, they preferred doing something to doing nothing. As I said above, the ACA is far from perfect. But it's better than telling cancer patients and diabetics that it's all their fault.

(Photo credit: AFP)