NEW YORK (CBSNewYork) — Gov. Chris Christie has jumped on the bandwagon. He’s not a fan of President Barack Obama’s latest ad pushing the uninsured to sign up for the Affordable Care Act, either.

Earlier this week, the president’s Twitter account tweeted an image of a man in what appears to be red footie pajamas with a mug in his hands. The caption reads: “Wear pajamas. Drink hot chocolate. Talk about getting health care.”

How do you plan to spend the cold days of December? http://t.co/Rwf5AYc3bG #GetTalking pic.twitter.com/PBQ397yLf4 — Barack Obama (@BarackObama) December 17, 2013

The ad set off quite an uproar on Twitter, with many users labeling the man in the image “pajama boy,” and ripping Obama. Others seemed to look at the ad as an act of desperation and that’s understandable considering a recent CBSNews/New York Times poll revealed that 34 percent of people without health care believe the Affordable Care Act will harm them and 46 percent said it will have no change on their lives whatsoever.

Christie, the Republican governor of New Jersey, jumped into the fray on Wednesday. He was at a soup kitchen in Paterson as part of his administration’s “Season of Service” initiative. He later took to Twitter and mimicked the president’s ad, firing off a tweet stressing volunteerism.

In New Jersey, we are spending the cold days of December volunteering. #GetOutOfYourPJs #SeasonOfService pic.twitter.com/yhtwDpy2cQ — Governor Christie (@GovChristie) December 18, 2013

The two hashtags Christie used in the tweet, “GetOutOfYourPJs” and “SeasonofService,” were immediately trending on the social media site.

Some Democrats were critical of Christie’s response, which seems more about the governor showing his might to the White House during a time of high speculation that he’ll run for president in 2016, than it does guiding his state.

The Christie administration, along with Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s administration in New York, was criticized earlier this week for not being more hands-on in its overseeing of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey during emergency construction on the George Washington Bridge, which on three occasions over the last few weeks has led to epic evening commute traffic delays and backups stretching as far as 20 miles.

Christie has also been fending off a potential scandal involving lane closures at the GWB, that some have said were a product of political retribution.

You May Also Be Interested In These Stories