NEIGHBOURS in Ottery St Mary claim their homes are at risk of toppling over the edge of an eight metre drop onto a row of houses below since a landslip more than a year ago.

Following the incident to the rear of Millcroft, in November 2012, business consultant Fred Osbourn, 33, and the family next door have been trying to ensure action is taken to stabilise the land and the future of their homes.

Since the landslip to the rear of their properties 14 months ago, the decking adjoining Mr Osbourn’s home is over hanging the precipice and cracks are starting to appear in the walls of his house.

He claims their lives, and those of the people living in the houses at the base of the steep slope, are in danger as material continues to collapse.

He wants the bank to be re-stabilised so subsequent remedial work that may be carried out does not trigger another landslide.

It is understood that the responsibility is on the landowner, in this case the owners of nearby Island Farm who told the Echo that the matter was “in the hands of their insurance company”.

Under the Building Act, East Devon District Council also has a responsibility to ensure public safety in relation to premises, which includes land.

But Mr Osbourn, who moved into his home six years ago, has criticised the length of time that is lapsing and has accused the landowner and the council of not taking the risk seriously enough.

He said the erosion of the bank worsens with each bout of heavy rain with “a substantial amount of loose branches, bricks and other heavy material” disappearing in the rains over the last few weeks.

“There has been absolutely no progress in sorting out this matter since it happened 14 months ago and we still face the possibility of our homes sliding into a row of six, three-storey terraced houses and flats immediately below our properties,” explained Mr Osbourne who said that his health has suffered as a result of the stress the matter has caused him.

In addition, he claims he’s suffered around £20,000 in loss of earnings due to time he’s had to had off work due to site meetings.

“I am acutely concerned that there will be an imminent landslide and hundreds of tonnes of rock and foundation materials will flatten the houses below us or kill somebody,” he added.

Mr Osbourn said that although his insurance company is now investigating whether they can deal with the work to stabilise the bank, the burden should not fall on him or his insurance company to rectify the problem.

A district council spokesperson, added: “It has been unclear whether the council is empowered to take the action that Mr Osbourn wants to see.

“Initial legal research failed to clarify the position.

“We have sought further specialist advice to get clear direction and we are hoping to hear from Counsel next week.”