Chattanooga’s CHI Memorial received a $69,000 slice of a $462,852 grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to assist uninsured people in Tennessee with accessing health insurance exchanges and Medicaid.

More specifically, money will be used for healthcare education initiatives and one-on-one guidance to navigate open enrollment for the Affordable Care Act, said Jennifer McDonald, CHI Memorial grant development specialist. And general information packets and flyers have been sent out to targeted areas, such as the population surrounding their Hixson, Westside and Glenwood clinics, she said.

Funds will be used for a Jan. 16 outreach event to help with enrollment, McDonald said. In conjunction with the Chattanooga mayor’s office, facilitators will guide applicants through the entire enrollment process. The event is at the UTC University Center—642 E. 5th St.—from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m.

CHI Memorial is also using grant money to train and hire interns for additional person-to-person aid, McDonald said.

Erricka Hill, CHI Memorial's social services manager for outpatient clinics, said staff would be available Saturday, and by appointment, until the end of the month to help individuals who do not have access to computers or understand the information.

“[We’re here to] help them understand the insurance process,” Hill said. “We help educate them of what plans involve, how much of a co-pay [they] might need and what all they need in order to qualify.”

Hill said that the entire process takes about an hour. Individuals will need to supply information including identification, proof of income, and proof of residence, officials said.

Hill said she recommends those interested first go to healthcare.gov to see what information is needed and then call their office at 423-756-1062.

Though open enrollment ends Jan. 31, CHI Memorial staff plan to use the grant money to continue education projects and assist with enrollment into April for those who qualify for an extension, Hill said.

Updated @ 2:04 p.m. on 1/14/16.