On Media Blog Archives Select Date… December, 2015 November, 2015 October, 2015 September, 2015 August, 2015 July, 2015 June, 2015 May, 2015 April, 2015 March, 2015 February, 2015 January, 2015

Who will replace Piers Morgan at CNN?

Piers Morgan is out. So who's in?

Jeff Zucker's decision to end Morgan's show has opened the floodgates on the longstanding speculation over the future of CNN's 9 p.m. hour. But who the CNN President will ultimately decide to put in that slot is far from clear.

What we do know is this: Morgan's tenure proved that the success or failure of a show depends on its host, not its bookings. Unless Zucker commits 9 p.m. to prerecorded programming, a la Anthony Bourdain or Blackfish, he will need a host (or hosts) who can command viewership regardless of their guests.

Bill Weir is certainly someone to watch. The former Nightline anchor was hired away from ABC News in October. At the time, sources told POLITICO and Mediaite that Weir had been promised a show in the 9 p.m. hour, and mentioned that promise to colleagues at ABC. (CNN sources denied that claim.)

(Also on POLITICO: CNN to end Piers Morgan's show)

Regardless of what CNN promised Weir, his ambitions are for primetime. One doesn't leave nightime network television in order to go into daytime cable television. Unless Zucker gets rid of another primetime host -- not altogether an unlikely possiblity -- 9 p.m. seems like an obvious slot for Weir. That said, he's certainly not the only one in the running. Morgan's departure gives Zucker the opportunity to test out multiple candidates.

(WATCH: Piers Morgan's CNN highlights)

One more thing: Cable news channels are showing a growing preference for panel-hosted programming, so don't be surprised if the 9 p.m. hour is given over to a show with multiple hosts, a la Fox News's "The Five" or MSNBC's "The Cycle." Indeed, up until last week, CNN hosted a 10 p.m. panel show anchored by Anderson Cooper.

Whoever -- or whatever -- is put in the 9 p.m. slot, it will be going up against fierce competition: Rachel Maddow, MSNBC's marquee personality, and Megyn Kelly, the new face of Fox News primetime. Then again, Zucker has always stressed that MSNBC and Fox News aren't the competition.

Authors: