Clemson freshman outfielder Seth Beer has batted nine home runs through 19 games, and on Sunday became the first Tiger in three years to hit a walk-off homer in a 3-2 extra-innings win vs. Boston College, Sun. March 20, 2016. (Carl Ackerman/Clemson sports information)

CLEMSON – Seth Beer should still be in high school. Instead, the freshman outfielder is single-handedly lifting the Clemson baseball team back to national relevance.

Beer blasted a walkoff home run to button up the Tigers’ 3-2 victory over Boston College in ten innings Sunday, sealing a series sweep and improving Clemson to 16-3 overall, 5-1 in the ACC. Clemson is now tied with Florida State and North Carolina for the ACC’s best conference records, looking for a better finish than recent seasons around the .500 mark in league play.

Beer enrolled at Clemson in January, and quickly elevated to the Tigers’ cleanup spot. He stroked his ninth home run of the season, already more than halfway to the Clemson freshman single-season record, on a 1-0 count facing BC reliever John Nicklas with two out in the bottom of the tenth. That is Clemson’s first walk-off home run since Kevin Bradley’s bomb beat USC Upstate on May 14, 2013.

The 19-year-old Beer has been on a tear since the season began. Since going 0-for-4 on Opening Day, Beer has hit safely in all 17 games with a plate appearance (he departed with a lacerated cheek before his first at-bat vs. South Carolina on March 6.) Beer is hitting .453 with 25 RBIs through 19 games.

The Tigers set up Beer’s heroics in the bottom of the ninth with Chris Williams’ infield single to bring home K.J. Bryant, tying the game at 2. Shortstop Eli White, who has struggled early this season, knocked his first home run in the bottom of the seventh.

Starting pitcher Alex Eubanks worked 6 2/3 innings, striking out ten Eagles without walking a batter, but left with BC leading 2-0. Center fielder Michael Strem and second baseman Jake Palomaki had RBI hits in the first and second innings, respectively, for the early lead.

Tigers reliever Alex Bostic earned the victory with 1 2/3 innings of work. On the weekend, Clemson’s pitchers produced a 1.61 ERA, walking three batters and notching 33 strikeouts.

Clemson will host Presbyterian College Tuesday night before visiting sixth-ranked Miami (16-4, 4-2 ACC) this coming weekend.