Con­gress un­did some of its planned cuts to vet­er­ans’ be­ne­fits in the latest spend­ing bill, but it also left the vast ma­jor­ity of the re­duc­tions in place. And in so do­ing, it en­sured that the white-hot con­tro­versy over be­ne­fits will not go away any time soon.

The om­ni­bus spend­ing bill re­moved some re­duc­tions to med­ic­ally re­tired vet­er­ans’ re­tire­ment be­ne­fits, but that was a small part — less than one-tenth — of the $6 bil­lion-plus cut in­cluded in the Decem­ber budget deal. And that res­tor­a­tion won’t be enough for the out­side vet­er­ans groups, who have launched an all-out ef­fort to re­verse the cuts and have vowed to keep fight­ing un­til all the fund­ing is re­stored.

Vet­er­ans yield polit­ic­al clout, and after an end­less string of state­ments pledging to “sup­port our troops,” law­makers are loathe to have crossed them. And so the re­peal ef­fort is gain­ing trac­tion: The Hill es­tim­ates that one-third of law­makers have backed a pro­pos­al to re­verse the COLA cuts to work­ing-age mil­it­ary re­tir­ees in­cluded in last month’s deal.

But in a budget con­strained en­vir­on­ment, the money to re­verse the cuts has to come from some­where, and that’s where the unity shat­ters. Here are some of the pro­pos­als.

Adding to the De­fi­cit: Simply re­peal­ing the cuts and let­ting the spend­ing add to the de­fi­cit is thus far the solu­tion that has been pro­posed the most. In the up­per cham­ber, Sens. Kay Hagan and Mark Pry­or have in­tro­duced le­gis­la­tion to re­peal, while in the House, Reps. Robert Wittman, Jeff Miller, and Ju­lia Brown­ley have in­tro­duced sim­il­ar le­gis­la­tion.

Wrap It In­to a Lar­ger Vet­er­ans Bill: The latest pro­pos­al to re­verse the cuts comes from Sen. Bernie Sanders. Sanders in­tro­duced an om­ni­bus vet­er­ans bill Thursday even­ing that deals with a whole swath of is­sues from restor­ing the COLA cuts to ex­pand­ing schol­ar­ship funds. And it looks like it could have mo­mentum. Sen­ate Ma­jor­ity Lead­er Harry Re­id is ex­pec­ted to file the le­gis­la­tion un­der Rule 14, al­low­ing it to skip the com­mit­tee pro­cess.

Tax Changes: Sen. Jeanne Shaheen and Rep. Dan Maf­fei have in­tro­duced le­gis­la­tion to swap the roughly $6 bil­lion in cuts with a clos­ing of a tax loop­hole for off­shore cor­por­a­tions.

But tax re­form — while sup­por­ted gen­er­ally by both parties — is typ­ic­ally more pop­u­lar in the­ory than prac­tice, and it has faced a ser­i­ous up­hill chal­lenge. Shaheen, however, has noted that she is will­ing to be “flex­ible” on how she off­sets re­vers­ing the COLA cuts.

Un­doc­u­mented Im­mig­rants: Rep. Mike Fitzpatrick is tak­ing a dif­fer­ent ap­proach­ing, press­ing to re­verse the COLA cuts by in­creas­ing re­quire­ments to re­ceive the Re­fund­able Child Tax Cred­it. The Pennsylvania Re­pub­lic­an wants to pre­vent un­doc­u­mented im­mig­rants from be­ing able to claim the cred­it.

Sen. Kelly Ayotte has in­tro­duced sim­il­ar le­gis­la­tion in the Sen­ate. Her pro­pos­al got a mo­ment­ary boost when Armed Ser­vice Com­mit­tee Chair­man Carl Lev­in told re­port­ers he would sup­port her bill, but his of­fice quickly re­trac­ted his state­ment, say­ing the sen­at­or didn’t real­ize it was off­set by tar­get­ing un­doc­u­mented im­mig­rants.

Block­ing For­eign Aid: Rep. Ted Poe wants to re­verse cuts by block­ing for­eign aid to Egypt or Pakistan. His at­tempt goes against the om­ni­bus bill which would al­low the Obama ad­min­is­tra­tion to re­sume more than $1 bil­lion in aid to Egypt.

And it isn’t the first time Poe has tried to block for­eign aid to Pakistan. When many of the armed-ser­vices branches, as well as the Coast Guard, sus­pen­ded their tu­ition as­sist­ance pro­grams, Poe sug­ges­ted sus­pend­ing aid to Pakistan un­til the pro­grams were fully fun­ded, des­pite the sig­ni­fic­ant dif­fer­ence in spend­ing both pro­grams re­quire.

Poe would also help off­set the costs of re­vers­ing the full COLA cuts by au­thor­iz­ing the sales of some fed­er­al land over­seen by the Bur­eau of Land Man­age­ment and the na­tion­al forest sys­tem.

At­tack­ing Obama­care: Rep. Scott Des­Jar­lais in­tro­duced le­gis­la­tion that would re­store COLA fund­ing and make up the ad­ded cost by re­du­cing the Af­ford­able Care Act’s Pre­ven­tion and Pub­lic Health Fund. The fund, part of the Af­ford­able Care Act, in­vests in pro­grams aimed at im­prov­ing health qual­ity and out­comes; it also sup­ports pre­ven­tion pro­grams.

Des­Jar­lais isn’t the first — and likely won’t be the last — Re­pub­lic­an con­gress­man to tar­get the fund, and the Obama ad­min­is­tra­tion has already used some of the fund to pay for oth­er parts of the Af­ford­able Care Act.

Sen. Ted Cruz also tried to amend the om­ni­bus to re­peal the Af­ford­able Care Act and re­store the full COLA fund­ing, des­pite the fact that any sig­ni­fic­ant changes to the ACA are a non­starter in the Demo­crat­ic­ally con­trolled Sen­ate.

Drugs for Vet­er­ans: Rep. James Lank­ford has in­tro­duced le­gis­la­tion to re­peal the COLA cuts and swap out the fund­ing by re­quir­ing the de­part­ments of De­fense and Vet­er­ans Af­fairs to pur­chase con­tracts for pre­scrip­tion drugs to­geth­er. The Ok­lahoma Re­pub­lic­an points to $660 mil­lion saved by the VA in 2005 un­der a sim­il­ar joint-pur­chas­ing policy.

Changes to the Postal Sys­tem: Rep. Dar­rell Issa is pro­pos­ing to re­store COLA funds by im­ple­ment­ing a mod­i­fied Sat­urday de­liv­ery sched­ule. The Postal Ser­vice pre­vi­ously tried to change its Sat­urday de­liv­ery sched­ule, but mem­bers of Con­gress blocked the at­tempt.

From Oth­er De­fense De­part­ment Spend­ing: Rep. Gus Bi­lira­kis would off­set the ap­prox­im­ately $6 bil­lion in cuts by re­du­cing the De­fense De­part­ment’s un­oblig­ated funds. The de­part­ment fin­ished the 2013 fisc­al year with $65.4 bil­lion in un­oblig­ated money, after us­ing the fund to help stave off the ef­fects of se­quest­ra­tion.