Topics: AlterNet, Donald Trump, Florida, GOP debate, John Kasich, Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz, Elections News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Anyone tuning into the Republican debate in Florida on Thursday night expecting the kind of exciting fireworks of the last debate might have been disappointed. Not a peep about anyone’s penis or hand size, short stature, tendency to sweat, or dishonest business practices, and no Ted Cruz telling Donald to stop interrupting and breathe. The four Republican candidates still standing seemed to have made a collective decision to be civil to one another, act more serious and debate actual issues. And yet still, they managed to spout a fair amount of alarming nonsense.

Here are nine notably absurd and jarring moments from the debate.

1. Donald Trump made a point of telling everyone he has watched the Democratic debates about highfalutin’ things like Social Security and it is soooooo boring. (Not exciting like his favorite shows, “Survivor” and “The Apprentice” and “The Bachelor.”)

2. Marco Rubio made it very clear that although his parents came to this country unskilled and uneducated and were welcomed and are part of what made this country great, he is firmly committed to slamming that door shut to unskilled immigrants from here on in.

3. Trump doubled down on his statement this week that “Islam hates us.” When Jake Tapper asked, “Did you mean all 1.6 billion Muslims?” Trump answered, “I mean a lot of them.”

Tapper gave him one more chance and said, “Do you want to clarify that?” But Trump really thought he had already been plenty clear, and insisted that any attempt to argue with him was political correctness.

Making this doubly notable was that it somehow made Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz seem like moderates about Muslims, because they think there are Muslims we can work with to defeat ISIL. They are not moderates about Islam. Neither is John Kasich.

4. Both Cruz and Rubio turned a question about whether we should commit the war crime of killing terrorists’ families into an opportunity to bash Obama for “gutting the military.” Kind of a headscratcher. Then again, the Republican candidates had the misfortune of debating on the very day when news came out that Obama’s approval ratings are up dramatically. Bummer for them.

5. Cruz managed to make Trump seem relatively reasonable about negotiating between Israel and the Palestinians.