A 12-year-old boy rides an all-terrain vehicle in Mead in July 2011 in this file photo. To minimize risk of injury while riding, experts say children should wear helmets, like this boy is doing, get training and make sure to ride the correct size of ATV. ( Joshua Buck / Longmont Times-Call )

What starts out as a perfect day, with warm sun shining overhead and a gentle breeze blowing, can suddenly turn to tragedy. It can happen in an instant, and in that instant, a life can be changed — or ended.

Recent ATV (all terrain vehicle/four wheeler) accidents in our area and throughout the country have drawn attention to concerns surrounding the use of ATVs.

In May 2014, an 8-year-old Pennsylvania boy died when his ATV crashed and rolled over him. This month, a 10-year-old Alabama boy died when his ATV crashed into a utility pole guide wire, ran up the wire and flipped landing on top of him. And the list goes on and on.

"We have a major public health problem with ATVs," said David Gilkey, an associate professor in the Department of Environmental and Radiological Health Sciences at CSU. "These vehicles are fun, but they have many risks associated with operation."

Gilkey has done extensive research for the last five years on the dangers. "About 800 deaths per year result from ATV accidents," he said. "A child younger than 16 dies in an ATV accident once every four days."

He encourages those who love to ride their ATV to do two things: "Wear a helmet and take the training."

An ATV Rider Course is offered through the ATV Safety Institute, a national nonprofit (atvsafety.org). "It is a good hands-on program." said Gilkey. "If you buy a new ATV, you get a voucher that pays for the training. But only 5 percent take the training."

Advertisement

"The more safety training you can get the better and certainly wear protective gear, said Dr. Mike Apostle, of Emergency Physicians of the Rockies. "People see ATVs as very recreational, but they need to see them the same as a car, especially when it comes to avoiding alcohol while using them."

Dr. Jerry Collins, general surgeon at McKee Medical Center agrees, "Compare it to driving a car, which requires education and wearing a seat belt. Yet, you'll let a kid get into an inherently unstable vehicle — there's a disconnect." McKee's emergency department treated 18 patients for ATV-related accidents from January 2013 to June 2014.

Gilkey's concern about the importance of wearing a helmet is obvious to others as well. Both Dr. Apostle and Dr. Collins noted that most fatalities on ATVs are related to head injuries.

More than 70 percent of the children killed in ATV accidents were not wearing helmets. In addition, "Compared to helmeted ATV riders, unhelmeted ATV riders are much more likely to suffer a serious traumatic brain injury and much more likely to receive significant injuries to the face and neck," according to a report by Johns Hopkins Injury Research and Policy in 2012.

But getting people to wear a helmet isn't always easy. Gilkey found this while working with a group of agricultural producers. Although frequent ATV riders, none had taken training. "They didn't want to wear a helmet, because they thought it would limit their hearing. But when they did, they all agreed that the helmet did not obscure. The training enhanced their ability to do their job."

Gilkey's main focus in his research has been with the agricultural sector. The research has been funded through the High Plains Intermountain Center for Agricultural Health and Safety, which is based at CSU.

"Agricultural ATV users account for only 20 percent of all riders," he noted. "But they represent 65 percent of occupational ATV-related fatalities."

Another safeguard that Gilkey and the center stress: "Make sure the rider is fitted to the unit; they come in small, medium and large sizes for kids, adolescents and adults, respectively." Although adult-sized ATVs have warnings on them stating no one under 16 should be riding the vehicle, "more than 90 percent of all child deaths in ATV accidents occurred when children were riding adult-sized ATVs."

The average weight of a 9-year-old boy is somewhere between 60 to 80 pounds. An adult-sized ATV can weigh 500 to 600 pounds or more. New models can weigh even more.

"Children don't have the strength, the coordination and the capability," said Gilkey. "If they're not trained, they don't have the skills."

The website "Concerned Families for ATV Safety" (atvsafetynet.org) shows more than 55 stories and pictures of children who have died as the result of an ATV accident. Many of them died because they chose to ride an adult-sized ATV or chose not to wear a helmet. One was only 23 months old.

They're much like the kids who live down the street. Kids who love baseball, dancing, swimming and just having fun — especially riding on their ATVs.