WASHINGTON —

For all the right reasons, Sheldon Kennedy is again at the forefront of NHL off-ice conversations.

Kennedy, 46, has graciously shared the startling truth about his teenage life in the feature-length documentary “Swift Current” — a compelling story about the sexual abuse he endured from coach Graham James — and the resulting recklessness he lived to near destruction.

The film debuted Saturday night on Canada’s Sportsnet, past my deadline. But after watching the two-minute, 38-second trailer, this is a must-see film for all hockey fans — particularly Avalanche followers, given that Kennedy and Joe Sakic were the scoring stars for the Saskatchewan major-junior team.

“I lived fast and dangerous. I was portrayed as this out-of-control drunk kid. There was something wrong with me. And there was: I had to protect a secret,” Kennedy says in the trailer.

Kennedy played for the Swift Current Broncos from 1986-89, alongside Sakic in two of his three years. As 17-year-old rookies in 1986-87, Kennedy and Sakic were on the team bus that crashed en route to Regina, Saskatchewan, killing four teammates, including 16-year-old Brent Ruff, the younger brother of current Dallas Stars coach Lindy Ruff.

The following season, Sakic and Kennedy combined for 131 goals and 277 points in a 72-game campaign. Sakic then signed with the Quebec Nordiques but Kennedy remained in Swift Current and helped lead the Broncos to the 1989 Memorial Cup, after which The Hockey News named James its “man of the year.” Sakic’s younger brother, Brian, was a 16-year-old forward on that Canadian major-junior championship team.

Kennedy joined the NHL that fall, playing for the Detroit Red Wings. He was among the fiercest hitters of his era, and amassed twice as many career penalty minutes (233) as points (107) in 310 games.

Kennedy was admittedly out of control on and off the ice, and said all of his problems started when he first was sexually abused by James at age 14, when he was coached by James in his native Winnipeg.

“I remember gong back to his apartment,” Kennedy says in the trailer. “I heard Graham crawling around the room, so I’m thinking, ‘OK, this is weird.’ Then all of a sudden he started touching my feet. My life changed from that point on.”

From age 14 to 19, Kennedy said he was sexually abused by James some 350 times. In all, James has admitted to sexual abusing six players — including Theo Fleury, who has authored a book about it. James is serving a combined seven-year prison term in Canada.

The documentary looks at hockey’s seemingly blind eye to sexual abuse during that era, the deadly bus crash, the major-junior championship and Kennedy’s struggles with his own family. The constant is James, the pedophile, and how he got away with it for so long.

“The coach is so respected. Your parents send you away and say, ‘Do what he says.’ At that age, you listen. That’s your first step if you want to play pro,” Kennedy told the Ottawa Citizen.

Joe Sakic said Saturday that he hasn’t seen the documentary and was unaware when it was coming out.

Mike Chambers: mchambers @denverpost.com or @mikechambers

Spotlight on …

Bryan Little, F, Winnipeg Jets

When: The Avalanche plays Little and the Jets twice in the next three games. Colorado concludes a seven-game road trip at Winnipeg on Monday and hosts the Jets on Saturday in a “Hockey Night in Canada” affair.

What’s up: Little entered the weekend with a team-high nine goals and ranked second with 18 points. He is one of the NHL’s most underrated players, despite scoring 20-plus goals in each of his last three full NHL seasons. He might be Winnipeg’s best defensive forward.

Background: Little is the all-time leading scorer for the Ontario Hockey League’s Barrie Colts. In four seasons he amassed 58, 68, 109 and 107 points, with 40-plus goals his last two years. He was the 12th overall selection in the 2006 NHL draft, taken by the Atlanta Thrashers (now Jets).

Chambers’ take: Little carries a lot of weight in Winnipeg. He is a two-way standout, with a career plus-8 rating while mostly playing on weak teams. In his first full NHL season, he scored 31 goals with the Thrashers on a 76-point team that finished 14th in the 15-team Eastern Conference. Since, he has been equally good on both sides of the ice. Little has developed his game to where his coach is his biggest fan.