President Obama appeared outside a Tennessee cancer survivor's front door and gave the woman a ride to a Wednesday event, after she sent him a thank you-note in appreciation of the Affordable Care Act.

The president surrounded himself Wednesday with two women who shared their health care stories in letters to him, before speaking at Taylor Stratton Elementary School.

Before getting to the event, Natoma Canfield accompanied the president aboard the Air Force One flight. Canfield is an Ohio cancer survivor who wrote in 2009 about being forced to drop her health insurance after she could no longer afford the monthly premium.

After arriving in Tennessee, Obama made room in his limousine for Kelly Bryant, of Nashville, who wrote about finding affordable insurance under the law to treat her breast cancer.

Hello there! President Obama appeared at a Tennessee cancer survivor's front door and gave the woma, Kelly Bryant, a ride to an event on Wednesday

New friends: Obama is seen holding an umbrella over Bryant on Wednesday outside her Nashville residence

Conversation: Bryant has said she and the president had a 'normal chit chat' in the ride over

He picked Bryant up on the way to the event, hugged her and even held an umbrella to shield her from a pounding rain.

According to the Tennessean, Obama said at the event held at Taylor Stratton Elementary School: 'It was so close to the school. Might as well swing by and get her.'

Bryant said to introduce the president, referring to her note: 'I never imagined in my wildest dreams that anyone would read it, let alone him.

'I am living proof of a president who listens and cares about the American people.'

She was quoted by the Columbia Daily Herald as saying of her treatment: 'The second time around was a tougher treatment regimen and a surgery which would have made it impossible for me to work full-time.

'With the help of healthcare.gov and the Affordable Care Act, I was able to find high-quality insurance that I could afford.

'It was a comfort to me and my family knowing I can concentrate on getting better and not losing everything in the process.'

Bryant told the Tennessean she and the president had a 'normal chit chat' in the ride over.

She told the newspaper: 'He's such a friendly, laid-back guy. As soon as you get in his presence, you're comfortable.'

The Tennessean reported that Bryant and Obama discussed tea, coffee, and NHL ice hockey during the car trip.

'I guess just being Southern, we're always taught to write thank-you notes,' Bryant told the newspaper.

Bryant told the Tennessean that Obama praised her yard and gave her a hug upon meeting her.

According to the news outlet, the president signed a 2008 inauguration invite for Bryant.

Obama's choice to visit Tennessee was deliberate.

The state's Republican governor, Bill Haslam, tried to expand Medicaid under the health care law to cover more than 200,000 state residents — only to be stymied by state legislators of his own party.

Speaking out: Bryant said Wednesday: 'I am living proof of a president who listens and cares about the American people'

Topics: Bryant and Obama discussed tea, coffee, and ice hockey during the car trip

Fresh off a Supreme Court victory, Obama said Wednesday in Tennessee that he's 'feeling pretty good' about the state of his health care law and pleaded for bipartisan cooperation on ways to make it work even better.

Obama said he wants to refocus the debate on improving health care quality, expanding access and eliminating waste now that the high court has upheld a key element of the Affordable Care Act.

'I'm feeling pretty good about how health care is going,' Obama said before he removed his suit jacket and answered questions about health care from Tennesseans seated at tables in an elementary school cafeteria.

Obama argued to his audience — and during a Twitter question-and-answer session immediately after the event — that health care coverage rates could be vastly improved if more governors and lawmakers would accept the federal government's offer of billions of dollars of federal money to pay to expand Medicaid to cover millions more low-income Americans in their states.

About 20 states, most of them led by Republican governors and including some heavily populated places like Florida and Texas, have refused to expand Medicaid. Obama has accused them of losing sight of what's good for their constituents.

'I think because of politics not all states have taken advantage of the options that are out there,' he said. 'Our hope is that more of them do.'

The Supreme Court handed Obama a major victory on health care last week when it upheld federal financial aid to millions of low- and middle-income Americans to help pay for insurance premiums regardless of where they live.

President Barack Obama walks in the rain to pick up Kelly Bryant at her home in Nashville, Tenn., Wednesday, July 1, 2015, en route to Taylor Stratton Elementary School

President Barack Obama takes off his coat before speaking at Taylor Stratton Elementary School

Obama declared immediately after the ruling that the law is 'here to stay.' He cited progress under its provisions but said more work was needed to 'make health care in America even better.' In Nashville, he talked about making sure people know about the law's benefits, including free preventive care, help for seniors on prescription medication and prohibitions on insurers denying coverage based on a prior illness.

While Obama talked up what he says is good about the law, the law's Republican opponents highlighted what they say is bad about it.

'The latest Supreme Court ruling won't change Obamacare's multitude of broken promises, including the one that resulted in millions of Americans losing the coverage they had and wanted to keep,' Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., said Wednesday. 'And the ruling won't change the skyrocketing costs in premiums, deductibles, and co-pays that have hit the middle class so hard over the last few years.'

Asked about the lack of Medicaid expansion in Tennessee, Obama lamented the politics he said are at play and urged lawmakers to find a 'uniquely Tennessee solution.'