Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

SAN DIEGO (AP) — Screams and cheers are cheap at Comic-Con, but the energy stepped up a notch Saturday evening after fans got their first look at “Deadpool.”

Not only did the trailer for the irreverent film starring Ryan Reynolds get a standing ovation, but soon the 6,500-person Hall H audience started chanting, “One more time!”

Host Chris Hardwick seemed momentarily flustered, explaining that he doesn’t actually have that power. But he asked the A/V gods if it was possible, and soon, the blood-soaked, expletive-laced trailer was playing again.

It seems fitting for a movie 11 years in the making that Reynolds said was only greenlit because of the enthusiasm of the fans.

The Marvel antihero, known for his salty language and off-humor, is given an origin story in this film, which comes out Feb. 12.

Perhaps the main event of the Twentieth Century Fox presentation, which also included looks at “Fantastic Four,” the “Maze Runner” sequel and “Victor Frankenstein,” was “X-Men: Apocalypse.”

The veil was stripped away from the highly secretive film as director Bryan Singer revealed that it takes place 10 years after the events of “X-Men: Days of Future Past” in 1983.

This is a world that has grown to accept mutants, mostly. But a mysterious and influential sect has risen that believes the mutants are gods.

While Jennifer Lawrence said her character in this outing is more Raven than Mystique, Michael Fassbender stayed ambiguous about whether we’d be seeing Erik or Magneto.

“I think he’s a guy who plays both sides. He’s always that kind of ambiguous villain,” said Fassbender. “When we meet him, he’s more of a simple guy, living a normal life. He’s hung up his cape and his evil ways.”

The footage also showed the first glimpse at Oscar Isaac’s villain Apocalypse and Sophie Turner’s young Jean Grey.

“X-Men: Apocalypse” is only five weeks into shooting and will be released on May 27.

Meanwhile, “The Maze Runner: The Scorch Trials,” out Sept. 18, showcased a new trailer and an extended look at the new monster of the movie: the Cranks. In the film, they’re terrifying, slimy, zombielike creatures.