Dr. Fred Cerise will take the reins at Parkland Memorial Hospital on Monday amid high expectations that he can fix Dallas County’s overwhelmed safety-net hospital system.

In a series of public forums last week, community leaders and patients sketched a list of problems that need Cerise’s attention as he becomes Parkland’s new chief executive officer and president.

He was asked to tackle the inadequate mental health services that long have plagued the county. Some wanted hospital workers to speak Spanish to Spanish-speaking patients. Others complained that Parkland’s contract-bidding process was unfair to minority businesses. Finally, a Parkland doctor stepped forward to ask about the thousands of people who are waiting to get into the Parkland system.

Cerise offered measured responses, asking speakers to recognize that the demand for medical service would always exceed Parkland’s ability to provide it. He noted repeatedly that Dallas County has the second-highest percentage of uninsured residents among U.S. urban counties.

“The country is struggling with how you take care of the entire population,” he told a gathering at Eastfield College’s Pleasant Grove campus.

Even as more Dallas County residents purchase health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, it is not known how many will leave the county health system. An estimated 31 percent of county residents — about 661,000 people — are uninsured, according to the latest U.S. census data.

“We see a continued role for Parkland, regardless of what happens,” Cerise said. “The need for our services is not going to change.

“We have to show that we’re providing good quality services with the resources we have. Then we decide what is the unmet demand and what can we do in the organization to meet it.”

Parkland spends over $1 billion annually trying to meet indigent health care needs. About a third of that money comes from local taxpayers. The county hospital district also is building a new hospital, at a cost of $1.3 billion, with county taxes footing more than half the bill.

Cerise said Parkland expects to make some improvements, mainly using Medicaid funding available under the new federal law. More than $300 million will be channeled into basic medical services over the next five years.

“We’re looking at how to deliver services differently,” Cerise told a crowd of several hundred people at Friendship West Baptist Church in southeast Oak Cliff.

For starters, Parkland plans to open a half-dozen storefront clinics that will boost its primary care capacity. The locations will be revealed after rental agreements are finalized, officials said.

Cerise also raised the possibility of Parkland partnering with private doctors and clinics to reduce access problems. Several speakers insisted the greatest need was in southern Dallas County, where patients have the fewest medical choices.

“We need to address access in an intelligent way so that we know they’re getting a high quality of service,” Cerise said. “If the southern half of the county is being ignored, it shouldn’t be.”

Cerise and other hospital officials described changes Parkland made in recent years to satisfy federal and state regulators. More than $75 million was spent to make the hospital system safer for patients.

“There really are some positive measures in place for quality, safety, efficiency and cost,” he told 75 people gathered at the Irving Chamber of Commerce in Las Colinas.

Such metrics “are the tools you need to assure you’re getting a good product for your money,” he said. “The public health systems haven’t been pressured in this way over the years.”

At the three sessions held so far, the exchanges were mostly polite and respectful. However, a few comments from the audience led to uncomfortable pauses.

“What are you going to do about the emergency room?” asked one woman. She recounted how her sister spent three days in Parkland’s ER a year ago, awaiting admission to the hospital for high blood pressure.

“They were telling her, ‘We got to get you a room,’” she recalled the staff saying. “Nobody gave her a bath or any food. It was really frustrating to know who to talk to.”

Cerise seemed perplexed by the woman’s comments. It was clear he knew about recent ER upgrades that were intended to reduce such waits to four hours or less.

“I was shocked if she was there and not followed,” Cerise said of the staff’s supposedly lagging response. “It’s a changed world now.”

After several other patients offered examples of the hospital’s staff insensitivity, Cerise acknowledged that Parkland needs to be more “patient-centered.” It must become a “medical home” that welcomes patients from a variety of cultures, he said.

At the Friendship West meeting, Parkland’s first new CEO in more than 30 years got a feel for how long his honeymoon might last.

Cerise listened as Dallas County Commissioner John Wiley Price told the crowd he was unhappy with Parkland’s CEO selection process. Price had supported the lone black candidate; Cerise is white.

Since Parkland serves mainly patients who are black and Hispanic, Price said, the hospital board should have tried harder to find a leader from one of those ethnic groups.

“It’s no reflection on Dr. Cerise. He’s here now,” Price said. “But I’m still not a happy camper, and I don’t expect to be soon.”

Price and several speakers sought assurances from Cerise that minority businesses would have a fair shot at winning contracts at Parkland. They also want better minority recruitment to fill top administrative openings.

Cerise said he was committed to improving diversity among Parkland’s top 60 managers, who overwhelmingly are white.

“It’s one of my personal goals to deliver a plan of diversity in hospital leadership,” Cerise said. “Give me some time, and I will show you it’s something we take seriously.”