click to enlarge Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz focused on jobs while speaking at the 2016 Indiana Republican Spring Dinner Thursday night.

Photo by Jasmine Otam

Republican presidential candidate and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz told Indiana Republicans that if elected, he plans to increase and keep jobs in America.Cruz, the guest speaker at the annual Indiana Republican Spring Dinner Thursday, mainly spoke about jobs and the role the federal government plays.“You want to unleash jobs—you lift the boot of the federal government off the back of small businesses,” said Cruz.He commended Indiana for being an example of that and creating more than 100,000 jobs in businesses that are not owned or operated by the government.Cruz went on to talk about what he calls “the most expensive regulation in the history of mankind,” the federal Clean Power Plan, which is designed to reduce carbon pollution from power plants.“It would kill at least 20,000 manufacturing jobs in the state of Indiana,” said Cruz. “It doesn’t make any sense to have the federal government destroying the livelihood of men and women of this state. It doesn’t make any sense to have the federal government hammering small businesses.”If elected, Cruz plans to repeal the Affordable Care Act, pass a simple flat tax and abolish the IRS.Cruz did not directly talk about Carrier and its plans to move to Mexico, like Donald Trump did at his rally on Wednesday, but made the point that he ultimately wants to protect small business owners and keep jobs in America.“We’re going to see millions of new, high-paying jobs. We’re going to see jobs coming back to America. We’re going to see manufacturing jobs coming back from China, coming back from Mexico, coming back to the state of Indiana,” he said.Cruz also spent time Thursday night laying out his argument for why he’s a stronger candidate than Trump.“What we are seeing happening all across the country is that 65 to 70 percent of Republicans nationwide recognize that Donald is not the best candidate to go head-to-head with Hilary Clinton,” continued Cruz.He went on to say that if Trump is the Republican nominee, Republicans will lose, which is why five of the 17 Republicans originally in the race for the 2016 nomination are now endorsing him.Cruz did not receive the endorsement of Gov. Mike Pence Thursday night. Pence has yet to endorse any candidate in the Republican race.“I’m here to announce tonight, I’m for anybody but Hillary and Bernie Sanders,” said Pence. “Any Republican in the White House would be infinitely better than either one of the Democratic candidates.”With the Indiana primary being the only election on May 3, presidential candidates are flocking to the state to win over the voters. In addition to Trump’s visit Wednesday, Ohio Gov. John Kasich has plans to visit on Tuesday.