Greek Finance Minister Yanis Varoufakis waits in this Feb. 20 file photo for the start of a meeting to discuss Athens's plans to reverse austerity measures agreed as part of its bailout. (Photo by Yves Herman/Reuters)

It's not just Greece's future that's at stake as European officials meet Monday and later this week, but the entire continent's.

That's the future explored in a major new report by Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European Commission, which could get lost in the shuffle of proposals, counterproposals and paperwork as the continent's leaders make what might be their last attempt at keeping Greece in the monetary union. Juncker and representatives of other European institutions are thinking about Europe's economy in the long term, and arguing for greater integration.

Diplomats and economic officials might be able to find a way to keep Greece in the union, but the kind of crisis the country has endured for the past several years -- unemployment, material hardship, loss of sovereignty, and constant uncertainty amid haggling over its debt -- will only recur in other countries at later dates unless the continent finds some way of balancing the movement of money between countries.

Greece may default on its debts if a deal for more funding in exchange for fiscal reforms is not made. Here's why that matters. (Jorge Ribas/The Washington Post)

If Germany insists taking in more money that it spends on imports from abroad, then someone, somewhere, is going to have to go into debt to buy all those German products. It's a problem that Juncker's report would address, although only in a very careful, circumspect way:

Here's Alastair MacDonald's summary for Reuters:

A need for economies and budgets to converge would "inevitably involve sharing more sovereignty over time", the report added. One ultimate outcome could be a "euro area treasury", although the report stressed it did not foresee "stabilizing" cash transfers going permanently to certain states, nor seek to use them to equalize incomes among rich and poor countries.

Stabilizing cash transfers are exactly the reason that Europe needs a treasury -- but citizens in wealthier countries such as Germany would see such a system as a permanent subsidy at their expense.

The politics are difficult, and MacDonald writes that the report contains something for everyone:

It may please Germany by calling for tougher discipline on countries, like France and Italy at present, that fail to meet budget criteria. But it also says that states running persistent trade surpluses, such as Germany, should adjust them. And it calls in vague terms for some shared fiscal resources to help countries in difficulty, an issue on which German Chancellor Angela Merkel has been wary.

The reaction to this report will reveal whether Europe's current leaders are ready to think about real reforms that would make the monetary union sustainable. No monetary union has ever succeeded without a fiscal authority capable of keeping all the plates spinning by moving cash from place to another. Europe has a choice between breaking apart and coming together, the same choice it's always had.

Welcome to Wonkbook. To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. Follow Wonkblog on Twitter and Facebook.

What's in Wonkbook: 1) Greek debt talks 2) Opinions, including Krugman on race 3) GOP politicians talk about the Confederate flag, and more

1. Top story: European leaders discuss Greece in emergency meeting

Greece makes a new proposal ahead of a hastily scheduled summit Monday that could decide the country's future. "The latest plan from Athens, comprising tax increases and spending cuts to hit budget targets required by lenders, was described by Greek and European officials over the weekend as possibly the country’s last chance to unlock urgently needed financing... Whether the new Greek proposal satisfies officials from the [International Monetary Fund], the European Commission and European Central Bank will set the tone for Monday’s meetings. If the three institutions—which oversee Greece’s bailout program—don’t buy Athens’s math on how it plans to meet creditors’ fiscal demands, then eurozone leaders and their finance chiefs are expected to discuss how to deal with the consequences of Greek default, senior European officials have warned." Nektaria Stamouli and Marcus Walker in The Wall Street Journal.

If Greece leaves, it would be a disaster for eastern Europe and other emerging economies. "A messy Greek exit would wipe up to a fifth off the dollar value of eastern European currencies and have spillover effects around the emerging world. ... The Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland, whose economies depend heavily on exports to the EU, would be hardest hit in terms of trade and investment... Direct connections between Greece and emerging markets are few, the most concrete being the subsidiaries of Greek banks operating in eastern European countries such as Romania and Bulgaria. ... Emerging markets with far fewer significant links, such as Mexico, Brazil, South Africa and Turkey, would also suffer from market volatility as investors shied away from riskier assets." Jonathan Wheatley in The Financial Times.

NIXON: Greece's brinksmanship has failed. "Normally, loans involving billions of euros of aid would be backed up by bulging files covering everything from implementation plans to draft legislation. Yet remarkably, [IMF and ECB] officials say that even on the eve of a crisis summit that could set in train events that could lead to Greece’s eurozone exit, little of this preparatory work has been done on even some of the least contentious reforms. Instead, Athens has gambled that eurozone governments would ultimately be forced into a panicky 'political' deal under the twin pressures of a market meltdown and overwhelming domestic sympathy for Greece from austerity-weary eurozone electorates. It is now clear that Athens miscalculated. ... Other peripheral countries that stuck with their bailout programs are now among the eurozone’s fastest growing; indeed, last year Greece’s program appeared to be working too. ... Now the time has run out. At Monday’s meeting of eurozone leaders, Mr. Tsipras will be confronted by a take it or leave it deal... While some eurozone policy makers believe that even at this point a deal may be possible, others believe it would lead to a euro exit." The Wall Street Journal.

SUMMERS: The country is on the verge of collapse, and it's in everyone's interest to make a deal. "Make no mistake about the consequence of a breakdown. With an end to European support and consequent bank closures and credit problems, austerity in Greece will get far worse than it is today and it will probably become a failed state to the great detriment of all its people and their leadership. When Greece fails as a state, Europe will collect far less debt than it would with an orderly debt restructuring. ... Diplomacy fails and catastrophes happen when nations are preoccupied with their own concerns and fail to consider the political needs of their counterparts." The Washington Post.

O'BRIEN: On the contrary, Greece would eventually recover back on the drachma. "People would try to move their money out of the country if they thought that you were about to devalue it, so you'd still have to use capital controls. Not only that, though, but the price of essentials like food and oil—which Greece imports—would explode overnight. There might be rationing. The next two years would be even worse than the last two—finance minister Yanis Varoufakis has said it would send Greece 'back to the Neolithic Age' in the short-term—but Greece would at least have a real chance to recover after that. A cheaper drachma would boost tourism and exports, and stop the self-defeating cycle of wage cuts and unemployment that's made debts harder to pay back for the people and the country." The Washington Post.

Some kind of deal might still be possible. "First, the creditors should recognize that their disgust at a reckless government given to terms such as 'pillaging,' 'criminal' and 'terror' in speaking of its partners doesn't justify punishing the Greek people or putting their own economies at risk. Second, they should admit that Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras is correct on one vital point: The current bailout program rescued Greece's creditors but condemned his country to long-term penury. It has failed. Even the International Monetary Fund acknowledges that it cannot work without further debt restructuring. Third, every road out of this mess is going to be expensive for both sides. The challenge is to minimize the costs, broadly understood, then explain the reasoning to voters who may be skeptical or downright hostile," write the editors of Bloomberg View.

2. Top opinions

SCHER: "Liberal" isn't a dirty word anymore. "The rise in liberal pride is crucial to liberals building a long-lasting relationship with moderates and cementing a post-Obama leftward trajectory. 'Forty-seven percent of Democrats and Democratic-leaning independents now identify as both socially liberal and economically moderate or liberal,' Gallup’s Frank Newport announced on Thursday. That’s up eight points since 2008 and 17 points since 2001. Earlier this year, the NBC/Wall Street Journal polling team deduced that 26 percent of voters overall self-identify as 'liberal,' a four point spike since 2011. These new numbers are in line with longer-term trends: last year Pew found a 26-point increase since 1994 in 'mostly or consistently liberal' Democrats." Politico.

VINIK: The IMF is what really matters for U.S. global leadership. "One of President Obama’s key talking points on the massive, troubled trade deal moving through the Hill this week is how important it is to US standing in the world. ... Yet for all the attention focused on the Trans-Pacific Partnership, there’s another issue stuck on the Hill that may be even more important for the US's geopolitical standing: reforms to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), agreed upon five years ago, but still waiting for approval by the US Congress. ... The reforms would give small countries a bigger voice in the IMF, and let the fund allocate money differently. ... The IMF involves 188 countries, far more than the TPP, and it’s already exacting a price in goodwill, infuriating our allies and undermining our credibility on the international stage." Politico.

KRUGMAN: Race is the issue that won't go away. "Racial hatred is still a potent force in our society, as we’ve just been reminded to our horror. And I’m sorry to say this, but the racial divide is still a defining feature of our political economy, the reason America is unique among advanced nations in its harsh treatment of the less fortunate and its willingness to tolerate unnecessary suffering among its citizens. ... The working-class turn against Democrats wasn’t a national phenomenon — it was entirely restricted to the South, where whites turned overwhelmingly Republican after the passage of the Civil Rights Act and Richard Nixon’s adoption of the so-called Southern strategy. And this party-switching, in turn, was what drove the rightward swing of American politics after 1980. Race made Reaganism possible. ... In 2012 the Supreme Court gave individual states the option, if they so chose, of blocking the Affordable Care Act’s expansion of Medicaid, a key part of the plan to provide health insurance to lower-income Americans. But why would any state choose to exercise that option? ... The answer is, 22 states at this point, although some may eventually change their minds. And what do these states have in common? Mainly, a history of slaveholding." The New York Times.

BALZ: Hillary Rodham Clinton and Jeb Bush want to run substantive presidential campaigns. "Though of different parties and different philosophies, Clinton and Bush certainly share one thing in common: They are unabashed policy wonks. ... But if the two are steeped in policy, they have left themselves sizable challenges as presidential candidates. Clinton’s is to flesh out her pledge to make income inequality — the gap between the wealthiest and the rest of society — the central issue of her candidacy. Bush’s is to demonstrate that he has something fresh to back up his goal of returning the U.S. economy to sustainable 4 percent annual growth rates." The Washington Post.

3. In case you missed it

Bush says the unsayable about Obamacare. "With a major Supreme Court ruling on the Affordable Care Act expected by the end of the month, Bush recently wandered away from the GOP harmony by pointing out that the health insurance exchanges at the heart of the court case were originally 'a Republican idea.' ... Bush, who typically answers every question he is asked, did not respond to a National Journal query on the topic during his Washington visit last week. ... Bush's comments also raise an uncomfortable fact for Republicans: Many features of the Affordable Care Act, including the much-reviled 'individual mandate' requiring most Americans to purchase health insurance, come from a plan drafted by the conservative Heritage Foundation, on whose board Bush once served." S.V. Dáte in National Journal.

Disputes over the budget will be a political opportunity for Ted Cruz and Rand Paul. They've "created national profiles by picking fights in the U.S. Senate, and the two Republican presidential rivals will soon have a chance to engage in another, as they oppose efforts to roll back automatic spending cuts enacted as part of a 2011 budget agreement. It's a brawl that will allow them to portray themselves as principled guardians of the public purse against a classic Washington establishment combine: Republicans who are worried about cuts to the Pentagon budget and Democrats who didn't want spending cuts in the first place. ... The spending debate is just getting underway. It will start with the Senate debate over a defense spending bill—which Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has identified as his next legislative priority—and continue through the fall when Congress will have to raise the debt ceiling." Heidi Przybyla for Bloomberg.

Recycling is now losing money. "Once a profitable business for cities and private employers alike, recycling in recent years has become a money-sucking enterprise. The District [of Columbia], Baltimore and many counties in between are contributing millions annually to prop up one of the nation’s busiest facilities here in Elkridge, Md. — but it is still losing money. In fact, almost every facility like it in the country is running in the red. And Waste Management and other recyclers say that more than 2,000 municipalities are paying to dispose of their recyclables instead of the other way around. In short, the business of American recycling has stalled. And industry leaders warn that the situation is worse than it appears. ... The problems of recycling in America are both global and local. A storm of falling oil prices, a strong dollar and a weakened economy in China have sent prices for American recyclables plummeting worldwide. ... By pushing to increase recycling rates with bigger and bigger bins — while demanding almost no sorting by consumers — the recycling stream has become increasingly polluted and less valuable, imperiling the economics of the whole system." Aaron C. Davis in The Washington Post.

GOP candidates share their views on the Confederate flag. "The massacre of nine African-Americans in a storied Charleston church last week, which thrust the issues of race relations and gun rights into the center of the 2016 presidential campaign, has now added another familiar, divisive question to the emerging contest for the Republican nomination: what to do with the Confederate battle flag that flies on the grounds of the South Carolina Capitol. ... As Florida’s governor, Mr. Bush in 2001 ordered the Confederate flag to be taken from its display outside his state’s Capitol 'to a museum where it belonged.' Senator Marco Rubio, also of Florida, told reporters that he thought the state would 'make the right choice for the people of South Carolina.' But neither candidate would state explicitly whether he wanted South Carolina to stop displaying a flag that is a particularly searing reminder of slavery." Jonathan Martin in The New York Times.