WASHINGTON — The Food and Drug Administration said Thursday that it was toughening testing procedures for manufacturers of reusable medical devices. It issued the new requirements in the wake of news that two people in a Los Angeles hospital had died from a deadly bacteria traced to medical scopes.

The changes will apply to new devices that the F.D.A. approves, not to the ones on the market that have led to the infections. Officials acknowledged that they could only recommend — not require — that products on the market use the more rigorous testing. That means the new standards might not be in broad practice for some time.

Agency officials said the stricter guidelines could potentially apply to a broad array of reusable devices, including the type of scopes at issue in California. Makers of the devices that are hardest to clean will also have to submit data proving they can be properly disinfected.

The agency has come under pressure to take stronger action because of illnesses caused by insufficiently sterilized scopes in a number of hospitals.

In the worst case, the F.D.A. can order manufacturers to stop distributing and even recall devices they make, though agency officials say that action has to be weighed against the risks to public health were the device to be removed from circulation. The agency has not yet taken that step in this case. About 500,000 procedures with the scopes are performed annually in the United States, according to the agency.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Officials said that manufacturers of the type of scopes implicated in the Los Angeles deaths were already asked last year to submit data to show their procedures for cleaning them were adequate, but that the information provided was “insufficient.” Previously, companies had to collect data but were not required to give it to the F.D.A.

“We are taking an A-to-Z approach to this,” said Dr. Stephen Ostroff, the chief scientist at the agency. It issued a draft of the changes announced Thursday in 2011. Dr. Ostroff said that the agency had sped up the final version just released “in light of those recent episodes.”

The announcement came nearly a month after California hospital officials reported that five patients had fallen ill and two had died from what they said were contaminated scopes at Ronald Reagan U.C.L.A. Medical Center. Officials said that the likely cause was a superbug that may have been transmitted during procedures using the devices, called duodenoscopes.

At the time, the hospital said it had gone above and beyond the cleansing procedure the manufacturer recommended.

Other hospitals have reported problems. In January, officials at Virginia Mason Hospital in Seattle acknowledged that from November 2012 to early 2014, 32 patients had been infected with a dangerous bacteria via duodenoscopes.

The devices are inserted down the throat and through the stomach to the top of the small intestine, an area called the duodenum. They are used to diagnose and treat diseases of the liver, bile ducts and pancreas. The devices themselves pose little risk to patients, but their design, which includes microscopic crevices nearly impossible to reach with a brush, makes them difficult to disinfect.

In the future, manufacturers will be required to thoroughly soil their devices and then follow their own cleaning instructions to prove that the device can be adequately disinfected.

“We are asking to see a higher safety margin,” the agency said in an email.

The agency was looking at the risks associated with disinfecting duodenoscopes as early as 2009. At that time, problems were cropping up because of flaws in the cleaning process, officials said. But by 2013, the users of the devices were following the process properly, but the problems did not go away.

The F.D.A. has said it received 75 reports from January 2013 to December 2014 of bacterial infections across the country believed to be linked to duodenoscopes. The tally could be an undercount. Dr. Ostroff said that “even that number is far too high.”