Topics: Abortion, abortion rights, Affordable Care Act, anti-choice, antiabortion, health insurance, Poverty, pro-life, Susan B. Anthony List, Politics News

The New Yorker has a lengthy profile this week of Marjorie Dannenfelser, president of the Susan B. Anthony List, a lobbying group that supports antiabortion candidates. The piece, written by Kelefa Sanneh, explores the group’s messaging strategy around the upcoming elections and the delicate line it walks to create moderate talking points in support of an extreme platform. Basically, this boils down to focusing on the apparent perils of the Affordable Care Act and “taxpayer-funded abortion” while advancing fringe policies that give clusters of tissue full legal rights.

But the group is reluctant to wear its support for fetal personhood heading into the midterms. Dannenfelser believes that life begins at conception and her view is consistent with the SBA List agenda, but the group doesn’t really touch the issue during elections. Because it alienates voters, who generally balk when a politician starts talking about a total ban on abortion, a possible ban on certain forms of contraception and a policy that elevates the “rights” of blastocysts over those of actual women. So instead, Dannenfelser focuses on policies that she views as having more mainstream traction, like the new healthcare law, which she does not like in the least.

Which is a little perplexing. Dannenfelser is a “culture of life” antiabortion activist. She boasts a degree of ideological consistency — by, say, opposing the death penalty — that many of the politicians she supports can’t claim for themselves. But Dannenfelser’s support for “life” has its limits, specifically when it comes to the law that gave more than 7 million people in this country healthcare. The Affordable Care Act, in the most literal terms imaginable, is a lifesaving piece of legislation. But Dannenfelser cried when a former political ally agreed to sign on to the law, a move that helped it pass. “It was one of the worst days I can remember,” she said, recalling when Bart Stupak (of the Stupak-Pitts Amendment) agreed to support the ACA if it excluded abortion coverage.