Topics: Barack Obama, Editor's Picks, George W. Bush, isis, John McCain, Joseph Lieberman, Lindsay Graham, Politics News

America has forgotten how to talk about important things. Instead we talk about politics, and mostly just the personalities. It’s worse on the left than on the right. For six years, debate among Democrats centered on Obama. Was he everything he seemed? Had he done all he could? Was it wise to criticize him? Now all the talk is of the next set of contestants: Hillary Clinton and Elizabeth Warren, perhaps Sanders or O’Malley or Webb.

Electoral politics devours all other politics. It consumes three of every four calendar years. Its debates are empty but entertaining. Signing on to a presidential campaign is like running off to join the circus. Crafting an agenda or building a movement is like doing your chores. Caught up in horse-race politics, we neglect other vital duties.

But if you go too long without a fight, you forget how to challenge the conventional wisdom, a political establishment — or even yourself. You lose track of your own bottom line, as well as the nerve and skill to defend it. You dream of elections and miss opportunities to engage the nation in vital debates. It’s a terrible waste. And it’s happening right now.

After 12 years of chaos and bloodshed, first in Iraq, then throughout the Middle East, President Obama seeks a declaration of war, which he chooses to call an “authorization for use of military force.” It is a chance to challenge the first premise of our failed foreign policy, that our military interventions can ever make us safe or bring democracy, prosperity or safety to others. It’s a debate we didn’t have before we entered Afghanistan or invaded Iraq on a lie; it’s a debate we’ve not had since the end of the Vietnam War.

The country wants this debate, but only the left can force it. One reason is because so few politicians of either party want to have the discussion. Rand Paul could once be counted on to make the classic libertarian case against empire, but he too is busily positioning himself for 2016. Only progressives can articulate a whole policy and build a movement to support it. The question is whether they’ll free themselves up for the task.

Obama won’t lead the discussion. If anything, he’s less inclined than George W. Bush toward a public debate of military policy. He speaks of transparency and due process in national security decision making, but believes that we should trust him to be the “decider” of the kill list. He’s not looking to strike up a conversation. His Javert-like hounding of whistle-blowers attests to his fondness for state secrets. His State of the Union devoted exactly one colorless sentence to his proposed “authorization of military force.” He has never sought to clarify the legal basis for his tenfold increase in drone strikes.

Obama, like many Democrats, shuns these debates partly out of fear of the right — or to be more precise, of angry white men. Republicans smell this fear from a mile off. It’s why Karl Rove wanted Congress to vote on the Iraq War three weeks before the 2002 midterms. It works like an evil charm every time: Some emotionally underdeveloped blowhard rattles his toy saber and Democrats lose all courage of their convictions. It doesn’t have to be this way.

Thirty years ago Neil Postman wrote his prescient classic “Amusing Ourselves to Death.” He portrayed our cultural descent into an all-enveloping fantasyland in which politics and news are but other sources of addictive entertainment. On any given Sunday you can watch John McCain or Lindsey Graham on some network news show acting out Postman’s dystopian vision.

Years ago I glimpsed a different McCain. A group I worked with funded and staffed trips he and John Kerry made to Vietnam pursuing reconciliation. I met him again while working for Bill Clinton on tobacco regulation and campaign finance reform. On both issues he was far out in front of the Clinton White House, to say nothing of his party. Whenever I bumped into him he was doing something brave.

Today he personifies the infantilization of politics — “Bomb, bomb, bomb, bomb, bomb Iran” — as well as its descent into delusion and anger-laced incoherence. In his endless call for armaments, airstrikes and invasions, real wars seem nothing more than violent video games. Ever belligerent, he’s turned into the guy muttering at the end of the bar with whom no one makes eye contact for fear of setting off a brawl.

McCain’s fall, like that of so many angry old white men, is a sad one. And while he, Graham and their ilk may scare Democrats, they’re more to be pitied than feared. America has grown up and thus away from them. It’s safe to call them out on their puerile behavior; to tell them that to be a man you must also be an adult, and that adulthood is defined by reason, responsibility and restraint. If progressives are ready to say it, the public’s ready to hear it.

Obama isn’t just afraid of old white men. He’s afraid of all of us, or at least he mistrusts us. By this I mean he doesn’t fully believe in our ability to receive facts, apply reason, make judgments and act responsibly on them. In this he is like many of our Founders—all of the Federalists, really– who were apt to view any public assemblage as a mob in the making. Like much of our modern meritocracy, he is more trusting of elites. He naturally identifies with an establishment wise enough to elevate him long before he entered politics. His jealous guarding not just of secrets, but of all of the prerogatives of power, reflects that identification.