Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders told an enthusiastic Riverside crowd that political change requires struggle, but their efforts will help make the country a better place for everyone in it.

An estimated 3,000 people filled the Riverside Municipal Auditorium and more spilled onto the surrounding streets Tuesday afternoon, May 24, hoping to see or at least hear the Vermont senator, who also spoke in San Bernardino in the evening.

“My point is that what seems impossible today, 20 years from now people will say, ‘Oh, no big deal,’” Sanders said after referencing movements for civil rights, women’s rights and gay rights.

“What the system always tries to make us feel is that real change is impossible.”



PHOTOS: See photos from the Riverside rally

In a nearly hour-long stump speech that won cheers for promising to raise the federal minimum wage, expand health care access and advance immigration reform, Sanders pumped up his supporters, an ethnically diverse crowd that looked to be mostly under 30.

Sanders’ campaign is about “putting the power of the government back in the hands of the people,” said Justin Myers, 28. He and his wife, Leslie Robinson, 26, came from Moreno Valley to see the candidate.

Robinson, who was discreetly nursing 17-month-old daughter Ruby under a shawl, said the couple is worried about affording college for their four kids. She also doesn’t think the Affordable Care Act went far enough in getting more people insured.

People began arriving before noon for the 2 p.m. rally, forming a line that snaked around three blocks. When organizers stopped letting people in around 1:30 p.m., some began pushing forward at the auditorium gate in hopes of getting inside, but they quickly became orderly again.

Those who didn’t get a spot inside the rally were told they could listen from loudspeakers outside or attend an evening rally at the National Orange Show in San Bernardino.

Before making his entrance in the auditorium, Sanders grabbed a microphone and stopped on the lower level to speak to supporters who weren’t able to get in.

Inside the main event, the crowd periodically chanted, “This is what democracy looks like,” and “Ber-nie! Ber-nie! Ber-nie!” while waiting for the speech to begin.

Sanders hit many of the same notes as in other Southern California appearances, touching on problems such as Flint, Michigan’s contaminated water supply, the nationwide opiate addiction epidemic and a “broken criminal justice system” that disproportionately punishes Latinos, blacks and Native Americans.

The crowd roared in appreciation when Sanders said marijuana should be removed from the federal list that says it’s as dangerous as heroin, and they cheered for the idea that drug addiction “should not be seen as a crime issue, but as a health issue.” Legalization of marijuana should be a state issue, Sanders said.

The candidate proposed expanding Social Security and offering paid family leave for new moms, and he promised to support a path to citizenship for the 11 million undocumented people in the U.S.