Buy Photo Stephen Rosenberg, left, and artist Philip Collins remove a stencil from a design on Spring Street at the intersection with Maple Street. September 14, 2014. (Photo: By Jenna Esarey, special to The Courier-Journal )Buy Photo

Using giant stencils and a whole lot of yellow, white and black paint, a quartet of artists created whimsical Creative Crosswalks designs at four intersections in downtown Jeffersonville on Sunday.

Under the direction of the Jeffersonville Public Art Commission, the new crosswalks were painted along Spring Street at the intersections at Maple, Chestnut and Market Streets, and Riverside Drive.

New Albany artist Philip Collins recruited some friends to help him translate his vision into a Candy Crosswalk at Maple Street, near the iconic Schimpff’s Confectionery. “I designed it with Schimpff’s in mind,” he said.

At the waterfront, where Spring Street ends at Riverside Drive, artist Miranda Becht, a Jeffersonville resident, created her Tuneful Fish crosswalk, featuring fish jumping from waves playing musical instruments.

“I was thinking about the waves of the river,” she said. “I was kind of remembering walking around down here with the music playing one night. I wanted to create happy little fish jumping out of the water.”

“Public art is important for everyone intellectually and socially,” she said. “Having pretty things to look at will boost the morale of your city and give you something to be proud of.”

Other crossings include a Chicken Crossing the Road and an M.C. Escher-esque Pedestrian Crossing incorporating “hidden” walkers in the image.

The Jeffersonville Arts Alliance, the Jeffersonville Public Art Commission and a Louisville group, The MAMMOTH, created City Canvas as an umbrella organization to manage public art projects in the city.

A call to artists was sent out for designs for the Creative Crosswalks to replace old crosswalks in the Historic Downtown District. Designs had to be compliant with traffic and safety regulations and could use only yellow, white and black.

40 designs were submitted. The 36 others are being held for possible installation at other locations in the city.

Public art is one of the tools the city is using to boost economic development. “Anything we can do to make our downtown more interesting is going to bring in visitors and business,” said the city’s director of planning and zoning, Shane Corbin. “Every detail we can add gets people talking about what’s going on down here.”

Other public art projects in Jeffersonville include a massive art piece by New Albany artist R. Michael Wimmer to be installed atop a berm on Tenth Street near the Quadrangle and the installation of artist-designed bike racks downtown.

“It’s very exciting,” said Dawn Spyker, a member of the art commission and a founding member of the Jeffersonville Arts Alliance. “We can say, look at our town. Look what we’re doing. We’re innovative. We’re inclusive. This just adds to the progress we were already making.”

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1tTcir5