WASHINGTON, D.C. — 800 years ago Monday, a group of Barons forced King John of England to sign a document limiting his royal power in a move that forever changed the scope of western political thought. Throughout history, the Magna Carta has been cited as one of the earliest examples of constitutionalism and limited government. Alabama Congressman Mo Brooks (R-AL5) took full advantage of the anniversary of its signing to point out how President Barack Obama has violated some of its core principles. Principles, he argues, that are also inherently American principles.

“It saddens me greatly that on this, the 800th anniversary of a document that formed the basis of our American system of government, some of those very principles set forth in the Magna Carta and later in our Constitution are being willfully undermined by this administration. The actions against the rule of law by President Obama, DHS Secretary Jeh Johnson, Attorneys General Eric Holder and Loretta Lynch, top officials in the IRS, and others, remind us that to maintain a free Republic, we must remain vigilant in our fight against tyranny.”

In citing a litany of scandals that have plagued the Obama Administration, Brooks went on to draw analogies between the abuses of medieval kings and the present-day presidency.

“When the President unilaterally suspends established immigration laws, is that unlike King John’s arbitrary and tyrannical application of law? When the President unilaterally changed Obamacare, is that unlike King John’s capricious rejection of the rule of law? When the administration targeted taxpayers based on their conservative political beliefs, is that unlike King John’s use of royal institutions to harass his enemies and barons? When the administration blatantly ignored a court order to halt the issuance of work authorizations for illegal immigrants, and issued thousands anyway, is that unlike King John’s exemption from the rule of law?”

Despite the failure of the Magna Carta to protect the subjects of thirteenth century England, Congressman Brooks believes that modern day Americans have recourse for when the executive oversteps legal boundaries.

“Unlike King John’s subjects in the 13th century, we are blessed to have a Constitution—our greatest weapon against tyranny. We have the duty to, as Jefferson said, bind this tyrannical administration from mischief by the chains of the Constitution. We must tirelessly invigilate the American principles of limited government, separation of powers, the rule of law, and checks and balances. And we must continue to have the courage, like King John’s barons, to stand up against those who turn a blind eye to the rule of law.”