SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — The best surprise of the Rockies’ spring training?

That’s easy. It’s the news that star shortstop Troy Tulowitzki and star outfielder Carlos Gonzalez both could play in a Cactus League game on Monday, when the Rockies host the Reds at Salt River Fields.

Both players are coming off surgeries and manager Walt Weiss had not expected them to play in a game until mid-March or later.

“It is possible that they may play tomorrow,” Weiss said Sunday. “We have to get through the day and see what that looks like. We are hopeful.”

Tulowitzki is coming off surgery last August to repair a torn labrum in his left hip. Gonzalez had surgery in August to repair the injured patella tendon in his left knee.

“I was really thinking, before I got down here, that those guys would play maybe around the middle of spring training, or a couple of weeks in,” Weiss said. “Things have gone so well that there is a possibility they will be out there tomorrow.”

Monday’s game will be the Rockies’ sixth of the Cactus League schedule.

Once CarGo and Tulo get on the field, Weiss said he will still proceed with some caution.

“We’ll be playing it by ear,” Weiss said. “A lot of it depends on how they show up every day. But the plan all along has been to take it slow. But I’m excited that we are talking about them being in a game at this point in spring training.”

Weiss said he didn’t expect either player to be this far along because “there was still a lot of baseball activity they hadn’t performed, even when spring training started. So I was being very conservative looking at it this spring for both of them.”

But Weiss said Tulo and CarGo both responded well to baseball drills last week, including running the bases.

Tulowitzki played 91 games last season and was a possible MVP candidate, hitting .340 with 21 homers, 52 RBIs and a 1.035 OPS.

Gonzalez, slowed by knee pain and a benign tumor in his left middle finger, struggled mightily, hitting just .238 with 11 homers in 70 games.

Weiss said neither player pressed him to get on the field earlier than expected.

“No, they haven’t lobbied me,” Weiss said. “I check in with them daily, and a couple of times a day with Doogie (trainer Keith Dugger), but they have just progressed so nicely.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp