The star quarterback on a New Jersey high school football team died Friday night after suffering an injury during a game.

Warren Hills Regional High School quarterback Evan Murray, 17, was tackled by an opposing player late in the second quarter, the New York Daily News reported.

Witnesses told the paper that the teen felt “woozy” after being hit, but reassured his teammates he would be fine before he was lifted on a gurney and taken to a hospital.

“He tried giving a thumbs-up to the rest of the team, and all of us cheered,” Kaitlin Bell, 16, a Warren Hills junior varsity cheerleader, told the paper.

Witnesses said Evan appeared to be OK and had even walked off the field after the play.

But just before halftime, he fell to the ground on the sideline, hushing the crowd.

“He was laying on the ground and everyone was looking at him,” Taylor Coughlin, 16, a junior at Warren Hills told lehighvalleylive.com. “He did get back up. He stood up with help and sat on a gurney.”

In a statement Saturday, interim Superintendent Gary Bowen said the school community is “deeply saddened.”

“Last night we experienced a tragedy in the loss of student athlete Evan Murray following an injury during the Summit-Warren Hills football game,” Mr. Bowen said. “Our school district, with the cooperation of many, is providing grief and crisis counseling beginning immediately today, Saturday, for as long as the need exists.”

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie extended his condolences on Twitter.

“On behalf of all the people of New Jersey, Mary Pat and I send our heartfelt thoughts and prayers to the Murray family on the loss of Evan,” the 2016 GOP presidential candidate tweeted.

An autopsy is set for Saturday afternoon, Warren County Prosecutor Richard Burke said during a press conference Saturday.

The teen was a three-sport athlete at Warren Hills, playing basketball and baseball. He had been the team’s starting quarterback since his sophomore year. He was also a member of the National Honor Society.