Believe it or not, Obamacare may have a silver lining.

Health-care reform in the U.S will push the health-care industry to adopt technologies that will keep costs down, improve treatment and even save lives, said Eric Dishman, an Intel fellow and general manager of the company's health and life sciences group.

(Read more: These are the guys actually making money off Obamacare)

"Technology is not a magic pill, but no doubt we are going to have to use technology to save money and improve care for all Americans," Dishman said.

Most people worldwide are pretty optimistic about how technology will improve health care and are willing to embrace new ways of tracking and treating their health conditions, according to a survey conducted by Penn Schoen Berland published on Monday.

According to the study—which surveyed 12,000 people worldwide and was commissioned by Intel—most people are OK with virtual visits to doctors and using sensors to track their health.

(Read more: Obamacare 'perfect storm': Feds reveal 10 percent error rate)

For example, more than 70 percent of respondents are receptive to using toilet sensors, prescription bottle sensors or swallowed health monitors in their health-care treatment.

"These simple sensors, which are cheap, cheap, cheap can be game changing," Dishman said.

The fact of the matter is, consumer technology is altering the way people think about health care.

"There is a real sea change happening. The consumer readiness to use technology themselves at home and take a proactive role in their health is ahead of where the health-care systems are delivering those models," Dishman said.

People see the advances technology has made in other aspects of their lives and wonder why the same advancements have not been integrated in the health-care system.

The rise of mobile has a lot to do with this, Dishman said.

"In the last few years we have seen an explosion of smartphones. And there's starting to be these apps people can use to track different things about their health, at least for fitness and it's starting to head that way for health care," he said. "Consumers' expectations are leaping ahead of the governments and businesses. The health-care industry is the last one to truly go digital."