WASHINGTON, D.C. – Here's one for "Obamacare" critics, supporters and wonks.

You may have read that Ohio's insurance department declared that premiums on the Affordable Care Act marketplace will go up by 12 percent in 2015 – and you may have read my analysis that said the figure is misleading and too high.

This prompted an insurance industry source to send a note observing that actually, these rates are artificially low. The note was not for publication so I won't quote from it, but the crux was this:

Premiums requested and approved for the ACA plans, whether 12 percent or 3 percent or 7.7 percent, make the Affordable Care Act, or ACA, look more affordable than it is. The premium prices are artificially suppressed through the ACA's fee structure and design, masking the true costs.

Is this true?

In a way, it is. The subject of ACA taxes and fees has received coverage. But putting it in the context of premiums makes it more understandable and deserves mention, so let's deal specifically with that angle. Read on, and then weigh in with your opinions below.

The ACA created a new way of insuring people who lacked health coverage. It declared that no one could be turned down for coverage or charged more because of poor health. It set up a system of computerized marketplaces, or exchanges, for buying this insurance. It offered subsidies to help customers pay, based on their incomes.

But when you take people who don't have insurance and suddenly give them coverage, you create a risk.

What if a lot of people who were sick and delayed treatment suddenly crowded the medical system as they became insured? What if an insurer got an unusually high share of such clients? How could insurers price their policies to cover these unknown risks without cherry-picking customers or charging premiums so high as to defeat the "affordable" part of the ACA?

ACA champions say one of the only ways around this to transfer the risk to a broader group of people and get them to share it. That's how insurance works, they say.

That's the problem, say the critics who don't want the government to mandate coverage for the uninsured and then raise others' costs to pay for it, squeezing them or their businesses financially.

The ACA established several methods for sharing the risk, but the one we will address relates directly to premiums -- and to sharing the risk by sharing the costs.

Under the ACA's framework, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, or HHS, tacked a temporary fee onto nearly all health insurance plans, starting this year. The fee is $63 per covered person this year. It drops to $44 next year. The 2016 fee has not yet been set but industry estimates put it around $26.

Maybe you have not seen this on your insurance bill because your employer is paying it or you only heard vaguely about this transitional fee. But assuming your insurance costs rose this year, the fee is one reason.

This fee is supposed to raise $12 billion this year, $8 billion next year and $5 billion in 2016. After a share is retained by the Treasury, most of the money will go into a pool that pays insurance companies when they have claims on individual policies from people with particularly high medical bills. This is what is known as a reinsurance pool. Essentially, it is insurance for insurance companies, making sure they aren't bankrupted from high claims.

This year, the government will send payments to these insurers when a customer's medical bills reach $45,000, and next year the reinsurance will kick in when a bill reaches $70,000, according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, a division of HHS. The fund only covers part of those claims – 80 percent this year – and the reinsurance benefits are capped at $250,000.

The threshold for getting this money will get tougher for insurers in 2015 and again in 2016. Then the program is supposed to end, since by then the previously uninsured, high-risk customers should be absorbed into the new system – without new, sudden cost shocks.

But how, exactly, does the reinsurance program affect Ohio premiums?

Not all of Ohio's insurers spell this out precisely, but the rate requests they filed with the Ohio Department of Insurance offer a surprising number of hints.

For example, Medical Mutual of Ohio estimates that it will get back $14.5 million through reinsurance in 2015, a sum that averages $12.50 per member every month. Aetna estimates that it will get reinsurance reimbursements of $4.5 million, averaging $35.78 per member, per month. CareSource's projection is $12.4 million, or $15.91 per member each month, and Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield comes in at $17.85 million, or $25.63 per member.

These figures as well as interviews and email exchanges between insurers and The Plain Dealer suggest that these companies expect reinsurance reimbursements ranging from 5 percent of their total claims (Medical Mutual) to as high as 12 percent (Aetna). Aetna will be new in Ohio's ACA market, which likely explains its anticipated risk. CareSource, which already has substantial ACA business, said the reinsurance program already is reducing its claims cost by 6 percent.

Put another way, premiums would have to be that much higher to cover all the costs if the reinsurance program did not exist. The reinsurance program, funded with a fee on nearly all people with insurance – in fairness, that includes those buying ACA policies – suppresses the premiums.

HHS acknowledged as much when it unveiled the technical details of the program, saying in the Federal Register in late 2012 that "it is anticipated that reinsurance payments will result in premium decreases in the individual market of between 10 and 15 percent."

Is this good? Bad?

It might depend upon how you feel about spreading the cost and the risk to insure more people.

"Ultimately this is all about insurance," said Jack Hoadley, a research professor at Georgetown University's Health Policy Institute. "If you think of fire insurance, it's a net transfer from the masses to the small subset of people who have fires. It's not like you want to have a fire, any more than you want to be one of those high-cost health cases that reinsurance protects. Insurance at the core is about spreading the burden across the greatest number."

HHS and the health insurance industry lobbying group, America's Health Insurance Plans, or AHIP, say reinsurance was essential to getting the ACA started. But they say the program will help all manner of people.

"The reinsurance program will mitigate some premium increases for individuals and families purchasing coverage on their own," said Clare Krusing, director of communications for AHIP. "It will make it easier for employees not eligible for employer-sponsored coverage, such as part-time and seasonal workers, to obtain health care coverage. And entrepreneurs and sole proprietors starting a small business will have more stable coverage options so they can focus on growing their businesses."

The average cost of an employer-provided family health plan -- one that had almost nothing to do with the ACA -- was $16,351 in 2013, and $5,884 for a single policy, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation's annual survey. The price is no doubt higher this year. Now add on the $63, or $5.25 a month, that an individual must pay this year – or $252 for a family of four – for the ACA transitional reinsurance program.

As a share of costs for insurance, that's not particularly substantial. But for an employer or family watching costs, it can add up.

It will end by 2017, when premiums may be a true barometer of insurance costs and risks. Along with enrollment figures, premiums still are a key measure of the ACA's performance.

But for now, those premiums are not the only measure of the ACA's cost.