Game tied 6-6, 10th inning. Big Pressure. No problem for Rockies newcomer Justin Morneau.

The veteran first baseman crushed a two-run, walk-off homer to center off Dale Thayer on Sunday afternoon, lifting the Rockies to an 8-6 victory over the San Diego Padres at Coors Field.

Morneau hit a 3-2 fastball for the sixth walk-off home run of his career. Center fielder Cameron Maybin made a desperate leap at the wall, but Morneau’s drive just kept going.

“I thought I hit it good off the bat, but it scared me a little bit when I saw him drifting back toward the bullpen,” Morneau said. “But as good of an athlete as he is, if he can’t catch it, then it’s definitely gone. It was scary there for a moment, but it was a good feeling when it went out.”

With Carlos Gonzalez on base with a single and running with the pitch, Morneau wasn’t necessarily thinking home run.

“I just wanted to stay aggressive,” he said. “That was one of those cases where, with a runner on, I just wanted something to drive. It was almost the same pitch I missed on a 3-1 count.”

PHOTOS: Colorado Rockies 8, San Diego Padres 6 – May 18, 2014

WATCH: Justin Morneau on walk-off homer and triple play

The victory clinched the three-game series for Colorado, which improved to 7-0 in home series this season. The Rockies remain three games behind the Giants in the National League West. The Giants, who open a three-game series at Coors Field on Tuesday, beat Miami 4-1 Sunday.

Reliever Nick Masset tossed a five-pitch, perfect top of the 10th to get the win, his first since Sept. 15, 2011 with Cincinnati when he beat the Chicago Cubs.

“It wasn’t probably the prettiest win, but we won a game to win a series,” manager Walt Weiss said. “It was a win in the division, which is always huge. Justin came up big there in the end and I’m really happy for him because he’s having a phenomenal season and he’s impacted our club in many different ways.”

Victory seemed well in hand until the ninth when Will Venable doubled and then trotted home on a two-run homer by Everth Cabrera, who clubbed a misplaced slider from closer La Troy Hawkins. It was Hawkins’ first blown save of the season after going 10-for-10 in save opportunities.

“This isn’t my first blown save opportunity, ” Hawkins said. “It’s a new day, on Tuesday.”

While Morneau was the hero, Troy Tulowitzki remains in the Tulo zone. The Rockies’ all-star shortstop, still flirting with a .400 average as May peeks at June, cranked a solo, leadoff homer to right in the fifth inning. Tulo’s homer, his National League-leading 13th, came off reliever Tim Stauffer and put the Rockies in front 5-4. Carlos Gonzalez drove in Tulo with a single for an insurance run in the seventh to make it 6-4.

The game included history with a twist.

The Rockies turned the third triple play in franchise history in the third inning. The third one included an oddity.

With Cabrera on second and Seth Smith on first, Carlos Quentin hit a chopper to Rockies third baseman Nolan Arenado. He stepped on third to force out Cabrera and then fired to DJ LeMahieu to force out Smith at second.

LeMahieu then fired to first to try and get Quentin, but Quentin beat the throw. Now comes the tricky part: Smith was called for interference while sliding at second to try to take out LaMahieu. That meant that Quentin was called out as well.

The play still goes down in the book as a triple play, but interference, called by second-base umpire Seth Buckminster, will always be a part of it.

The first triple play in Rockies history came on April 10, 2003 vs. the Cardinals at Coors Field on a play turned by first baseman Todd Helton and shortstop Jose Hernandez.

The second, and most famous triple play in club history was an unassisted gem by Tulowitzki on April 29, 2007 vs. the Braves at Coors Field.

Rockies starter Juan Nicasio put in a six-inning effort that’s best described as workmanlike. He certainly labored, giving up four runs on nine hits, including a solo home run to Smith, the former Rockie, in the first and a solo shot to Rene Rivera that cut Colorado’s lead to 5-4 in the sixth.

Tulowitzki, who entered the game hitting .400, is now hitting .393 after a 1-for-5 day. Helton was the last Rockies player to be this close to .400 at this point in the season. On May 18, 2000, Helton was hitting .417. He hit .372 that season and the last time he was at .400 or better was June 10.

The Rockies staked an early 4-1 lead with a four-run third inning off San Diego’s Donn Roach, a long reliever pressed into starting duty when Andrew Cashner went on the disabled list with right elbow soreness. Charlie Blackmon slugged a two-run single off Roach, and Corey Dickerson followed with a two-run, opposite-field homer to left.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp