H&M design sold exclusively at the Coachella festival this year. Greg Marino/H&M

To the stylish set headed to Coachella this weekend: don’t worry if you forget to pack your crop top. H&M will be selling not one but two belly-baring shirts on the festival grounds, plus a fringe-lined robe and a pair of floral flared pants.

The fast fashion retailer has saved seven pieces from its H&M Loves Coachella capsule collection exclusively for its on-site pop-up shop open to the thousands of festivalgoers. The garments range in price from $24.95 to $149.

Read More: Coachella Is Next in Brand Frenzy for Music Festival Fans

“Coachella has become one of the most fashionable festivals in the world,” says Daniel Kulle, president of H&M North America. “We want to be where our customers are.”

Indeed, Coachella, held at the Empire Polo Club in southern California has become as much about fashion as it is about music. Along with giving traction to otherwise questionable styles—hello, flower crowns—it has helped to usher in a 1970s revival currently sweeping the high-fashion runways.

Retailers at all price points are pitching their festival-appropriate wares this time of year. ASOS, Nasty Gal and Topshop have festival pages on their websites, filled with fringe, flowers and flared pants.

H&M has a leg up as an official sponsor of Coachella, which means it can use the festival name in its marketing materials. The retailer created its first festival capsule collection, called H&M Loves Coachella, and released it to 350 of its North American stores in March as a way to broaden and prolong its festival partnership. The push makes sense, given the spend-readiness of festival attendees. Nearly 8 in 10 festivalgoers purchased something to prepare for a festival, according to Live Nation’s Festival Report. Two thirds bought clothing, while half bought shoes.

Read More: Listen to a 12 Hour Mix of 160 Coachella Artists

And when festivalgoers flock to the desert this weekend for the start of Coachella, a handful of exclusive pieces await. It is not the expected festival sartorial fare of oversized concert T-shirts and baseball caps. In fact, none of it even says Coachella. Instead, the pieces are on-trend looks for summer, including a pair of white lace shorts and a matching crop top. By purchasing the clothing, Mr. Kulle says, “you’re saying, ‘I’m here.’”

Take a look at the exclusive festival pieces from H&M below and share your thoughts in the comments

H&M designs sold exclusively at Coachella this year Greg Marino/H&M

Beaded crop top by H&M to be sold exclusively at Coachella H&M

Lace Beach Coverup by H&M to be sold exclusively at Coachella H&M

Floral Robe by H&M to be sold exclusively at Coachella H&M

Beaded shorts by H&M to be sold exclusively at Coachella H&M