Better bargain elsewhere. You think there might be mutual interest between the Broncos and running back Arian Foster, who was recently released by the Houston Texans?

Jeromie, tough between the tackles

Kiz: Foster is smart, tough and one of best interviews in the NFL. So I love him almost as much as Gary Kubiak, who coached him in Houston. But at age 29, Foster is damaged goods. If the Broncos want to look for a bargain at running back in free agency, maybe they should kick the tires on Alfred Morris, who excelled with Mike Shanahan’s zone-blocking scheme in Washington.

Getting defensive. A strong Denver defense with Robert Griffin III playing quarterback would be better than half a defense with Brock Osweiler. Osweiler should be the team’s No. 4 priority to retain in 2016. I’d put Von Miller (franchise tag done), Malik Jackson and Danny Trevathan ahead of Osweiler. The Broncos also can’t lose DeMarcus Ware.

Peter, San Diego

Kiz: Reality bites, and the reality is Denver cannot keep all of your favorite players. We here at Kickin’ It Headquarters don’t think Osweiler is worth more than $10 million per year. But, given the crazy market for NFL quarterbacks, here is our best offer: three years, $39 million, with $14 million guaranteed. Breakdown: $6 million signing bonus and salaries of $8 million in 2016, $10 million in 2017 and $15 million in 2018. Smart folks tell me that won’t get the deal done. I tell smart folks: You happy with overpaying Demaryius Thomas?

On thin ice. I have Patrick Roy and Joe Sakic jerseys and wear them often. I love the Avs and want nothing but success for them, but it’s nice to see someone write an article in The Denver Post that even hints at criticism of management. You’re right, Kiz. The Avs are sneaky old. Also take a look at coaching, because this roster is very talented. Ignoring Roy’s complete aversion to advanced statistics, the Avs have bungled the trade market. Ryan O’Reilly for two reclamation projects and a draft pick? And the Mikkel Boedker acquisition? David Jones was a better and more consistent scorer at a similar age, but Boed- ker reportedly will ask for $6 million per year as an unrestricted free agent.

Alan, jilted hockey lover

Kiz: The honeymoon is over for Sakic and Roy as a management team. If the Avs fail to make the playoffs this season, Captain Joe and Saint Patrick will be on the hot seat next season.

Peyton’s place. And today’s parting shot is a plea for Peyton Manning to leave football and tackle a bigger job.

Is there any truth to the rumor that Manning will simultaneously announce that he is retiring from the NFL while also putting his hat in the ring for a run at the U.S. presidency?

Geoff, American voter

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or @markkiszla