One man's 20 years in the state Senate and his challenger's time working with a James City County Head Start program go a long way to explaining what drives each of the candidates seeking to represent the state Senate district that covers the upper Peninsula.

State Sen. Thomas K. "Tommy" Norment Jr., R-James City County, the Senate majority leader, focuses much of his attention on putting together the state government budget – and worrying that a poisonous partisanship is turning Richmond's Capitol Square into a Washington-style Capitol Hill.

"It takes more than saying, 'Hey — I want to do this.' Politics is the art of compromise. It is, I hate to say it this way, the art of making a deal," Norment said.

He believes his ability to bring legislators together – whether it's the often strongly opinionated members of the GOP caucus or winning support from across the aisle – is what 3rd District voters should be thinking about on Nov. 3.

His opponent, Democrat Hugo Reyes, is making his first run for office, saying he is the kind of fresh voice the state Senate needs. If his party wins control of the body, he says, it could clear the way for Virginia to tap Affordable Care Act funds that would let the state expand Medicaid.

"Mental health is the top issue for me right now," Reyes said. "The problem is, the other side doesn't fund it."

Reyes said that if Virginia opted to expand its Medicaid program by using funds from the federal Affordable Care Act, the state could get badly needed resources for Eastern State Hospital and for its financially strapped community mental health services.

Norment opposed Gov. Terry McAuliffe's campaign to tap those Obamacare funds because of concern that rising enrollment would drain the state's budget.

Now, to try to open discussion about ways to cover at least some uninsured Virginians, he says he is floating the idea of ending the state requirement that it approve new hospital and medical facilities. It's an idea that conservatives have suggested could bring health care costs down. It might be enough to resume discussion about providing health care for low-income Virginians, he thinks.

But, he added, last year's battle over Medicaid expansion highlights what he sees as a basic issue at stake in November.

"In 2014, for 104 days, (Senate Democrats) held the budget hostage to try to get the House of Delegates to capitulate on one specific issue," he said at a debate this month at Christopher Newport University.

Norment believes that same kind of standoff is inevitable if the Democrats win control of the Senate.

And standoff is something he abhors.

Despite his own strong feelings that legislators were being tarred unfairly by newspaper and TV reporting on ethics, Norment this year spent hours reviewing and rewriting the 50-page bill that set new limits on the gifts officials can accept – and then spent hours more convincing reluctant senators to go along.

In general, Norment's legislation tends to focus on what are often highly technical matters of criminal and civil law, as well as tourism and higher education issues, which come across his desk from the College of William and Mary, where he teaches two classes on public policy.

Much of what he does is behind the scenes. As majority leader, he works to keep his 20 Republican colleagues in line when voting on bills. If he is re-elected in November and the GOP retains control of the Senate, he is line to be the next chairman of the powerful Finance Committee.

He's been chair of the finance subcommittee that allocates money for schools and colleges, where he says he's been struggling to gradually get state funding for schools back to pre-recession levels.

But education is an area where the state should do more, Reyes argues.

He's particularly eager to see the state expand access to preschool programs – particularly after his experience working with parents of children at the Head Start program run by the Williamsburg-James City County Community Action Agency when they don't speak English.

Doing more for young children is the sort of thing Virginia could do if it accepted Affordable Care Act funds for Medicaid expansion, Reyes said, arguing it would free up money the state now spends on indigent care for other programs.

That means it should not require tax increases to boost funding for mental health and education, as well as expanding state programs for veterans, another priority for Reyes, a veteran with 17 years in the Army, Army Reserve and National Guard. He believes the state could do more to help veterans, with counselors to help those trying the navigate the complexities of Veterans Administration health care, and with job training.

While Norment has defended the General Assembly's role in drawing congressional and General Assembly districts, a task mandated in the state Constitution, Reyes favors an independent commission for redistricting.

"We can see what you get when you let people in office do redistricting," he said.

The strongly Republican 3rd Senate District, which gave Republican gubernatorial candidate Ken Cuccinelli 58 percent of its votes in 2013, sprawls from Hampton on the east to New Kent County on the west, and from King and Queen County on the north down to Suffolk.

Ress can be reached by telephone at 757-247-4535.

Thomas K. Norment

Republican

Age: 69

Occupation: attorney

Education: B.A., Virginia Military Institute; J.D., College of William and Mary

Elected Offices: James City County Board of Supervisors 1987-1991; Virginia State Senate, 1992 to present.