President Obama on Sunday said that Internal Revenue Service officials responsible for the targeting of Tea Party groups made “boneheaded” decisions, but denied that the agency was used to go after the administration's political opponents.

Asked in a pre-Super Bowl interview on Fox if the scrutiny of conservative groups seeking tax-exempt status had been directed from the White House, Obama said there was no “corruption” of any kind in the scandal.

“There was some boneheaded decisions,” the president told Fox News’ Bill O’Reilly, but dismissed the suggestion that there was corruption.

“Not even mass corruption, not even a smidgen of corruption,” said Obama.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

“You have the 501(c)(3) law, which people think is kind of confusing, and we know that the folks did not know how to implement [it.],” the president explained.

Obama blamed coverage of the IRS scandal by conservative groups and outlets for the continued controversy.

“These kinds of things keep on surfacing in part because you and your TV station will promote them,” said Obama.

O’Reilly asked Obama about numerous visits to the White House from then-IRS Commissioner Douglas Shulman, questioning if the agency’s scrutiny of political conservative groups may have been directed from above.

“Mr. Shulman as head of the IRS is constantly coming in because at the time we were trying to set up healthcare.gov and the IRS is involved with making sure that works as well as part of the overall healthcare team,” said Obama.

Also from the Washington Examiner Obama: protesters make me a better president President Obama told Vietnamese activists in Hanoi on Tuesday that people like them have made him a better leader. The courageous work that they do is "important everywhere, including, by the way, in the United States, where there are all sorts of activists and people who are mobilizing, [who] often times are very critical of me and don't always make my life comfortable but, ultimately, I think it's a better country and I do a better job as president because I'm subject to that accountability," Obama said. He encouraged the civil society leaders to continue pressuring their government to make reforms. "Ultimately, it's up to the Vietnamese people to determine how their society functions and the nature of the

“No. 2, we’ve also got the IRS involved with some of the financial reforms to make sure that we don’t have taxpayer funded bailouts in the future,” Obama continued. “We had all these different agendas in which the head of the IRS is naturally involved.”