I get frequent calls from folks who can’t bear to throw out a piece of expensive medical equipment that they — or a loved one — no longer need or are no longer able to use.

Well, here’s one solution. The Access Center for Independent Living’s (ACIL) Recycled Equipment Donated for Independence Program (REDI) will give that piece of equipment to someone who needs it.

“A lot of times people can’t afford a hospital bed or a lift chair,” explained Greg Kramer, assistant director of the Access Center. “The Affordable Care Act requires everybody have insurance, but some insurance doesn’t cover durable medical equipment or even if it does, it may not completely pay for it.”

Kramer said a hospital bed may cost several thousand dollars with specialized beds selling for as much as $50,000.

ACIL is a non-profit, non-residential center for independent living funded through Title VII of the Rehabilitation Act. At least 51 percent of those on the organization’s board and staff have disabilities.

“Our mission is to ensure that people with disabilities have complete access to the communities in which they wish to live,” Kramer said. “We do so through offering advocacy, information and referral, independent living skills training, peer support, our recycled durable medical equipment program and through assisting individuals transition from institutional settings to community living.”

Other services include a Traumatic Brain Injury Support Group, a Youth Transition Program and a Disability Awareness Training.

The REDI program relies on donations of medical equipment in good working condition. Once the item is donated it goes through a cleaning process to make it ready to go back out to someone in need in the community. “There’s no fee for the item requested, however we do ask if a donation can be made to cover administrate costs,” Kramer said.

Here’s what they need most:

Manual wheelchairs

Lift chairs

Walkers with seats

Hospital beds

Scooters

Hoyer lifts

Batteries for power wheelchairs and scooters

Other needs

The group’s Brain Injury(BI) Support Group meets from 2-3:30 p.m. every second Thursday and fourth Tuesday at the Access Center. “We are the only support group in the area,” said Kramer. “We are registered with the Brain Injury Association of Ohio (BIAOH) however we do not receive any funding from them since they closed their doors. They now provide website information and referral of support groups in Ohio by county.”

The purpose of the support group meetings, said Kramer, is to bring hope to the survivors by sharing thoughts and emotions. “We are starting to include activities that will help stimulate the brain.”

Here’s what this group can use:

Painting supplies including canvases, brushes, charcoal pencils

Rags and cleaning supplies

Decks of cards (large type)

Uno games

Classical Music CDs to play during activities

Gardening books

Indoor gardening supplies

Donations to either program can be dropped off between noon and 4 p.m. Monday through Thursday at the Access Center, 1329 Stanley Ave., Dayton. For more information, check out www.acils.com.

Feedback from the Brunner Center

Celine O’Neill, executive director of the Brunner Literacy Center, 4825 Salem Ave. in Dayton, wrote to say Make a Difference readers continue to stop by “with all sorts of supplies that you requested on our behalf.”

“It’s so unexpected and so gratifying,” O’Neill said. “You contribute so much to the culture of giving in the Miami Valley with your column. Thank you for supporting us and others with your kind words.”

That’s a tribute to you, dear readers!