Reps. Franklin Pratt (left) and Vince Leach listen on the last day of their session at the state Capitol in Phoenix on April 2, 2015. (Photo: Patrick Breen/The Republic)

The 2015 Arizona Legislature drew to a close in the early hours Friday. Here's a look at what passed and what failed.

Passed

Travel ID: Legislation creating a travel ID that will allow Arizonans to board commercial airline flights next year passed on the last day. If signed, Arizona residents will have the option of getting a Real ID-compliant driver's license.

Affordable Care Act: A bill that bars the state from using any resources or staff to comply with the federal Affordable Care Act. Most importantly, said sponsor Rep. Justin Olson, R-Mesa, if the bill is signed by Gov. Doug Ducey, it would prevent Arizona from establishing its own health-care exchange.

Plastic-bag ban: The bill would block cities, towns and counties from passing ordinances that ban or regulate the use of plastic bags, Styrofoam and other containers. The bill also would prohibit local governments from requiring businesses to report how much energy they use, halting efforts by Tempe, Flagstaff and Phoenix officials, who are considering new environmental ordinances.

Ride-share rules: A bill that creates new rules for ride-share companies such as Uber and Lyft.

Department of Weights and Measures: Ducey's plan to dissolve the state Department of Weights and Measures and divide its duties among other state agencies. Lawmakers approved the measure, which puts most of the department's duties in the Department of Agriculture.

Penny-per-gallon gas tax: A bill to extend a penny-per-gallon tax on gasoline for another eight years. The tax would revive a program that ended nearly five years ago that helps businesses cover the cost of cleaning up leaks from underground tanks.

School vouchers: An expansion of empowerment scholarship accounts, or vouchers, to benefit schoolchildren on Native American reservations.

Failed

Ballot delivery: A controversial bill that aimed to prevent "ballot harvesting." The measure would have made it a Class 6 felony to deliver more than two ballots to election officials that were not from family members. The bill made exceptions to the limits for caregivers and candidates.

School comment on elections: A bill that would have restricted educators from talking about elections and political issues.

Inspector general: Ducey's bid to create an inspector-general office with wide-ranging powers to investigate state government.

Citizens Clean Elections Commission: A proposed ballot measure that would have asked voters to end the state's public campaign-finance system and direct the money that funds the Citizens Clean Elections Commission to K-12 education instead fell two votes shy of the needed number.

Liquor-sales buffer: A bill that would have exempted grocery stores that sell liquor from the required 300-foot buffer from churches and schools. The legislation was proposed by Circle K but fought by neighborhood groups and the city of Phoenix.

Municipal gun restrictions: A bill that would block cities and towns from enacting gun restrictions tighter than those approved by the state. The penalty could be a fine up to $5,000 against the elected official who made a contrary decision.

School vouchers: A bill that would have allowed low-income students who receive a scholarship from a student-tuition organization to also get a voucher didn't get a final vote.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1D58V7K