Sports anchor Tim Ring is with the Arizona Cardinals at the NFC Championship in Charlotte, NC, and shares his experiences in this travel diary.

Check back often for his updates.

4:20 p.m. Saturday

The Cardinals touched down and arrived at their team hotel just about 30 minutes ago. I'm not going to lie to you; it's cold. I'll share some more thoughts on the game later tonight, but I just had a great visit with Joe Buck who will be on the call tomorrow. Joe passed along some interesting thoughts on Carson Palmer and his future in Arizona. I'll have that interview coming up at 5 p.m. on 3TV and CBS 5.

1:30 p.m. Saturday

Wheels have touched down in Charlotte. There's a chill in the air but the sun is shining.

Great moment on the plane as soon we touched down. A chant of, "Rise Up...Red Sea" broke out and honestly, the plane was rockin'. I don't foresee many Cardinals fans at the game tomorrow but those that are here, are fired up.

I'm heading over now to meet with Joe Buck. Joe will be on the call tomorrow for Fox Sports. I'll bring you his thoughts on the game and more tonight at 5 p.m. on 3TV and CBS 5 sports.

9:40 a.m. Saturday

Well after much concern and consternation, we're airborne. I wasn't going to boast about an on-time arrival until we got up in the air. It was little like the climactic scene in Argo - only without the thought of, you know, impending death that we would not make it.

Anyway, a couple of quick thoughts about the game. I think the Cardinals can win tomorrow if they get back to playing offensively the way they did the majority of the season. They have to constantly put pressure on the Panther defense by utilizing their vertical passing game. Carson Palmer and Bruce Arians admitted Palmer was far too conservative against the Packers (translation: throwing too many short passes). Palmer has to get back to going up top to his four receivers. In fact, expect Palmer to throw deep early Sunday - even if he forces the issue. If anything, this will send a message to both teams that, "this is the way it's going to be today." The Cardinals led the NFL with a point differential of +112 this season. They didn't get there by being conservative. Look for an aggressive Birdgang offense tomorrow.

6:11 a.m. Saturday

Good morning from Sky Harbor. It appears the travel Gods have smiled on us this morning. After dozens of flights to Charlotte were canceled over the last 24 hours, our 7:30 a.m. flight is scheduled to depart on time. As one might imagine, Cardinals fans are in abundance as this flight is one of the first to make it into Charlotte since the storms hit. We are scheduled to arrive in Charlotte at 1:19 p.m. and we'll have live reports from the Bank of America Stadium beginning at 5 p.m. on 3TV. I'll check in later as the trek to the NFC Championship Game continues.

[RELATED: Cardinals fans cheer, #BeRedSeeRed at Big Red Rage]

[RELATED: Arizona, North Carolina governors wager on NFC Championship]

[RELATED: Cardinals history has not-so-normal moments]

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.