Bargain hunters can expect to find plenty of great deals during after-Christmas sales this year.

Apparel

Some clothing retailers offer their biggest discounts of the year during after-Christmas sales, according to DealNews. Expect Banana Republic, Children’s Place, Express, Gap, Macy’s and similar merchants to take an extra 25 percent to 50 percent off already marked-down items. And look for coupons from these retailers for additional discounts. For even better deals, Brent Shelton of FatWallet.com recommends visiting retailers’ outlet sites or stores.

Beauty products

Look for retailers such as Bath & Body Works and Sephora to take an extra 20 percent off clearance items, according to DealNews.

Electronics

If you didn’t snag a great deal on a gadget during a Black Friday sale, you’ll probably find items on sale after Christmas, according to DealNews. In late January, after the International Consumer Electronics Show wraps up in Las Vegas, 2014 models will be deeply discounted as retailers try to make room for 2015 models. Wait until the end of January (about a week before the Super Bowl) for sales on brand-name big-screen HDTVs.

Holiday items

Gift wrap, bags, bows, candy decorations, party supplies and household items that were packaged with holiday branding will be marked down 50 percent to 75 percent, Shelton says. Other items that fit this category include artificial Christmas trees, lighting, power strips and extension cords.

Luxury brands

You probably won’t find pricier designer-brand apparel and accessories as deeply discounted as other apparel, but you will see sales at retailers such as Brooks Brothers, Calvin Klein, Cole Haan, Saks and Tory Burch. Look for discounts of at least 25 percent (and as high as 70 percent) plus free shipping for online purchases.

Outerwear

Coats and other cold-weather gear will be discounted even though it’s just starting to feel like winter in some parts of country. Look for sales — plus use coupons for additional discounts — on brands such as Columbia, Mountain Hardwear and Patagonia, and deep markdowns from REI Outlet and Sierra Trading Post, says Kristin Cook, managing editor of Ben’s Bargains.

Toys

Toys were already being marked down 50 percent to 60 percent — especially items retailers thought would be big sellers but weren’t, Cook says. Prices could go even lower the week after Christmas. Try Target, Amazon and Wal-Mart for the best deals, she says, and don’t be surprised if these retailers offer to match competitors’ toy prices.

Cameron Huddleston,

Kiplinger.com