(Des Moines, IA) Approximately 13oo pro-life activists gathered at the Iowa State Capitol grounds to demand that the state of Iowa defunds Planned Parenthood at the #TruthExposed Rally held on Saturday, August 15th. The event was organized by Simon Conway, drive time host on WHO Radio, and Jenifer Bowen, the executive director of Iowa Right to Life.

“On a beautiful summer day, on the first weekend of the Iowa State Fair, I think (turnout) was remarkable,” Conway told Caffeinated Thoughts.

“We put together a coalition, this was a coalition. There were some people who really dislike each other who shared a microphone for one reason, and one reason alone because we are united that we have to stop the trafficking in dead baby parts,” Conway added.

“We are very, very pleased with the turnout (Saturday) for pulling something together, I got a text message from Simon Conway less than a week-and-a-half ago, saying we need to put this rally together, we need everybody to stand together in unity. In a week-and-a-half we pulled together 19 speakers, all on different sides of different issues, and different sides of this issue,” Bowen told Caffeinated Thoughts.

“Very pleased with the results, very pleased with the messaging, I think people left encouraged by the event, they left inspired, hopefully, to go back and do more. This is just the beginning,” Bowen added.

Caffeinated Thoughts caught all of the speeches on video and are listed in the order they were given.

Simon Conway’s opening remarks:

Iowa Governor Terry Branstad was the first elected official to speak.

Iowa Lt. Governor Kim Reynolds spoke:

U.S. Senator Joni Ernst (R-Iowa) spoke:

Former U.S. Senator Rick Santorum (R-PA) was the only presidential candidate to speak at the rally.

WHO Radio Morning Host Jan Mickelson

Congressman Steve King (R-Iowa) spoke:

Wisconsin Lt. Governor Rebecca Kleefisch spoke on behalf of Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker’s presidential campaign.

Congressman David Young (R-Iowa):

Iowa Secretary of State Paul Pate:

Iowa House Majority Leader Linda Upmeyer:

Former Iowa Secretary of State and current Madison County Attorney Matt Schultz spoke on behalf of U.S. Senator Ted Cruz’s presidential campaign.

State Senator Jack Whitver (R-Ankeny) spoke on behalf of U.S. Senator Marco Rubio’s presidential campaign.

State Senator Ken Rozenboom (R-Oskaloosa):

Bob Vander Plaats, CEO/President of the FAMiLY Leader

Rev. Cary Gordon, pastor at Cornerstone World Outreach in Sioux City, IA:

Former U.S. Senate & Iowa State Treasurer candidate Sam Clovis:

Ryan Rhodes spoke on behalf of Dr. Ben Carson’s presidential campaign.

Jenifer Bowen, Executive Director with Iowa Right to Life, spoke and challenged activists to contact Attorney General Tom Miller to launch an investigation.

Simon Conway offered closing remarks.