I understand the thinking followed by the framers of our Constitution when they decided that Supreme Court justices should be appointed for life.

Their primary reason was to limit the power of the executive branch of government and to prevent the court from being swayed by the prevailing public opinion. They believed that this would protect the rights of minorities, and if assured of a lifetime position, the justices would be able to vote their consciences without fearing that they would be voted out of office.

Another reason why the Founding Fathers favored lifetime appointments for the justices was to keep the court relatively stable, in that even if one political party held the presidency for several consecutive terms, there would still be representatives on the court from the opposing party.

The purpose of the Federalist Papers — 85 essays authored by Alexander Hamilton, James Madison and John Jay — was to influence ratification of the Constitution.

In Article 78 ("The Judiciary Department"), Hamilton hoped to allay the fear of those who opposed a federal form of government that the Supreme Court would be too powerful. He offered the assurance that the judiciary would be the weakest branch of government, in that it had no power over the budget or policy, and that only the executive and legislative branches were empowered to enforce our laws.

It is about time we acknowledge that it hasn't worked out the way Hamilton said it would.

Contrary to his and the other framers' intentions, the Supreme Court has proved itself not only to be highly political but also in direct opposition to Hamilton's essay. It can be argued that today it is more powerful than either the executive or the legislative branches, so powerful that in a 5-4 vote in the presidential election of 2000, the court decided for us who would be our chief executive.

Since then, in almost every important case that has come before it, the breakdown of the court's votes has been the same. The Roberts court has made it possible for large corporations and billionaires like the Koch brothers to control elections with their unlimited wealth, and there is growing fear among women that the justices may overturn Roe v. Wade and return abortion to the back alleys.

The latest evidence of this swing to the right was seen recently. In yet another 5-4 vote, the five right-oriented justices ruled that President Obama's Affordable Care Act violates the First Amendment and other federal laws that protect religious freedom by requiring companies to provide coverage for contraceptives.

Can anyone doubt that the five who voted against the requirement were influenced by the fact that they are all Roman Catholic, all Republican conservatives and all male? In a second 5-4 ruling, the court further weakened the influence of labor unions by ruling that some health care workers are not obliged to pay union dues.

The bottom line then is that the present system is seriously flawed and should be changed. This is not a liberal idea, but one that is shared by many conservatives. After all, there may come a day when the liberals gain a majority on the court, and while I prefer to believe that they would not be as blatantly biased as the present Right Wing Quintet, I am sure that not all of their decisions would be made with 100 percent objectivity.

Don LoCicero of Allentown is an author and professor emeritus at Cedar Crest College. His blog can be found at http://www.savvymafkikker.com.