For the first time in decades, U.S. businesses are closing at a faster pace than new ones are being started.

Business closings represented 8.4 percent of all business in 2012, according to the latest census data analyzed by polling firm Gallup, while business start-ups comprised 8.1 percent of all businesses.

Some say the trend is deeply disturbing because new businesses provide so much innovation and economic vitality.

"Let's get one thing clear: this economy is never truly coming back unless we reverse the birth and death trends of American businesses," Gallup CEO Jim Clifton recently wrote.

Thomas Edsall, a contributing columnist for the New York Times, cited increasing government regulation of small businesses, corporate consolidations, more occupational licensing requirements and too few skilled immigrants as among the reasons why start-ups are lagging.

The trend in Michigan is similar, with one huge caveat.

Business closings rose at an annual rate of 67.3 percent between 2010 and 2013, according to the latest figures from the Edward Lowe Foundation's YourEconomy.org database. The number of start-ups fell 25.5 percent annually in the same period.

Here's the caveat: many of those start-ups were formed by people who lost jobs during Michigan's deep recession, but closed them when they became re-employed in the recovery.

The number of single-employee establishments in the state fell from 307,457 in 2010 to 173,834 in 2013, according to YourEconomy.org.

Becoming self-employed in the Great Recession was "a total act of desperation," said Rob Fowler, CEO of the Small Business Association of Michigan.

Still, new-business growth in the state has been weak in the economic recovery.

Michigan had 489,980 business establishments with two or more employees in 2013, up just 1 percent from 2011, according to YourEconomy.org.

Ned Staebler, CEO of business incubator and accelerator TechTown Detroit, said government regulation is "not helpful to new firm creation."

But he said many other factors likely play a bigger role than licensing requirements in the struggle to create and grow a business.

"Compared to getting financing, product development, retail space build out, customer acquisition, etc., (licensing is) the least of an entrepreneur's worries," Staebler said in an email.

Fowler said his association's members are struggling more with federal regulations, such as the Affordable Care Act and Labor Department rules, than with state regulations.

Gov. Rick Snyder's efforts to trim business regulations and occupational licensing requirements are having a positive impact on Michigan businesses, he said.

Fowler also believes that the data isn't yet reflecting the renewed entrepreneurial climate.

He said he especially notices the change on college campuses, where entrepreneurship is "cool again."

Many universities have student-led entrepreneur clubs and offer degrees in entrepreneurship.

"I'm more optimistic about young people being entrepreneurial and the culture being entrepreneurial than I have been in 20 years, he said. "The data hasn't caught up yet."

Email Rick Haglund at haglund.rick@gmail.com