Note: Chuchua is a retired Jeep dealer and an Off-Road Motorsports Hall of Fame inductee. He ran unsuccessfully for Anaheim City Council in 2008, 2012 and 2014. He co-founded Orange County Veterans Memorial Park Foundation and Coalition of Anaheim Taxpayers for Economic Responsibility.

Note: Choi emigrated from South Korea in 1968. He taught library and information science and Korean at UC Irvine and Saddleback College. He was elected to the Irvine Unified School District board in 1998 and the Irvine City Council in 2004.

Note: Panahi has his own law office in Newport Beach. He attended Corona del Mar High, Orange Coast College and UCLA and received his law degree from Northwestern University School of Law. He has served as a public defender.

Note: Alexia is an Orange Unified School District board member. She didn't respond to the Register's requests for an interview.

Note: Sidhu emigrated from India in 1974. He owns El Pollo Loco restaurants in Mission Viejo, San Juan Capistrano and San Clemente. He served on the Anaheim City Council from 2004 to 2012.

Note: Roditis is president of American Ground Transportation, operating taxis and shuttles in Orange County and north San Diego County. He serves on the Anaheim Cultural and Heritage Commission.

Note: Pauly served on the Villa Park City Council from 2006-14. She is on the Central Committee of the Republican Party of Orange County. Pauly served in the Air Force as a public affairs specialist.

A race to replace termed-out Assemblyman Don Wagner in the conservative 68th Assembly District feels crowded – especially for GOP candidates.

Five Republicans, one Democrat and one independent will face off in the June 7 primary, in which any voter in the district may vote for any candidate regardless of the voter’s party affiliation. The top two vote-getters will advance to the Nov. 8 general election.

Former Anaheim Councilman Harry Sidhu and Irvine Mayor Steven Choi are leading the pack in campaign fundraising, allowing them to send out mailers and post signs throughout the district, which encompasses Lake Forest, Tustin, Villa Park and parts of Anaheim, Irvine and Orange plus surrounding unincorporated communities.

Sidhu has raised $274,049 in total contributions (excluding loans) and Choi $220,664, according to the latest campaign finance reports, which run through April 23. They are far ahead of the third-place candidate, former Villa Park Councilwoman Deborah Pauly, who’s raised $25,818.

Sidhu and Choi could use their finances to boost their name recognition in the low-profile race, said Scott Spitzer, associate professor of political science at Cal State Fullerton.

“Very few people care about state Assembly positions; most people don’t even know the name of their representative,” Spitzer said. “Money raises your profile.”

But some say Sidhu and Choi’s ties to the Republican establishment could backfire, fueled by an anti-establishment sentiment in the presidential election. Donald Trump supporters, who tend to be anti-establishment conservatives, might affect the Assembly race if they turn up to vote in the primary, Spitzer said.

“I think it’s going to help me,” said Pauly, a Tea Party favorite who has openly criticized county GOP leadership as well as council colleagues. “This is the year of the outsider. People are looking for a change agent. I have definitely been that.”

Other lesser-funded candidates are relying on grass-roots campaigns to win the support of targeted voters.

Republican Konstantinos “Kostas” Roditis, serving on the Anaheim Cultural and Heritage Commission, proposes giving homeowners the option of paying an 8 percent, one-time tax and never paying property tax as long as they continue to own their property.

Brian Chuchua, the only candidate with no party preference, said he decided to run for the Assembly to make sure veterans get their cemetery at the former El Toro Marine Base.

Republican Alexia Deligianni-Brydges didn’t return the Register’s repeated phone and email requests for an interview.

Sidhu, Choi and Pauly adhere to the same fiscal conservative values. They bash Democrats in the Legislature for driving businesses out of California with high taxes and excessive regulations.

Sidhu said he’s the only candidate who owns businesses with nearly 100 employees and understands the pain of small-business owners. Choi emphasizes that he’s the only candidate with mayoral experience.

Pauly, who acknowledges her “blunt honesty,” made headlines for calling two Muslims speaking at a local event “unadulterated evil” and for comparing Obamacare with sodomy.

If five Republicans split the vote, Sean Jay Panahi could monopolize the Democratic vote and advance to the general election.

Panahi, a civil attorney who’d never run for any political office, said he’s satisfied with how Democrats in the Legislature are leading the state. He’s the only candidate who has shown support for California’s bullet-train project.

“I believe California’s made the turn and it’s doing better,” Panahi said.

Republicans make up about 43 percent of voters in the 68th District, with Democrats at about 29 percent, according to California’s secretary of state.

“When there’s only one Democrat in a race like this, it really increases the chance they’ll make it to November,” said Jodi Balma, a political scientist at Fullerton College.

Balma pointed to the nearby Assembly District 55 primary in 2014 as an example. Republicans had an 8-point advantage in voter registration, but the field of three Republicans and one Democrat resulted in a candidate from each party making the November ballot. Republican Ling Ling Chang easily won that race.

For the top Republican vote-getter, it’s like the good old days, where in a safe seat you just have to win the primary to win in November,” Balma said.

Contact the writer: 949-445-6397 or tshimura@ocregister.com