The woman making the allegation is a 57-year-old grandmother of 12. She says she was driving home from a friend's house early Thursday morning, June 18, around 2 a.m., when she was pulled over near NE 50th St. and Lincoln Blvd.

Oklahoma City police put one of their own officers on leave after they received a claim that the officer forced a woman to perform a sex act on him during a traffic stop.

The woman making the allegation is a 57-year-old grandmother of 12. She says she was driving home from a friend's house early Thursday morning, June 18, around 2 a.m., when she was pulled over near NE 50th St. and Lincoln Blvd.

"So he patted me down, and didn't find anything," she said.

The woman says the officer then asked her if she was hiding any drugs and told her to undress.

"So I raised up my blouse. He wanted me to raise up my bra. I did all of that and he took a flashlight and shined it on my chest," she said.

She says that officer not only frisked her and told her to undress. She says he forced her to perform oral sex while she was sitting in his squad car.

"I said, oh no, sir, you ain't supposed to do this to me sir," she said. "He said, hurry up because I just got off duty and I don't have all night."

This woman agreed to talk with News 9 as long as we protected her identity. She says she feared the officer would kill her if she did not comply.

"I said, sir no, I can't do this," she said. "He said come on, come on, just a minute, just a minute. I said, sir, I can't do this! I said, you going to shoot me?"

She says this all happened on a side street near an insurance building on Beverly Dr. in NE Oklahoma City, while cars were driving by. Oklahoma City police say they are investigating her claim.

"It is an allegation that we take very seriously," said Sgt. Jennifer Wardlow with the Oklahoma City Police Department. "I can tell you that a criminal investigation is underway, and that officer has been placed on administrative leave pending the outcome of the investigation."

The Oklahoma City Fraternal Order of Police released the following statement regarding the allegations:

"The Oklahoma City Fraternal Order of Police stands firmly by its officers until a full investigation is completed. Officers often find themselves unfairly targeted by all types of allegations. The officer in question is fully cooperating with investigators so we urge everyone to reserve judgment and support the investigative process." - John George, OKC FOP President