Economy: A Washington Post blog laments a decline in manufacturing that’s brought about a loss in high-paying factory jobs. In fact, our factories, while not thriving, are growing. It’s the jobs that aren’t. The question is why.

As the chart alongside shows, we’re still 3.3% below the 2007 peak in factory output — although, since 2000, output is actually up 13%. Jobs, however, are down for both periods. Since the factory downturn that began in President Clinton’s last year, U.S. manufacturers have shed 5 million jobs.

The Washington Post’s Wonkblog cites a study by the liberal Economic Policy Institute blaming the job loss on “trade deficits and declining factory output.”

Sorry, but trade deficits do not cause factory output to decline. Just look at the 1990s, when trade deficits surged yet factory output nearly doubled.

More recently, since the start of the 2007 financial crisis, factory output has fallen 3.3% as jobs have plunged 10.2%. But the trade deficit has shrunk by 10%.

Long-term, the picture is complicated. Factories now are driven by productivity gains from automation that make it easier to produce far more goods with fewer people. So even amid growth, fewer jobs are created.

But there’s no doubt the recent trend is worrisome.

President Obama vowed in 2013 to add a million factory jobs in his second term to boost the middle class. He’ll be lucky to get half that. Despite paying lip service to creating jobs, his policies have made it harder than ever for manufacturers to hire.

Take just two recent examples.

New Environmental Protection Agency regulations to slash carbon emissions 30% by 2030 will have a devastating effect on factory jobs. A study by the Heritage Foundation found that this regulation by itself would cost each American $7,000 in income while killing 500,000 factory jobs and 45% of all coal-industry jobs.

Then there’s the just-released ozone standards, also from the EPA’s job-killing policy shop. A study by NERA Economic Consulting for the National Association of Manufacturers (NAM) estimated a $140 billion hit to GDP and as many as 1.4 million jobs lost each year.

“Unfortunately, the new proposed ozone standard is so over the top, even places with no industrial activity for miles around will be considered noncompliant,” said Jay Timmons, president and CEO of NAM.

The government’s own Energy Information Administration estimates that electricity prices will rise 7% as a result of this rule.

Since Obama took office, thousands of new regulations have gone into effect. In 2012, regulation cost the U.S. economy about $2 trillion, or 12% of GDP. And manufacturers have been hit hardest. The average factory today spends $19,564 per worker to comply with regulations. For small manufacturers, it’s bigger: $34,671 per worker.

Add to this the 40% top corporate tax that U.S. manufacturers face — the highest in the developed world. Just cutting this to the OECD average of 25% and making a few other badly needed tax tweaks would add millions of new jobs over the next decade.

And don’t forget ObamaCare. Kaiser Family Foundation data show that the average cost of a family health plan for manufacturing under the “Affordable” Care Act has soared 33%, from $12,441 in 2009 to $16,538.

Amid high taxes and a regulatory siege, the administration and its clueless progressive supporters wonder why factory jobs are barely growing. The wonder is that they’re growing at all.