In his Sept. 4 op-ed column, “Obama’s biggest failure,” devoted to assailing the president over the massive human tragedy that is Syria, Michael Gerson mentioned just one possible tactic: destroying barrel-bomb-laden helicopters. That would require neutralizing Syria’s formidable antiaircraft batteries, which the Pentagon, fearing U.S. casualties, has long resisted.

Mr. Gerson created an ominous scenario — that Iran will devote “tens of billions” of dollars to bolstering Syrian President Bashar al-Assad — and ignored diplomacy.

As Mr. Assad’s fellow Alawites and Hezbollah militants reconsider allegiance to his faltering regime, renewed efforts to craft a diplomatic settlement have been reported. And Tehran is unlikely to bolster Mr. Assad with billions at the cost of ignoring Iranians’ demands for better post-sanctions lives.

Richard McKee, Arlington

●

I disagree with Colbert I. King’s assertion of the accepted wisdom that Iran poses a threat to Israel [“Mending the D.C.-Jerusalem divide,” op-ed, Sept. 5]. Unlike Iran, Israel is believed to possess up to 300 nuclear weapons, has not signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and has never accepted inspection of its alleged nuclear sites. If anything, it is Israel that is a threat to Iran.

Another aspect of the general debate over the nuclear deal is that Iran has a small Jewish community that has existed there for thousands of years. As reported recently in the Atlantic , that community of 10,000 to 25,000 has religious freedom, with dozens of synagogues, kosher shops, etc. Judaism, like Christianity and Zoroastrianism, is an officially recognized religion in Iran. There is a national Jewish association and a Jewish member of parliament. Does that really sound like a country that is a threat to Israel?

Anthony C. Newton, Arlington

●

Another piece of legislation Republicans don’t like, another tortured argument for legal action against it, this time by Rep. Mike Pompeo (R-Kan.) and David B. Rivkin Jr. of the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, [“Don’t vote on the Iran deal,” op-ed, Sept. 7]. Last I checked, Republicans had the majority in both the House and the Senate. They actually get to write the laws that govern our country. Yet instead of taking that opportunity to craft a plan of action and gather votes for it, they waste time trying to stymie efforts to actually solve problems (e.g., the Affordable Care Act and the Iran nuclear deal). When that doesn’t work, they try to figure out how the judicial branch can save them. With that kind of track record, is it any wonder that early polls show Donald Trump doing so well?

Chris Wilcox, Fulton, Md.