The absence of debates doesn't mean presidential candidates like Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio will be absent from the airwaves. AP Images

With the holiday week curtailing retail campaigning and the next set of debates still three weeks away, the 2016 presidential candidates are turning to television to fill the political void.

The objective of the stepped-up broadcasting blitz is to keep a presence in voters' minds as their attention gravitates to the traditional holiday rituals of family, travel, shopping, worship and football.

As much as they're competing with each other, candidates will be eagerly vying for people's time – even if it's just a fraction of a minute – in order to punch their messaging through during a busy time of the year.

"If you were going to spend money in a campaign advertising, now would be around the time that you would start doing that," Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., said at a campaign stop in Iowa Monday.

Rubio is launching his first pair of television ads this week. A sobering national security spot displays his recognition of the "civilizational struggle" against the Islamic State group and will air nationally. A softer biographical ad, going up in Iowa and later in New Hampshire, highlights his modest upbringing and tells the story of his father, who worked as a hotel bartender to provide for the Rubio family.



Those Rubio spots will join two TV commercials and one radio ad already on the airwaves in the Hawkeye State, courtesy of Sen. Ted Cruz's campaign. With a small purchase of time on stations there for a flight through the first week of December, the Texas Republican is seeking to remind voters of his dynamic debate performances, when he touted standing up to establishment Republicans and the media.

In the final frame of the ads, the words "Trust" and "Ted" morph into one, spelling out "Trusted." It's meant to reinforce the narrative to conservatives that he's the candidate who can be trusted to follow through with his promises. In the radio ad, he employs praise from talk show titan Rush Limbaugh, who gushes that Cruz is the candidate "most steadfastly opposed to liberalism."



Whereas Rubio is highlighting strength and personal appeal, Cruz is choosing to trumpet his defiance and courage of conviction.

The two leading Democratic presidential contenders also have unfurled new early state advertisements.

Both of Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders' 30-second spots zone in on his favored cause of constructing a more fair governing system, economically and politically. One proposes taxing Wall Street and requiring equal pay for women; the other heralds his people-powered campaign that relies on small donors, rather than billionaires.



Front-runner Hillary Clinton's spots are both on the topic of preserving President Barack Obama's health care law, the Affordable Care Act. One features a breast cancer survivor vouching for the former secretary of state, and the other chronicles Clinton's long fight to reform health care.

"I'm not going to let the Republicans rip up 'Obamacare,'" she says.



Aside from plugging a message to voters, candidates' ability to place advertisements on the air roughly 70 days before voting begins signals financial prowess.

Travis Ridout, co-director of the Wesleyan Media Project – which tracks campaign advertising – says airing commercials this early is more about continuing a drumbeat of momentum than nailing down actual votes.

"It might be sort of a top-of-the-head thing so when the pollster calls it's, 'I remember that one guy on the air.' It can help you in the polls temporarily, which can help with media and donors. It doesn't mean they're going to vote for you in February," he says.

But it's no coincidence that the candidates in the best polling positions are also the ones with the capacity to purchase broadcasting shares.

The one glaring exception is Donald Trump, who has thus far only put money behind a package of radio commercials.

Super PACs, the outside groups able to accept unlimited campaign contributions, have driven the bulk of the earlier spending on advertising. While they're being tasked with filling in the gaps for underfunded candidates they support, they also have more autonomy to fire off attacks, allowing the beneficiary to claim innocence.

For instance, the pro-Cruz Courageous Conservatives PAC is slamming Rubio with a radio spot in Iowa for his role in the "Gang of 8" bipartisan immigration bill.

"Marco Rubio betrayed our trust, failed us, and he's done nothing since coming to Washington but push for amnesty," says a female narrator.



New Day For America, a super PAC supporting GOP Gov. John Kasich of Ohio, has already aired an ad comparing the national security experience of Trump and Ben Carson to that of Obama's "on-the-job training." In the coming weeks, the same group is plotting a frontal assault on Trump's legitimacy, as previewed in an online video which pieces together some of the billionaire's more brow-raising statements.

The effect of short bursts of advertising can be fleeting, and Trump for months has successfully sucked up gobs of earned media coverage without placing many dollars on the television airwaves. Then there's the pro-Jeb Bush super PAC Right to Rise USA which by late in the month had aired nearly half of all the presidential TV ads in October, according to one analysis. That dominance on the air has manufactured little on the ground, though, as Bush continues to slump in the single digits.

Political pros maintain that TV advertising remains the most effective way to deliver a message to voters, especially when their attention is drawn away by other life events.

"What will be fascinating to watch is how this battle plays out between traditional and nontraditional campaigns," says veteran Democratic strategist Mark Putnam, who makes ads for a living. "Social and earned media coverage has a very short life. Disciplined campaigns know that consistent and focused paid media communications is what inevitably wins the day.