In a Facebook post titled “Let Allah Sort It Out,” former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin condemned President Obama’s decision to get further involved with the ongoing civil war in Syria.

“So we’re bombing Syria because Syria is bombing Syria? And I’m the idiot?” Mrs. Palin asked on Friday. “President Obama wants America involved in Syria’s civil war pitting the antagonistic Assad regime against equally antagonistic Al Qaeda affiliated rebels. But he’s not quite sure which side is doing what, what the ultimate end game is, or even whose side we should be on.”

Mrs. Palin, the 2008 Republican vice presidential nominee, argued that though Americans sympathize with the plight of innocent civilians in the war-torn country, the United States has “no clear mission in Syria,” and the president’s advertised war plan “has given Assad enough of a heads-up that he’s reportedly already placing human shields at targeted sites.”

SEE ALSO: Syrian state media call Obama’s move a ‘retreat’

“Our Nobel Peace Prize winning President needs to seek Congressional approval before taking us to war,” she added.

On Saturday, Mr. Obama sent a letter to congressional leaders and draft legislation on the Authorization for the Use of U.S. Armed Forces (AUMF) in connection to the Syrian conflict. The draft resolution authorizes the president to use the U.S. military “as he determines to be necessary and appropriate in connection with the use of chemical weapons or other weapons of mass destruction in the conflict in Syria[.]”

House Republican leaders said they’ll wait until the end of their summer vacation, which ends a week from today, before returning to Washington to vote on authorizing a strike on President Bashar Assad’s regime.

The GOP leadership said the coming days will give Mr. Obama some time to make a more convincing case than he has laid out so far.

“As I said before,” Mrs. Palin concluded Friday, “if we are dangerously uncertain of the outcome and are led into war by a Commander-in-chief who can’t recognize that this conflict is pitting Islamic extremists against an authoritarian regime with both sides shouting ‘Allah Akbar’ at each other, then let Allah sort it out.”