A pair of bees share a rose in the Longmont Memorial Rose Garden at Roosevelt Park. (Dean Hendrickson / Special to the Times-Call)

At the west end of the vast Roosevelt Park in Longmont sits the Memorial Rose Garden. A motorist turning from Longs Peak Avenue north onto Bross Street might not even notice the garden. It's in bloom only during the summer, and the nearby colorful playground might draw the eye quicker than plots of flowers. But the rose garden has taken root in the same grounds since 1946, and it survives and thrives with the help of city staff and Longmont volunteers.

History

As a tribute to veterans — including those who had served in the recently ended World War II — the Lyons Club of Longmont established the Memorial Rose Garden with 250 plants. The garden was originally on the southeast side of the park but moved to the west side in 1952 where it still sits today.

photographed roses which were in full bloom at the Longmont Memorial Rose Garden in Roosevelt Park. (Paul Sandford / Special to the Times-Call)

The garden has changed and grown throughout its 69 year history. More plots were added, as well as different rose types. A partnership with the All American Rose Society allowed the garden to grow specific, unique flowers that the society would breed as part of the All American Rose Selection. This included a plot dedicated to 9/11 with roses named Firefighter and God Bless America. A plot dedicated in part to the royal family with a rose named Queen Elizabeth. There is a deep red rose named Abraham Lincoln, and an orange one with black tips named after former tennis pro Chris Evert.

The partnership ended a handful of years ago, meaning that for now, the rose garden has stopped growing.

"We are no longer creating new beds," said Lanette Christensen, a city horticulturist who has worked in the garden for 16 years. "We are sticking with what we have."

Caretakers

There are currently 3,000-plus plants and hundreds of varieties of roses in the garden. Very few of those are new. The newest are the Iconic Yellow Lemonade and Iconic Pink Lemonade, but there are also roses like the Old English Rose that have been there since the beginning.

"They're an old type of rose, and they're more fragrant," Christensen said of the garden's oldest residents. "The Old Fashioned English Rose is a lot heartier."

Christensen said that if taken care of, very few roses have to be replaced. This past year she purchased only 30 new plants, meaning that just 1 percent of plants are new this year.

The city has switched from a full-time rose-garden worker to employing two seasonal workers who are in charge of the garden in addition to the rest of the city's parks. Those two employees, along with Christensen, begin work after the last hard frost to prepare the plants for the summer bloom. Because of an early frost in October, workers had to prune the roses lower than normal this spring, but that's a good thing.

"A lot of things hadn't acclimated yet so most everything this year is down to the bottom," Christensen said. "Even climbers that normally start off high have been taken down, which is good with regeneration."

In addition, Christiansen is always working to procure new arbors (stands for climber roses), and all the beds are in the process of getting concrete border that will raise them and "formalize them," Christiansen said.

Volunteers

The garden is also changing with the volunteer program. Since the city no longer pays a full-time employee to care for the garden, the city relies on a team of volunteers. For years the volunteer program was loosely organized, but that is changing this year with the introduction of a new volunteer coordinator — Lauren Poulos.

Roses bloom at the Memorial Rose Garden in 2014. (Times-Call file)

"The city needed someone to have that centralized position, to recruit and organize," Poulos said.

Poulos took on the Adopt a Rose Garden Volunteer Program and added a formal, mandatory training (26 Longmont residents attended training this year). She and the city are also providing volunteer T-shirts and necessary supplies and working to ensure the program thrives in future years.

"I'm looking forward to growing the program, getting more volunteers and getting awareness out there to the community," Poulos said.

The volunteer program is vital to the garden during the blooming season. The city makes sure the plots are irrigated and fumigated and new plants are provided when needed there, deadheading — the process of cutting off shriveling blooms — is key to making sure the plants bloom multiple times over the summer and stay healthy. Deadheading is a volunteer's main duty.

The city provides shears and gloves with the stipulation that a volunteer (or group) deadheads at least once a month on their own schedule. Poulos said the work is divided so that each individual or group sort of adopts a rosebed for the summer and then cares for it throughout.

"We invite individuals to take on their own plots," Poulos said. "An individual can take on one to however many they want."

Most of the individuals that come are elderly, retired and tend to volunteer during the week. Groups tend to volunteer together or take shifts. One group, the Hoe and Hope Garden Club, has been volunteering for years.

Want to volunteer? Anyone interested in volunteering to work at the Memorial Rose Garden may email volunteer coordinator Lauren Poulos at Lauren.Poulos@longmontcolorado.gov

"Our encouragement of civic volunteering is one of the cornerstones of the group," said Hoe and Hope member Georgia Jallo. "(The garden) appeals to us on many levels."

Hoe and Hope, which has been in existence for 50 years, has 20 members that either attended the training or are planning to help out this summer. Jallo said the city's ramped up program is encouraging them to take it more seriously.

"The city has made this a priority for their park," Jallo said. "We also want to make it a priority this year."

Poulos said the volunteer program allows for residents to have some "civic pride."

"The functional aspect of the program is to have help with the roses," Poulos said. "But it's also a neat way to get people involved. People get attached to their plots."

Poulos is even planning to reach out to businesses for sponsorship, furthering the role the community plays in the garden. Poulos said the training and awareness is vital, not only to ensure the garden continues, but to prevent and misinformation or theft.

"There's been instances of theft in the garden, from trimming specific roses to digging up whole plants," Poulos said. "People need to know it's not just random people out there trimming roses, and you can't just go and take roses."

Visit the garden

The Roosevelt Park rose garden puts on new blooms from late June through August. When the frost comes in the fall, the last blooms give way to frozen and dead plants that will resurface the following summer. But during those blooming months, and at other times, the garden is still a wonder to wander through, with benches, paths and an arbor that roses climb up and cover some summers.

"Most people are really happy to be here, they just love it," Christensen said of visitors. "It's super fragrant in the morning when it's just starting to heat up. It's a great place to sit and a nice place to educate kids."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones