Magic Special Events finds its niche repurposing and reinventing

The evolution of Magic Special Events in Richmond, Va., began long before the company was known for its corporate picnics and unique inventory. At the age of 12, Woody Thomas, president of Magic Special Events, performed magic shows at birthday parties. By the time he

was driving, he was doing two birthday shows each Saturday.

“Dad was a dentist who used magic to set patients at ease. He showed me some tricks and I got pretty good at them,” Thomas says. “I had a business phone line at 16 and by college I was doing more corporate parties. I left college after 1½ years to help corporations with things like clowns, balloons and dunk tanks. I realized I can only do so many magic shows each day, but I can do multiple events.”

That began what Thomas refers to as his “career in dumpster diving” as he went through what his competitors no longer wanted to find what he was looking for. Several years later, Thomas heard a newer employee tell a customer the company didn’t have what they were looking for. After the call, Thomas found out what the customer was looking for and told the employee they could get it. When the employee protested that he can’t sell what they don’t have, Thomas responded that “this company was built on selling what we don’t have.”

Repurposing and reinventing has been an integral part of the business plan all along the way. “We got into balloons when singing telegrams and balloon bouquets were big. Since I was twisting balloon animals as a kid I knew where to buy them. Then the calls came in for balloon drops/releases. I said, ‘Sure I can do that.’ I didn’t know how, but I figured it out,” Thomas says. While balloons were big business, Thomas eventually transitioned away from them.

“I got out of it because it’s a lot of work with nothing to show for it at the end of the night. I like to reuse things. We made giant sculptures like a 12-ft. flamingo with balloons, but at the end of the night we’d have to pop them all and get rid of it. It was such a waste that all the work went to nothing so that’s when I started building plywood flamingoes we could paint and keep renting. When we were transitioning away from balloons, clients would call and say they need balloons for this or that and I would show them another possibility in a rental item,” Thomas says.

The costume portion of the business also was a product of evolution. “There was a time when singing telegrams with gorillas and chickens were big. We had those and then people started calling and asking if we had this costume or that costume. That’s how we got up to 8,000 costumes in our inventory,” he says.

Thomas says this learn-as-we-go approach has helped make the company versatile and open to ideas. “Because we’ve done everything like this, we’ve figured everything out on our own and we can fill a wide range of requests. I just did the first balloon drop in years — we have all the stuff to do that. It’s not a big deal, but the average company doesn’t know how to start to do that. The evolution of all this is that I’ve liked things fun,” he says.

The extensive costume collection hangs from the ceiling of the company’s 25,000-sq.-ft. warehouse, along with a variety of novelties, including a multitude of statues, a giant Mardi Gras mask and a life-size horse. In addition to creative use of ceiling space, shelving throughout the warehouse is filled with unique items for any theme, from tropical islands and fairy tales to Hollywood and casinos. Thomas also has dozens of hand-painted 12-ft.-by-40-ft. backdrops to complete the look of an event. In the midst of it all is the work station where items are repurposed or built from an idea. In this place where Aladdin’s lamp becomes a white teapot for an Alice in Wonderland party and horseshoes become Western-themed candle holders, categorizing inventory can be tricky.

While such a vast inventory and creative repurposing allow Thomas to produce picnics and parties with almost any theme, he relies on a solid warehouse staff and Party Cad software to keep it organized.

“We use Party Cad extensively, but we take it to a different level. When I go out for a picnic sales call in another city, I want to make that trip one time. Before I go out I download an aerial photograph. While I’m there I pull up the photograph and take measurements so Party Cad can scale the whole thing. This way, we’re usually able to give a complete rendering in the proposal. If we can show them what their party will look like before the event, that’s a big sell. We also use Party Cad to pull up jobs at common hotels to show what we’ve done there in the past. Even our custom pieces are built into Party Cad so we can easily show them to clients,” Thomas says.

The program also helps him convey his vision to his employees. “The first thing I do when I walk into a venue is visualize what the room will look like the night of the party. I visualize the party happening while I’m there. I’ll come back here and do a Party Cad of it or hand-draw it and give it to someone else to put into the system. I want the vision, but I have employees who figure out the details — how may tables, chairs and other items are needed. I create the look of the party in the software so I can follow it through from the entrance gets this, the prefunction area gets this equipment, we’ll do this vignette over here — usually our clients don’t see that but it helps our installers visualize the party and understand where everything should go. We attach the Party Cad image of the party to the contract software so we can look at all aspects of the party at once,” he says.

This approach has helped the company find its niche over the years. “At one time we were trying to be the all-inclusive rental company with glassware and all that, but it’s just not us,” Thomas says. “Our guys don’t want to count glasses, but they really get into the production meetings and they bring things to the table. It’s really a joint effort with everybody working to pull it all together.”

Today, Thomas continues to build the majority of his business around corporate events and picnics. “What I’ve found is that when corporate clients contact us, they’re looking for solutions to problems. We view everything as a challenge and that keeps it interesting for us. Nothing’s fun unless it’s a challenge,” he says.

One challenge that the company takes on every year is a rigorous schedule of company picnics across eight states. Over the years, Thomas has honed this process to the point where he says that, for the most part, they are turnkey events. His unique approach to staffing large picnics hundreds of miles from his warehouse has made these events run more smoothly and created relationships within communities.

“We staff each picnic with a few of our guys and a local football team or charity organization. We have two to three trucks on site and start preliminary setup as soon as we arrive. On Friday at 4 p.m., the football team or charity shows up to help with 90 percent of the setup. Saturday morning, the same group comes back to help with the rest of the set up and begin working in the on-site kitchen and serving. The picnic starts at 11:00 a.m., and we serve food and provide fun and games continuously. At 3 p.m. Saturday the event is over and within two hours all the trucks are back on the road. The logistics of hiring a team rather than 80 individuals makes the whole thing easier. You already have a group that can work cohesively and no one wants to be the weak link. In the end, it’s a win-win-win. We win because the work is done efficiently. The group wins because they get a check for more than any other fundraiser they could have done. The company wins because they are the ones who write the check that goes to the volunteer group,” he says.

For all the challenges, unique requests and time restrictions, Thomas says he loves his work. For him, the payoff is in the big reveal. “To a lot of people it’s a mystery what we do and how we do it, but to me it’s a day-to-day thing. It’s certainly not like work. I work just about every day because I love it. This is not like many other businesses where if you don’t finish today you can finish tomorrow. This has a start and finish deadline and if you’re not ready at the start, you’re finished. To me the two most exciting things are making the sale and then being there when the party begins. It’s like a show. When the guests arrive it’s like the curtain opening. You want to wow them when they get there,” he says. “There’s something about a show — and so with the event business — either you love it or you hate it. There’s not a lot of in between. It’s physically demanding and mentally demanding but the reward is when people walk in and go, ‘Wow.’”