The Naperville Area Chamber of Commerce took no official position Monday on increasing the minimum wage and instead used its monthly Legislative Committee lunch to host a panel for informational purposes only.

One of panelists, U.S. Rep. Bill Foster, (D-11th), argued that a pay hike for both Illinois and the nation's working poor was good both for workers and for the overall economy.

"There's always the need for a floor (on how low pay can be)," he said.

While some jobs might inevitably wind up offshore because of higher labor cost, Foster said, the benefits of the income redistribution far outweighs any negatives.

"You get much better economic growth if you transfer to the middle class ... (higher wages) are much more likely to circulate in the local economy," he said.

DuPage County Board Member Tonia Khouri (R-Aurora), who owns Green T Services landscaping and home repair business, said she was less-than-enthused about the concept, in part because there's no guarantee it won't be muddled by politics.

"I'm for raising everybody's wages and quality of life," said Khouri, who would be Foster's re-election bid opponent should she win the March 15 Republican primary. "But Washington and Springfield red tape won't do anything except hinder job growth."

Illinois' minimum is $8.25 per hour, with the exception of Chicago, which passed an ordinance increasing the amount to $10 and then incrementally raising it until it reaches $13 per hour in 2019.

Foster said he preferred that policy be made at the national level, and while he hadn't yet settled on a definite figure, $12 a hour might be a good start, indexed yearly for inflation.

The Illinois Senate passed legislation in February that would have raised the minimum wage to $9 an hour and then increased it incrementally until reaching $11 in 2019. That bill, however, was not called for a vote in the House.

Ben Brockschmidt, of the Illinois Chamber of Commerce, argued that raising the minimum could slow job growth and hurt the people it seeks to help.

The change doesn't combat poverty, he said, and would hurt the inner city the most, where only one in 10 African-American teens have jobs.

Brockschmidt cited a University of Chicago study that showed violent crime dropped by 51 percent in areas where teens were able to find work.

He also argued that employers are still grappling with the effects of the Affordable Care Act, and now was no time to be adding more reasons for employers to move out of state.

"It is impossible to look at jobs not created ... that is a number we cannot quantify," Brockschmidt said.