HENNEPIN — Putnam County on Monday marked the transition of 10-year state’s attorney James A. Mack of Hennepin into his role as the county’s first new resident judge in nearly a quarter-century.



Mack, the newest judge in the five-county 10th Judicial Circuit surrounding Peoria, took his oath of office in the oldest operating courthouse in the state before a crowd that included several other current and retired judges.



“It’s an honor for me to be here. This is a historic event in a historic building. The last time we did this was 24 years ago,” said Chief Judge Stephen Kouri, who swore Mack in.



Mack, 49, a Republican, succeeds the retiring Scott Shore, a Granville Democrat who was elected without opposition in 1990. Mack defeated Democrat Brad Popurella of McNabb and independent John Grivetti of Standard in the Nov. 4 election.



“This is the happiest and most important day of my professional life,” Mack said.



Shore, who will return to private legal practice in a Hennepin office, recalled his own beginnings on the bench while also summarizing Mack’s record of public and private practice.



“Judge Mack, this now begins what is certain to be another eventful chapter in your life and your career,” Shore said.



After brief remarks that mostly consisted of thanking numerous people, Mack swore in new and re-elected county officials who seldom have occasion to take their oaths before such large assemblies.



The new work schedule Mack begins Tuesday morning was a reminder that being the “resident” judge has almost nothing to do with actually presiding here. Judges elected in the 10th district’s “Northern Circuit” of Marshall, Putnam and Stark counties typically spend their first five years in Peoria and Tazewell counties to minimize conflicts from their past legal practices.



“I’ll be in Room 203 (in the Peoria County Courthouse),” handling chancery, probate and “miscellaneous remedy” cases, Mack said.



That indicates a great responsibility, noted Shore, who is leaving as the district’s senior judge. Chancery cases, in particular, involve a judge’s powers of equity, which are based on principles of fairness and generally broader than those arising from specific statutes.



The state’s attorney for at least the next two years will be Christina Mennie, a Hennepin attorney who was appointed Saturday to fill Mack’s two-year unexpired term. She was closing out her private practice Monday while also making arrangements to be sworn in soon by the now-former prosecutor whom she previously often faced as a defense attorney.



“(Mack) was a fair-minded prosecutor, and I believe he always had the county in mind as he worked,” she said. “I admired that in him and will be conscientious of that throughout my term.”



Gary L. Smith can be reached at glsmith@mtco.com. Read his Northern Circuit blog at pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @Glsmithx.