Colts guided by Chuck Pagano, whose father coached Fairview High 21 years

For the Pagano family of Boulder, autumn and winter Sundays are anything but relaxing.

At 11 a.m., typically, retirees Sam and Diana Pagano will sit down to watch an Indianapolis Colts game with their daughter Peach, the youngest of six, and her teenage sons, Carlo and Mariano.

They watch Colts Head Coach Chuck Pagano, their third-youngest, pace the sidelines, and Sam reminds himself he isn't dreaming.

"We're sitting there and they got the camera on and it's a big game at the stadium, and we just want to pinch ourselves," Sam says. "I think, 'What's Chuck doing out there?'"

The Paganos watch, and they pray. Depending on how the game's going, prayer might be supplemented by profanity.

Chuck Pagano, left, a defensive standout on two Fairview High state championship football teams in the late 70s, with his father Sam, the school's football coach for 21 years.

At 2 p.m., they flip on the San Diego Chargers, for whom the second-youngest Pagano, John, is employed as defensive coordinator.

"We're exhausted by 6," Sam says.

"And I gotta tell you," Peach adds, "at 44, the anxiety is getting worse."

This Sunday, the Paganos, who all live together in a home in east Boulder, will get to act out their routine at Sports Authority Field, where Chuck's Colts will play underdog to the Denver Broncos in an NFL divisional round playoff game.

For Chuck, it'll be a return to the spot where he and his siblings spent several summers in the late '70s, back when Sam, the former longtime football coach at Boulder's Fairview High, ran a youth camp at Mile High Stadium. Sam's roster of counselors would feature a slew of Broncos greats, including Chuck's favorite player, Tom Jackson.

"Jackson, Dave Studdard, Steve Watson, Barney Chavous — those guys were like big brothers to us," Peach says. "They took care of us, kind of like family."

Chuck would, of course, be thrilled to leave Denver with a win. But there was a time, not so long ago, that the prospect of a Broncos playoff loss was liable to leave Chuck and John in bad moods all week.

"I came home one Sunday and the Broncos had played Buffalo," Sam recalls. "They got beat, and Chuck was kind of upset, but John was really crying. 'I wanted John Elway to win! Blah, blah, blah.' I said, 'John, I got my own problems. I got a big game this week. I can't be worrying about the Broncos."

There were plenty of those big games during the 21 years Sam coached Fairview. He won three state championships in that time, and Chuck, a defensive standout, was the best player on two of those teams. John was all-state, too.

Though both brothers are now coaching at the highest level possible, Sam insists that wasn't by design.

"I didn't see their coaching mentality until they were in college, and decided what they were going to do," he says. "I told them, 'Make sure you get a business degree, and if you want to coach, that's great, too.'"

Even if this wasn't the plan, per se, none of the Paganos are surprised to see Chuck having this kind of success, in this big a role.

"You've got to know your subject matter," Sam says. "You've got to know what to do in coaching technique, if it's with the secondary or the linebackers or whatever. And Chuck has all that knowledge, and lot of it comes from relationships and his own motivation. He's great with relationships with players. I read all the time, 'Why do players love Chuck Pagano so much?'"

Chuck's mother, Diana, hazards a guess: "Because he likes them."

"He'll be with the janitor as well as the CEO," she adds. "He stops and talks to everybody and makes sure that they're OK."

When Chuck's family describes him, they beam about the good guy who talks to the janitor much more than they do about the razor-focused field general who has led his Colts to the playoffs in all three seasons of his tenure in Indianapolis.

"He's easy to like," says nephew Carlo. "And he's one of the funniest people I've ever met. He's got a joke left and right."

According to his family, Chuck does an uncanny Al Pacino impression, and is known to emcee family events.

Family members say he also keeps everything, from a bad game to his recent and highly publicized bout with leukemia, in perspective.

"He's classy," Sam says. "When he loses to his brother, he's even more classy."

On one occasion a couple years back, Chuck called Sam after a game, as he always does. The Colts had just fallen to John's Chargers, and Chuck was crying.

"I felt bad for him," Sam recounts. "He said, 'Dad, it's just a game.'"

For Carlo and Mariano, blossoming football stars at Fairview themselves, this weekend's bout is a little bit more than a game.

"If we win Sunday, the whole week is going to be great until the next Sunday," Carlo says. "But if we lose, I don't know. Trying to go to school is the worst when you're the only Colts fan in the sea of orange. It'll be like we never left the stadium."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness