HBW adds states lobbyist — Dawe exits NEC — Application Developers Alliance adds European board — Pitts-Casso paint part

HBW ADDS STATES LOBBYIST: Public policy authority Brydon Ross has joined Houston-based energy policy company HBW Resources. Based out of Kentucky, Ross will lead the firm’s state policy group as vice president for state affairs. He has served as the director of energy and environmental policy for the Council of State Governments, and as the interim executive director of the Association of Air Pollution Control Agencies. He is a former director of government relations for the Association of Oil Pipelines in D.C.

“Brydon Ross has made his career advancing good energy policy and working closely with state legislators and stakeholders,” said David Holt, the managing partner for HBW Resources. “Our clients will benefit from his counsel and experience working with private sector leaders, elected officials and policymakers.”

Story Continued Below

DAWE EXITS NEC: Chris Dawe, a health policy adviser to the National Economic Council and a former staffer to Sen. Max Baucus, is leaving the Obama administration Friday. He has not yet announced his professional plans, but hopes to spend some of his immediate downtime at the playground in Glover Park with his 7-month-old, Harper.

“It has been an immense honor to serve President [Barack] Obama, Secretary [Kathleen] Sebelius and this entire administration over the past three years — first at the HHS Office of Health Reform and more recently at the National Economic Council at the White House — helping to implement the elements of the Affordable Care Act that are already starting to improve care and lower costs for millions of Americans,” Dawe wrote in an email to friends and colleagues that was shared with PI.

GOOD WEDNESDAY AFTERNOON where it’s been 154 years since the first successful United States Pony Express ran from Saint Joseph, Mo., to Sacramento, Calif. in 1860. Byron remains abroad, on a “walkabout,” as one PI source calls it, and Andrea holds down the fort in the meantime, so send your lobbying news, gossip, tips and scoops to adrusch@politico.com.

APP DEVELOPERS ALLIANCE ADDS EUROPEAN BOARD: The Application Developers Alliance is adding a board and staff to better serve its European membership, which includes nearly 8,000 developers. Members of the new European board include: Eugene Stipp of Yahoo, Richard Hyndman of Google, Wolfgang Petersen of Intel, Rich Preece of Intuit, Jon Bradford of Techstars, Ollie Clamp of Millennial Media, Geoff Hollingworth of Ericsson, Ragnar Kruse of Smaato, James Parton of Twilio, Kaya Taner of AppLift and Rok Zorko of Outfit7.

“Alliance activity in Europe will include developer-focused programming, education, business resources and policy advocacy,” Alliance President Jon Potter said in a statement. “These are the cornerstones of Alliance success since our 2012 launch, and we are pleased that our European companies have urged our growth and invited our expansion.”

PITTS-CASSO PAINT PARTY: Rep. Joe Pitts is hosting a wine and paint party, where the congressman will “guide you step by step to create your own masterpiece.” The event promises to provide the Pinot and everything you need to paint at the Capitol Hill Arts Workshop, Monday, April 7. Prices are $2,000 to host, $1,500 to sponsor and $1,000 to contribute, with proceeds going to Friends of Joe Pitts.

ALUMINUM ASSOCIATION ADDS ASHE, BLAYLOCK: Fort Worth, Texas-based Blaylock Industries has joined the Aluminum Association’s member companies, announced at the group’s biannual spring meeting in San Antonio. The association also added Alcoa’s vice president of commercial, sales and marketing, Anthony Ashe, to its board of directors.

“Both of these moves are exciting for the industry and the association,” said Aluminum Association Chairman Layle “Kip” Smith, president of Noranda Aluminum. “The aluminum industry is poised for continued growth as U.S. manufacturing experiences a resurgence and it’s encouraging to see the association growing at the same time.”

ARNOLD & PORTER ADD FOUR: Arnold & Porter has elected four new counsel to the firm in D.C. Stefanie Alfonso-Frank is a member of the firm’s telecommunications, Internet and media practice, Kevin Cline is a member of the firm’s product liability group. David Fauvre is a litigator and counselor, specializing in complex commercial litigation and white-collar criminal defense matters, and Sara Zogg is a member of the firm’s intellectual property group.

YO QUIERO TACO BELL: The Taco Bell Franchisees are hosting their annual fly-in and legislative conference next week, complete with a taco and burrito reception in the Rayburn building. 75-plus Taco Bell restaurant owners from around the country will attend meetings with their legislators on Capitol Hill on Tuesday, April 8, including an event for the Taco Bell Foundation for Teens with House Speaker John Boehner, the Boys & Girls Clubs of America CEO Jim Clark, singer Kelly Rowland and Taco Bell Corp. CEO Brian Niccol in the Cannon Caucus Room.

That evening the Taco Bell Legislative Reception will take place in the Rayburn building, featuring Taco Bell food for guests to sample. (Last year nearly 10,000 tacos, burritos and nachos were distributed.)

**A message from POWERJobs: Jobs on our radar this week: Analyst- Public Opinion and Market Research at The Mellman Group, Vice President, Campaigns and Advocacy at Planned Parenthood Federation of America and VP Brand Operations & Business at AARP. Interested? Apply to these jobs and more at www.POWERJobs.com; finally, a career site made for YOU!**

NRF PUSHES SAVE AMERICAN WORKERS ACT: In a letter to House Speaker John Boehner and Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, the National Retail Federation is urging the passage of a piece of legislation that would change Obamacare’s definition of full-time employment from 30 hours per week to 40 hours.The group has warned that all votes related to the Save American Workers Act would be considered key votes for the association’s annual scorecard.

“The 40-hour full-time definition proposed in H.R. 2575 will return flexibility to employers,” NRF Senior Vice President for Government Relations David French wrote. “We hope to continue to work to help mitigate the negative effects [the Affordable Care Act has] on the retail industry and retail employees.”

ALZHEIMER’S ADVOCATES HIT THE HILL: As part of the 26th annual Alzheimer's Association Advocacy Forum next week, more than 800 advocates from across the country will fly in to D.C. to push Congress for action on Alzheimer’s disease. They’ll arrive Monday and be on the Hill Wednesday, April 9, draped in purple — the color of the Alzheimer's movement. The advocates are largely current and former unpaid caregivers (family and friends), as well as some people with the disease.

DENTAL EDUCATORS DESCEND ON D.C. The American Dental Education Association and American Association for Dental Research are flying in members of the nation’s academic dental and research communities to meet with members of Congress on Tuesday, April 8. Reps. Paul Gosar, Mike Simpson and G.K. Butterfield will address the group that morning in the Rayburn building regarding federal funding for oral health care. In the afternoon the group will disperse on the Hill to discuss congressionally funded oral health programs.

WHAT CAN YOU TELL ABOUT A VOTER IN 2014? — Alex Lundry, chief data scientist for TargetPoint Consulting, talks with POLITICO chief White House correspondent Mike Allen about what voters are watching, what cable boxes reveal, what’s DVRed and more — check out the one-on-one: politico.com/openmike.

BIG DONORS FEAR SHAKEDOWN: Anna and Tarini Parti write for the homepage: The biggest Washington donors used to have a great excuse to keep their wallets closed when fundraisers came knocking: Sorry, I’m maxed out. But a Supreme Court ruling swiped that line from them Wednesday when the justices tossed a rule that limited how much an individual can give to candidates, party committees and PACs. Now, fundraisers hope donors, many of them lobbyists, will embrace their new legal right with gusto to give more across the board to candidates and party committees. Read more: http://politi.co/QGLDkj

COVINGTON & BURLING RESPONDED TO MCCUTCHEON RULING with this memo: http://bit.ly/1dQqKgK

MCCUTCHEON IN A CHART: Caplin & Drysdale Law Office shares with PI the impact of the Supreme Court’s McCutcheon vs. FEC ruling, in the form of a handy diagram: http://bit.ly/1fOBDL3

AND PLAINTIFF SHAUN MCCUTCHEON writes for POLITICO Magazine: I fought the law and I won: Why Wednesday's Supreme Court ruling is a victory for free speech: http://politi.co/1hELEOU

ELSEWHERE IN THE INFLUENCE WORLD:

MCDERMOTT WILL & EMERY LAUNCHES HEALTH CARE LOBBYING ARM: The law firm McDermott Will & Emery is spinning off some of its lobbying services into a new shop called McDermottPlus. The firm’s subsidiary will provide consulting services to the healthcare industry, including lobbying, “data analytics and modeling and policy advice,” the firm said Wednesday.” Via The Hill’s Megan R. Wilson: http://bit.ly/1mMY5f4

THE ‘GO SLOW’ PATENT LOBBY GROUP: “Major U.S. companies including Ford, Apple and Pfizer have formed a lobbying group aimed at pushing back at some changes to the patent system members of Congress have proposed, saying these measures would hinder protection of valuable inventions. ... Called the Partnership for American Innovation, the group warned that steps to stop the PAEs could also hurt truly innovative companies.” Via Reuters: http://reut.rs/1dVdd7a

NEW POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE REGISTRATIONS:

Southern Conservatives Fund (Super PAC)

Space PAC (Super PAC)

NEW LOBBYING REGISTRATIONS: (Firm: Client)

American Continental Group: 7 Eleven, Inc.

Arent Fox: Reef Points Advisors LLC

Capitol Counsel: Capitol Hill Consulting Group

Capitol Counsel: Grant Park Strategies

CB Anderson Partners: City of College Park, GA

Federal Solutions: East Mississippi Community College

Holland & Knight: Arrow International, Inc.

Johnston & Associates: Vitol S.A.

KOR Trading: Healthy Markets

Mayer Brown: Viamedia, Inc.

Safe Routes to School National Partnership: Safe Routes to School National Partnership

Thorn Run Partners: Access Management Services

Thorn Run Partners: American Financial Services Association

Thorn Run Partners: Inspirion Pharmaceuticals, LLC

Thorn Run Partners: Moyer Foundation

Townsend Public Affairs: City of Walnut Creek

Winning Washington Strategies: Portus

Winning Washington Strategies: RESNET

Winning Washington Strategies: The Association of Pool & Spa Professionals

NEW LOBBYING TERMINATIONS (Firm: Client (Type of Termination))

Blinded Veterans Association: Blinded Veterans Association (Q1 Termination)

Burleigh Leonard and Company: Prime Policy Group (Q1 Termination (No Activity))

KPMG: KPMG CDQ Coalition (Q1 Termination)

McAllister & Quinn: VEECO Instruments Incorporated (Q1 Termination (No Activity))

Ms. Margaret McGlinch: LexisNexis Special Services (Q1 Termination)

O'Brien DC: American Nursery and Landscape Association (Q1 Termination (No Activity))

O'Brien DC: California Association of Nurseries and Garden Centers (Q1 Termination (No Activity))

O'Brien DC: Dairy Institute of California (Q1 Termination)

O'Brien DC: Society of American Florists (Q1 Termination (No Activity))

Partnership for 21st Century Skills: Partnership for 21st Century Skills (Q1 Termination (No Activity))

**A message from POWERJobs: Tap into the power of POWERJobs for the newest job opportunities in the Washington area from the area’s top employers, including AARP, Boeing, Leidos Biomedical Research and U.S. Chamber of Commerce. Powered by names you trust — POLITICO, WTOP, WJLA/ABC-TV, NewsChannel 8 and Federal News Radio- POWERJOBS is the ultimate career site with more than 2 million job searches and nearly 17,000 applications submitted this year so far. Connect through Facebook or LinkedIn, search jobs by industry and set up job-specific email alerts using www.POWERJobs.com, the site for Washington’s top talent.**

** A message from the National Retail Federation: Retail is more than great products, or the sound of a cash register. More than a storefront, or a website. It’s working together as a community, creating the things people want, today. It’s the smile at the end of every transaction and the effort and innovation that customers don’t see. Retail businesses – 98% of which are small businesses – are at the heart of many towns and neighborhoods nationwide. That’s why when retail thrives, communities thrive. Think you know retail? Think again: http://bit.ly/this_is_retail #thisisretail **