The Clemson Tigers are gearing up for the chance to become the first 15-0 team in college football history.

The National Championship Media Day kicked off in Phoenix on Saturday where Clemson players shared their thoughts ahead of Monday night's title game.

For Quarterback Deshaun Watson, the National Championship is a serious showdown, but he said loving what he does is the most important thing.

"He makes sure that we're having fun and out there doing our job and doing what we love to do," Watson said of head coach Dabo Swinney.

Watson said he is focusing on Clemson's preparations, rather than worrying about Alabama's team.

"We just gotta do what we do," he said. "I can't really focus on what they have. I focus on my job and continue to do what we do and take it one play at a time and see what happens."

When asked about his feelings on the possibility of pay for college athletes, Watson said he supports it due to the demands of being a college athlete.

"It's really a full-time job, especially with school and having workouts and football," he said. "If it happens, that would be great for the college athletes."

Linebacker Ben Boulware, named defensive MVP after the Orange Bowl, was also asked about pay for college players, but said he thinks universities covering the cost of tuition is sufficient pay.

"I think we get a free education," he said. "I think getting your degree and graduating at a huge university is good enough payoff... I think free education is good enough."

Boulware said the showdown with Alabama is going to be difficult because both teams have strong players.

"They're very similar to us because they're not one dimensional at all. I think if you stop Derrick Henry you have to deal with [Jake] Coker and the receivers," he said. "It's going to be difficult because there's not one thing you have to stop... so we definitely have a difficult task at hand."

During Media Day, the topic turned to a serious discussion about Boulware's facial hair.

"It's definitely beautiful," Boulware joked about his mustache. "I definitely have one of the best mustaches in college football. And I'm making that claim and I don't want to see anybody come up and try to doubt me."

Swinney took the podium at Media Day to set the record straight for those who want to say his team is the underdog in the Championship.

"We may not be the favorite but we don't see ourselves as an underdog," he said. "We think we've got a great team and I think that our guys have done a great job of embracing every role that we've been put in for the past seven years."

"The only other team that's had five 10-plus win seasons, we're playing them," Swinney said.

Copyright 2016 FOX Carolina (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved.