It is no secret that Massachusetts Medicaid is expensive. That has been especially true over the last couple of years, as the national Affordable Care Act expanded eligibility for Medicaid, and problems with the state's online health insurance marketplace resulted in hundreds of thousands of new people being placed in temporary Medicaid coverage.

Around 42 percent of MassHealth's 1.8 million enrollees are in six managed care plans. The state pays a fixed rate to the plans, which contract with doctors to provide all the patient's healthcare services – medical services, pharmacy and behavioral health. The rules and rates are set by the federal agency overseeing Medicaid.

In 2014, these Medicaid managed care plans in Massachusetts lost $137 million.

A new report released Wednesday by a task force convened by House Speaker Robert DeLeo, D-Winthrop, found that some of the losses are due to the cost of health care – in particular, the cost of new and expensive specialty drugs. Managed care organizations spent between $65 million and $75 million in 2014 just to cover Sovaldi, a new and expensive drug that cures Hepatitis C and came on the market in late 2013, once the annual rates paid to managed care organizations were set. Although in the long term, these drugs save money by reducing a patient's future health care costs, because Medicaid patients change plans frequently, the insurer that pays for the drug may not be the one reaping the benefits later on.

The report found that there are also structural problems with the managed care program that create high costs, such as the ability of members to switch between plans on a daily basis and a lack of data sharing between insurance plans, doctors and state health care agencies.

Many of the people in MassHealth managed care organizations are the sickest people – those who are homeless or have serious mental health or substance abuse problems. "The challenge is how do we make sure people's health outcomes improve while at the same time reducing costs and making sure there's a system that's accountable to them and that knows how to manage them, despite the dire conditions they live in," said State Rep. Jeffrey Sanchez, D-Jamaica Plain, chairman of the working group and chairman of the Joint Committee on Health Care Financing.

The report recommends switching plans to longer enrollment cycles – for example, only letting members switch plans every month or every quarter. It recommends creating more transparency around the way MassHealth rates are set and requiring annual public reporting from MassHealth and more data-sharing so that the state can track trends. It recommends eliminating legal ambiguities about whether case management – connecting patients to social services, helping them manage chronic illness, and similar services - is considered administrative and therefore subject to a cap on how much premium money can be spent on it. The report said the state should explore ways to address the impact of new drugs and technologies – for example, by using bulk purchasing to lower costs.

The recommendations come as Gov. Charlie Baker's administration is developing ways to reorganize MassHealth in order to slow the enormous growth in costs.

Final MCO Working Group Report