You could feel the anticipation building all day.

Finally, football was back at Granite Bay High School and the players couldn’t wait to take the field for the first time in 2015.

In front of a packed crowd and active “Tribe,” the Grizzlies showed why they’re a force to be reckoned with in the Sac Joaquin Section this season thanks to a 21-7 victory against Division I foe Jesuit.

The game, which remained a one-touchdown margin until early in the third quarter, was a show of elite defense for both clubs. The pads were popping, the sweat was flying and neither team’s offense seemed in sync.

Granite Bay’s senior middle linebacker Ryan MacIntosh helped his team scratch the scoreboard first as he picked off a Jesuit pass at their own five-yard line and returned it for a touchdown.

But MacIntosh wasn’t the only defensive player making a splash.

Safety Sam Cusano helped the Grizzlies clinch the win with a timely 33-yard interception return for a touchdown to put Granite Bay up, 21-0, with just 6:26 left in regulation.

“They outscored our offense,” head coach Jeff Evans said of his defense.

Granite Bay’s stout defensive unit did not surrender a single point to Jesuit until the game’s final four minutes. For that, Evans praised his 34 seniors on the team for their “outstanding” leadership during Granite Bay’s perpetration for and execution in the home opener.

“That was one of the things that made the (coaching) transition easier for me,” admitted the first-year head coach. “Knowing that this was going to be the group of seniors that I was walking in with, on top of the coaching staff. There’s some years where we just don’t feel or look like ‘a Granite Bay’ football team. This team looks like ‘a Granite Bay’ football team, and those seniors made that happen.”

The Grizzlies, who historically favor the running game, made an effort to air it out early in the game. Despite two consecutive holding penalties, both which negated substantial offensive gains, the home team never gave up on the passing game.

“It was more mental mistakes by us than Jesuit,” said junior running back Isaiah Lewis, who’s 14-yard reception in the fourth quarter produced Granite Bay’s only offensive touchdown of the evening.

Lewis received especially high praise from coach Evans after the win.

“Every so often, we get a special athlete,” Evans explained. “We’ve had a few of them in the past, like Sammie Stroughter and Devon Wylie and Miles Burris, guys like that. He’s that type of guy — just an extremely supreme athlete. He looked like a man among boys tonight, even against Division I guys that were on (Jesuit).

“He’s going to do some big things for us.”

Granite Bay will now take its 1-0 record on the road as the Grizzlies travel to Elk Grove next week to square off with 2014 Capitol Valley Conference champion Consumnes Oaks. Kickoff for that game is scheduled for 7:15.