When Jon Hoke was hired as South Carolina’s new co-defensive coordinator, few players were impacted more than Jordan Diggs.

Jordan Diggs POSITION: Safety YEAR: Junior HEIGHT/WEIGHT: 6-0/210 HOMETOWN: Fort Myers, Fla. LAST YEAR: Played spur linebacker and finished sixth on the team in tackles, with 37 total stops, two sacks, and one fumble recovery.

A rising junior who had played in every game the past two seasons, Diggs was in line to replace the graduated Sherrod Golightly as the starter at USC’s spur linebacker position. But Hoke’s arrival brought the installation of a 4-3 base defense, and a position shuffle among three players which involved Diggs switching from spur to safety.

To help college football fans get through the dog days of summer before the conference media days begin the preseason football frenzy later this month, The Post and Courier is counting down the 10 most important players for South Carolina and Clemson for 2015. We start with No. 10 and will continue the countdown each day through July 12, at which time we will feature the No. 1 player for each team.

T.J. Gurley was moved to Diggs’ former spur position, and Larenz Bryant — a backup spur last season — was getting looks at outside linebacker before his spring practice was cut short by a liver injury suffered in a collision with a teammate. Of all those moves, the most critical might involve Diggs, who brings a degree of veteran’s savvy to an emerging secondary which will be without its leader from last season, departed senior Brison Williams.

“I love it,” Diggs said of the move in spring practice. “You see things from the back end, with a new set of eyes. I’m used to being so close to the ball. It’s been fun. I’m having a lot of fun. I feel natural back there. It’s a matter of just getting reps and getting more and more comfortable.”

USC’s linebacking corps found its footing last season when Skai Moore and Jonathan Walton were paired together late in the season. Gurley, second on the team in tackles last season, moves to a spur position which effectively becomes a nickel back under Hoke’s system. Diggs will be called upon to bolster a secondary now without Williams, who played primarily safety against the spread-offense opponents USC faced with regularity last year.

It all brings more responsibility for Diggs, who finished last year as USC’s sixth-leading tackler with 37 total stops. He added two sacks, and forced and recovered a fumble on what would have been a third-down conversion in USC territory during the overtime victory at Florida.

Diggs finished last season at around 219 pounds, and was working on dropping weight since he felt he played better carrying less bulk. He was at 215 when he was moved to the safety position, and in spring ball was listed at 210. “It was easy for me to drop a few more and just go with the flow,” he said then.

Diggs’ work in the spring earned him the most improved safety award from coaches. Replacing Williams won’t be easy, but in a secondary which will feature three sophomores who’ll see extensive playing time — corners Chris Lammons and Al Harris Jr., and safety D.J. Smith — a little experience could go a long way.

USC Top 10

Friday: No. 10 WR Deebo Samuel

Saturday: No. 9 LB Jordan Diggs

Sunday: No. 8