At a promotional event today for Obamacare, HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius got a book from one Americans who shares the frustrations most people across the country are facing over Obamacare. She received a book entitled, “Web Sites for Dummies” in response to the failing Obamacare web site.

From a report on the state legislator who gave her the book:

The only warning State Sen. Brian Kelsey, R-Germantown, gave of what he intended to do at U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius’ visit to the Benjamin L. Hooks Central Library Friday, Nov. 1, was that he would appear “in protest of the visit.” Before it was over, though, he’d done a little more than that. He presented the secretary with a copy of the book “Web Sites for Dummies,” a jab at her department’s problematic rollout of the federal health insurance website. And a Daily News photo capturing the result – Sebelius holding the book, the title clearly visible, preparing to hand it off to an aide – was circulated widely across the Web, garnering coverage everywhere from BuzzFeed to the Huffington Post to the Tennessean and several news blogs, as well as attracting a torrent of social media chatter. “I only had two seconds to convey that message to her, so I thought the book would be a creative way to ensure she remembered the message,” Kelsey said.

“Perhaps that is a sign she should stop doing the promotional tour while the site isn’t working properly,” conservative writer Jim Geraghty responded.

Tony Perkins of the Family Research Council talked about the frustration of Americans on Obamacare and pro-lifers on its abortion funding.

“Without skipping a beat, the HHS chief insisted she didn’t know what she so clearly knew in 2009, which is that ObamaCare is the biggest expansion of taxpayer-funded abortion in U.S. history,” he said of Sebelius’ answers during a hearing last week.

“I can’t tell you what I don’t know firmly right now,” Sebelius said. “… I will get that information.”

“Are we really supposed to believe that one of the most zealous abortion supporters in the Obama administration doesn’t know which plans cover the procedure she’s spent so much of her career advocating? That a woman who fought for late-term abortions in Kansas (and threw a Governor’s mansion party for the criminal performing them) would be in the dark after three years about whether the network she oversees is covering her pet cause? Give me a break,” he said.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

Perkins continued: “At the very least, Americans deserve to know which plans cover the procedure before they enroll. That’s the kind of clarification that Rep. Shimkus asked for — but never got — from Secretary Sebelius. And let’s face it: the onus shouldn’t be on citizens to force the government to comply with its law on taxpayer-funded abortion, it should be on HHS. (And don’t forget, funds are sure to flow to abortion through those “community health centers” too.)”

He concluded: “If Secretary Sebelius won’t be forthcoming, Congress will be. To call the administration’s bluff, Rep. Chris Smith (R-N.J.) filed a bill, The Abortion Insurance Full Disclosure Act, that demands HHS provide all the insurance details to exchange shoppers up front. He understands that when it comes to ObamaCare, what you don’t know can hurt you — and hundreds of thousands of unborn children too. Contact your congressman and ask him to cosponsor Smith’s bill.”