Buy Photo Roses and Thistles (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

A thistle to police agencies nationwide that have failed to test rape kits that might otherwise be used to prosecute violent offenders. There are at least 140,000 untested rape kits in the 27 states that are tracking them. And while Congress has provided funding for the testing of more than 1 million kits, little progress has been made on the backlog. In fact, the Iowa Legislature is now considering a bill, similar to one enacted in other states, that would require police agencies to simply respond to the attorney general’s written survey on rape kits. If laws need to be enacted to get Iowa police agencies to answer rape-kit questions from our attorney general, we’re in trouble. It’s a strong indication that some police agencies — not all, but some — don’t take these cases seriously enough.

A rose to Broadlawns Medical Center and the Taxpayers Association of Central Iowa for working together on behalf of the public. Broadlawns, Polk County's public hospital, is flush with cash and plans to cut its property-tax rate by 15 percent, or $9 million. Leaders of the taxpayers group would like to see a larger cut, but it's respecting Broadlawns CEO Jody Jenner's more conservative approach. Taxpayers would be smart to listen: Jenner has led an amazing turnaround effort at the hospital, which was struggling a decade ago. He's cut costs and diversified the hospital's revenue sources. And Iowa's expanded Medicaid program, thanks to the Affordable Care Act, has led to surpluses at Broadlawns. Jenner is using that money to expand much-needed mental health, dental and other services.

So the next time a presidential candidate promises to "repeal every word of Obamacare," ask how he'd ensure stability for "safety net" hospitals like Broadlawns. Ask him how he'd replace expanded Medicaid programs that serve the neediest Americans. And ask him how he'd provide property-tax relief for homeowners like those in Polk County. And give the candidate a thistle if the answer is insufficient.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1TxMW25