Donald Trump may be the Republican nominee for President, but his presence seems to be hurting the party. (Photo: Getty Images)

For decades, Republicans have promoted limited government, family values and American leadership on the world stage. In recent days, however, these time-honored principles have been called into question as top officeholders have embraced Donald Trump, the presumptive presidential nominee who rejects much of what has defined the GOP for generations.

On Thursday, House Speaker Paul Ryan, the party’s intellectual leader and rising star, edged closer to jumping on the Trump train. After a much-ballyhooed meeting on Capitol Hill, Ryan and Trump said they were “totally committed to working together,” though Ryan again stopped short of a formal endorsement.

The unlikely passengers already boarding include Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, who called Trump unqualified just months ago, and Arizona Sen. John McCain, whose heroism as a prisoner of war in Vietnam was questioned by Trump.

The rationale for making nice with the apparent nominee is compelling. Republicans don’t want a civil war. They don’t want to look arrogant in rejecting the voters’ choice. And those running for re-election can ill afford to offend Trump voters.

That rationale is as shortsighted as well as it is expedient.

Trump's coarse, cocky and largely ad-lib style in the primaries is a risky proposition for the general election. Having never held or sought public office, the billionaire businessman has never been fully vetted. His life as a man about New York and debt-laden developer has produced three marriages, four business bankruptcy filings and a seemingly endless trail of impolitic comments. From now until November, the airwaves will be full of unflattering accounts of his behavior, not to mention any new revelations.

More important than this year’s political machinations is the question of the GOP’s long-term viability. No Republican can endorse Trump without understanding that he or she is participating in the unraveling of a great and proud party.

America benefits from having two competitive parties, one of which advocates smaller government. But Trump takes the GOP in exactly the wrong direction. Rather than embracing the diverse nation America is rapidly becoming, he stokes white resentment. Rather than trying to patch up the party’s deficit with women, he adds to the gender gap with his boorish comments.

Rather than building on the party’s strengths in national security and economics, he undermines them with his ill-informed and wildly inconsistent utterances. And rather than trying to restrain government, he promises to defend Social Security, Medicare and other benefit programs that, as Ryan has noted, threaten to swallow the federal budget.

If Republican officeholders don't keep a suitable distance from Trump, they will have to answer this question: Why did they undermine the party for years to come in an ill-conceived effort to maximize their gains (or minimize their losses) this year?

Trump’s newfound friends embrace him at their peril. Thanks to the evolving composition of the American electorate, Trumpism is anathema to large blocs of voters in states such as Florida and Nevada, and eventually will be in states such as Arizona, North Carolina and even Texas.

If the Grand Old Party wants to be competitive again at the presidential level, it will have to know what it stands for — and what, or whom, it stands against.

Another view: Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Alabama

For the first time in a long time, this November will give Americans a clear choice on perhaps the most important issue facing our country and our civilization: whether we remain a nation-state that serves its own people, or whether we slide irrevocably toward a soulless globalism that treats humans as interchangeable widgets in the world market.

In Donald Trump, we have a forceful advocate for America. Trump has said that our trade, immigration and foreign policies must be changed to protect the interests of American workers and our nation.

In Hillary Clinton, we have a committed globalist. Clinton was an ardent supporter of the Trans-Pacific Partnership — which surrenders American sovereignty to an international union of 12 countries — and has clearly left the door wide open to enacting the pact if elected.

There is only one sure way to defeat the TPP, and that is to defeat Hillary Clinton.

Meanwhile, Clinton’s immigration platform is the most radical in our history. Freezing deportations. Ending detentions. Halting enforcement. She’d expand President Obama’s illegal amnesty decree, effectively creating open borders.

Clinton’s extremist proposal economically targets our poor African-American and Hispanic communities whose wages and job prospects are being steadily eroded by the huge influx of new foreign workers.

Yet some Republicans persist in saying that they don’t know whether Mr. Trump is a “real conservative.” This charge misleads in two ways. First: Mr. Trump’s cautious approach to mass migration, transnational trade commissions and nation-building are, by definition, conservative.

Second, the divide between Trump and Clinton on the role of government could not be more stark. Consider just a few of the things President Trump would do after taking the oath: repeal Obamacare; nominate constitutionalist justices; replace Obama’s radical Cabinet appointments; reduce taxes and regulations; produce more American energy; rein in the out-of-control EPA; and cancel Obama’s illegal amnesties.

The choice is a simple one: Do we want a country that serves our people, or not?

Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., was the first senator to endorse Donald Trump.

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1TirJr4