Not afraid to get dirty: Molly Sims can't hide her beauty in sweats as she chases after her muddy toddler Brooks at the park



Even dressed down in sweats and makeup free, Molly Sims can't hide her enviable good looks.



The former model, 40, and her producer husband Scott Stuber, 45, took their toddler son Brooks, 19 months, to Coldwater Canyon Park in Beverly Hills on Sunday for a little play time.



Like any good mom, the actress did not seem phased when her son managed to cover the knees of his romper with mud.



Here's the dirt: Molly Sims and her husband Scott Stuber took their son Brooks to Beverly Hills park Sunday

Molly went for an incognito look in a plain gray sweatshirt, navy sweatpants and navy Nike sneakers.



She had her blonde hair pulled up in a messy bun and hid her eyes behind sunglasses. Her only accessories were a pair of bracelets on her left wrist.



Her husband matched her look in jeans, a gray zip-up sweatshirt over a gray T-shirt, navy sneakers and a backwards blue baseball cap. He also wore sunglasses.



Family time: Molly, Scott and Brooks enjoyed a cool day at Coldwater Canyon Park in Beverly Hills

Being social: The family stopped to talk to another park patron while on their family outing

Their little man wore a white onesie with red stars all over it. a black-and-white striped stocking cap and blue and orange sneakers.



He looked as if he enjoyed some time crawling on the moist ground on a drizzly day in Southern California, because he had mud smeared all over both knees of his outfit.



The parents took turns tending to Brooks and stopped at one point to talk to another person in the park.



Statuesque beauty: Even dressed down in sweats the former model's good looks shined through

Father-son bonding: Scott carried Brooks when the toddler got tired of walking and playing in the dirt

Maintaining her swimsuit model figure has not been easy for the former Las Vegas star since giving birth in June 2012.



She recently admitted that she struggled to regain her figure and told Us Weekly she had a thyroid condition during the pregnancy.

'My thyroid kind of shut down, so that really made it very difficult in terms of the weight loss,' she said. 'It's been difficult, I'm not going to lie.

'I've had to exercise and keep a very, very rigid diet. I mean, it's the hardest thing I've done -- and I've modelled since I was pretty much 21 years old!'



Deep in conversation: Scott seemed amused by what his wife was saying as the threesome enjoyed their day

She turned to fitness trainer Tracy Anderson in an effort to regain her body after having the baby.

She most recently appeared on episodes of the CW's Carrie Diaries.