The state needs a new viable plan to pay for its transportation needs. Wisconsin could take some lessons from other states. Credit: Kristyna Wentz-Graff

By

It's imperative that Wisconsin begins the serious task of focusing on the future of transportation and exploring new ways to fund important transportation projects.

That was the message Gov. Scott Walker delivered in an article published Jan. 12 in the Journal Sentinel and reinforced by the newspaper's editorial on Wednesday. The governor has charged Transportation Secretary Mark Gottlieb with leading that effort and developing a plan that meets the long-term transportation infrastructure funding needs facing our state.

The two questions that people seem to be asking about the Walker directive are: 1) What has changed since last summer's budget process when the administration and Legislature refused to consider different funding mechanisms? and, 2) What will the new plan entail?

To answer the first question, I think it is fair to say our elected representatives in the legislative and executive branches are coming to the realization that something different needs to be done. The Transportation Finance and Policy Commission, which was appointed by the leaders of both parties, put forth very clear data demonstrating that Wisconsin cannot come even close to maintaining the current condition and functionality of our system over the next decade under the existing funding setup.

While fuel efficiency is a good thing, it is also undermining how the state has traditionally funded all modes of transportation. Rising fuel efficiency means drivers pay less in fuel taxes even as they continue to put the same wear and tear on the system. This is a troubling trend, considering that fuel taxes represent the largest source of transportation funding.

It is more than just commuters who will be inconvenienced if the system deteriorates. Businesses, especially heavy manufacturers, farmers, loggers and the tourism industry are highly dependent on a reliable transportation system to be profitable in this extremely competitive environment.

My guess is that we will not know the answer to the second question about what the plan will look like for some time. There is still groundwork to be laid and an election to be held.

In the meantime, what is perhaps even more important than how we collect the money is articulating the priorities for Wisconsin's transportation network.

In order for the public to buy into any funding strategy, people are going to want to know, with as much specificity as is practical, where the money will go and why.

While most acknowledge that vital areas of our aging interstate highway system must be rebuilt, there are pressing needs across the state in rural and urban areas alike that must be addressed. Those needs must be central to the conversation and ultimately any successful plan. Such a plan will need to continue the state's current practice of preserving and maintaining existing facilities and services, while expanding key parts of the system to address economic, safety and mobility needs.

Even though it may seem at times that we discuss topics like this endlessly without ever taking action, it is important to note a growing number of states have stepped up to the plate. What is also interesting is that it is occurring in both blue and red states. In 2013, Arkansas, Indiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Texas, Virginia, Washington, Washington, D.C., and Wyoming all took substantive action to address their transportation finances.

Some states, such as Wyoming, simply increased their per-gallon gas tax. Others, such as Maryland, Virginia and Massachusetts, adopted a percentage tax on the wholesale price of gasoline in an effort to combat the stagnant nature of the per-gallon gas tax.

Wisconsin will undoubtedly chart its own course in the end, but we can take some lessons from these other states. The one thing I hope we will have gleaned is that it will require significant input and a balanced, well-communicated plan.

Craig Thompson is executive director of the Transportation Development Association of Wisconsin and served on the Transportation Finance and Policy Commission.