The North Carolina Senate’s proposed budget calls for the repeal of two long-standing health care laws that local hospitals say could have wide-reaching effects on their bottom lines and markets.

Sen. Tom Apodaca, R-Henderson, proposed a bill in late March to repeal Mission Hospital’s Certificate of Public Advantage, as well as the Certificate of Need, which applies to any health care entity in the state.

The bill passed its first reading and has been with the Senate Committee on Rules and Operations, which Apodaca chairs, ever since, but the same provisions made their way into the Senate’s budget.

The Certificate of Public Advantage was established for Mission Hospital in 1995, when it merged with St. Joseph’s to become the largest health care provider in the area and the only one in Buncombe County. The COPA requires state regulators to monitor the Mission health system to prevent it from instituting anti-competitive practices.

The Certificate of Need is a regulation that requires all health care facilities to get state approval before expanding services or making large equipment purchases. The purpose of the CON process is to make sure medical services aren’t duplicated, and that one area isn’t saturated with health facilities while another area is underserved.

Local health agencies have mixed feelings about repealing the laws.

“It’s just an antiquated system,” Apodaca said about the COPA and CON. Their repeal would increase competition and bring costs down, he added, and the changes are part of the Senate’s overall Medicaid reform.

“No. 1, I think it will drive down costs. I’m a free-market guy,” Apodaca said.

He’s received no backlash in Raleigh over repeal of the COPA, which affects only Western North Carolina, but the reaction has been about 75 percent for and 25 percent against the repeal of the CON.

COPA

Mission Health officials are in favor of repealing the COPA, which they say is no longer relevant.

“Mission believes that after almost 20 years, the COPA has outlived its useful life,” Mission Health President and CEO Dr. Ronald A. Paulus said in a statement to the Times-News.

Although Mission supports the COPA’s termination, he writes, it did not initiate or request the termination, and the hospital appreciates that Apodaca “is aware of the unnecessary waste and challenges imposed by the COPA.”

Flexibility, reduced financial burden and costs coming from the termination of the COPA would “create important opportunities to adapt and respond to rapidly changing market conditions,” he said.

Officials with Park Ridge Health, which in the past has called for more stringent enforcement of the COPA agreement, are waiting to see what the details of the Senate’s plan are, said Victoria Dunkel, communications director.

“The COPA was designed to protect both Mission Health Systems and the people of Western North carolina and I don’t believe it’s in either party’s best interest for the COPA to go away,” said Graham Fields, assistant to the president for external relations at Park Ridge Health.

CON

Mission, Park Ridge and Pardee Hospital all seem to be on the same side when it comes to the CON law, however. They’re concerned that other providers would offer profitable procedures and leave the hospital systems to provide the costly, but necessary, services that don’t make money.

“The Certificate of Need Law is very, very important to protect community hospitals,” Fields said, adding that if the law is repealed, those profitable health services would shift elsewhere.

Mission “strongly opposes” repealing the CON law, although it supports its modernization, Paulus said in the release.

Dunkel said that while the CON’s removal could spur some free market competition, it doesn’t address concerns about how hospitals can make up for having to perform procedures that do not make money. Highly profitable surgeries and other procedures performed by hospitals across the state make up for the loss they take from providing mandated services to underserved populations.

CON laws provide support for “safety net institutions that are otherwise subject to cream skimming and cherry picking by for-profit entities ... that do not share the burden of caring for those without insurance or with unprofitable clinical needs,” Paulus said in the release.

Jay Kirby, President and CEO of Pardee Hospital, said the CON protects hospitals and their patients.

“A repeal of CON will result in unnecessary duplication of services, higher insurance premiums and higher health care costs for individuals and businesses in Henderson County and across the State,” Kirby said in a statement to the Times-News.

Kirby said the CON helps the state manage the growth of health care services, and if it is repealed, private facilities will “flood the state,” serving only high-paying patients with high-cost procedures.

“That means nonprofit hospitals like Pardee will face a higher percentage of under- and uninsured patients, making it very difficult to maintain the operations and services we make available today,” he said.

He added that Pardee works with a number of health care partners like Blue Ridge Community Health, Mission Health Partners, the YMCA and UNC Healthcare to expand access to care and reduce duplication.

“The loss of CON will put all our efforts at risk,” he said.

If the CON is repealed and the COPA is continued, Paulus says, there would be “grave consequences for Mission Health and the region.”

Richard Saver, the Arch T. Allen Distinguished Professor of Law at UNC Law School, said CON laws swept the country in response to 1974 legislation requiring such laws in order to get federal funding.

The federal law was repealed in the ’80s, but more than 30 states still have them on the books. Saver said the laws were meant to reduce wasteful duplication of facilities and make sure that one area wasn’t overserved while another was underserved, allowing for more efficient allocation of medical services that also cut down on costs.

North Carolina’s CON law is considered to be fairly comprehensive, he said.

Before CON, many critics said it’s “nothing more than Soviet-style master planning that is inefficient and impedes competition,” Saver said, but “I think the nuances are a little more subtle.”

The picture is muddled because the health market is unique, Saver said, with third-party insurers and doctors prescribing products, creating patterns and behaviors not seen in other markets. That’s why, Saver said, “some regulation of controlling new suppliers might be helpful.”

Apodaca says the measure is not intended to undercut the viability of community hospitals.

“We all want to keep small, local hospitals,” Apodaca said. But he added that in this day and time — and with the provisions of the Affordable Care Act — that may be impossible.