The Indiana Supreme Court will reconsider a law that seeks to put tougher penalties on selling and using synthetic drugs such as “Spice.” (Photo: Courtesy photo)

Synthetic drugs such as "spice" and "bath salts" are moving from the corner store to the black market as Indiana searches for the best way to eradicate the dangerous chemicals.

State lawmakers had passed a ban on synthetic drugs in 2013 allowed the state Pharmacy Board to add new chemicals to the list as state drug labs identified them.

But that part of the law has been ruled unconstitutionally vague by a state court of appeals because it said information on new banned chemicals isn't made readily available to residents. The case has advanced to the state Supreme Court.

Meanwhile, synthetic drug use is regaining some of the popularity it lost after nationwide crackdowns in the early 2010s, according U.S. Poison Control Centers.

"We do a lot of runs on these drugs and I'd say it's probably a million dollar business," said Chief Wayne Kessinger of the Floyd County Sheriff's Office. "We are doing our part in getting these drugs, but when it's in a package labeled 'not for human consumption,' it limits what we can do."

Synthetic chemicals meant to mimic marijuana are only second to marijuana in popularity with high schoolers, according to the National Institute on Drug Abuse. The chemical can cause effects similar to smoking marijuana, but can also lead to intense hallucinations, and preliminary studies suggest it may cause strokes.

Bath salts can be even more dangerous as they are meant to mimic harder drugs such as methamphetamine and cocaine.

"These are highly toxic chemicals that have had huge impacts if you get the chemical wrong," Attorney General Greg Zoeller said.

Law enforcement officials and county prosecutors in Clark, Floyd and Harrison counties led a fight against the sale of synthetic drugs in 2012 and 2013, targeting corner stores and smoke shops. But that only forced most of the sales underground, Southern Indiana officials said.

Much of the controversy over synthetic drug prosecutions are due to the ever-changing nature of the drug. Lawmakers in Indiana have struggled for years to define exactly what kind of blanket ban would put the biggest dent in the industry.

Under the 2013 law, the Pharmacy Board of Indiana has identified and banned roughly 80 new substances. And the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency is currently looking at more than 300 synthetic drug compounds known to them.

Kim Early, who tests seized drugs at the Indiana State Police crime lab in Evansville, said it is not always clear when running the tests whether or not the drugs are actually known to the state as an illegal substance.

And because reporting new substances and getting them on state ban lists can take months, possession of these unknown chemicals can fall into a legal gray area.

"Sometimes it seems like the criminals are a step ahead of us in terms of new chemicals and sometimes it feels like we are caught up, it just depends," Early said.

Law enforcement officers in Southern Indiana said they are left confused about whether or not they can arrest individuals if they don't know what they have is actually illegal.

"If there is a banned substance in there, by the time we get it back from the state crime labs, they've changed it up," Kessinger said. "We can't ever get ahead of it unless we find some old stock that still has some banned stuff in there."

Zoeller said state lawmakers are fighting hard to keep the flexibility of the state's synthetic drug ban on the books. If lawmakers are forced to go back to the drawing board, he said they will try to create an adaptable law.

"Drugs by their very nature can be manipulated and we can't always just wait for the legislature," he said. "The chemical compounds are becoming much easier to manufacture locally, so I think you're going to see this as a growing trend."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1IUplTO