A foot chase ended tragically as a suspected car thief apparently drowned early Saturday while trying to get away.

Collier County deputies recovered the body from a creek in Golden Gate at Mer Soleil Apartments.

Alysia Carroll experienced a spectrum of emotions last night. She was excited at the possibility of catching her alleged car thief in the act, but that changed dramatically as she feared she was witnessing a person die before her eyes.

"My car door was open, and the lights were all on, and a couple of my belongings were missing," Carroll said.

She feared someone had broken into her car. She was right.

"I came downstairs to find my friend coming towards me saying he was in the canal."

Carroll and her friends said they chased the suspected car thief down a nearby path.

The suspect tripped on a branch before stumbling into the water where he then attempted to make his way across. Carroll said the suspect actually did make it across, but in an expected and tragic move, turned back.

"He was swimming, and then it dawned on us he was really struggling because he was flopping around and he was trying to breathe but you could hear him choking on water," Carroll said.

"It was so serene. The water just went quiet; there was nothing."

"It's sad that it happened that way, but he shouldn't of been breaking into cars."

Cesar Aragon lives in the same neighborhood. He said his car has been broken into multiple times as well.

"Three times to be exact."

Several neighbors said they've also experienced car break-ins, but Aragon said few come forward.

"Some of them for fear or whatever, they decide not to do anything, but they definitely should because that's all they know. The cops know there's an issue here," Aragon said.

Managers of the apartment complex said they haven't heard any complaints about cars being broken into until recently.

Neighbors said they've heard rumors that those who have been committing these break-ins more than likely live in the same apartment complex.

Collier County deputies said while it is believed to be an accidental apparent drowning, the Medical Examiner will further investigate to determine the official cause of death.

Deputies also said they're still working to contact family members of the suspect. Until that happens, they are not releasing his name.