Zotec Partners, LLC (Zotec) today announces it has closed the definitive agreement to acquire 100 percent of the stock of Medical Management Professionals, Inc. (MMP), a medical billing and practice management company and subsidiary of publicly traded CBIZ, Inc., effective Aug. 30, 2013.

The combined company will remain headquartered in Indianapolis and will be one of the largest revenue cycle and practice management services firms in the country, specializing in radiology, anesthesiology, emergency medicine and pathology.

The acquisition of MMP will grow total service offerings through the inclusion of the company's physician practice management services and revenue cycle management clients in the emergency medicine specialty. The transaction will expand the company's geographic network considerably, combining MMP's client focus in the Southeast and Mid-Atlantic with Zotec's presence in the Midwest, Southwest and West.

"This partnership will allow us to better serve our clients' revenue cycle and physician practice management needs," said T. Scott Law, founder and CEO of Zotec Partners. "MMP's reputation for delivering superior personalized service coupled with our leading technology solutions will enable us to deliver the highest quality of service to our clients."

Zotec is the industry leader in specialized medical billing and practice management services for the hospital-based specialty market. The company is committed to the continuous pursuit of excellence in the physician revenue cycle and practice management industry by delivering effective solutions through personalized service and measurable client results. Zotec proprietary processes and technology manage in excess of 50 million medical encounters across all 50 states.

"We are excited to partner with Zotec as its industry focus and passion mirrors our own," said Darrell Hulsey, president of MMP. "Employing Zotec's strengths, including its revenue cycle technology, will enable us to elevate services to our clients."

Founded in 1993, MMP offers leading medical billing and practice management services to hospital-based physicians in the areas of radiology, anesthesiology, emergency medicine and pathology. It currently serves more than 3,000 physicians in 30 states. MMP's flexible solutions range from billing only services to full practice management services.

For more information about Zotec Partners, visit http://www.zotecpartners.com.