In Boulder, Terrapin Care Station patron Logan Singletary, left, shops for pot products with the help of employee Jason Lihani on Thursday. Boulder has 15 medical dispensaries, 14 recreational dispensaries, 21 medical grow facilities and 23 recreational grow facilities, according to the city's licensing department. ( David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer )

Employee Amanda Herman weighs medical marijuana last month at Native Roots Longmont, 19 S. Sunset St., which sits on Boulder County land and is therefore allowed by law. The Longmont City Council banned retail pot shops in 2013. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

Across the street from a Longmont-owned kids fishing park and next door to a city administrative building, the Native Roots dispensary is peddling pot.

Longmont banned marijuana dispensaries — medical and recreational — in 2011 and 2013, but this store sits in an unincorporated Boulder County enclave that includes the county fairgrounds.

In May 2013, one week before Gov. John Hickenlooper signed laws related to how recreational marijuana should be sold and taxed, the Longmont City Council decided it would rather let other communities experiment with marijuana commerce before it allowed dispensaries in Longmont.

"I think it's time to let someone else lead the way," council member Sarah Levison said at the May 21, 2013, meeting where the council banned dispensaries. "That needs to be worked out. Not by us. We're not ground zero for this one. ... We can always repeal a ban. When one of those things gets started and someone else gets sued first, we can learn from that experience and do it the right way."

Last month, Native Roots Longmont ran a green-and-white ad in the Times-Call.

"LONGMONT IS NOW OPEN RECREATIONAL!" it proclaimed in block letters above a limited-time offer for a $30 eighth-ounce of weed. Native Roots went from a medical-only dispensary to a medical and recreational pot store.

Advertisement

With Longmont's wait-and-see approach, city tax coffers won't see any part of that $30. But the city of Boulder gets roughly 7 percent of sales from Native Roots' recreational store in Boulder.

Mike Okada, general manager of Native Roots, said the recreational side is quickly catching up to the store's popular medical business.

"It's growing more and more every day," Okada said in between helping a steady stream of medical and recreational customers earlier this month.

Medical marijuana is taken from a container at Native Roots Longmont, which sits in an unincorporated Boulder County enclave that includes the county fairgrounds. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

Okada said in an interview that the store doesn't necessarily mind that its location is just out of reach of the city's ban.

"The goal of our presence here in Longmont is not to offend anyone and let the stigma naturally go away rather than force it down that path," he said. "For now, there's one less regulating body to follow. ... The ones we have to answer to are the state and the county, and both of those are regulating laws in a reasonable and nice way and getting rid of things that don't make sense."

Okada said he was a bit torn on Longmont's ban.

"I do like that state law allows for local authorities to decide for themselves, though I do want Longmont to be a little more forward-thinking," Okada said.

Roots in Longmont

One April afternoon inside Native Roots, Kelli Elenz, 23, waited to be called into the recreational side of the store. Elenz moved to Longmont from Arizona three years ago and said she doesn't understand why the city banned dispensaries.

"I guess the older generation must not want it here," Elenz said. "But then in Boulder, you've got the older generation and the college students coming together to say, you know, 'We want this here.'"

Elenz said before Native Roots went recreational, she was driving into Boulder to buy weed, and sometimes the competitive pricing is still worth the drive.

Native Roots, which operates on county land, recently ran an ad proclaiming: LONGMONT IS NOW OPEN RECREATIONAL! However, the City Council banned medical and retail pot shops years ago, with no plans to take the matter up again anytime soon. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

"I was going way into Boulder, like Folsom (Street) and Canyon (Boulevard) because they have so many places; they have some really great deals," she said. "But then again, the gas sometimes will cancel that out."

Zak Nitzel, 21, said he thinks Longmont is missing out on other recreational and medical customers who are driving to Boulder. Nitzel waited to go into the medical side of the store. He uses marijuana to manage pain originating from skateboarding injuries.

"People are just spending more time and energy when they have to leave, and Longmont is missing out on the tax they could be using to fix some of the stuff from the (2013) flood," he said.

Up the street, in a neighborhood just north of Native Roots, resident Scott Evans, 61, disagreed.

"I wouldn't want to trade money for marijuana," Evans said. "I think the city probably is missing out, but that's OK with me because I wouldn't want to collect revenue that way."

Evans said he had a history of abusing drugs and alcohol, and marijuana had a worse effect than liquor.

"It's not good to be in an altered state of consciousness, even if you're in your own home," Evans said, adding that he and his wife want Longmont's ban to stay in place. "I would be for it if it was regulated through doctors and prescriptions and you went and got a prescription for it like any other medicine."

Aside from a reverse-911 call two years ago about burglaries in the area, Evans said he hasn't had any trouble from the Native Roots dispensary down the road.

Colorado green

In 2014, the state of Colorado made roughly $37.7 million in taxes from recreational pot, according to the state's Department of Revenue. The $37.7 million came from a 2.9 percent retail sales tax, a 10 percent additional retail marijuana tax and a 15 percent marijuana excise tax and does not include application and licensing fees.

A portion of the money generated by the 10 percent marijuana tax was sent back to local governments where dispensaries are located — as a "state shareback" — and the first $40 million from the 15 percent excise tax will be dedicated to a school construction fund. As of January, the excise tax had generated $12.7 million for the Building Excellent Schools Today grant program, according to state Department of Revenue figures.

BEST is also funded by lottery revenue and the state's land trust. No schools in Boulder County applied for a grant in 2015.

The rest of the money goes into the state's general fund.

After the first recreational dispensary opened in Boulder County in February of last year, the county pulled in roughly $3.2 million in tax money for recreational marijuana in 2014, according to the state Department of Revenue.

The city of Boulder tacked on more taxes for recreational pot in addition to the state and county taxes. The city received nearly $300,000 from the state's shareback program for recreational pot in 2014 and generated $1.049 million in taxes on recreational marijuana products.

In Boulder, there are 15 medical dispensaries, 14 recreational dispensaries, 21 medical grow facilities and 23 recreational grow facilities, according to the city's licensing department.

Once the city of Boulder decided to let in legal recreational weed, it had to decide how much it would cost to license and regulate sales so the finance department could try to accurately predict whether the tax revenue would meet the costs, said Bob Eichem, Boulder's chief financial officer.

Retail pot Amendment 64, which legalized marijuana in the state, passed in Colorado in 2012 with roughly 55 percent of state voters' approval. In Longmont, 58 percent of voters approved the amendment. The Longmont City Council decided to ban dispensaries and other pot operations, which Amendment 64 expressly left as a choice for local governments. In Boulder, where 75 percent of voters approved Amendment 64, the City Council took a different approach. The first retail location opened in the city in February 2014, and the city has allowed medical marijuana dispensaries since 2010.

Eichem's office predicted the city would pull in $2 million the first year from both medical and recreational pot — a number that was, essentially, a guess.

"We knew there was a great amount of uncertainty about that," Eichem said. "We didn't know what the popularity would be, and we got a lot of input from people with huge ranges, and others said people would not migrate from medical to recreational. ... So we picked the number ($2 million), and then we budgeted from that and said, 'OK, let's break this down.'"

Eichem's office set aside $513,470 for new operating expenses: everything from extra research by the city attorney to a new patrol car for the police department.

Next, the city set aside $250,000 for a program to educate youth about the effects of marijuana consumption. The city also set aside $400,000 of the projected revenue for then-unknown expenses.

Eichem estimated that between $20,000 and $30,000 of the $400,000 set aside was used for things like extra training for the licensing staff.

In reality, while the city fell short of its $2 million mark, because so little of the "just-in-case" fund was used, the city still socked away roughly $550,000 in revenues from extra taxes on medical and recreational marijuana in 2014. The remaining "just-in-case" money will roll over to 2015, while $180,317 of that revenue will be appropriated to the city's general fund.

"I'm glad we budgeted that way because we didn't commit to a bunch of expenditures," Eichem said. "It worked the way we hoped it would work."

Boulder's rules 'challenging'

Shawn Coleman, a lobbyist for the marijuana industry who lives in Boulder, said Boulder is pulling in less money than it could from marijuana due to what he considers to be restrictive regulation.

"I think that it's a very challenging environment for business owners," Coleman said. "The Boulder City Council, in reflecting the city's voters who passed Amendment 64 with a 3-to-1 ratio, they've done the best they can to make the environment very welcoming to the industry. City staff has not taken the same approach."

Coleman points to limited business hours of 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. for a marijuana business plus strict zoning for pot shops as evidence that Boulder has gone too far past the state in regulating the industry.

"If Longmont is interested in a policy change, I hope they follow what the state has set up because that's a good set of regulations that were largely written by Longmont's own (State Rep.) Jonathan Singer," Coleman said. "The City Council should have a lot of faith in what the state has done and avoid doing some of the things that Boulder has done, which are bizarre, frankly."

Singer, who has been a proponent of Amendment 64, said he thought Longmont should have enacted a moratorium rather than a ban on marijuana establishments.

"A moratorium would still allow you to figure out what is working in other cities, but the outright ban seemed adversarial," Singer said. "Longmont now has the advantage of seeing what worked in Boulder and what didn't work. And they can look at other communities like Denver and Aurora."

Singer said if the Longmont City Council was trying to avoid the perception as a city that allows marijuana, Native Roots' location makes that argument moot.

"Basically, by allowing the ban to remain in place and with a dispensary in the unincorporated Boulder County area, which is pretty much in Longmont, I mean the cat's out of the bag on that one," Singer said.

Mayor: 'We're missing out'

When Longmont was struggling first with the medical marijuana question in 2011 and later the recreational question in 2013, the main issue was if it was the kind of thing that belonged in the city. Revenues from the marijuana industry were so difficult to project concretely, they weren't a large part of the discussion.

Longmont planner Ben Ortiz examined the questions from a zoning perspective through a process that won first in a statewide competition on governmental decision-making processes.

In 2010, Ortiz and other city employees convened extensive panels to discuss what approach the city should take to medical marijuana shops: ban them entirely, give them free rein or regulate them heavily. The panels were made up of a cross-section of the community, with parents, school employees, marijuana business owners, marijuana patients, doctors, law enforcement and others.

Tax revenue had so many variables to it, the point wasn't a major component of the discussions.

"The problem with the tax revenue question is cities can regulate (marijuana) so many different ways if your community does decide to regulate," Ortiz said. "Like, one of the things municipalities can do is limit the number of permits they can issue — they can limit it to 10 because they have the power to do so, and if we had done that, the revenue generated from 10 would be different than the revenue generated from 50."

Officials started on settling the ban-or-regulate question for medical marijuana first.

The makeup of the City Council had not changed drastically by 2013, so officials then expected the same result as when the medical marijuana question came up, said Longmont planner Erin Fosdick.

When the question of whether to allow recreational marijuana came before the Longmont City Council in 2013, "We didn't do any specific fiscal modeling — especially at the time, it was just too difficult," Fosdick said. "If we were to do this now, we would have a lot more information in terms of comparisons, in terms of what other cities are doing."

The ordinance banning marijuana establishments, including retail shops, narrowly passed the council in 2013.

Mayor Dennis Coombs, who dissented then, said the ban would probably be revisited eventually but wasn't sure now is the right time.

"It's a hot-button issue one way or another," Coombs said. "Originally, I voted not to ban it, and I did it mostly at that point not because I wanted pot shops in Longmont, but we're going to lose the tax base to Boulder County anyway. Right now, we can't control it, and we're missing out on the tax base."

But when asked if he would bring it up before the council, Coombs demurred.

"I don't think it's a battle I really want to fight right now, but if someone else brought up (rescinding the ban), I would support it."

Mayor Pro Tem Brian Bagley said although he voted against the measure in 2013, he isn't sure where he would land on it in 2015 or further in the future.

"On one hand, I realize our community — Longmont and Colorado — are moving toward a more open stance as far as marijuana goes," Bagley said. "But something in me hesitates because I don't want to go home and tell my kids that it's OK to smoke pot, because I don't think it's OK to send the message to drink and smoke. ... I feel like both sides of the argument are painting pot in inaccurate ways. On one hand, it's a gateway drug, and on the other, they say it's harmless, and I think in reality it probably falls somewhere in the middle."

The revenues earned from recreational marijuana don't necessarily persuade Bagley either, he said.

"Just because something earns money doesn't make it the right position," he said. "For me, it comes down to what I think is right and wrong, and to me, I've got an 8-, 9-, 11-, 14- and 16-year-old, and I don't like the thought of going home and telling them their dad voted to allow pot in Longmont."

Longmont council member Jeff Moore, who was not on the council at the time, said that although there is data now available for Boulder on recreational marijuana sales, it might not translate easily to Longmont.

"You've got 3,000 college students there," Moore said. "I think it's fine like it is. People drive to Boulder if they want it. ... There's not too many people coming to council saying they want legal marijuana (sales) here."

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci