NIH, FDA get funding boosts

A MERRY CHRISTMAS FOR NIH, FDA — The $32.1 billion for NIH in the year-end budget deal ends a long drought for the medical research agency, fully funds the Obama administration’s Precision Medicine and BRAIN initiatives, and provides major boosts for Alzheimer’s and cancer research. The 6.6 percent increase still leaves funding below where it was in adjusted dollars 12 years ago, after the last big dollar surge, but it's an undeniable victory for research. Not to be left out is FDA, which got a 5 percent increase, the bulk of which is earmarked for neglected food safety programs. The drug, device and biologics centers saw modest gains as well.

DEVICE TAX SUSPENSION BRINGS LOBBYING TO FRUITION — The two-year suspension of Obamacare’s medical device tax is partial fulfillment of a years-long industry lobbying campaign for full repeal. Many believe it will be scrapped permanently because of the political difficulty of reinstating a tax that’s been temporarily blocked. At a minimum, it means $3.9 billion to the industry over the next two years, according to the Joint Committee on Taxation’s estimate of the package.

Story Continued Below

AND THE R&D TAX BREAK IS PERMANENT — Another big win for pharma and medical device makers: the research and development tax credit, included in the $680 billion package of tax extenders, is here to stay. That year-end deal was in large part a bonanza for health care interests.

Happy Monday and welcome back to Prescription PULSE, holiday recess edition. Programming note: your favorite pharma newsletter will take a break next week and return on Tuesday, Jan. 5. Now our nugget from medical history: This week in 1898, Pierre and Marie Curie isolated radium (element 88 on your periodic table). It was one of a number of discoveries that led to Marie Curie becoming the first woman to receive the Nobel Prize in 1903. More from Wired: http://bit.ly/1NXr4tu

OMNIBUS MANDATES REPORT ON PRESCRIPTION DRUG SPENDING — The budget deal includes a directive to HHS to undertake a major report detailing spending on prescription drug prices (after rebates) for the top 10 most frequently used and the top 10 highest cost medicines under Medicare Part B and Part D, Medicaid and the Department of Veterans Affairs. An important limitation on the instruction: HHS can only use data that's available under current law and not proprietary. The report due in six months must also include an account of what HHS has done to lower drugs costs since 2001. It’s included in the Labor-HHS section of the conference report (pages 55-57): http://1.usa.gov/1I93mds

RIDERS-ROUNDUP: OTHER KEY PHARMA PROVISIONS — The massive $1.1 trillion spending bill contains some other important wins and losses for the drug industry. Here are some key ones:

— The popular FDA pediatric disease priority review voucher program was extended until Sept. 30, just as the incentive for companies to develop drugs for rare diseases in children was about to sunset. When FDA does approve one of these pediatric drugs, the program rewards the company with a voucher for an expedited review of another drug. Companies have been able to sell these vouchers for hundreds of millions of dollars. Some public health advocates worry the program hasn’t incentivized truly new innovation.

— Gene editing block — FDA won’t be able to use any funds to review or approve clinical research that modifies a human embryo to change a heritable genetic trait, known as germline gene editing.

— The bill directs the Veterans Administration to adopt opioid prescribing guidelines CDC is in the process of finalizing. Public health groups are probably cheering that, but opioid makers likely are not.

—The bill restricts FDA from developing a rule that would require pharmaceutical prescribing information to be distributed to health care professionals electronically instead of on paper.

— Another provision that says U.S. Customs and Border Protection can’t block an individual from importing a 90-day supply of a prescription drug for personal use from Canada. However, the provision says the drug must comply with the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, so some legal experts believe this could make the law meaningless as drugs sold in other countries aren’t likely to meet FDA Act standards.

ONE HOLD LIFTED ON CALIFF, ONE REMAINS — Nebraska freshman Sen. Ben Sasse released his hold on the nomination of Robert Califf for FDA Commissioner, saying that HHS had produced the documents he wanted about the failure of Obamacare co-ops. Alaska Sen. Lisa Murkowski still has a hold over concerns about FDA’s approval of genetically modified salmon, but a GOP HELP aide said that the committee plans a vote to advance Califf’s nomination in early January. He appears to have support in the full chamber as well.

SENATE ‘CURES’ LIMPS INTO 2016, BUT HOPE LINGERS — The big boost for NIH complicates any attempt for additional, mandatory funding for the agency, which was the carrot that got Democrats behind the big bipartisan push in the House. As expected, 2015 slips into the history books without a HELP Committee draft of its companion Innovations for Healthier Americans initiative, much less a marked up bill, which was the goal Chairman Lamar Alexander had set. But sources tell Prescription PULSE that Alexander and ranking member Patty Murray still want to put out a draft in January. Of course, they’ve wanted to do that for several months now, and some of the key outstanding issues that have kept that from happening before remain —NIH funding and Democratic pressure for action on prescription drug pricing, among other things. We’ll see.

… House Energy and Commerce Chairman Fred Upton praised the NIH funding in the year-end deal, noting that it was close to the level included in the House-passed Cures. “[B]ut more work remains as we seek to build upon this momentum to deliver cures now,” his statement said. “As the Senate continues to do its work, we will continue to seek out every legislative opportunity to improve the future for patients and cures.”

SHKRELI OUT, TILLES IN AT TURING —Martin Shkreli resigned as CEO of Turing Pharmaceuticals Friday afternoon after being charged with fraud and Ron Tilles was named interim CEO. The case against Shkreli is unrelated to pharmaceutical pricing but Turing still has the notoriety Shkreli brought it by hiking the price of a drug often used to treat HIV patients by 5,000 percent earlier this year. The company didn't indicate whether the new leadership planned to reduce the price of Daraprim. Tilles has been chairman of Turing's board of directors since the company launched last year. Shkreli says he’s confident he will be cleared of all charges. Read the POLITICO NY story on the indictment: http://politi.co/1RroRZR

... Shkreli's downfall doesn't mean Congress is stopping its investigation into drug price hike rises. Sens. Susan Collins and Claire McCaskill said they'll continue their work, adding the practice wasn't limited to one company: http://1.usa.gov/1OBjtgG.

DEMOCRATS WANT CMS DRUG COST PLANS — Five Democratic senators led by Mark Warner want to know how acting CMS Administrator Andy Slavitt is maximizing CMS’s authorities to improve transparency on drug pricing and bring prices down. Specifically they ask how CMS might use CMMI to examine new payment mechanisms — like an alternative to Part B payments to doctors based on a drug’s average sales price plus 6 percent (which many say incentivizes prescribing high cost drugs). They also want to know how CMS can use comparative effectiveness analyses from groups like PCORI and ICER to improve patient outcomes and lower program spending. And in the private insurance market, where many consumers have high-deductible plans, they want to know how CMS plans to use its authority to ensure people can access drugs. The letter: http://1.usa.gov/1NBVHBn

FDA’S 2016 PHARMA PRIORITIES — Reevaluating FDA regulation of drug advertising and promotion in light of recent pharmaceutical court cases surrounding the First Amendment is a front burner item for the agency’s drug center, Janet Woodcock said last week. Other key priorities include continuing to implement the 2013 compounding law and the track and trace legislation, which aims to improve the safety of the drug supply chain. FDA will also be focusing on reaching new user fee agreements for brand, generic and biosimilar drugs. And it will continue to address the opioid epidemic through guidance on how companies can get generic versions of abuse-deterrent opioids approved. It also plans to reevaluate opioid labels as well as the safety systems known as risk evaluation and mitigation strategies (REMS).

… Ramping up the drug center’s staffing is key. CDER currently has 600 vacancies, Woodcock said. FDA’s also working on a strategic plan for drug imports and updating personalized medicine policies. FDA commissioner nominee Robert Califf aims to modernize clinical evidence development by using electronic health data, she added. For all the 2016 goals and a roundup of 2015 see: http://1.usa.gov/1MlLver

AMARIN, FDA STILL WORKING ON SETTLEMENT — The wait continues. Amarin and FDA asked for another extension to work out a settlement in their free speech case related to off-label marketing. They have until Feb. 17, 2016 to update the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York.

… ICYMI: FDA and Pacira Pharmaceuticals were able to wrap up their free speech dispute last week. Pacira called the settlement a “favorable resolution” and legal experts say it is likely a win for drug companies that seek to promote truthful off-label information about their products. The settlement confirmed Pacira’s understanding of the drug’s approved indication, and resulted in FDA updating the drug’s labeling and pulling a warning letter regarding advertising. The settlement: http://bit.ly/1J9zSqP. FDA’s letter rescinding the warning letter: http://1.usa.gov/1m4lFGd

BIOSIMILAR USER FEE REATHORIZATION KICKS OFF — FDA commenced work on reauthorizing the biosimilar use fee program Friday with a public meeting. While there’s only been one biosimilar approved in the U.S., the agency said that as of November, 59 were in its development program. That’s pretty significant since when the use fee program was first put in place the agency was only expecting 11 products in the program at any one time. However, GPhA VP David Gaugh noted at the meeting that fewer biosimilars have been approved by FDA than the agency anticipated by this point. Gaugh also said that most of FDA’s time and resources has been spent on developing broader biosimilars policies not on reviewing drugs (only 7 percent of agency BSUFA resources went to application reviews). He also asked that FDA, industry and payers to collaborate on biosimilar education.

... FDA’s taking steps to make sure biosimilar uptake is successful in the U.S., Woodcock said. It’s working to educate doctors in hope of avoiding the pushback that came with the introduction of generic medicines. A hurdle for the agency on biosimilars is recruiting and retaining staff that can review biosimilars. “This is very complicated science. I think it's very fun but the people who have to do it every day are highly sought after outside,” and offered much higher salaries than the government can pay, Woodcock said.

DRUG OVERDOSES CONTINUE TO CLIMB — The CDC reported that 47,055 people died of drug overdoses in 2014 — a 6.5 percent increase from the year before and a startling 137 percent jump since 2000. Overdoses on prescription opioids in particular climbed by 9 percent, while overdoses involving heroin and synthetic opioids such as fentanyl grew by even more — 26 percent and 80 percent, respectively — according to the data published in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Overdose deaths were highest in five states: West Virginia, New Mexico, New Hampshire, Kentucky and Ohio. The report drew calls for Medicare reforms. “Unless Congress lets Medicare use drug management tools like patient review and restriction programs to curb abuse, overdose deaths will continue to rise,” said Cynthia Reilly, director of the Prescription Drug Abuse Project at The Pew Charitable Trusts. More from Brett here.

VERMONT PUTS MANDATORY OPIOID GUIDELINES, PDMP CHECKS IN PLACE — Gov. Peter Shumlin announced last week that rules were in force to require prescribers of controlled substances to check the state’s prescription drug monitoring database. It also puts in place requirements for prescribing opioids, including a risk assessment and consideration of alternative treatments, as well as follow-up evaluations. The prescribing rule: http://1.usa.gov/1NC1g2y

… Meanwhile, CDC’s draft opioid prescribing guidelines remain open for public comment through mid-January. The agency noted in its release of the overdose numbers that the greatest risk factor for heroin use was the misuse of prescription opioids. ICYMI, Brett’s story on the guidelines CDC released last week.

ICER RELEASES NEW REPORTS ON DIABETES, ASTHMA MEDS – The Institute for Clinical and Economic review put out two new analyses of the cost-effectiveness and value of new medicines this morning. GSK’s asthma biologic Nucala (mepolizumab) didn’t fare so well. While the drug appears to offer additional benefits and improved quality of life, to achieve a cost-effectiveness ratio of $150,000 per each quality of life year gained by the drug, the price per vial would need to drop 63 percent from the $2,500 wholesale acquisition cost, the report concludes. If the drug was priced in the range of $7,787 to $12,116 per year it would not exceed 5-year potential budget impact thresholds, the report adds.

… Novo Nordisk’s Tresiba (insulin degludec) does OK by ICER’s standards. The drug would need to be discounted by less than 10 percent to be better aligned with its value to patients and the health system, ICER said. This is well within the range of most negotiated discounts, the report notes. Based on the list price, the cost of the insulin is approximately $7,800 per year.

K STREET NEWS: WEINSTEIN JOINS PODESTA GROUP, NEW 340B WEBSITE LAUNCHES — Anna Weinstein, a former Senate Democratic adviser and strategist at BIO, is joining the Podesta Group’s health care practice. She’ll focus on Medicare policy, clinical trials, and drug discovery and development.

… In other staffing moves, Express Scripts hired Chris Davis from GPhA and Emily Katz, who was health policy director to Sen. Barbara Boxer, as directors of government affairs.

… 340B Health, a group of safety net providers who support the drug discount program, launched a new website, www.340BCoalition.org.

NEW RARE DISEASE CAUCUS ON THE SCENE — The first bicameral rare disease congressional caucus was announced last week, led by Sens. Orrin Hatch and Amy Klobuchar, and Reps. Leonard Lance and Joseph Crowley. The announcement from the Rare Disease Legislative Advocates: http://bit.ly/1Pea3MF

CATCHING OUR ATTENTION: IS PHARMA INFLUENCING ACADEMIC TRIAL REPORTING — Academic scientists who ignore legal requirements to publicly report clinical trials results have often received large payments from drug companies involved in those studies, STAT reports. STAT reviewed federal data, which reveals it’s pretty common for both drug companies and academics to fail to report clinical trials results within legally mandated timelines, or at all. And it’s hard to draw firm conclusions about whether the drug industry influence is a large factor in the widespread failure of trial reporting, the article adds. For more on the missing clinical trial data go to: http://bit.ly/1Id8dKE.

** A message from The Pharmaceutical Care Management Association: PBMs are projected to save employers, unions, government programs, and consumers $654 billion - up to 30 percent - on drug benefit costs over the next decade. PBMs reduce drug costs by: · Offering Amazon-style home delivery of medications and creating select networks of more affordable pharmacies; · Encouraging the use of generics and more affordable brand medications; · Negotiating rebates from drug manufacturers and discounts from drugstores; · Managing high-cost specialty medications; and · Reducing waste and improving adherence. Learn more at: http://thatswhatpbmsdo.com **