Topics: Art, Museums, Whitney Museum of American Art, Entertainment News

If I had a few billion dollars, I wouldn’t have a few billion dollars. I would give away a billion here or there, found a foundation to help save people, and underwrite cultural institutions, especially those that support young artists and writers. But if I were to indulge myself, I would buy fabulous works of art—for me to see every day, for art is surely my weakness. In time, my art collection would probably need to be shared, if only to protect me from my greed, and from burning in the hell in which I don’t believe. Great art belongs to the public. Maybe I would build a museum. I wonder how arty my art museum would be?

On May 1, 2015, the Whitney Museum of American Art opened a new, $422 million building, a Renzo Piano-designed structure on Gansevoort Street in the Meatpacking District in New York. The building tells the usual tale of power and old New York wealth, thanks to an initial $125 million gift in 2007 from Estée Lauder’s American Art Foundation. Upon the opening, with a visit from the first lady and her challenge to the Whitney’s directors to make the museum’s great collection available to underserved populations, now seems the time to think about what’s boxed in Renzo Piano’s new box, and to consider what the ideal art museum might be.

The new Whitney’s beautiful galleries afford extraordinary flexibility, with 50,000 square feet of exhibition space sans columns, a black-box theater, and various smartly designed elements that should foster innovative curating. Piano’s building has a brutal charm, industrial and pretty, at the end of the High Line on the West Side. Down the stairs at 14th Street, and make a right: the lobby’s airy space frames a view of the Hudson River that neatly obscures the Department of Sanitation plant next door. Largess abounds: light, steel and the promise of fine art, much of it great.

The new Whitney shows art well, the museum’s primary function performed with aplomb. The galleries are on the top four floors: to begin, one takes “the most beautiful freight elevator I have ever ridden on,” according to Michelle Obama, up to the 8th floor, and then works down, with visits to the outdoor terraces encouraged, the eastward view excellent. Terraces are a major feature of Piano’s museum designs—whether utilized as semi-covered access tubes, as they are at the Centre Pompidou, or appended like fancy fire escapes, as they are here at the Whitney. From the street or from the High Line, assuming good weather, visitors arriving at the new Whitney see the folks on the terraces and can imagine themselves up there, delighting in the prospect. It’s no accident that once inside the museum, the elevator to the eighth floor opens near the terrace, and that most museum-goers tend to check out the view before stepping into the gallery proper. Seeing is a kind of owning, as Cortez knew.

Then the gallery viewing begins, from the eighth floor down to the fifth, for now, through the permanent collection that has its origins in the patronage of Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney in the early 20th century, with her prophetic investments in the paintings of what became the Ashcan School. Today, to show its stuff, the Whitney curators offer 23 “chapters”—groupings according to 23 of the curators’s ideas—organizing the artworks, to help viewers parse what’s hidden within the timelines. It’s a curatorial fad, or maybe a development; over the past 20 years, we’ve seen curators begin to reposition artworks ahistorically in great museums, sometimes salon-style, sometimes by room or floor. We’re learning more about moments in time, these groupings say, and synchronicity: the job of a good museum is to teach, too.

But the job description of the good museum, like that of the good college, has also expanded over the same 20 years. A museum today has to do more than just show its stuff: a museum today, while still a church and a library, now also must be a mall and a playground and a store and a theater and a tax haven and an architectural wonder. Can you picture a museum with a dating app, its own version of Tinder? I can. Swipe to meet by the Kara Walker.

Culture is made by a museum, perhaps most conspicuously when a museum collects a specifically national collection, such as the Whitney’s. Claims are made by the museum’s curators when they decide how to show work—those 23 chapters in the new Whitney constitute arguments about who Americans were, are and will be. Not to mention who weren’t Americans yet: A museum also contributes to the rewriting of history, with those who were on the margins eased back into the national discourse. Thus a museum is a textbook, too, as visitors study for a variety of exams never to be administered.

A contemporary art museum has an additional challenge, ideologically, both to be the power and fight the power. For example, when the new Whitney displays an Abstract Expressionist painting, which in 1950 was a threat to the Cold War status quo, that painting on the wall today becomes the status quo, institutionalized as cultural capital, with meanings in 2015 that subsequent generations need to resist, and in resisting, make new. So there is the old Jackson Pollock painting on the new Whitney’s wall, and the museum has to figure out how not to overdetermine the artwork’s achievements and thereby erase history. (In this case, the new Whitney fails: Pollock’s “Number 27, 1950” has been hung vertically, despite convincing evidence that the painting is a horizontal.)