Three Democrats and one Republican are seeking to unseat Eighth Congressional District Congressman Paul Cook, the Republican currently serving Highland and the mountains and desert southeast sections of California.

The lone Republican challenging Cook is former Assemblyman, former gubernatorial candidate, and Tea Party favorite Tim Donnelly.

On Friday, April 22, Donnelly stopped by our office for an interview.

How will Donnelly do the job better than Cook?

“It shouldn’t be hard,” he says. “Nobody knows he exists. This is an extremely conservative district. All we’re getting is the same Pablum.”

Donnelly was critical of Cook’s vote for the Omnibus Bill continuing amnesty, support for the United Nations, Obamacare, climate change and immigration of 300,000 refuges from the Middle East, he says. Donnelly estimates 10-13 percent of Muslims agree with ISIS and Jihad.

“Jihad is the right to murder those with whom you do not agree,” he says. “They could be declaring allegiance to ISIS in their Facebook page and the government doesn’t even know about it. They don’t know jack.”

Cook and others have not done anything to remedy the situation, even after the Dec. 2 San Bernardino terrorist attack, Donnelly says.

“You know, there is a time and place for shutting down the government. For me this is about someone who does not represent us and is putting us at risk,” he warns. “You know what, I would rather be a John the Baptist and just be one, but still be a John the Baptist. And he had his head cut off by the government.”

Although he is running for a spot in the federal government, Donnelly wants to get rid of most of it.

“I want to abolish the IRS (Internal Revenue Service),” he says. “I’m for a flatter tax.”

As for medical care, Donnelly supports a “cash system.”

“You can give indigents $10,000 a year for their medical care and let the marketplace set the price.”

And replacing the federal government with local control at all levels would improve our lives, he believes.

Donnelly is a talk show host, and displays that kind of passion about what he believes.

His next major appearance will be for his 50th birthday on May 9 at a barbecue at the National Orange Show. He calls it “$50 for 50,” and will charge $50 for two people for the event.

For more information, visit donnellyforcongress.com or call (760) 933-8460.