Vermont Gov. Shumlin won't run for fourth term

Vermont Gov. Peter Shumlin will not seek reelection in 2016, he announced Monday.

Shumlin, who chaired the Democratic Governors Association last cycle, was first elected in 2010 and is serving his third two-year term.

Story Continued Below

But in the 2014 election, he failed to earn a majority of the vote. The state Legislature, which is controlled by Democrats, selected him for another term earlier this year over his Republican challenger, Scott Milne.

“I decided to make this decision now because I want these 18 months in office” to be dedicated to policy work, Shumlin said at a press conference Monday afternoon.

Shumlin’s decision to forgo a fourth term comes despite earlier indications that he was leaning toward another run.

“I’m going to serve for as long as Vermonters will have me and for as long as we’ve still got work left to do. And we’ve got a lot of work left to do,” he told POLITICO in February.

Reporters asked the 59-year-old Shumlin on Monday about the high-profile failure of his administration to pass a single-payer health care system in the state. But he expressed hope he could still enact reforms during his final 18 months in office.

“What I learned the hard way was that … you can’t support any health care system if you keep spending money the way we are,” he said. “I wish we could have done the whole package. I think we can get half the loaf. Let’s do that.”

Shumlin’s travails on health care came to define his sagging fortunes as he narrowly clung to a lead against Milne. Outraged liberals who once cheered Vermont’s first-in-the-nation embrace of single-payer health care were dismayed when Shumlin shelved it over cost concerns. His administration was also beset by the technical failures of the state’s Obamacare exchange.

Shumlin added that he plans to complete his term and won’t accept a job in a Democratic administration. “I will not be going to Washington,” he said.

Republicans were excited about the potential of taking on a damaged Shumlin in 2016 but may be less eager to do battle with a fresh face. If he decides to run, Lt. Gov. Phil Scott would likely be the leading GOP candidate. The Republican Governors Association has talked to Scott about a potential run.

“You always consider,” Scott told WCAX-TV earlier this month. “You know, the last time around I was fairly clear early on I had no interest in running. At this point in time I’m going to give it more thought.”

The Republican Governors Association, which battled with Shumlin over the course of the 2014 cycle, piled on in a statement emailed to reporters that called Vermont “a strong opportunity” for the committee “to go on offense.”

“By throwing in the towel after an embarrassing term as DGA chairman and deciding not to seek reelection,” Shumlin “is finally admitting he has failed to be an effective leader for Vermont,” said RGA communications director Jon Thompson. “His decision adds Vermont to a growing list of open seats the DGA will be forced to spend limited resources on to defend in 2016, and presents a strong opportunity for the RGA to go on offense. Vermont is ready for and deserves new leadership — a Republican governor who will be able to jumpstart the state’s economy and remind Vermonters what it’s like to live in a well-run state.”

Vermonters, despite their liberal reputation, have a history of backing Republicans on the state level: GOP Gov. Jim Douglas served four terms from 2003-2011, and three-term Sen. Jim Jeffords left office less than a decade ago.

Democratic operatives mentioned Rep. Peter Welch, state House Speaker Shap Smith and former state senator and gubernatorial candidate Matt Dunne as potential 2016 candidates. Welch, who ran for governor in 1990 and is in his fifth House term, released a statement touting Shumlin’s “extraordinary record of service” but didn’t address whether he would be interested in the job.

Smith has already acknowledged his interest in the race, telling the same local television station he would only run if Shumlin decided not to.

As for Shumlin, he said the 2014 election — in which he edged Milne on Election Day, 46 percent to 45 percent, before the race was kicked to the Legislature in January — was “absolutely not” a factor in deciding not to run again.

“You know me, I love tough races,” he told reporters. “And I firmly believe that in a presidential year we would have won big. But we’re never going to find out.”

Kyle Cheney and Kevin Robillard contributed to this report.