Gov. Scott Walker suggested Wednesday he would not allow the state to set up a health care exchange if the U.S. Supreme Court strikes down a portion of Obamacare. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Brookfield— Speaking before a conservative audience Wednesday, Gov. Scott Walker suggested he would not allow Wisconsin to set up a health care exchange if the U.S. Supreme Court strikes down a portion of Obamacare.

"We're going to push back," the likely Republican presidential candidate said of President Barack Obama's signature health care law.

"This president of the United States — they've got to come up with a solution....They're going to try to put the pressure on us but we need to put the pressure right back on them."

Walker spoke at the Sharon Lynne Wilson Center for the Arts as part of the "Insight 2015" program put on by WTMJ-AM (620) host Charlie Sykes. The event will be broadcast from 8:30 a.m. to noon Thursday.

The Supreme Court is now considering a case that argues tax credits to subsidize health care can be given only to those who sign up for health care through insurance exchanges established by states — and not ones set up by the federal government. Like some other states, Wisconsin does not have its own exchange and people here rely on a federal exchange.

If the Supreme Court rules against the Obama administration, there will be pressure on states like Wisconsin to establish exchanges. There will also be a push for Congress and the president to reach a deal changing the Affordable Care Act — and Walker said that's who should address the issue.

The 35-minute interview with Walker came as he ramps up an expected presidential run. He vaulted into the top tier of the GOP field in January after speaking at the Iowa Freedom Summit but in recent weeks has come under fire over allegations of flip-flopping on immigration and other issues.

Low expectations?

Walker said he was surprised with how quickly he had advanced in the crowded presidential field, saying the speech he gave in Iowa was in keeping with ones he has given for years. He said he benefited from low expectations because the national media figured Midwesterners were bland.

"Just telling the truth apparently isn't exciting," he joked.

He marveled at a New York Times story this week about whether his dog allergy would hurt his chances as a candidate. "Remember, this is the publication that's 'all the news that's fit to print.' At one point I thought, is this the Onion?" Walker said, referring to the satirical publication that lampoons politicians and the media.

Taking swipes

Walker also took swipes at his main Republican rival, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, and the likely Democratic nominee, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. He suggested voters would be fatigued at the prospect of electing another Bush or Clinton.

"I think the American people want someone new and fresh," he said.

He called Bush a friend and said he had patterned his governorship on the tenures of Bush and former Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels. But Walker also referred to Bush as a "fairly conservative" governor, a description that would not appeal to die-hard Republicans.

He was tougher on Clinton, saying she had given "horrible advice" to Obama.

"There is no place in the world where she hasn't played a prominent role where it is not screwed up right now," he said.

"Look at the mess we have because of the lack of American leadership. (Russian President Vladimir) Putin is no dummy. He thinks like (Vladimir) Lenin. Lenin said you probe with bayonets. If you find steel, you pull back. If you find mush, you push. And that's exactly what Putin's doing because of our failure to lead and Hillary Clinton was right at the forefront of that."

Walker also discussed ethanol, an issue where his stance has recently shifted. He opposed a state ethanol mandate when he made his first, unsuccessful run for governor, in 2006.

But in a speech last month in Iowa — the country's largest corn producer and host of the first-in-the-nation presidential caucus — he said he supports the federal Renewable Fuels Standard, which dictates how much ethanol must be blended with gasoline.

In his March speech in Iowa, Walker said he wanted to phase out the fuel standard "eventually," but he talked about a more specific time frame Wednesday, saying he wanted to get rid of it in a "couple years."

"I'd like to see a whole series of regulations and mandates be phased out by the end of the first term of the next president," he said.

More Scott Walker coverage

For more coverage of Gov. Scott Walker and the 2016 presidential race, from news stories to videos and interactive features, go to jsonline.com/scottwalker