Brookings, SD

With Nate Wolters now in the NBA, the South Dakota State men's basketball team will need help this season if they hope to repeat as Summit League champs. Monday, the Jackrabbits found out they'll be getting some help in the form of 6’9”, 231 pounder Cody Larson. Larson was granted a transfer waiver from the NCAA this afternoon and is eligible to suit up the next two years for the Jacks.

"My phone rang and I saw it was coach Nagy, I knew what it was about," SDSU Forward Cody Larson said.

That call from his new coach was one that Cody Larson had been waiting for all day. Scott Nagy informed him that he was cleared to take the court with the Jackrabbits effective immediately.

"I was overwhelmed with joy and hugging the guys. Everyone was excited for me. I got a really good response from the team, so that was encouraging. The theme here so far is we support each other and that has made the experience all that much better," Larson said.

That support will be key as the Roosevelt grad puts his troubled past behind him and begins to focus on basketball once again. His talents were good enough to take him to the University of Florida. Now Larson can showcase them in front of his peers that have supported him in his home state.

"Playing with kids I've played against my entire life. Jordan Dykstra and Marcus Heemstra I have played against since I was an eighth grader. It will be fun to have family close and all my relatives can come watch. It will be a different environment, but I think it will be a better environment for me," Larson said.

With a another chance to play ball and a basketball team once again loaded to possibly make another tournament run, how far can this squad go with their new 6-9 toy?

"I think we are going to be really, really good, I really do. The guys work hard, really hard. Like I keep saying they put each other first and it's not a ‘me’ mentality. That is going to get us very far," Larson said.

Larson and company host Dakota Wesleyan in an exhibition game on November 1st.