By 8 p.m., 200 East and 900 South looked like a refugee camp as thousands of people had set up tents and awnings, tossed down blankets and sleeping bags, and tied dogs and small children to nearby fences and trees. Everyone was looking to have a good time.

A good time is relative to the person having it. For reasons apparent only to drunks and idiots, having a good time to some people requires making sure that other people don't.

Public safety that night consisted largely of politely reminding people to not let their pajama-clad offspring run around in the middle of the street, to move their chairs and blankets back onto the grass, and to not pee in the yards of those who live along the route.

Speaking of which, the city set up dozens of portable toilets and hand-cleaning stations along the route. In the spirit of the evening, they became part of the entertainment.

When I went inside one for the purpose of sending a message to Atlantis, someone convinced a mob of children to beat on the outside and rock it back and forth.

I was never able to determine who put the kids up to it, but Givens and Pascadlo remain persons of interest.

As night fell and the crowds deepened, calls began coming in. Someone's blanket was touching someone else's. Somebody was driving a motorcycle on the sidewalk. Some guy might have a gun. A woman was unconscious.

The biggest concern for officers was keeping the parade route clear. Everyone was warned that vehicles parked on the street after 2 a.m. would be "relocated."

Relocated sounds nicer but it's really just a friendlier public relations term for "towed" and "impounded."

After 2 a.m., tow trucks hauled vehicles to a nearby "my car got stolen" lot, so frantic owners could call the police to make a report and discover that their rides had in fact only been borrowed. Upon paying a parking ticket fee, they could have them back.

At first, I was surprised how smoothly things ran. A couple of people got tickets, a motorcycle was impounded, and Givens and Pascadlo said "please" 5,000 times. Nobody I saw got arrested or punched in the face.

In short, there was really no news. Until I said the magic words "It's time for me to go home."

Sgt. Pascadlo was driving me back to the station when we got a report of a man on the roof of an apartment building throwing bricks at passing cars and pedestrians. We drove by, and sure enough, there was.

The man — visibly drunk and/or crazy — was perched atop a four-story apartment for reasons that never really became apparent. He refused to come down no matter how many times the police said "Please."

Eventually, more police arrived, along with an ambulance, firetrucks and the news media. As the standoff dragged on and the crowd of spectators grew, the walls of various parallel dimensions grew thin.