Sioux Falls, Sd

Fourth of July weekend can turn dangerous if you're not safe around fireworks. One Sioux Falls family is cutting down on the risks involved thanks to an invention they've turned into a successful business.

Things are looking up for the Knopf family. After inventing a tube that helps shoot rockets in a more controlled setting, the product is starting to take off.

"If we can save one eye, one child getting burned, then it's all worth it," Knopf said.

Jeff Knopf says Safety Rocket Launcher got into local firework shops last year. Now, more than 150,000 have been sold across the country and the company is hitting the international market.

"The call for it was way beyond what we even anticipated," Knopf said. "This was something that should have been out years ago, so we went in full-line production."

While a simple idea, these tubes replace bottles and pop cans and make fireworks this holiday weekend a whole lot safer.

The Safety Rocket Launcher is made of a special type of plastic infused with chlorine and is self extinguishing. Pound it into the ground a few inches, point it in the right direction and you're ready to go. If you have a dud, the firework will either explode in the tube or land away from the group.

"It actually increases the sale on bottle rockets, whistlers and skyrockets as well because now mothers feel there's something a little bit safer that I can allow my children to shoot out of and still have the safety," Knopf said.

Knopf quit his day job to focus more on the business that started out of a small warehouse in east Sioux Falls. These days the tubes are produced in several plants in the United States and now China.

"We believe that this year we'll expand to millions. It will be millions of tubes going out. We're pretty excited about that and we're excited about these companies that have joined up with us because they realize that safety, going forward, is important to them as well," Knopf said.

The Safety Rocket Launcher sells for roughly $5 and comes in five different colors.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.