CHICAGO, Nov. 22, 2013 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Azteca America Chicago, maintaining its commitment to supporting the Latino community, is organizing a healthcare forum to be held on Saturday, November 23 at 10:00 am at Little Village High School. Experts from the University of Illinois Hospitals will explain the changes that the implementation of the Affordable Care Act will entail. The event is open to the public.

Also known as "ObamaCare," the Affordable Care Act is intended to improve healthcare for Americans. Its main objective is to make healthcare more accessible to all residents by improving healthcare services, better regulating the healthcare insurance industry, and bringing down wasteful spending.

It is estimated that nearly 44 million Americans cannot afford health insurance. One of the primary purposes of this new law is to help these people have better access to the healthcare system by expanding Medicaid and Medicare as well as offering subsidies to people who cannot afford health insurance.

At the Healthcare Forum to be held Saturday, November 23, experts on the new law will address questions regarding the options available to people who may not have the resources to afford a health insurance plan on their own. The options available to undocumented immigrants and their families will also be explained.

The forum will offer guidance regarding the healthcare rights and options available to residents, regardless of their legal status. Certificates for free health examinations will also be available.

Rohr-Max and the Spanish-language newspaper Hoy, in their continuing support of the Latino community, invite Illinois residents to come learn about the changes and benefits the Affordable Care Act has to offer.

Don't miss this opportunity to be better informed about the Affordable Care Act, Saturday, November 23 at 10:00 am at Little Village High School located at 3120 South Kostner Avenue, in Chicago. Azteca America Chicago 61 invites you – más cerca de ti.

The Azteca America logo is available at http://www.globenewswire.com/newsroom/prs/?pkgid=17119

Germon Santiago (312) 814-7808