SANTA CRUZ -- Former Watsonville Mayor Todd McFarren announced Monday that he will run for the Fourth District seat on the county's Board of Supervisors in the June 3 election.

He formally threw his hat in the ring Monday at the Monterey Bay Central Labor Council's annual Labor Day picnic. About 100 union members and politicians gathered at DeLaveaga Park.

McFarren, who served on the council in the 1990s and has been active in city politics for many years, will run against current 4th District Supervisor Greg Caput.

Dana Sales, a member of the Santa Cruz County Board of Education, is also considering a bid for the seat representing Watsonville, as well as City Councilman Daniel Dodge and Councilwoman Trina Coffman-Gomez.

McFarren, a workers' compensation lawyer in Watsonville, said he would like to focus on getting more resources for South County.

"The truth is, the 4th District has traditionally been underrepresented in the county," McFarren said. "I'm 63, so I figured, if I'm going to run, now's the time."

Beyond political announcements, the picnic maintains an important tradition of recognizing workers, said Cesar Lara, executive director of the Monterey Bay Central Labor Council.

The council has roughly 40,000 members representing 60 unions.

"Every Labor Day, we take a second to reflect on how labor's been in the past 12 months," Lara said.

This year's main developments include the unemployment rate in Santa Cruz County dropping to 8.2 percent -- down from 9.9 percent one year ago -- as well as the implementation of the Affordable Care Act being a month away.

Erik Larsen, a health care organizer for the Labor Council, said he wants workers to understand the act, which has a goal of providing universal coverage.

"It's a really interesting time with the health care reform," Larsen said.

Judy Geer, a member of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, said the picnic is an important place for workers to unite. Geer, a licensed nurse, said she's always fought for fair treatment in the workplace.

"I always come to the Labor Day picnic, because I think a woman's place is in her union," Geer said.

Follow Sentinel reporter Bonnie Horgos at Twitter.com/bhorgos