Buy Photo Nashville’s corporate welfare habit could lead to problems for the city. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The current tally: $623 million for a new convention center. $70 million for a new Sounds stadium. $182 million to the Omni Hotel. $5.8 million to Gaylord Entertainment Co. $6 million to LifePoint Hospitals. $12.5 million to a downtown tower developer. $66 million to HCA. And, most recently, another $56.3 million to Bridgestone. All in a city that just had its credit rating downgraded and purportedly can't afford sidewalks.

Make no mistake: If such gargantuan welfare checks had been written to Nashville's poorest citizens — rather than its most affluent corporations —Republicans would be screaming bloody murder.

That is not to say that this degree of unabashed corporate welfare is a partisan issue, however. Plainly, it's not, because with the sole exception of Councilman Josh Stites, nobody is blameless. But after successfully derailing a recent attempt to solve a serious public transportation problem, can anyone explain why local conservatives, with a few notable exceptions, have largely remained silent in the face of so many massive corporate handouts?

The trope that Nashville's seemingly endless supply of tax abatements and economic development grants (two euphemisms for "corporate welfare") will ultimately "pay for themselves" is laughable.

Daniel Horwitz is an attorney in Nashville. (Photo: Submitted)

Proof of that will come by 2016, when our next mayor — whoever that is — is forced to institute the largest property tax hike in Metro history just to cover the impending budget shortfall. When that happens, how many voters will look back upon our city's recent "investments" without regret?

Moreover, with local politicians clamoring to hand over public dollars to any business that even whispers about leaving town, why on earth wouldn't every other corporation in Nashville make the same threat?

Don't get us wrong. We're strong believers that government can effectively leverage public resources to achieve public good. Police and firefighters, roads and bridges, schools and teachers, domestic violence shelters and legal aid — all are laudable public investments. The question, though, is what Nashville as a city chooses to prioritize, because every dollar doled out to a local corporation is one that can't be spent on something far more valuable.

Raising MNPS salaries to ensure that we're able to compete for the best teachers in the country? Yes please. An ultra-high-speed fiber optic cable network like Chattanooga's? Sign us up. A sound investment in a comprehensive local transportation solution? It's long overdue.

Mike Jameson is an attorney, former Metro councilman and judge. (Photo: Submitted)

Simply handing cash over to local corporations, however, can hardly be described as a "public investment." It's not. It also reeks of cronyism and incentivizes corruption. If Bridgestone ends up repaying Metro's current officeholders in campaign contributions a few years from now, will anyone really be surprised?

Of note, our city's current behavior is not only detestable — it's also imminently unsustainable. Thus, at some point, Nashville's mayoral candidates will have to have an honest conversation about whether it's acceptable to continue using public money to fund private gain. But with nearly all of Metro's politicians playing a role in misspending local tax dollars, who is going to step up to end the madness?

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1BoyWPv