What the Republicans said about health care

With help from Paul Demko, Brianna Ehley, Erin Mershon and Brett Norman.

WHAT THE REPUBLICANS SAID LAST NIGHT — Health care made an extended appearance at Thursday's Republican debate in Iowa — the last opportunity for the candidates (minus Donald Trump) to share a stage before Monday's caucuses. Here were three of the biggest moments.

Story Continued Below

— Ted Cruz vows to repeal 'every word of Obamacare.' The Texas senator added that his ideal replacement would center around three principles: allowing insurers to sell health plans across state lines, expanding the use of health savings accounts, and de-linking health insurance from employment. "I think that's a much more attractive vision for health care than the Washington-driven, top-down Obamacare that is causing so many millions of people to hurt," Cruz said.

— Chris Christie blasts Planned Parenthood. Asked about which entitlement program he'd get rid of as president, the New Jersey governor pledged to strike federal funding for Planned Parenthood. "Let me tell you something," Christie said, when pressed by the moderator about having any "bigger" priorities. "When you see thousands upon thousands upon thousands of children being murdered in the womb, I can't think of anything better than that."

— John Kasich stresses the value of Medicaid. The Ohio governor said that the decision to expand Medicaid in his state "innovated the government," by increasing resources for the elderly and improving care for the mentally ill. "We have treated the drug-addicted in our prisons and we released them in to the community, and our recidivism rate is less than 20 percent," Kasich said. "That's basically bordering on a miracle."

QUICK FACT-CHECK — Cruz asserted that the Affordable Care Act is "the biggest job-killer in this country," a frequent claim among the GOP candidates. But that doesn't appear to be true. Since the law passed in March 2010, there's been an unprecedented run of private-sector job growth. And while the CBO has projected that the law will have a small negative effect on the labor supply, most economists suggest that the law hasn't really pushed Americans out of full-time jobs and into part-time work — yet.

THANK GOODNESS IT'S FRIDAY PULSE — It's our last issue of January, and I've learned that at least four of my colleagues on the health team had birthdays this month. That put me in mind of a 2011 study from United Kingdom government researchers on the correlation between birth month and career. People born in January were more likely to become doctors — and debt collectors.

Is your birthday really your destiny? Share your news, notes, and horoscopes at ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

IS ZIKA THE NEW EBOLA? — "The latest Obama administration crisis comes on the wings of a mosquito," POLITICO Pro's Joanne Kenen and Jennifer Haberkorn write, after the World Health Organization on Thursday warned that the Zika virus is "spreading explosively" throughout the Americas.

Zika doesn't carry as many risks as Ebola, which is spread through close interpersonal contact and can be fatal. But the mosquito-borne virus appears linked to birth defects in newborns, and the White House is attempting to get ahead of a potential firestorm. The story for Pros.

— Ron Klain weighs in. Klain, who coordinated the White House emergency Ebola response in late 2014, spoke to POLITICO about how officials are tackling this new challenge. Fear is normal — and good public health policy has to address it, not ridicule it, according to Klain. "That's how the human psyche is wired," he said.

And even if Zika does get politicized in ways that whip up fears, he thinks the fact that the U.S. got through Ebola without an outbreak here will help President Obama communicate a message of calm. "When he stands up, he can say, 'We got the nation through Ebola … . You can trust me on the science and you can trust me to lead,'" Klain added.

CLINTON TWEETS; THE MARKET MOVES — Hillary Clinton criticized Valeant's high drug prices on Thursday, and the company's stock price fell 9 percent — coincidentally or not. "This is predatory pricing. It is unjustified. It is wrong," Clinton wrote on Twitter, linking to a campaign blog post excoriating Valeant's price hikes.

— Merck sets lower price for new hep C drug. Another company is trying to get in front of the price debate: Merck's new hepatitis C treatment will cost about one-third less than Gilead's Sovaldi, the company announced on Thursday. The list price of Merck's drug, Zepatier, will be $54,600 for a 12-week regiment, or about $650 per pill, Pro's Sarah Karlin reports.

ENROLLMENT WATCH: WEB TRAFFIC SURGES — HHS says that week-over-week HealthCare.gov traffic jumped 50 percent on Thursday morning, three days ahead of Sunday night's deadline to sign up for exchange coverage. The agency also released select enrollment numbers and trends. "Several large Southern cities have seen disproportionate growth in new consumer plan selections in OE3 relative to their 2015 enrollment," CMS Chief Data Officer Niall Brennan writes.

— How many sign-ups this year? Ace forecaster Charles Gaba, who keeps lowering his projections, now says that he's expecting between 12.4 million and 12.9 million exchange sign-ups this year. That's about 2 million sign-ups lower than his original prediction, he writes in a blog post that explains why his forecast keeps falling.

CO-OPS WELCOME PATH TO ATTRACT MORE CAPITAL — Obamacare's troubled co-op health plans have been agitating for guidance from CMS on how they can attract outside investors. Now, CMS appears to be listening. The agency announced in a FAQ that it is “exploring what changes could be made to help CO-OPs diversify their boards and grow and raise capital." That’s welcome news for the fledgling insurers. "We’re thrilled after almost two years of requests to be able to build this pathway that CMS is now taking this challenge seriously," Martin Hickey, chairman of the National Alliance of State Health Co-ops, told Pro's Paul Demko. A path to additional funds could prove crucial for the 11 remaining nonprofit startups, many of which continue to hemorrhage cash.

ECONOMIST ON SANDERS HEALTH PLAN: NEARLY 2X AS EXPENSIVE AS PROMISED — Emory's Kenneth Thorpe has concluded that Bernie Sanders' single-payer proposal is underfunded by $1.1 trillion per year, Dylan Matthews writes at Vox.

One of Thorpe's findings: That 71 percent of households with private insurance would be worse off after accounting for tax increases and reduced health spending. Another finding: That national drug spending would be negative, according to Sanders' projected savings. (Given that minor implausibility, the Sanders team revised their numbers after Matthews pointed it out.)

Understandably, the Sanders campaign took issue with Thorpe's analysis. Policy director Warren Gunnels termed it a "total hatchet job."

WALGREENS SUSPENDS SOME TIES TO THERANOS — The lab-testing company's bad week keeps getting worse: Walgreens has asked Theranos to discontinue using its California lab, Pro's Darius Tahir reports. The news comes days after CMS reported finding unsafe practices in Theranos' labs.

** A message from PhRMA: Coverage does not necessarily mean access to care. More medicines are being excluded from coverage, deductibles and copays are going up and insurance companies are increasingly imposing other barriers to access. Know the 5 reasons you may not get the medicine you need. Learn more at AccessBetterCoverage.org - http://onphr.ma/23fm1LW **

COMMONWEALTH FUND ON 'UNTOLD STORY' OF WHITE MORTALITY — A new issue brief reviews the emerging research on middle-aged white mortality, concluding that substance abuse and suicides only partly explain the stalled or rising death rates for most ailments and diseases. And "for working-age whites — especially 45-to-54-year-olds — we are witnessing regression that has little precedent in the industrialized world over the past half-century," David Squires and David Blumenthal write.

CMS PROPOSES ACO CHANGES — After months of pushback over how CMS's ACO program pays providers, the agency's proposed rule would change how it sets financial targets for participants. A number of organizations had dropped out or threatened to drop out of the ACO program over the current methodology. "[Lots] of input to make measurement fairer," acting administrator Andy Slavitt said on Twitter.

— Industry reaction: Positive. Many providers are still digesting the technical details, but Pro's Erin Mershon caught up with one ACO representative who concluded the update is pretty promising. However, CMS's proposed changes would be slowly phased in — especially for providers who haven't yet joined the program, but plan to.

HEALTH AFFAIRS JOURNAL ARTICLE WITH 'MOST IMPACT' — Health Affairs editor Alan Weil this week issued his picks for the journal's top articles from 2015, and I pushed him to go further: Which paper will have the most impact? "I love all my children equally," he told me, "but I'd say the Medicare Advantage paper will lead to long-term impact," given policymakers' focus on MA payment rates and financing of Medicare, among other issues. That paper found that high-cost patients with complex care needs disproportionately switched out of Medicare Advantage and into traditional Medicare, raising questions over whether MA plans appropriately serve those patients.

I also asked Weil which issue needs more attention, and he highlighted a paper addressing dementia's growing impact on caregivers. "With growing rates of dementia and no sustainable system of financing long-term services and supports this is a topic that [needs] much more attention," he said.

NBA STARS, HEALTH EXPERTS TALK DISEASE PREVENTION — What Surgeon General Vivek Murthy, Kaiser Permanente CEO Bernard Tyson, and NBA legend Shane Battier all had in common on Thursday morning: They were at the Ronald Reagan Center for the inaugural Total Health Forum. According to Murthy, the event was an effort to highlight disparities and stress the joy of good health. "Healthy is not equated with fun and happiness," Murthy said. "We need to change that."

BEST STORY OF THE WEEK … was actually written by Atul Gawande seven years ago, in the New Yorker, on solitary confinement.

Why focus on 2009's "Hellhole" in January 2016? Because President Obama this week banned solitary confinement for juveniles in federal prisons, and Gawande's story is one of the most harrowing investigations of what life is like when confined in solitary.

As always, I take nominations for this weekly feature. Email me at ddiamond@politico.com or find me on Twitter at @ddiamond.

BOARD RECOMMENDS TWEAKS TO CDC’S OPIOID GUIDELINE — The board of scientific counselors to the agency’s National Center for Injury Prevention and Control have signed off on a workgroup's report suggesting relatively minor changes to CDC’s draft opioid guidelines, Pro's Brett Norman reports. But neither the workgroup report nor the board found consensus on a CDC recommendation for how long opioids should be prescribed for acute, non-traumatic pain, leaving the resolution of that controversial standard to the agency alone. It was the last step in the public vetting of draft guideline. Now the CDC settles in with the board’s input and more than 4,000 public comments to finalize the guideline and get it cleared for release. The workgroup report: http://1.usa.gov/1WPQifU

AROUND TOWN: SUPER SAYS GOODBYE — Nora Super, the executive director of the White House Conference on Aging, is moving on after 18 months. The conference issued its final report in December. "Nora has been offered a position that will allow her to continue working in the field of aging, so we are likely to remain in touch," HHS's Kathy Greenlee writes in a goodbye note.

ON TAP NEXT WEEK — Academy Health's two-day National Health Policy Conference kicks off on Monday, with a special focus on the election's effects for health policy.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by David Pittman and Darius Tahir

The Senate Aging Committee’s investigations on drug costs could affect the HELP Committee, Morning Consult reports: http://bit.ly/1nC9aDh

The dueling Florida health insurance exchanges — what's in a name? The Florida Times-Union has the story: http://bit.ly/1OTF5rA

So: are Gilead's pricing tactics … illegal? The Incidental Economist asks some sharp legal minds to ponder the question: http://bit.ly/1Sf4ksy

Apple tweaked its algorithms — and is no longer sending searchers to crisis pregnancy centers and adoption agencies, according to Fast Company:http://bit.ly/1nBbfiW

STAT News notes of the six drugs ever approved to treat Alzheimer’s, none slow its progression: http://bit.ly/1P19qlO

LIVE FROM BRUSSELS: SAFE HARBOR, EU BAILOUTS AND A BELGIAN ALE: Do you have access to in-depth reporting about big decisions shaping the EU? Pro’s Europe Brief is written through an American lens, and draws on POLITICO resources in both Brussels and D.C. to provide you with the updates and analysis you need to stay a step ahead of all things happening across the pond. Try it for free! Download a complimentary issue of Europe Brief today.

** A message from PhRMA: The medicine you need may not be covered by your health insurance plan or plans may require very high cost sharing. Insurers are increasingly making it hard to get the treatments you need to live a longer, healthier life by increasing deductibles and copays and creating other barriers to access. Here are 5 ways insurers may prevent you from accessing the medicine you need: (1) Prior authorization (2) Step therapy (3) Non-medical switching (4) High out-of-pocket costs (5) Not covered at all. When you’re choosing coverage be sure to look carefully at how — and if — the medicines you and your family need are covered. Learn more about these terms at AccessBetterCoverage.org - http://onphr.ma/23fm1LW **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **