When the L.A. Kings took home the Stanley Cup trophy in 2012 after defeating the New Jersey Devils, Jordan Nolan, Ojibwe, a center for the Kings, raised the silver cup over his head and celebrated with two very important people in his life: His mother, Sandra, and his father, Ted Nolan.

Ted, Jordan’s father, is the head coach of the Buffalo Sabres, and the first Native American to coach the team.

“I’ve been fortunate to do some things in life, but nothing compares to watching your son do it,” Ted told NHL.com about Jordan’s win back in 2012. “I never would have dreamed about this in my life. I was nervous. I was a parent. That was a great feeling, to watch your son go through something like this — being a parent versus being a coach and walking through it with him. It was a great experience and I’ll never forget it.”

RELATED: A Pair of Young Native Players Help the Los Angeles Kings to Their First Stanley Cup

Just days ago, on June 14, Jordan celebrated a Stanley Cup win for a second time, and his parents were also there to support him. Jordan told SaultStar.com that he loved having them there and that he was surprised his parents would be there with him a second time in less than three years.

“It's pretty cool to do it again,” Jordan told SaultStar.com. “I wasn't expecting this halfway through the season.”

Midway through the season, the Kings were 30-22-6 and just sixth in the Western Conference.

But, Jordan, 24, said that their team was still hopeful. “…We had a strong leadership core in the dressing room. We definitely believed we could win the Stanley Cup,” Nolan told SaultStar.com. And they did; defeating the New York Rangers in a 3-2 double overtime nail biter.

In 2012, Jordan helped the Kings win their first Cup after defeating the New Jersey Devils four games to two with a final score of 6-1 in Game Six. At the time, Ted was the coaching Latvia’s Men’s hockey team in the IIHF World Championships. But he was there to cheer for his son.

This year, however, post-season was challenging for Jordan who played in only three of the team’s playoff games. “Not dressing was tough,” he told SaultStar.com. “You'd like to have a bigger role. But when the team is playing well, it's hard to get back into the lineup.”

RELATED: Ojibwa Hockey Legend Ted Nolan Doesn't Like the R-Word

Well, perhaps Jordan will take solace in the fact that his name is now on two Stanley Cup trophies.