Joking about stereotypes keeps them where they belong: in the realm of fiction.

Lena Dunham speaks at the 2014 Winter Television Critics Association last January. (Photo: Frederick M. Brown, Getty Images)

Lena Dunham's satirical "Dog or Jewish Boyfriend?" quiz in The New Yorker sparked a hailstorm of controversy. She jokingly asks which statements refer to her dog or Jewish boyfriend. Mostly neutral whimsical statements are listed, including, "(o)ur anniversary is in two days and I'm not sure if he remembers" or "(h)e's really more of an ass man." But other statements like "(h)e doesn't tip" or "he is judgmental about the food" clearly play on Jewish stereotypes.

The Anti-Defamation League and others condemned her for perpetuating anti-Semitic stereotypes. Others, like Salon writer Anna Silmon, said the criticism was an overreaction since Dunham was clearly joking and is far from anti-Semitic.

But I'd take it a step beyond Dunham's supporters and argue that not only are her comments harmless but they actually benefit the fight to mock, lampoon and dismiss ridiculous and false stereotypes. It relegates bigotry and mean stereotypes to where it belongs: Humor columns in the world of fiction far, far away from the world of reality.

Stereotypes about Jews being cheap and over-mothered are obviously offensive and false, but there is value in such offensive humor because it helps to disarm and mock real anti-Semitism. The potency of the prejudice is undermined. Bigotry is something we should fictionalize and mock through humor.

And the fact that Dunham is a Jewish comedian and openly identifies as such puts this into the context of obviously self-deprecating humor. After all, Jeff Foxworthy and Larry the Cable Guy are given a pass to promote stereotypes about country people and rednecks. They don't have a license to promote offensive black stereotypes like black comedians Dave Chappelle or Chris Rock do.

Sociology professor Cynthia Merriwether-DeVries explains the value of minority comics playing on minority stereotypes: "I know what the people in power say about my community and I'll say it myself ... it destabilizes their power. It takes away their ability to use that stereotype against me."

Also, Dunham's piece was clearly intended to be fictional. The "Shouts & Murmurs" section of The New Yorker isn't where you find hard-hitting or thoughtful policy pieces. The submission guidelines explicitly require submissions that "are humorous fiction," not "first-person essays."

Imagine if all racism and bigotry were expressed in satirical papers like The Onion, or satirical news columns like The New Yorker's The Borowitz Report? People would start to recognize expressions of bigotry and racism for what it is: laughable and ridiculous.

Further, Dunham joking about stereotypes helped spur an open conversations that is necessary to combat and dispel real misconceptions and bigoted stereotypes. These public conversations need to happen. Satire can help bring these otherwise private hush-hush conversations to the public, where it won't be immune from necessary scrutiny and scorn.

Regardless of Dunham's intentions to mock anti-Semitic stereotypes or give them a kernel of legitimacy, I thank her for sparking a vital conversation, and ultimately relegating pernicious stereotypes to the world of humorous fiction.

Eliyahu Federman is an executive at an e-commerce company. He writes on religion, culture and law. Follow him on twitter @EliFederman.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the Opinion front page.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1bHgQOc