TOP STORIES

Roche has acquired in vitro diagnostics group GeneWEAVE BioSciences in a $425 million deal. It uses “smarticles technology” — molecular diagnostics that identify multidrug-resistant organisms and assess antibiotic susceptibility from clinical samples. — PharmaTimes

LIFE SCIENCES

Researchers have found that schizophrenia is linked with significant changes in connections between the thalamus and the frontal cortex. The identified markers are visible before schizophrenia fully develops, which indicates that the connection changes aren’t developed as a result of the disease or medications, but are a precursor. — Drugs.com

Liquid biopsy player Biocept announced that its teaming up with the University of California, Irvine, to evaluate blood-based biomarkers in patients with metastatic cancers. — Fierce Diagnostics

Which one is more powerful: the FDA or the First Amendment? — The Incidental Economist blog

PAYERS-PROVIDERS

HHS announced that it will spend $169 million to open 266 new health center sites across the nation with funding from the Affordable Care Act.

The new health centers will be located in 46 states, Washington, D.C., and Puerto Rico and are projected to increase access to healthcare services for more than 1.2 million patients. The investment in the centers will add to the more than 700 new health centers that have opened as a result of the ACA, according to HHS. — Becker’s Hospital CFO

TECH

Glucose monitor device maker Senseonics raised $10 million implanted smartphone-connected sensor.

Senseonics’ pill-like sensor is entirely implanted in the user’s upper arm so that it can continuously monitor the user’s glucose levels. The device is meant to last at least 90 days before it needs to be replaced. The sensor sends data to a transmitter that a users wears on their upper arm as well. When on the user’s upper arm, the transmitter can take readings from the implanted sensor and send them to a companion smartphone app. — MobiHealth News

POLITICS

A New England Journal of Medicine editorial responds to the Republican-driven controversy over Planned Parenthood and fetal tissue research. — New England Journal of Medicine

A National Institutes of Health-funded study involving researchers at Case Western Reserve University found they could detect fast-growing cancerous tumors using an MRI and a special contrast solution.

“We showed with this technique that we can detect very tiny tumors of just a few hundred cells,” Zheng-Rong Lu, who led the study, said. The technique could “potentially can make a big impact on clinical practice and also management of cancer.” — The Hill

A LITTLE BIT EXTRA

LG Display continues to be the leading pioneer in flexible technology, and it just debuted its new flexible TV panel at an event in Korea. Pretty cool stuff.

— IFLScience

Photo: Roche