Fox News’ Megyn Kelly invited Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.) to comment on Obamacare architect Jonathan Gruber’s remarks about the “stupid” American people that have been captured in two separate videos from last year.

According to video that surfaced last week, Gruber said in October 2013 that Obama was able to ram the Affordable Care Act into law because of its “lack of transparency” and the “stupidity of the American voter.”

“I can’t get past the irony to even get to the arrogance,” Gowdy said of Gruber’s past comments. “The most transparent administration since the continent shifted had to rely on artifice and deception to pass its signature piece of legislation. You can’t make that up.”

Megyn Kelly called the videos — one of which was newly discovered yesterday — the “smoking gun piece of evidence” showing that individuals behind Obamacare’s construction used dishonesty to craft the law.

“It’s really serious in a participatory democracy when you tell your fellow citizens that you are either not smart enough to understand the truth or we can’t tell you the truth because you wouldn’t go along with it,” explained Gowdy. “Well if you wouldn’t go along with it, maybe you shouldn’t pass the law.”

The South Carolina Republican then issued some solid advice for Gruber, who is a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

“Put down the cognac and the lost writings of J.D. Salinger,” said Gowdy. “If you want to see how stupid our fellow citizens are, take a look at last Tuesday night because they rejected you, this bill and this administration.”

Gowdy also called on Obama to “repudiate” Gruber for insulting the American people by calling them stupid.

“I would love for the president … to repudiate what this guy [said],” explained Gowdy. “I mean, it’s an insult. He insulted the very people, frankly, who put the president in office twice. So I would love to hear somebody other than Josh Earnest apologize for what this professor said.”

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com