More than $142 million in funding could be cut from Central Florida hospitals next year if the state and federal government don't agree to extend a program that pays for the care of low-income and uninsured patients.

Statewide, hospitals could lose $2.2 billion if the Low Income Pool program, or LIP, is not extended before it expires June 30, potentially putting a significant hole in the state budget.

Gov. Rick Scott's $77 billion budget recommendation to lawmakers last month included the funding.

Florida Hospital stands to lose the most in the Orlando area, with nearly $64.9 million that could be cut, according to the Safety Net Hospital Alliance of Florida, an advocacy group for 14 hospitals in the state. Orlando Health could see a cut of nearly $40 million.

LIP money supplements hospital care through Medicaid for low-income and uninsured patients but also helps reimburse hospitals beyond regular Medicaid rates, said Tony Carvalho, president of the Safety Net alliance. The program is funded through county tax revenues funneled to the state and federal matching funds totaling $1.3 billion.

The consequences of such significant cuts could be dire for hospitals, Carvalho said.

Programs that don't make money, such as primary-care clinics, trauma centers and graduate medical-education programs, could be targeted for severe reductions by some hospitals.

"These are things that you don't have to have to be a hospital, but they're very significant to the community," Carvalho said, noting he couldn't say how specific hospitals would respond to cuts.

Eliot Fishman, a federaldirector for Medicare and Medicaid Services, told a health-care symposium in Orlando this week that the LIP program would not continue "in its current form."

The comment was not a surprise to Mike Griffin, Florida Hospital vice president of public affairs.

"What Fishman said on Tuesday has basically been their position for more than a year," Griffin said.

A spokeswoman with Orlando Health would not comment.

A federal official Friday reiterated that the program wouldn't be extended in its current form while expressing a willingness to work with Florida to ensure access to health care for those affected by the funding. But the official would not explicitly say what changes are being sought.

The lack of a LIP extension could put the state budget in a bind. Lawmakers are constitutionally obligated to pass a balanced budget each year. The 60-day legislative session starts March 3, leaving little time before budget drafting starts in earnest for an agreement to be reached.

State legislative leaders, however, are not panicking. The same program was set to expire last year, but the federal government granted an extension of LIP to Florida for one year.

Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, said he wants to be flexible in crafting the budget.

"In the past, we have looked at including LIP, contingent on federal approval, so that may be an option. We may also look at a way to phase in a new policy," Gardiner said.

Scott's administration is still hopeful an agreement can be reached, noting that talks between the state Agency for Health Care Administration and the federal Health and Human Services Department are ongoing.

"AHCA is currently working with HHS on ways to continue this important program," Scott spokeswoman Jackie Schutz said.

The issue arises as Florida continues to refuse to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. Scott, a staunch opponent of the law, shocked political observers in 2013 by advocating that the state expand Medicaid and accept the federal payments.

Under the law, Florida would receive full payments from the federal government for three years before phasing down to 90 percent payments. All told, the cost would be more than $52 billion in federal money over 10 years.

But Republican Florida House members didn't go along, and Democrats complained Scott didn't push hard for Medicaid expansion.

Democrats are hoping that this year the 1 million people who would be covered under Medicaid expansion will get coverage.

House Republicans, though, don't appear to be budging. House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, told reporters last month he doesn't plan on doing anything with Medicaid expansion this year.

Griffin said the solution to the problem of how to pay for the cost of health care for low-income and uninsured patients is to expand Medicaid.

"It's not a silver bullet, but it's a bronze bullet. It solves a lot of problems," Griffin said.

grohrer@orlandosentinel.com or 850-222-5564