POLITICO Florida Playbook: Scott’s admin scrubbed press release clearing Planned Parenthood; high-energy Jeb v. Trump; Biden’s mini-Miami tour; Murphy gives back fraudsters contribs

By Marc Caputo (mcaputo@politico.com; @MarcACaputo) with Kristen East (keast@politico.com; @kristenicoleast)

It’s mid-week, Florida Playbookers, just three more days and a bunch of fundraisers and stump speeches to go until the Labor Day weekend -- and the first real dose of college football. But before the play-calling on the gridiron starts, check out the games in Gov. Scott’s administration.

Story Continued Below

INSIDE THE SCOTT ADMINISTRATION SPIN MACHINE -- “Emails: Scott’s office scrubbed release that cleared Planned Parenthood,” by POLITICO’s Christine Sexton: Gov. Rick Scott’s office scrubbed a press release written by his own regulators that found there was no “mishandling of fetal remains” at clinics run by Planned Parenthood and, at the same time, said it would refer doctors who worked at those clinics to the state Board of Medicine for possible disciplinary action. Amid an outcry over a series of videos filmed at Planned Parenthood clinics outside Florida, Scott ordered health care regulators to inspect 16 Florida clinics run by the organization. The regulators reported that three clinics performed unlicensed abortions and that one did not follow its own guidelines for disposing of fetal remains. http://politi.co/1Ex2NYP

HECKUVA JOB, O’CONNELL -- “Scott: Resigning Lottery secretary did a ‘good job’,” by POLITICO’s Matt Dixon: Gov. Rick Scott ignored questions Tuesday about Florida Lottery Secretary Cynthia O’Connell, who isresigningafterreportsabout missed work and excessive travel bills. “Cynthia did a good job,” Scott said after a Cabinet meeting in St. Augustine. “We had record sales, which means we increased the amount of dollars to give to education.” http://politi.co/1L19eQY

PRISON SECRECY – “Miami Herald sues Florida corrections department over public records,” by The Miami Herald’s Julie Brown: “The Miami Herald has filed a lawsuit against the Florida Department of Corrections, alleging that the agency has violated the state’s open record laws by withholding information about suspicious deaths and possible sexual and physical assaults of inmates at the hands of corrections officers in the state prison system. For more than a year, the Herald has been examining cases of physical, mental and sexual abuse of inmates, as well as a series of inmate deaths that have happened in state prisons that have had a history of violence. In some cases, the prison system failed to contact outside law enforcement agencies, allowing its own staff to conduct the investigations. In some cases, both inmates and DOC investigators have alleged the agency systemically covers up corruption and wrongdoing.” http://bit.ly/1KpGnLN

COÑO! -- “Bush rips Trump in Spanish and English,” by POLITICO’s Marc Caputo: “He attacks me every day — he personalizes everything,” Bush said to a Spanish-language reporter, in a sign that Trump’s criticisms of his vigor are getting to the former Florida governor. “If you’re not totally in agreement with him, you’re an ‘idiot,’ you’re ‘stupid,’ you have ‘low energy,’ blah, blah, blah. That’s what he does.”…

Earlier in the day, Bush’s campaign released a web-ad video mash-up of Trump over the years praising universal health care and Hillary Clinton, and saying at one point that he’s more of a Democrat. The ad and Bush’s aggressive posture at the press conference Tuesday are part of a strategy to help make the presidential contest a two-man race with Trump. Bush’s effort has yet to pay dividends. He has fallen in Republican polls of the nation, Iowa and New Hampshire while Dr. Ben Carson, a nonpolitician like Trump, has risen to the No. 2 slot nationally and in Iowa. A third nonpolitician in the Republican field, Carly Fiorina, is also rising.

In a national Republican voter survey Monday from Public Policy Polling, the three nonpoliticians were beating the politicians 52-45 percent, with 3 percent undecided. In PPP’s survey last week of New Hampshire, the nonpoliticians led 51-45 percent, with 4 percent undecided. And in a Monday Iowa poll from Monmouth University, it was 56-39 percent, with 5 percent undecided. http://politi.co/1JKmHM1

-- @PatriciaMazzei: “Jeb Bush on Donald Trump: ‘El hombre no es conservador.’” http://hrld.us/1N0Pkdp

-- “Jeb Bush: The man who killed Trump’s casino dreams,” by CNN’s Jeremy Diamond: “Donald Trump openly boasts that he donates to politicians so he can exact favors from them after they reach office. He did so for Jeb Bush in 1998, holding a high-dollar fundraiser for the gubernatorial candidate in Trump Tower and shelling out $50,000 to the Florida Republican Party. But when Bush took office in 1999, Trump didn’t get the political help he needed to make his casino dreams a reality in the Sunshine State. Instead, Bush maintained his hardline stance against gambling in the state, delivering a death blow to Trump’s hopes of building out a multi-million dollar casino endeavor with the Seminole Tribe of Florida and prompting him to abandon those plans.” http://cnn.it/1Q7MIu0

ANCHOR BABY QUESTIONS? AWAY! -- “Jeb Bush’s testy ‘anchor babies’ exchange,” by POLITICO’s Marc Caputo: Jeb Bush and his campaign say they're willing to talk about Donald Trump, to a point. During a press availability Monday, the former Florida governor indicated he would “love” to change the subject. But his love quickly faded when asked about his take on the term “anchor babies.” Here’s an exchange between Bush and POLITICO.

Question: “When you headed the Hispanic Leadership Network in 2013, you guys told people not to use the phrase ‘anchor baby,’ and now you say it’s not offensive and I was wondering …”

Bush: “It’s been used a long time. I wasn’t aware of that memo. I was a volunteer, co-chairman. Look, we can be politically correct about these things. Here’s my record: I think that birthright citizenship is embedded in the Constitution of the United States. I’ve consistently said that. So what’s your question?" http://politi.co/1NLfp1t

JEB V. BDB -- “Jeb Bush knocks de Blasio again, this time on charters,” by POLITICO’s Eliza Shapiro: Republican presidential candidate and former Florida governor Jeb Bush criticized Mayor Bill de Blasio for the second time in as many weeks on Tuesday, citing the New York City mayor’s record on charter schools. “[Hillary] Clinton ally Bill de Blasio has succeeded in transforming the city into a downright hostile environment for charter schools, where more than 43,000 students now remain on waiting lists for them,” Bush wrote in an op-ed about parent choice posted on TownHall.com. http://politi.co/1NVxBEM

TESTING WARS – “School leaders insist test scores are not accurate,” by POLITICO’s Jessica Bakeman: “School district superintendents throughout Florida are challenging the Scott administration's interpretation of a third-party report on Tuesday that analyzed the results of new state exams. As far as the superintendents are concerned, the results aren’t accurate and shouldn’t be used to grade students or evaluate teachers and schools, despite the Department of Education’s assertions otherwise. The superintendents are lobbying the state to exclude the test scores as a factor in assigning school grades, which are on an ‘A’ to ‘F’ scale, for at least this year, and some are also pushing to hold teachers harmless from the test scores. The report, which was ordered by Gov. Rick Scott and the Legislature and performed by Alpine Testing Solutions and edCount LLC under a $594,000 contract, contains specific criticisms of the exams, which the superintendents argue support their conclusions, not the department’s.” http://politi.co/1LSJpZ4

--Earlier on Tuesday, education commissioner Pam Stewarttouted the report's overall conclusion that the tests' results were valid in aggregate and could be used to evaluate teachers and grade schools. “I believe it is in the best interest of our students that we move forward based on the results of this year’s FSA, and I am pleased that the report supports that,” she said. “Now all Floridians can share my confidence in the FSA.” More, from Bakeman: http://politi.co/1O5XtMc

-- Here's the report: http://bit.ly/1NUYwRc

BIDEN TIME -- Vice President Joe Biden speaks today at Miami Dade College about “the importance of helping Americans go to college and the critical role that partnerships between colleges like MDC and employers play in helping Americans obtain the skills they need to succeed in the workforce, especially in the STEM areas,” a press release says. If this sounds campaign-y to you, well, you’re not alone. Biden then hits up a 6:30 p.m. Democratic senatorial fundraiser at the home of donor Steve Bittel. And Sen. Ted Cruz has his first Florida fundraiser at one of the Falic family homes in Bal Harbour this evening. Jeb held a Friday fundraiser and a Tuesday event in Miami.

NOT MEDICAL MARIJUANA PUSH-- “Group seeks to legalize marijuana in Florida,” by Orlando Sentinel’s Scott Powers: “Petitions are hitting the streets soon for a new proposed constitutional amendment that would fully legalize marijuana use, possession and cultivation by adults in Florida. A political action committee called Floridians For Freedom, associated with a longtime marijuana advocacy group called the Florida Cannabis Action Network, announced Tuesday it has gotten state approval to begin seeking signatures to get their measure on the November, 2016, ballot. The measure is distinct from another constitutional drive, run by United For Care and led by Orlando lawyer John Morgan, because Morgan's group wants to legalize marijuana for medical purposes only, while Floridians For Freedom wants it legalized for all uses.” http://bit.ly/1VuHLhX

MEDICAL MARIJUANA CHANGE -- “Congress quietly ends federal government’s ban on medical marijuana,” by The LA Times’ Evan Halper: “The bill’s passage over the weekend marks the first time Congress has approved nationally significant legislation backed by legalization advocates. It brings almost to a close two decades of tension between the states and Washington over medical use of marijuana. Under the provision, states where medical pot is legal would no longer need to worry about federal drug agents raiding retail operations. Agents would be prohibited from doing so.” http://lat.ms/1GLGI3V

CABINET UPDATE -- “Scott, cabinet update land buy list as environmental fight looms,” by POLITICO’s Matt Dixon:http://politi.co/1hvEShM

LATVALA IN A LATHER -- “Jack Latvala: How dare anyone question my GOP loyalty,” by The Tampa Bay Times’ Adam C. Smith: “State Sen. Joe Negron may have declared victory in his campaign for Florida Senate president, but … Sen. Jack Latvala … is still campaigning for the job. And with Negron supporters spreading the word that Latvala could even strike a deal with Democrats to win the post, the Pinellas Republican noted that he has been working to elect Republicans for 46 years. ‘I love my Republican party,’ he told the crowd at the Carillon Hilton. ‘I have never been anything but a Republican.’ That was a veiled swipe at Negron, who used to be Martin County Democratic Chairman and once ran unsuccessfully for the Florida House as a Democrat.” http://bit.ly/1EwAFVT

DEPT. OF CORRECTIONS – Yesterday’s story on this topic, and the Florida Playbook mention of it, incorrectly described Senate Republican leader Bill Galvano as neutral in the race. He backs Negron. (story here http://politi.co/1VtquFR). Separately, I learned yesterday that possible CD-6 candidate Brandon Patty is 33. His age was wrong in the Friday Florida Playbook.

RUBIO: ABOLISH DOE -- “In Nevada, Marco Rubio says U.S. education department is unnecessary,” by AP: “What starts out as a suggestion ends up being, ‘If you want money from us, you must to do it this way,’ and you will end up with a version of a national school board," Rubio said. “We don’t need a national school board.” http://bit.ly/1JAb4u5

-- “US presidential hopeful Marco Rubio to visit Puerto Rico,” by AP’s Danica Coto: http://apne.ws/1O6sSy5 (Note: Florida Playbook told you first, Friday http://politi.co/1hSt1uY)

--RUBIO’S PR FUNDRAISER hosts: Bertica Cabrera Morris, Maita Carbonell, Jorge Del Río, José Fuentes, Art Garffer, José R. Izquierdo Ii, Esteban A. López-Rosado, Onix Maldonado, Francisco “Paco” Martínez, and Elías Sánchez. Invite is here: http://politi.co/1L2sDRt

GOP AG WANNABES? -- “Meet the Republicans eyeing Fla attorney general’s office,” by The Tampa Bay Times’ Steve Bousquet: “Among them: State Rep. Richard Corcoran of Wesley Chapel; state Sen. Joe Negron of Stuart; State Sen. Rob Bradley of Orange Park; state Rep. Dana Young of Tampa; U.S. Rep. Tom Rooney of Okeechobee. We've also heard Buzz about state Rep. Matt Gaetz of Fort Walton Beach, but he tells us he's focucused on state senate in 2016 -- and also that he's long viewed the attorney general job as the best public office in Florida.” http://bit.ly/1Ul8kcj

HEAD -- “Bilirakis backs Jolly Senate bid,” by Florida Political Blog: http://bit.ly/1JwvsKq

--“Joe Biden has strong Florida ties and support, but few see plausible path to presidency,” By The Tampa Bay Times' Adam C. Smith and The Miami Herald’s Patricia Mazzei: http://bit.ly/1UlkbXY

E-SNARK -- “Hillary Belittles Little Havana,” by Capitol Hill Cubans: “As one of her recently-released emails reveals, just a few years back, Hillary was poking fun at the Cuban-American community and belittling Little Havana. The email exchange was from her tenure as Secretary of State, when she was using a private home server to discuss official business with then-Assistant Secretary for Legislative Affairs, Richard Verma … about a ‘hold’ placed by then-U.S. Senator George LeMieux (R-FL) on President Obama’s nominee to be Ambassador to Brazil, Tom Shannon.

“What took them so long [to lift the hold]? Did you promise your first born?” Clinton writes.

Verma’s reply: “Yes, I sold my soul to George Lemieux today. I am not proud of it.”

Clinton: “Does this mean you have to go to Cuba and arrest Castro or just shovel more $ into Little Havana?” http://bit.ly/1LSEG9O

-- “Clinton emails show interest in Florida,” by The Tampa Bay Times’ Alex Leary: http://bit.ly/1EAqCze

--“St. Petersburg pushes for Cuban consulate,” by The Tampa Bay Times’ Charlie Frago: http://bit.ly/1LJ1aHq

SOBEL’S CHOICE -- “Will Senator Eleanor Sobel run for Hollywood mayor?” by Miami Herald’s Amy Sherman: “Sobel says she will delay a decision about whether to run until March” http://bit.ly/1NV7dLp

NATION, WE CAN HEAL -- “Hulk Hogan seeks forgiveness, says he’s not a racist,” by The Tampa Tribune: “A month after Hulk Hogan was fired by World Wrestling Entertainment following the leak of a racist rant from a video tape in 2006, he asked his fans for forgiveness today while attributing the offensive word heard on video to growing up in a ‘rough’ South Tampa neighborhood.” http://bit.ly/1Iz0Vd8

-- “Man shot by deputy at WWE center remains in hospital,” by AP’s Kyle Hightower: “A man shot by a sheriff's deputy while stalking a female wrestler outside a World Wrestling Entertainment training facility in central Florida remains hospitalized, authorities said Tuesday. Armando Montalvo, 29, was in critical but stable condition at an Orlando hospital, the Orange County's Sheriff's Office said.” http://apne.ws/1Q788Ym

AFFORDABLE CARE ACT? -- “Florida Healthy Kids blames Obamacare for price increases,” by AP’s Kelli Kennedy: “Florida Healthy Kids Corporation is warning …the increases will affect the families of the nearly 36,000 children in the full-pay program. That's 19 percent of the organization's 185,000 enrollees. Chief Executive Officer Rebecca Matthews said rates have increased significantly since the Affordable Care Act, and many insurance companies canceled coverage.” http://apne.ws/1Xda6v5

FRAUD BUST -- “Miami developers, contractor plead guilty in $36 million affordable-housing scam,” by Miami Herald’s Jay Weaver: “The federal prosecution of an elaborate affordable-housing racket that cost taxpayers $36 million has reached a critical turning point this week: Four prominent Miami developers and a major Fort Lauderdale contractor are pleading guilty to theft of government funds. On Monday, Michael Cox and Gonzalo DeRamon, co-founders of the Biscayne Housing Group, consummated plea deals in Miami federal court. They now stand convicted of conspiring with the top two principals of the Carlisle Development Group — once the state’s biggest affordable housing developer — as well as two South Florida contractors who already pleaded guilty … On Friday, Matthew Greer, 37, the onetime chief executive officer of Miami-based Carlisle, and the company’s co-founder, Lloyd Boggio, 69, are planning to plead guilty to two conspiracy offenses, according to court records. They’re accused of accepting more than $26 million in unlawful.” http://hrld.us/1Vtclse

--MURPHY’S LAW – Whenever there’s a major fraud bust in Florida, it’s a good bet some of that money wound up in a campaign. And we have a winner: Rep. Patrick Murphy, Senate candidate and son of a builder, who collected $6,000 from Boggio from 2011-2014, $250 from Cox in 2012; and $500 from Greer in 2011. Solution: donate an equivalent amount to charity as a giveback, the campaign said in a statement: “We decided to donate the contributions to a charity that focuses on affordable housing. That is the right thing to do.” As the Murphy campaign was announcing the give-back, Grayson’s campaign was demanding the congressman return “the dirty money.”

DISNEY-DUBAI? -- “Flights start between Orlando and Dubai,” by AP: “The first nonstop flight from Dubai by Emirates Airlines arrives Tuesday at Orlando International Airport. The flight is aboard the world's largest passenger plane, the A-380.” http://apne.ws/1L2e9kv

DIRTY FIFA -- “Aaron Davidson’s stunning soccer bribery case could clean up FIFA’s corruption,” by Miami New Times’ Tim Elfrink: http://bit.ly/1JA9PLz

JUDICIAL SHADE IN SOLAR FIGHT --“Solar choice group, electric companies spar at Florida Supreme Court,” by POLITICO’s Daniel Ducassi:Attorneys for and against a proposed constitutional amendment to limit regulations on selling solar power were met with skepticism by Florida Supreme Court justices Tuesday morning. The amendment would give homeowners and businesses the ability to sell electric power on the same (or neighboring) property without falling under Public Service Commission regulation. http://politi.co/1EzVqQS

BECAUSE FLORIDA – “Racial Slur Burned Into Florida Man’s Front Lawn,” by The Huffington Post: “A man in Palm Bay, Florida, says his family feels threatened after vandals used a chemical to burn the racial slur n***** into his front lawn. Courtney Gordon told WESH-TV that someone likely used weed killer to plaster the hateful word on his lawn, which faces the street. Now everyone can see the 3-foot letters.” http://huff.to/1EwC9PH

BECAUSE FLORI-DUH -- “Authorities remove dead body from vent in Riviera gas station,” by Palm Beach Post: “Police removed the body of a dead man through the inside of the Marathon gas station that police believe he was trying to break into. Riviera Beach Police, with the assistance of West Palm Beach Fire Rescue, spent time this morning assessing the best way to extract the body, lodged feet first in the air vent, police spokeswoman Rose Ann Brown said. They first attempted to use a crane from the roof to remove the body, but appeared to eventually extract him from inside the gas station. His body was carried out in a body bag around 11:30 a.m., after more than five hours.” http://pbpo.st/1Uk6f0e