Health Coaches

Health coaches are trusted advisors, motivators, and lifestyle experts available on-site to help employees in areas such as tobacco cessation, weight and stress management, nutrition, and fitness. They also play a major role in condition management and educate and manage at-risk employees. With the expertise of motivational interviewing, coaches can help employees develop a long-term strategy with health goals, hold them accountable, and monitor progress. All health coaches receive specialized training and accredited certification. With health coaching, members benefit from continuous access to a health professional, minimizing doctor's visits and associated costs.

Registered Dietitians

Food is an essential part of life, and a balanced diet is at the core of health and well-being. While registered dietitians are informed with physical aspects of food, they also understand personal and emotional attachments. On-site dietitians can provide individualized solutions to barriers for eating healthy. They also provide guidance on weight-management and diabetes-condition support. The experts at Viverae know that a much higher level of accountability is present when someone is onsite because deeper levels of relationships and trust are built.

"We know that each client's culture is unique, which drives our commitment to personalized service. Our goal is to arm our clients with the tools they need to significantly impact their program, regardless of their size or experience," said Mike Lamb, president and chief executive officer at Viverae. "As a tenured leader in the market, we have the ability to attract top talent and supply that mobilization to our clients."

Companies that want to excel in offering unique wellness programs or need additional support will benefit from adding human expertise. The experts at Viverae believe that these professional services present opportunities to drive engagement and mitigate costs. Their research shows that employees who have access to personalized services will make better health decisions over time.

About Viverae

Dallas-based Viverae is a leader in innovative workplace wellness technology, supporting and empowering members on their journey to better health and well-being. Its secure, powerful and proprietary application MyViverae® manages member health data, activity, incentives, and third-party insurance claims to personalize wellness programs and create an engaging experience. With more than 350 clients and nearly 1 million members in a variety of industries across the country, its wellness programs are designed to create a culture of health while managing healthcare costs.

Viverae's health management programs are compliant with Affordable Care Act requirements and applicable law, and National Committee for Quality Assurance and national health advocacy group standards.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150901/262843LOGO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/viverae-connects-employers-to-wellness-experts-to-drive-ultimate-engagement-with-personalized-support-300257097.html

SOURCE Viverae