At each conference, there will be in-depth discussions and strategy sessions on the Affordable Care Act, consumerism, employee education, the high-deductible health plan uprising and more

Businessolver, a leading benefits administration technology company, today announced its two-day Vision 20/16 User Conferences taking place in three cities across the nation. The conferences will bring together like-minded human resources professionals, thought leaders and the Businessolver community to discuss some of the most difficult challenges facing the benefits industry today.

At each conference, there will be in-depth discussions and strategy sessions on the Affordable Care Act, consumerism, employee education, the high-deductible health plan uprising and more. Attendees will also get an inside look at Businessolver's future vision including the Business and Product Roadmap, along with an exclusive opportunity to experience Businessolver's online benefits enrollment software, Benefitsolver, and its new user interface design before its launch later this year.

Locations and dates for the Vision 20/16 User Conferences include:



April 4-5, 2016 - Four Seasons Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada

May 17-18, 2016 - Hotel Sofitel, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

June 29-30, 2016 - Hotel Allegro, Chicago, Illinois

"We are excited to announce our second year of user conferences," said Businessolver President and CEO Jon Shanahan. "We look forward to sharing our vision with attendees and showing them first-hand how Businessolver is changing the benefits administration landscape."

The Vision 20/16 Users Conferences are sponsored by GuideSpark, Discovery Benefits, Voya Financial, Healthcare Blue Book, ARAG, Trans America Employee Benefits, Allstate and The Hartford.

To learn more about Vision 20/16, visit: Vision 20/16

# # #

About Businessolver: Since 1998 Businessolver has delivered market-changing benefits administration technology supported by an intrinsic responsiveness to client needs. It creates client programs that maximize benefit program investment, minimize risk exposure, and engage employees with easy-to-use solutions and communication tools to assist them in making wise and cost-efficient benefit selections. Founded and developed by HR professionals, Businessolver's unwavering service-oriented culture and secure SaaS platform provides measurable success in its mission to provide complete client delight.

For more information, please contact:

Sam Randall

Email: sam.randall(at)edelman(dot)com

Phone: 312-240-2771