FORT LEE — FORT LEE — The bitter wind chill swirling above the Hudson River Tuesday was nothing compared to the cold shoulder Fort Lee residents got from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey the second week of September, when the closing of local access lanes to the George Washington Bridge froze borough traffic for hours each rush hour.

So when Robert Tessaro heard about a gathering near the bridge to call for Gov. Chris Christie’s resignation if it turns out he had a hand in the lane closures, Tessaro knew he had to brave the freezing temperatures to join in the protest.

“We want the answer to why this happened, and if the governor was involved, he should resign,” said Tessaro, 37, a Fort Lee resident and small business owner, who was among the countless motorists stuck in traffic during the closures.

"The bridge is a part of Fort Lee, it's a part of who we are. But it was used as a weapon against us," said Tessaro. "A lot of my friends and family couldn't get to work. They couldn't get to school."

Investigators are looking into whether the closures were politically motivated -- in retaliation for the Fort Lee mayor's failure to endorse Christie for re-election or for someone else's actions -- or were imposed for financial or other inappropriate reasons.

Participants in the noon news conference gathered on a bluff overlooking the bridge in Fort Lee, where borough streets were clogged for hours during the morning and evenng rush hours the week of Sept. 9-13, when two out of three local access lanes were ordered diverted to the bridge’s main approach by a Christie-backed official at the Port Authority.

The group that organized the event, a Democratic-leaning political action committee known as the Progressive Change Campaign Committee, created a website: ChristieResign.com where they said 13,000 people had signed an online petition calling for the Republican governor's resignation if it’s revealed that he knew about the closures ahead of time. The New Jersey Working Families Alliance, a labor, environmental and community group, also took part in the event.



North Bergen resident Alex Howard, who was bundled up against the bitter chill during the event at Fort Lee Historic Park, said he and his wife, Eliza, were an hour late for a doctor’s appointment in Englewood Cliffs on the second day of the closures.

Howard, a 67-year-old systems analyst and a registered Democrat, said he was skeptical of the governor’s statements since the scandal arose.

“He said he fired bridget Kelly without asking her any questions,” said Howard, referring to Christie’s former deputy chief of staff, who was implicated in the closures . “But then, he says he wants to know what happened. Excuse me? It doesn’t make sense.”

Christie told reporters he fired Kelly on Jan. 9, one day after an email publicly surfaced in which she told the former Port Authority official who gave the closure orders, David Wildstein, "Time for some traffic problems in Fort Lee." Wildstein, who resigned in December, sent an immediate, two-word reply to Kelly's Aug. 13 email: "Got it."

During a news conference when he announced that he had fired Kelly and cut ties with his two-time campaign manager, Bill Stepien, who was also implicated in the closures, Christie apologized for the traffic nightmare and said learning that such trusted aides had hid the closure scheme from him was the biggest disappointment of his political career. Christie has vowed to cooperate with all "appropriate" investigations.

On Monday, a joint committee of the state Senate and Assembly issued another round of subpoenas involving the closures, while the U.S. Attorney's office in Newark and the Port Authority inspector generals' office also continue to probe the matter.

Participants Robert Duffey, a spokesman for the Working Families Alliance, said that even if Christie did not know about the closures ahead of time, the governor had established "a culture" of bullying by his administration.

Another Fort Lee resident, 55-yera-old Valerie Howard-Fadul, said she was stuck in Fort Lee traffic for more than five hours after coming home from an afternoon appointment with her eye doctor in Manhattan during the evening rush hour on the second day of the lane closures. Fadul did not try to hide her conviction that Christie was behind them

"He paralyzed our town, he paralyzed the people here," she said. "This is a total abuse of power."

RELATED COVERAGE

• Timeline of Port Authority's George Washington Bridge controversy

• Complete coverage of bridge scandal