WASHINGTON — For all you regular, right-thinking, reasonable Republicans out there, Barack Obama brought a message to Dallas last week: He feels your pain and he’s here to help.

The GOP “has become captive I think to a fairly extreme faction that thinks compromise is a dirty word,” the president said during his visit Wednesday, speaking to a group unlikely to exert much influence over the direction of the Republican Party: high-dollar Democratic donors.

“We’ve got to liberate those reality-based Republicans from some of the extreme impulses in that party,” he said. “We could name for you a whole bunch of Republicans who are good and decent people who are as frustrated as we are in some ways about what’s happened to their party.”

In Obama’s diagnosis, Sen. Ted Cruz, the tea party Texan who brought the government to a standstill over Obamacare funding, is both symptom and cause of what ails the other party. Not that he dared utter Cruz’s name on Lone Star soil, at least within earshot of reporters.

“There’s a group that — and a few of them are from Texas, I’ve got to admit — who just aren’t willing to do the hard work and the compromise necessary to move the country forward,” Obama said, drawing knowing laughter from the Democratic high rollers at the home of Peter and Lisa Kraus.

The powerhouse fundraisers hosted about 100 donors to the party’s Senate campaign arm. Democrats aren’t making a play as Sen. John Cornyn faces re-election next year. So the $15,000 per person collected at that reception and afterward, at a dinner hosted by lawyer Russell Budd, will go out of state, to help protect the party’s 55-45 majority.

Lisa Kraus, introducing the president, referred to Cruz as part of a “reckless” band of lawmakers who led a budget showdown meant to defund Obamacare.

“I want to personally thank you for standing up to this faction and for saying. ‘No you can’t. No you can’t shut down the government because you don’t like a law,’” she said.

Obama echoed the view.

“The shutdown cost this country money. It was bad for business. It was bad for families,” he said. The threat of a federal debt default was even worse, and a very real possibility. Yet “according to at least one senator from Texas,” he said — again referring to Cruz — the shutdown was a “necessity.”

“That’s a radical position. … It’s a destructive position,” Obama said.

Having mocked the president’s trip as a “broken promises tour,” Cruz wasn’t about to let that slide.

In an email blast to potential donors, he took umbrage — and asked donors to kick in $25 to $250 to “help us stop Obamacare.”

“While the president was pushing the Obamacare train wreck and raising cash, he attacked our conservative efforts as ‘radical’ and ‘destructive.’ That’s remarkable considering the president promised Americans they could keep their health care plans — which we now know is not true,” Cruz wrote.

Obama also devoted part of his Dallas trip to pressuring Gov. Rick Perry to expand Medicaid, covering as many as 1.5 million uninsured Texans. He blamed Perry’s ideology and “bullheadedness” for a decision that clearly, in his view, ignores the state’s best interests.

Perry was wholly uninterested in the advice and counsel, of which there was plenty.

“I’m a proud Democrat and am committed to the values that the Democratic Party represents, but I’m also interested in getting the Republican Party back in a functioning state. Because this country has two parties, and we need both of them operating in a way that allows us to move forward,” Obama said at the Kraus home.

The Cruz-inspired 16-day government shutdown left the GOP reeling and divided.

But Obama does seem sincere in that remarkably generous offer to help rebuild an opposition he had on the run just weeks ago.

That would explain the bungled rollout of Obamacare, and the contortions required by the White House to square those millions of cancellation notices with the president’s oft-repeated promise that no one would lose insurance they liked, period.

Yes, Republicans, help is on the way.

Follow Washington Bureau chief Todd J. Gillman on Twitter at @toddgillman.