Every Saturday cleveland.com will highlight stories of interest from the previous week of news coverage. This week, Westlake and Cleveland go toe-to-toe over water services, Steelyard Commons to begin second, phases of construction, the United States government shuts down, Obamacare launches, the Indians are eliminated from the playoffs, shock jock "Rover" is indicted, West Side Market vendors' battle with the City of Cleveland over parking continues, and plans are announced for an Ameritrust complex makeover. Included below are overviews each of these stories and more.

MONDAY

Westlake residents and businesses to face steep fees for city's defection from Cleveland Water Department

Westlake residents likely will soon get slammed with an extra $291 on each quarterly water bill for the next five years to cover the cost of the suburb’s defection from the Cleveland Water Department.

Cleveland Public Utilities Director Paul Bender asked City Council members during a caucus Monday to approve the increase, which would apply only to customers in Westlake -- the water department's fifth-largest consumer and the first to withdraw from the system in decades.

Bender said that the extra fees are necessary to collect Westlake’s unpaid $39.8 million share in infrastructural improvements and another $19 million to reroute the elaborate network of subterranean pipes to ensure that water still can be delivered to Westlake’s suburban neighbors.

Legislation will be proposed and discussed in committee in the coming months that will give the city permission to begin issuing the higher bills in February. | Read the full story | Related: Westlake 'blindsided' | Westlake mayor responds |Letter to Westlake water customers | Headed to court | Naymik: Battle over water system could leave residents soaked



Steelyard: Phase 2

Developer Mitchell Schneider expects to close on his financing in mid-October and start work right away, with hopes of finishing buildings for retailers just over a year later.

Obamacare FAQ

On Tuesday, the roughly 1.7 million Ohioans who lack insurance could begin purchasing it through the government-operated marketplace. An estimated 916,000 Ohioans qualified for financial help to buy insurance.



Pilot Flying J recovery

Jimmy Haslam said his business, the nation's largest chain of travel centers, is working to pay back, with interest, any trucking company that was duped in a rebate fraud that came to light in April.

TUESDAY

Government ordered to begin 'orderly' shutdown after Congress gridlocks on funding

For the first time in nearly two decades, the federal government staggered into a partial shutdown early Tuesday morning after congressional Republicans stubbornly demanded changes in the nation's health care law as the price for essential federal funding and President Barack Obama and Democrats adamantly refused.

As Congress gridlocked, Obama said a "shutdown will have a very real economic impact on real people, right away," with hundreds of thousands of federal workers furloughed and veterans' centers, national parks, most of the space agency and other government operations shuttered.

He laid the blame at the feet of House Republicans, whom he accused of seeking to tie government funding to ideological demands, "all to save face after making some impossible promises to the extreme right wing of their party."

House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, responded a short while later on the House floor. "The American people don't want a shutdown and neither do I," he said. Yet, he added, the new health care law "is having a devastating impact. ... Something has to be done." | Read the full story | Related: Who will take the blame? | No resolution in sight | A government shutdown looks like this |Government shutdown coverage



Oberlin sued

Ohioans for Concealed Carry sued Oberlin on Tuesday, claiming the new law City Council passed last month involving the possession of guns in parks violates state statute.

Success with glitches

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services acknowledged there were bumps in the roll-out of online exchanges designed help tens of millions of uninsured Americans buy health insurance.

Bobby Thompson trial

Twelve jurors and four alternates were selected for the trial of Bobby Thompson. Thompson is accused of running a veterans charity scam that took in more than $100 million from donors nationwide.

WEDNESDAY

Cleveland Indians eliminated by Rays in AL wild-card game, 4-0

On a pleasant October night an Indians season that no one thought would go this far came to an unpleasant end.

Danny Salazar, the rookie with the electric right arm, pitched like a rookie Wednesday night and Alex Cobb bent, but didn't break as the road-tested Rays eliminated the Indians, 4-0, in the American League wild-card game in front of a boisterous sellout crowd of 43,579 at Progressive Field.

• Rays 4, Indians 0 box score

The Indians won the top wild-card spot by going 21-6 in September to pass Texas and the Rays with a 10-0 finishing kick. They left the Rays and Texas deadlocked and in need of a tiebreaker to decide who would face the Tribe on Wednesday. | Read the full story | Related: New relationship with fans



Shock jock indicted

WMMS shock jock, Shane French, host of "Rover's Morning Glory" is facing more than a dozen felony and misdemeanor charges stemming from an altercation with an off-duty police officer in July at the Whiskey Island Marina. | Proclaims innocence

Inappropriate mailing

Beachwood Councilman Brian Linick says a mass mailing titled "An Important Message" recently sent to all Beachwood residents by the city is a waste of taxpayers' money.

Med mart opening

An invitation-only ribbon-cutting will be held Oct. 8, followed a week later by its first major event, the Cleveland Clinic's 2013 Medical Innovation Summit -- a three-day meeting that will introduce the building to more than 1,000 medical experts.

THURSDAY

Cleveland Browns defeat Buffalo Bills, 37-24

The feel-good, hometown-hero story of Brian Hoyer took a cruel turn Thursday night when he suffered a potential season-ending right knee injury in the first quarter of the Browns' 37-24 victory over the Bills at FirstEnergy Stadium.

Hoyer hobbled out of the stadium on crutches and wearing a full brace on his right leg and didn't put any weight on it. Coach Rob Chudzinski told NFL Network at halftime that he feared Hoyer might have torn ligaments in the knee, which could end his season.

After the game, Chudzinski said that Hoyer's injury was a sprain, and that he'll have an MRI on Friday. He would not elaborate on his halftime remarks that he feared torn ligaments.

But the never-say-die Browns put on a thrilling performance in Hoyer's absence, pulling away with Brandon Weeden at quarterback for the victory, their third straight. It improved the Browns to 3-2 and all alone in first in the AFC North -- at least for a few days. | Read the full story | Related: Jim Brown honored | Hoyer out for season with torn ACL



Mishandled case

Claims that police botched sex crimes investigations are rolled into one civil case set for trial next year. City officials have publicly defended the investigations done in two crimes reported against Sowell prior to the bodies being discovered.

Creating new issues

West Side Market vendors believe parking congestion has driven their unique customers away. Yet, vendors are still resisting a city of Cleveland plan to alleviate parking issues because they believe the city plan will hurt them more than help.

Capitol Hill lockdown

A woman driving a black Infiniti with a young child inside tried to ram through a White House barricade Thursday, then led police on a chase toward the Capitol, where police shot and killed her, witnesses and officials said.

FRIDAY

Ameritrust redo will include a Marriott Autograph Collection hotel and 205 apartments

The buyer of the former Ameritrust complex has inked a deal with Marriott to bring an Autograph Collection hotel to East Ninth Street, as part of a project that includes 205 apartments, a grocery store, a Euclid Avenue rooftop bar and an indoor dog park.

Developer Greg Geis hopes to wrap up financing deals in November and push for an opening just a year later. That's an aggressive schedule for an undertaking that involves three historic buildings and carries, if you include the new Cuyahoga County headquarters at East Ninth and Prospect Avenue, a $250 million price tag.

A painful vacancy at one of downtown Cleveland's key corners, the complex -- which Geis recently started calling "The 9" -- could become a hub of activity, teeming with renters, shoppers and visitors. If the Geis Cos. are successful, the project won't just pay off for its investors. It will shore up a long-troubled intersection and help bolster the case for remaking other vacant or near-empty buildings nearby.