Sioux Falls, SD

A decade-old South Dakota court file was opened for the first time Friday.

After a ruling from a Union County judge last month the court documents that led investigators to search the Lykken family farm in connection with a 1971 cold case have been released.

In August of 2004 South Dakota authorities broke ground on the Lykken family farm and broke open the speculation about the disappearance of Sherri Miller and Pam Jackson.

This past April authorities announced Miller and Jackson died in a car crash after the 1960 Studebaker they were riding in that night was found in a Union county creek last fall.

Car Crash Behind Missing Girls Mystery

The discovery cleared David Lykken and his family of any connection to the case, but the documents released Friday show that investigators thought all signs pointed to the Lykken farm.

David Lykken is currently serving a 225 year prison sentence for kidnapping and rape. In 2007 he was wrongly accused of murdering Miller and Jackson.

READ: Newly-Released Search Warrant Affidavits For Lykken Farm

The documents released Friday say investigators interviewed up to nine of Lykken’s ex-girlfriends and victims who accused Lykken of stalking, physical abuse and several sexual assaults. Most also said he would be capable of murder. One of them had recollections that she saw Miller and Jackson and their Studebaker on the Lykken farm.

A woman referred to as Victim #6 was interviewed twice before the initial search of the Lykken farm in August of 2004. She told authorities she not only saw the Studebaker but saw, 'Cheryl lying over the steering wheel...and Pam with her head on the passenger window.'

Victim #6 was interviewed a third time in October 2004 by a state-hired psychologist while under hypnosis and recalled even more details. She even said she believed Miller and Jackson were ground up and fed to the cattle at the Lykken farm.

The documents also say state agents got other tips about the Lykken family including one tip from the former secretary of the old Union County Sheriff. She said the former sheriff confronted David Lykken's father about the disappearance just a few days after the girls were reported missing in 1971. She said the former sheriff thought the Lykkens might have something to do with the case but never had enough evidence.

But last September, when the remains of the girls and the Studebaker were pulled out of Brule Creek, it showed that all of those tips simply led investigators down the wrong path.