PORTLAND, Ore. – Heading into halftime Saturday night, visions of Rahim Moore ran through Denver Nuggets coach Melvin Hunt’s head.

With less than two seconds remaining in the first half and trailing 55-53, the Nuggets guarded Portland Trail Blazers All-Star LaMarcus Aldridge as he fired a full-court baseball pass from under his own basket to teammate Nicolas Batum.

Batum caught the ball on the left wing between Wilson Chandler and a leaping Randy Foye, before turning to find former Denver guard Arron Afflalo for an open three-pointer in the left corner. Afflalo, the former Nugget who torched his previous team with 21 points on 8 of 11 shooting, drilled the shot as the buzzer expired to give the Blazers a 58-53 lead entering the locker room.

Nuggets Mailbag: Pose a question for Christopher Dempsey

It was a last-second momentum-changer, one that put the Nuggets three points deeper into a hole they never emerged from in a 120-114 loss Saturday night.

“The Broncos had that a couple years (ago),” said Hunt, referring to the “Mile High Miracle” that eventually cost Denver the 2013 NFL Divisional Playoffs against the Baltimore Ravens.

“We made one little error as far as letting the ball get behind our defense,” Hunt said. “It’s a game of mistakes. But we had enough time to recover from that mistake.”

In a game played in the doldrums of a lengthy regular season, with each team in the second half of back-to-back games, the Nuggets provided the some of the late-game energy needed to overcome their late first half blunder.

It was just not enough to handle their lack of size and a matchup problem that plagued the team all year.

The Blazers were second in the NBA in three-point attempts per game entering Saturday night (27.6). They hoisted only three shots from deep in the first quarter and a total of eight in the first half, using a healthy dose of touches in the post to LaMarcus Aldridge and Chris Kaman to build a lead that reached 11 following a Kaman offensive rebound with 9:27 left in the second quarter.

Aldridge scored 32 points and added 11 rebounds for Portland, which finished 8 of 18 from deep and shot 56.5 percent from the field. Kaman went 7 of 12 and finished with 14 points and nine rebounds.

“That’s why they’re in the playoffs,” said Kenneth Faried, who finished with 14 points (3 of 10) and 10 rebounds. “They’ve got All-Stars in LaMarcus (Aldridge) and Damian (Lillard).”

In their four regular season contests against Portland this season, the Nuggets gave up an average of over 117 points per game. That is well over their season average of 103.6 points allowed per game, a mark that ranked 27th in the NBA entering Saturday.

The undersized Nuggets were without Danilo Gallinari, who rested for the third time in seven games. Darrell Arthur missed his third consecutive game with a calf injury.

J.J. Hickson started the game 4-for-7 from the field in only his sixth start of the season. After Denver battled back from 11 down to take a 50-49 lead in the second quarter, Afflalo’s buzzer-beater concluded an 8-3 finish by the Blazers to close the half.

Saturday’s loss put them at 8-7 since Brian Shaw was fired on March 3 and replaced by Hunt. Jameer Nelson led the Nuggets with 22 points off the bench, followed by 17 from Randy Foye.

It was the pair of guards’ nearly flawless shooting that kept the Nuggets afloat in the second half, when Nelson scored 20 of his points. The last of his four three-pointers gave Denver a sliver of hope after facing down a 10-point deficit with 26 seconds left.

After an and-one layup by Wilson Chandler, Faried stole a pass. Ty Lawson assisted Nelson on a three-pointer to pull Denver within four.

“I’ve seen Reggie Miller hit a bunch of shots with 10, 11 seconds,” Nelson said. “Anything can happen.”

Hunt called timeout twice within that 26-second span, sending the message that he planned on competing until the end. In a season when the team’s motivation has been in question, it was a message to which he felt the squad responded positively.

“They’re playing ‘til the last tick on that clock,” Hunt said. “That right there really makes me proud about my group.”

Denver will play the Utah Jazz on Wednesday.