By Chris Butler | Tennessee Watchdog

NASHVILLE — In the spirit of being a true watchdog, you really must keep a sharp eye on certain Tennessee government officials in 2015.

Throughout 2014, we reported countless stories of waste, fraud and abuse throughout Tennessee. The complete list is endless, but here are the worst offenders:

Oak Ridge Police Chief James Akagi

Two months before Oak Ridge School District employee Alex Heitman died of a reported suicide he reported thieves were stealing school money.

But that wasn’t the official story, at least initially.

Oak Ridge Police Chief James Akagi publicly denied Heitman had anything to do with the case.

When a public records request proved otherwise, Akagi refused to address the matter any longer, despite our repeated attempts to reach him, even through his personal cell phone.

With public safety in mind, law enforcement officers are generally happy to help the press, but not Akagi, apparently.

Oak Ridge City Council member Trina Baughn called out Akagi publicly in regards to this case and for the way his department has seemingly withheld records in the death of Sarah McAdams.

A growing number of people no longer believe Heitman took his own life.

When other media picked up our work and confronted Akagi, the police chief said he had no knowledge of Heitman reporting the theft of taxpayer money, some of which was used to buy methamphetamine.

U.S. Rep. Steve Cohen

You have to work hard to make this list two years in a row, yet U.S. Rep. Steve Cohen, D-Memphis, continues to say and do things that easily qualify him.

In 2013, Cohen said tea partiers are the moral equivalent of arsonists and suggested Bible readers have held up progressive gun control laws.

In October the congressman tried to rile his constituents by tweeting that the Ebola virus would mutate into a Biblical-style plague that would devastate Tennessee.

That is unless state Republicans complied fully with Obamacare and expanded Medicaid in Tennessee.

While there were a few outbreaks of Ebola nationwide this fall, the end-of-the world prophecy Cohen warned us about never quite manifested itself.

Also this year, Cohen was identified as one of Washington D.C.’s biggest large government champions, having proposed $143 billion in new spending.

Here’s hoping the new year will give Cohen an opportunity to not only chill out, but to manage taxpayer money more responsibly.

May we suggest a nice, extended vacation, congressman?

Take the whole year off, if you wish.

Advocates of government-owned Internet

There’s a movement afoot in Tennessee to convince you privately owned Internet service providers are greedy and incompetent.

Many liberty-minded people would argue such problems are the result of government giving these ISP’s a monopoly.

But government forces, particularly those with Chattanooga’s public utility, the Electric Power Board, are adamant these private ISPs need competition to provide consumers a greater amount of choice.

No one can argue with that logic, but is it really government’s place to provide that competition? EPB and a growing number of political leaders across Tennessee seem to believe so.

EPB has already spent $111 million in taxpayer-provided federal stimulus money to set up a smart grid to help create an ultra-high-speed Internet to compete against private providers, even outside its municipal boundaries.

Ten Republican legislators in the Tennessee General Assembly tried unsuccessfully this year to do away with state laws limiting the growth of these government-owned networks beyond municipal lines.

Now, they are lobbying the Federal Communications Commission to overrule those state laws, and the FCC seems very sympathetic.

Keep an eye on how this plays out in 2015.

Local government supervisors

This year, Tennessee Watchdog told you a multitude of stories about local government employees stealing from taxpayers, whether they were local mayors or lowly clerks who had sole access to government money.

In one notable instance, a former Alcoa City School District employee who oversaw federal funds took nearly $500,000 in taxpayer money and used some of it on her iTunes account.

In almost all of these cases government entities had no checks and balances in place.

State auditors were usually the ones to discover the problems.

One auditor, Ben Vance, said this year that while it’s his job to detect theft, the primary responsibility for that lies with managers at the local level — who completely fail in their duties.

Thieves are very much aware of this, Vance added.

“The local governments just do not pay attention to what their employees do and how things really run. I see that in a lot of cases. You have to wonder why the citizens of the town aren’t more involved when something like this happens.”

These problems exist in plenty of other states, though, Vance said.

Here’s hoping Tennessee takes the lead on addressing the problem in 2015.

The Board of Professional Responsibility

Some of the most powerful people in Tennessee may communicate in secret among themselves, don’t have to take an oath of office and have the power to tax a select group of people.

The people who work for this agency, the Board of Professional Responsibility, under the Tennessee Supreme Court, don’t have accountability to state lawmakers.

Various lawyers in Tennessee have complained the state Supreme Court created the board on its own initiative, without state legislators’ input or approval.

Technically, the board only has the power to discipline attorneys whom they think act unethically.

Board members don’t take an oath, although a spokeswoman for the board, Michele Wojciechowski, said such an oath isn’t necessary, per a 2013 ruling from the state Supreme Court.

The board collects a yearly $170 professional privilege tax, which attorneys pay on top of a licensing fee.

Nashville attorney Connie Reguli said that only the legislature can create a tax.

Nashville attorney Jim Roberts, meanwhile, testified to a legislative committee in 2010 that a judge retaliated against him after he asked that judge to recuse himself from a case. The same judge later reported Roberts to the board.

Roberts calls the board “a Gestapo.”

Contact Christopher Butler at chris@tennesseewatchdog.org

Follow Tennessee Watchdog and receive regular updates through Facebook and Twitter

Like Watchdog.org? Click HERE to get breaking news alerts in YOUR state!