Skipping a doctor’s visit to complete a client presentation or forgoing a chiropractic adjustment to get the kids to school on time is typical in Orange County, according to the EVP of strategic services and incoming president of St. Joseph Hoag Health, Annette Walker.

“We are spending money on health care but are not using it because of our busy lifestyles,” said Walker. “If we don’t use preventative care, then we eventually end up in the emergency room, which costs way more money.”

Sitting on a pale yellow chair with a view of Orchid Hills behind her, Walker explained the problem many full-time employees face when it comes to taking care of their health.

“Our data is very clear that it takes a minimum of two hours out of the workday to get to and from a health care appointment,” said Walker.

Although two hours may not seem like much, at a time when the average full-time employed American is cramming 47 hours into the work week as reported by a 2014 Gallop Poll, every minute counts.

To squeeze a few extra hours out of the 9-to-5, Walker and her team are bringing health care to the office floor with a focus on preventive care and convenience.

Health care at the office

Instead of lengthy commutes and mind-numbing waiting rooms, the 1,800 employees at Western Digital’s headquarters in Irvine receive a call at their desks when it’s time for appointments at the company’s on-site wellness center.

In July, the billion-dollar data-storage company partnered with St. Joseph Hoag Health to create the 4,600-square-foot wellness center called Drive.

In addition to a full-time primary doctor, the wellness center offers physical therapy, acupuncture, health coaching, chiropractic care and behavioral health services to Western Digital employees. Without exiting the building, patients also can receive medications and blood test results.

To determine what to offer at the clinic, Western Digital looked at which health care services employees were spending the most money on, said Jason Bibelheimer, vice president of human resources operations at Western Digital, in an email. “Our health-management partner helped us to identify gaps in care and the multiple medical issues of our employee population,” he said.

For Western Digital employees, preventive care is 100 percent covered, and other services at the clinic are offered at a competitive rate. Although the company offers three health plans, contributes $3,000 to an annual health savings account and provides cash incentives for making health care appointments, employees can opt out of coverage.

Since the wellness center opened five months ago, 31 percent of employees have made appointments, and Western Digital reports a 99 percent employee-satisfaction rating.

The clinic is also likely benefiting Western Digital’s bottom line. “Employers save on costs (with the implementation of the clinic),” Walker said. “People aren’t out sick and are more productive because they are able to work and be healthy instead of missing deadlines.”

Dr. Christopher Celio, the resident doctor at Western Digital’s clinic, described how access to an immediate treatment saved one Western Digital employee from taking a sick day. After getting a terrible migraine at her desk, the employee got pain medication from Celio and was able to continue working.

According to Bibelheimer, Western Digital has saved roughly 2,300 hours of productivity since the clinic opened its doors, time that would have been taken as sick time.

Despite the time-saving advantages of work-site clinics, some critics argue that health care in the office translates to less personal time for employees. As sleeping (see Google’s sleep pods), eating and health care all move to the office, employees may find few reasons to leave the office – or have a life at home.

Last year, an Ernst & Young study found that 24 percent of full-time employees in the U.S are having a harder time managing their work-life balance than they did five years ago. Proponents of work-site clinics claim employee efficiency is improved with ease of access to health care, presumably allowing employees to limit overtime and make it home, but the results have yet to be seen.

A growing trend

Nationwide, 29 percent of companies with more than 5,000 employees provided work-site clinics in 2015, up from 24 percent in 2013, according to a survey by Mercer, a human resources consulting firm.

Because work-site clinics help companies ensure their employees have access to reasonably priced health care, the increased popularity of clinics among employers is likely due to coverage requirements mandated by the Affordable Care Act.

But as work-site clinics were heralded for saving companies millions in health care costs, the IRS released a murky “not so fast” statement last year.

Under the ACA, health care costs spent through work-site clinics will be counted in 2018’s so-called Cadillac tax, which enforces a 40 percent nondeductible excise tax on high-value plans.

In response to the Mercer survey, 15 percent of employers said their wellness clinics could threaten their chances at avoiding the excise tax and 11 percent think it’ll help. The remaining respondents don’t know or think the clinics will have no impact.

Despite an uncertain future, St. Joseph Hoag Health is in talks with several other local employers interested in adding work-site clinics, Walker said. She is also hopeful the legacy of St. Joseph Hoag Health in Orange County will alleviate some of the concerns employees and employers may have.

For more than 90 years, St. Joseph Hoag Health has maintained a foothold in Orange County’s health care system with multiple hospitals and a large network of medical professionals. Walker said the organization’s main challenge is educating the public and employers on the new kinds of services offered by the brand.

“People don’t always know what they want,” said Walker. “They can’t even imagine what they could have if they don’t know it’s yet possible.”

As the tectonic plates of health care shift under the ACA, Walker remains hopeful as she remembers a time when things were similarly ambiguous.

In the 1980s, Walker had to lay off employees for the third time in three years while she was the director of laboratory services at an Orange County hospital. As she again watched hard-working people exit the building, Walker decided she needed to move into a strategy development role.

Since then, she has earned the Modern Healthcare's Innovation in Healthcare Technology Award and the Hospitals and Health Networks Innovator Award.

Walker said that the clinic at Western Digital is just one example of St. Joseph Hoag Health’s commitment to innovating and revolutionizing the delivery of health services.

“The clinic at Western Digital is just a piece of the innovation to health care St. Joseph’s is initiating,” said Walker.

“To be part of health care right now and create a different kind of health care for our grandchildren is the great honor of our generation.”

Contact the writer: jljones@ocregister.com or on Twitter @JLJonesOCR