Secretary Hillary Clinton touted her experience to supporters Saturday afternoon in Eau Claire, saying she would be a champion for job creation, fight for teachers and public education and be a strong commander-in-chief.

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton says, "I know from firsthand experience how important it is for us to lead the world in the fight against terrorism. This is the most important national security challenge we face. "

Clinton says her presidency would also focus on education, making college more affordable but stressed that a solid foundation begins with our children.

Clinton says, "It starts with pre-school education, early childhood education so kids can get ahead and I want to be a good partner with America's teachers, because they should be supported and not scapegoated. They should be given the respect they deserve for doing this job."

Clinton acknowledged Tuesday's primary race will be a tight one but believes ultimately she will be the Democratic nominee.



EAU CLAIRE, Wis. (WEAU) -- Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton said she's focused on keeping America safe, making college affordable and making the United States the superpower in clean, renewable energy.

Clinton spoke to supporters at The Lismore in Eau Claire Saturday afternoon. She told them it shouldn't be enough for candidates to make promises that are hard or even impossible to keep, and that inciting anger is even worse. Clinton said we should raise the minimum wage, and that she was shocked when Wisconsin repealed the Equal Pay Law.

"If you're doing the same job, you should get the same pay," she said.

Clinton also spoke of combating climate change, and producing enough clean energy to power every American home by the end of her second term. She suggested making companies that take taxpayer money "pay every penny back," and that she'd "slap an exit tax" on companies that leave the United States. Clinton said taxing the wealthy is the best way to pay for all the improvements and progress she wants to make. She said that she and Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders share the same goal of making college affordable, but that her proposal for debt-free tuition is more feasible. Sanders has proposed making public colleges and universities tuition-free. Clinton said that would require Gov. Scott Walker to chip in $300,000,000, which would take "a deathbed conversion." She proposed that people who receive the debt-free tuition benefit be required to work 10 hours per week.

"We are not going to let the government make money off of lending money to young people anymore," Clinton said.

She also told the crowd that she's going to defend the Affordable Care Act. She said we need to work to do comprehensive background checks for gun purchases, end immunity from liability for the makers and sellers of guns and close loopholes in current gun laws. Clinton called it a set of common sense gun safety measures.

Clinton called herself the person best able to withstand whatever the Republicans have planned. She said she will defend a woman's right to make her own health care decisions, defend Planned Parenthood and defend voting rights. She ended her address by mentioning Wisconsin's primary election on Tuesday, and telling the crowd she would be deeply honored to earn their support.

"I will fight for you. We will make progress together."