Topics: Editor's Picks, George Wallace, Roy Moore, Same-sex marriage, The South, News

When a federal court recently struck down Alabama’s same-sex marriage ban, it wasn’t Governor Robert Bentley who insisted on repeating George Wallace’s ludicrous theatrics of treason, defying the authority of federal law and the Supreme Court. It was Alabama’s Chief Justice Roy Moore, ordering probate judges to ignore the federal court order and refuse to issue same-sex marriage licenses. The local media, to its credit, knew exactly what was going on:

Bentley refused to become the next Alabama governor making a show of defying the law in front of TV cameras and in the process sending the message that our state is still intolerant and a lawless place for some of its citizens who happen to be different from the majority. But what Bentley refused to do, Moore did do. He is trying to stand in the courthouse door as surely as Wallace stood in the schoolhouse door. Shame on him.

At “The Daily Show,” Jon Stewart went for the foolish hypocrisy angle—or at least one of many: Moore and the probate judges following his lead explicitly invoking the Bible as the reason to reject same-sex marriage violates the Alabama Constitution, as just amended in the last election. Stewart played a clip from WSFA 12 news, last Nov. 3, describing the newly passed, so-called “Sharia Law” constitutional amendment, “It would prohibit judges and other state officials from basing any of their decisions on ‘foreign law,’” the newscaster explained in the clip. Pregnant pause. Then Stewart asked, “Where was the Bible written, again?”

It’s not so much that people want to laugh at Alabama’s idea of sober judicial leadership. But what are the alternatives? Anything less leads deep into darkness and confusion. Taking Moore seriously certainly doesn’t work, as CNN’s Chris Cuomo discovered, much to his chagrin. Moore is a first-rate dissembler and fabulist, who even tried comparing the federal judge’s order (and the Supreme Court’s refusal to stay it, which he manfully tried to ignore) to the Dred Scott and Plessy vs. Ferguson decisions, in an attempt to portray his own (sort of) Bible-based gut-level bigotry as just like being opposed to the (somewhat more than sort-of) Bible-based bigotry of slavery and segregation!

Comparing Moore precisely to Wallace may be mistaken—the differences are as instructive as the similarities—but Moore is actually more deeply reactionary than Wallace ever dreamed of, burrowing ever deeper into his bigoted rationalizations, rather than moving on and adjusting. Although Wallace’s infamous “Segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever!” pronouncement was unflinchingly categorical, he dropped that support like a hot potato when it became untenable after Martin Luther King’s watershed “I have a dream” speech. As Taylor Branch noted just before the 50th anniversary of the March on Washington, Wallace led the way in disavowing classical racism, creating a new brand of “principled conservatism” in the process:

By the end of 1963, with segregation losing its stable respectability, he [Wallace] dropped the word [segregation] altogether from a fresh stump speech denouncing “big government” by “pointy-headed bureaucrats,” tyrannical judges, and “tax, tax, spend, spend” legislators. He spurned racial discourse, calling it favoritism, and insisted with aplomb that he had never denigrated any person or group in his fight for local control.

Wallace’s complete rewrite of his history was typical of conservatism more generally. Conservatism varies widely in time and space, but it always manages to invent a mythic history for itself, making it the only logical alternative—even if that means a 180-degree turn from what it was saying five minutes before. But don’t expect Moore to suddenly shift gears as Wallace did. This is not one of those 180-degree moments. Wallace set conservatism off in a new direction, while Moore represents a culmination of that process over a period of decades, in which a bizarre, far-flung structure of historical lies and misleading fabulist narratives has been constructed and disseminated by a network of Christian Reconstructionists who want to remake America along the lines of “The Handmaid’s Tale.” To help spread their influencce, they’ve invented an entire alternative history universe, which the mainstream media and punditocracy continue to misunderstand, misrepresent or ignore. Moore and his supporters live in that alternative universe, and it’s only by studying them and their core lies that we can hope to get a fix on what they are really about.

An excellent place to start down that path in this particular instance is a post at Rightwing Watch by Brian Tashman, “Roy Moore’s Showdown with the Courts Over Gay Marriage Tied to the Work of Neo-Confederate Leader.” The leader in question is Michael Peroutka, a third-party presidential candidate in 2004, who I wrote about last August, when he was running as a Republican for a county commission seat in Maryland’s Anne Arundel County. As I wrote at the time:

Then there’s the Maryland GOP, which has its hands full with a wealthy, self-funded county council candidate, Michael Peroutka, who’s a past leader of the League of the South, a group that thinks the wrong side won the Civil War, and whose president, Michael Hill, recently openly fantasized about creating their own three- to five-man death squads. The squads’ “primary targets will not be enemy soldiers; instead, they will be political leaders, members of the hostile media, cultural icons, bureaucrats, and other of the managerial elite.” There’s even a videotape of Peroutka leading a meeting of the League of the South in singing “the national anthem,” as he introduced it—yes, “Dixie.”

The League of the South recently announced it will be celebrating the 150th anniversary of Lincoln’s assasination this coming April, in case there were any lingering doubts about where their sentiments lie. And as for our current president, Peroutka’s organization, the Institute on the Constitution, proudly hosted a speaker who argued that “President Obama is not eligible to be president of the United States because he is not a ‘natural born citizen’ as defined by Article II of the Constitution, which was based on Deuteronomy 17,” as reported by Sara Posner of Religion Dispatches. I’ll have more to say about Peroutka, who went on to win his seat in the GOP wave, below, including his purely cosmetic resignation from the League of the South, which he insisted was not for anything in their politics or ideology. But for now let’s return to some of what Tashman had to say:

Moore’s call for statewide defiance of the federal judiciary’s “tyranny” stems from a belief that the Constitution was made to protect biblical commandments, so that anything that goes against his personal interpretation of the Bible is therefore in violation of the Constitution. Moore shares that belief with a powerful ally: Michael Peroutka, a neo-Confederate activist who is also one of the most influential behind-the-scenes figures in the Religious Right’s reimagining of American law. Peroutka… promotes this theocratic view of the law through his group the Institute on the Constitution. Speaking at an event at the Institute in 2011, Moore gushed that Peroutka would help lead America to a “glorious triumph” over the federal government’s “tyranny.” But Peroutka is more than a friend and ideological ally to Moore: he has funded Moore’s activism for more than a decade, and in 2012 bankrolled Moore’s successful campaign for the top seat on the Alabama Supreme Court.

Indeed, in early 2012, the Montgomery Advertiser reported that $50,000 of the $78,000 Moore had amassed through the end of 2011 came from Peroutka. “Donor tied to extremists,” the headline read. But the story reported, “Moore said his campaign does not have secessionist ideas and that he believes ‘all people are created in the image of God.’ Except for gays and lesbians, obviously. Moreover, his denial of secessionist tendencies clashed with his claim that Peroutka’s support was principled. “His interest is simply in supporting someone, like myself, who supports the U.S. Constitution,” Moore claimed. But Peroutka’s “support” for the Constitution is inextricably bound up in secessionist beliefs.

Peroutka’s financial support for Moore’s campaign was only a fraction of his overall support, as Tashman’s account made clear. Without Peroutka’s financial backing, Moore might have simply disappeared from sight:

After Moore was removed from his original position on Alabama’s high court in 2003 for defying a federal court order to remove a monument of the Ten Commandments from the state judicial building, Peroutka paid for the ousted judge to go on a national speaking tour to build support for his cause. He also funded a group that held rallies in support of Moore. Over the nine years, Peroutka contributed over a quarter of a million dollars to two groups founded by Moore, the Foundation for Moral Law (which is now run by Moore’s wife Kayla) and the now-defunct Coalition to Restore America. In 2004, the far-right Constitution Party tried to recruit Moore to run for president on its ticket. When he declined, Peroutka stepped in to run in his place.

Such long-standing ties signify a much deeper convergence in thinking than Moore’s bland vanilla claim to the Memphis Advertiser might suggest. And the occasional gestures by both men to throw casual observers off the scent should always be evaluated in light of the larger picture. This applies equally to Peroutka’s mid-October announcement that he had resigned from the League of the South, as well as Moore’s repeated attempts to portray his anti-gay bigotry as in harmony with—if not the modern equivalent of—support for black equality in our nation’s past. If you believe George Wallace’s claim that he had never denigrated any person or group, then these are the guys for you. But if you remember “Segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever!” you just might want to question anything they claim.

First, consider Peroutka’s incoherent explanation for why he left the League of the South. At the time I wrote for Salon in late August, Peroutka had only recently convened a press conference, under severe pressure, in which he insisted that he wasn’t a racist—those who attacked him were—and that he had no intention of leaving the League of the South. However, in mid-October, just two weeks before the election, the Baltimore Sun reported that he had left the League, around the time my story had run, but for inexplicable reasons:

Peroutka, a Millersville Republican, said he left the group prior to Labor Day because he discovered statements members made on the subject of being opposed to interracial marriage were “contrary to my beliefs.” He would not elaborate. Though his League of the South membership drew criticism during the campaign — “Everybody wants to talk about League of the South all the time,” he said — the decision to quit the group was not politically motivated, Peroutka said. “I didn’t do it to bring up any political points,” Peroutka said. “I dont have any problem with the organization.” Peroutka said he still stands by the group’s stances on self-government and conserving southern heritage.

The lack of any serious differences were further underscored, when Peroutka won the election, and was congratulated by League President Michael Hill. His resignation was kabuki theater, nothing more

Even in its own terms, the account was nonsensical, since he remains quite friendly with Hill, who is himself opposed to racial intermarriage. But that’s relatively common among Southern conservatives: about 20 percent of them held such views from 2000 to 2012, according to the General Social Survey. Given that the League of the South appeals overwhelmingly to this demographic, it would have been truly shocking if there weren’t members who felt this way. What did Peroutka expect to find there? Who’s he trying to kid?