You don’t have to hit your head to develop an insidious bleed between the soft covering of your brain and the brain itself that in days, weeks or months can threaten your health or life.

The condition, called chronic subdural hematoma, is becoming increasingly common as the population ages, prompting an New York University Langone Medical Center neurosurgeon, Dr. Uzma Samadani, to urge her colleagues to gear up for a growing number of cases likely to require neurological intervention.

By 2030, when a fifth to a quarter of the U.S. population will be older than 65, chronic subdural hematoma, or SDH, is expected to afflict 60,000 Americans a year, which would make it the most common reason for brain surgery, surpassing brain tumors and metastases, Samadani and colleagues reported last month in The Journal of Neurosurgery. Head trauma from, say, a fall or another accident remains an important cause of the disorder, though in a third to a half of the cases, patients cannot recall an injury that might account for it.

In many instances, the trauma, if there was one, was so trivial it was forgotten, like walking into an open cupboard door or hitting one’s head getting in or out of a car. Indirect trauma that jostles the brain is more common. About half of patients who report having fallen did so without hitting their heads.

James Reilly, 68, is a case in point. In early January, Reilly, who lives in Hoboken, New Jersey, said he fell out of bed while dreaming and broke a few ribs, but didn’t hit his head and seemed otherwise fine. But two months later, he developed difficulty speaking and using a computer, and a CT scan of his brain revealed a chronic SDH.

The lesion was surgically drained at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Manhattan, New York, where Samadani is chief of neurosurgery and Reilly is a clerk in the department of neurology and physical medicine. He returned to his job last week.

The incidence of chronic SDH has been rising steadily since 1967, with a third of the cases occurring in people over 80. The recent report identified 695 new cases among 875,842 patients seen at the Veterans Affairs’ New York Harbor Healthcare System from 2000 to 2012. The condition is much more common among VA patients, compared with the general population. They are typically older men with a higher rate of additional risk factors, including heavy drinking or a history of brain injury, Samadani said.

Heavy drinking causes liver damage that can disrupt the blood’s clotting functions, she explained. Likewise, the chance of developing a chronic SDH is significantly higher among those on anticoagulant medication, like Coumadin (warfarin), commonly prescribed to prevent heart attacks, strokes and blood clots, especially for older adults. As many as 24 percent of patients with the disorder were on warfarin or an antiplatelet drug to prevent clots, according to a study by researchers in Wales.

As many as 10 percent of patients had a history of alcoholism or epilepsy, the Welsh team reported. Obesity can be a contributing factor by increasing estrogen levels in the body, Samadani said.

However, older age remains the leading predisposing factor. As people age, the brain shrinks, creating a space into which fluid can collect. The veins that drain the brain must traverse this space, and even the slightest jolt can cause them to leak, leaving blood trapped against the brain. Also, these “bridging veins” become more fragile and susceptible to tears.

Chronic SDH has been described as “the great neurological imitator” because it often presents a confusing array of possible symptoms that can resemble, alternatively, a psychiatric disorder, dementia, a migraine, epilepsy, Parkinson’s disease, a stroke or a transient ischemic attack, also known as a ministroke.

Patients may develop a rather severe headache and weakness on one side of the body, have difficulty walking, seem confused or have trouble speaking, Samadani said. She added that chronic SDH “is a common treatable cause of dementia.”

Symptoms tend to develop rather suddenly, often without apparent explanation. Patients and their doctors need to be aware of the various symptoms and signs, and follow up with a CT scan that most often can reveal or rule out a subdural hematoma. The scan may need to be repeated using a dye if initial results are unclear.

The Welsh team noted that the most important factor in diagnosing chronic SDH was “a high index of suspicion” in patients whether or not they had a head injury or other trauma. Warning signs include headache; a change in mental status or worsening of pre-existing neurological or psychological illness; and neurological problems in a specific location like one side of the face, an arm or even a small area of the tongue. Treatment of a chronic SDH is not always needed, though patients with a seemingly stable hematoma must be monitored, with prompt treatment if symptoms worsen. If bleeding into the subdural space continues unchecked, it increases pressure on the brain that can lead to a loss of consciousness, permanent disability or death.

Only a third of patients require surgical treatment, Samadani said. In the remaining two-thirds, the hematoma is gradually reabsorbed without invasive treatment. Patients can also be given medication to help speed the process, she said.

While many chronic subdural hematomas cannot be prevented, the risk of developing one can be lowered by avoiding alcohol abuse, reducing the risk of falls and maintaining a normal body weight.

While there is no certain way yet to minimize brain shrinkage with age, Dr. Steven R. Flanagan, chairman of rehabilitative medicine at NYU Langone Medical Center, said, “Regular cardiovascular aerobic exercise is good not only for the heart and lungs, but also for cognitive function. Evidence suggests it increases brain-derived neurotrophic factor,” which promotes survival of the brain’s neurons.

Yet another reason to get — and stay — moving as you get older.