TRENTON — For the second time in recent weeks, New Jersey lawmakers are poised to approve fast-track legislation that could prove a boon to powerful South Jersey political leader George E. Norcross.

The measure, which won unanimous approval in the state Assembly on Monday and appears headed for approval in the Senate next week, could bring big changes in how hundreds of small and midsize companies furnish health-insurance coverage for their employees.

The new law would encourage smaller firms to band together in large pools to spread out risk and share health care costs. But if passed and signed into law by Governor Christie, the bill also could create a lucrative market for brokers and for third-party administrators who manage the new pools.

Supporters of the bill said the idea was heavily promoted by Joseph Buckelew, a former Ocean County Republican leader who is also the chairman of Conner Strong & Buckelew, the South Jersey insurance brokerage owned by Norcross.

Through a subsidiary, Conner Strong already manages a number of insurance pools that provide health care coverage and other types of insurance to New Jersey towns and local agencies.

“Joe thought it would be a great idea if we could take the same concept and apply it to the private sector,” said one the bill’s sponsors, Assemblyman Ronald Dancer, a Republican whose district includes parts of Ocean and Monmouth counties. “In this economy, small businesses need a break, especially with health care costs that keep going up.”

Dancer said both Buckelew and William Harla, a lobbyist whose firm has been hired by Conner Strong, contributed provisions of what would emerge as the final bill package. Neither Buckelew nor Harla, who works for the Teaneck law firm DeCotiis, FitzPatrick & Cole, returned calls seeking comment.

Sen. Robert Singer, another Republican sponsor of the bill who also represents Ocean and Monmouth residents, said he was contacted by Buckelew about the legislation. Singer said it was his understanding that Conner Strong and firms like it would compete to manage the new private insurance pools envisioned in the measure.

He also said Conner Strong and others might seek to invest money in the pools. Under the bill, third-party investors would be allowed to make “underwriting profits” through their investments in some circumstances.

Although such private pools have been legal in New Jersey for a number of years, Singer said, investors and profits were not allowed. As a result, he said, there are currently only two or three groups, providing coverage to about 20,000 workers.

“We see a big expansion,” he said.

Singer dismissed the suggestion the bill is tailored to political players like Norcross, the Camden-born Democrat who influences a wide voting bloc in Trenton and has become one of the state’s most powerful figures through alliances with Christie and Senate President Stephen Sweeney, D-Gloucester.

The bill had been on the voting agenda for the Senate this week, but Sweeney, who did not return calls seeking comment, held it due to the objection of Senate Democrats who described it as a Republican measure catering to special interests.

Last week the Legislature took quick action on a bill that gives special benefits to a Camden “renaissance” school partly backed by Norcross. That bill, which Christie is expected to sign, also provides expanded pensions for 600 Camden public employees.

Singer said of the latest measure, “If this becomes law, Norcross will be just one of many companies competing in this market.”

Daniel Fee, a spokesman for Norcross, said Norcross was unavailable for comment Tuesday.

“Conner Strong & Buckelew has always supported expanding the number of affordable options for insurance purchasers,” Fee said in a statement. “These vehicles are promoted by many other states because they provide broad benefit to small- and medium-sized businesses and help create jobs.”

The federal government says that such private insurance pools — known formally as “Multiple Employer Welfare Arrangements,” or MEWAs — have saved money for employers in some cases. But MEWAs also have been susceptible to mismanagement and fraud, according to the government.

In 2013, the U.S. Department of Labor issued sweeping new regulations under the Affordable Care Act tightening reporting requirements for MEWAs. The department also issued a bulletin summarizing dozens of civil and criminal cases it had brought against MEWA operators in recent years.

In many cases, companies that expected to save money by joining a MEWA lost millions in premiums through high administrative fees or outright fraud by operators. Employees who had paid their health insurance premiums were stuck paying expensive medical bills out of pocket.

One MEWA, operated by the New Jersey Licensed Beverage Association, was successfully sued by the government in 2004 after it had racked up millions in debt over its five years in operation. The fund, which covered 3,800 restaurant workers, had a backlog of $6.2 million in unpaid claims when it ceased operations in 2003.

Email: pillets@northjersey.com

This article has been edited to correct an inaccuracy in the original concerning the legislative history of the Senate version of the bill.