By Kathy Hedberg, Lewiston Tribune, Idaho McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

Aug. 06 -- GRANGEVILLE -- A fire that destroyed the main production building of Rocky Canyon Pellet Co. here burst into flames in three minutes after an electrical explosion, the owner of the company said Tuesday.

The fire completely consumed the building and equipment inside, Lot Smith of Grangeville said. The fire was apparently caused by an electrical problem and reported about 6 p.m. Monday . Grangeville Rural Fire Chief Danny Tackett said it took less than three hours for the building to burn to rubbish.

No one was hurt in the fire, however, and other outbuildings and a nearby residence were saved.

Smith said the building was covered by insurance, "but probably not enough."

The plant was used to manufacture pellets burned in wood stoves. The company's website indicates it uses mostly natural red fir to make the pellets, resulting in pellets that burn hotter, longer and cleaner than other wood pellets.

Smith said the fire will cause a lull at the business, but he expects it to be only temporary.

"It was just a total loss and hopefully we'll try to get back up as quick as you can," Smith said.

But he said replacing the pellet manufacturing equipment will be difficult. Most of it is specialty equipment that is not readily available. He said it might be several months before all replacements are made.

There have been other fires at the company over the past years, Smith said, but most of them were small and easily extinguished. Monday's blaze occurred in the electrical section of the building and ignited boxes and other materials around it in an instant.

Ten firefighters from the local volunteer fire department responded to the fire, along with three engines. They were assisted by crews from the U.S. Forest Service , Idaho Forest Group and Primeland Corp.

The company has been in business since 2003 and also manufactures Rosebud horse bedding.

Hedberg may be contacted at [email protected] (208) 983-2326.

___

(c)2014 the Lewiston Tribune (Lewiston, Idaho)

Visit the Lewiston Tribune (Lewiston, Idaho) at www.lmtribune.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 342

[jetpack-related-posts]