Recently, a preteen tennis player came into Neeru Jayanthi’s clinic for follow-up on an overuse injury to his wrist.

Jayanthi, a sports medicine physician at Loyola University Medical Center in suburban Chicago, learned that the child’s coach had instructed him to take off his splint before a tryout, for fear that it would hinder his performance.

“He’s only 11!” Jayanthi says.

Jayanthi says this is emblematic of a growing emphasis on performance and specialization that has invaded many youth sports. Efforts to corral children into highly focused sports programs often arise from good intentions, Jayanthi says, yet research suggests that kids who specialize in a single sport when they’re young risk injury and burnout but don’t improve their odds of attaining an elite sports career.

The push to start children on focused training programs stems in part from the idea that practice distinguishes elites from the rest, a notion Malcolm Gladwell popularized with his “10,000-hour rule” in his book “Outliers.”

Citing research by Florida State University psychologist K. Anders Ericsson showing that a group of elite violinists accumulated an average of 10,000 hours of practice before reaching the top, Gladwell asserts that 10,000 hours is the “magic number for true expertise.”

Yet Gladwell’s rule contradicts the evidence regarding sports. Studies have found a wide range in the amount of practice that athletes require to reach the top, says David Epstein, author of “The Sports Gene,” a book that examines sports performance.

He points to Swedish athlete Stefan Holm as an example. Holm devoted most of his life to training for the high jump, only to lose the 2007 World Championships to a competitor who had taken up the event 18 months earlier.

Hours spent training are just one aspect of an athlete’s development; motivation and other psychological factors are also important, says Karin Moesch, a sports psychologist at the University of Copenhagen. Kids who complete many hours of concentrated training by age 12 or 13 may lose interest, Moesch says.

“They think, ‘I’ve already done enough of that,’ so they stop,” she says.

Injury is another concern. Jayanthi’s research team studied young athletes who had come to a clinic either for sports-related injuries or sports physicals. Among the 124 tennis players in the study, those who were injured spent more than five times as much time playing tennis as they did in unstructured recreation. Uninjured players spent slightly more than twice as much time in organized sports as in free play.

In another study, Jayanthi’s group evaluated about 1,200 athletes between the ages of 7 and 18, and found that injuries occurred more commonly among those who did specialized training.

“It’s not just the hours spent; it’s what you’re doing during that time,” Jayanthi says, and unstructured play appears less risky than organized practice. “Kids have self-restraint. When they’re playing for fun, they stop when they start to feel a strain, but if they’re at practice they may continue because they don’t want to let the coach down.” Early specialization cuts short a period when young athletes can sample a wide variety of sports, and robs them of the opportunity to stumble upon their best fit, Epstein says.

“Though narrowly focused child prodigies fascinate us and garner media attention, it turns out that later specializers are more the norm than the exception,” he writes in his book.