Obamacare providers forced to cover hormone therapy and more for gender reassignment.

If your health insurance premiums rise, it’s because you’re paying for more than your barely-more-than-emergency coverage. You’re paying for your mentally ill neighbor’s hormones to transition into whatever he or she is not.

He wasn’t born that way but you have to pay to make the change.

You will be paying for this insanity, according to an exuberant Atlantic writer:

The rule also changes the way “gender” is interpreted under the law. “On the definition of gender identity, it accepts that gender is not a binary,” Sepper said. “It occurs on a spectrum, and folks can even not have a gender.” This is a fairly radical shift—it accepts that people might identify as something other than “male” or “female.”

So, if you’re transgendered, broke, and want hormones, you’re all set.

If you want to keep your doctor and your premiums low, forget it. Only two weeks ago, we find out that Obamacare premiums are going to take off again. From the Hill:

Health insurance companies are laying the groundwork for substantial increases in ObamaCare premiums, opening up a line of attack for Republicans in a presidential election year. Many insurers have been losing money on the ObamaCare marketplaces, in part because they set their premiums too low when the plans started in 2014. The companies are now expected to seek substantial price increases. “There are absolutely some carriers that are going to have to come in with some pretty significant price hikes to make up for the underpricing that they did before,” said Sabrina Corlette, a professor at Georgetown University’s Center on Health Insurance Reforms, while noting that the final picture remains unclear. Insurers are already making the case for premium increases, pointing to a pool of enrollees that is smaller, sicker and costlier than they expected. The Blue Cross Blue Shield Association released a widely publicized report last month that said new enrollees under ObamaCare had 22 percent higher medical costs than people who received coverage through their employers. “The industry is clearly setting the stage for bigger premium increases in 2017,” said Larry Levitt, an expert on the health law at the Kaiser Family Foundation.

The worst part of this is that these regulations happen bureaucratically. No elected officials make these decisions. Obama flunkies running his various departments control your tax dollars and, with health care, your finances and life.

People who argued against Obamacare knew this was going to happen. Social justice warriors on the left are thrilled at these consequences. What is better than the already burdened middle class being stuck with paying for their most recent pet social project?

Making them pay for abortions.