Hil’s grilled, but Iraq’s ignored

Staten Island: In 2001-02, Congress created a joint inquiry by the House and Senate Intelligence committees that held 22 hearings (nine public and 13 closed) into the 9/11 attacks.

With a Republican-controlled Congress, various panels have held 21 hearings on Benghazi. A GOP-controlled House committee found that there was no wrongdoing by Obama administration officials.

In October 2015, Republican House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy commented on Fox News that they put together a Benghazi special committee, boasting that it hurt Hillary Clinton in the polls, which no doubt was its intention.

We have never had a committee to investigate how the Bush administration hoodwinked this country into a war without end. Those responsible have never been, nor will they ever be, held accountable for the worst foreign policy blunder of all time, the effects of which will reverberate in perpetuity. Michele Corelli

A woman’s prerogative

Deer Park, L.I.: First Hillary Clinton says she is against gay marriage, then she says she is for it. Next up, she says she is against coal mining, then she says she is for it. If she becomes President, at first she will be against Iran having nukes; after the treaty runs out, she will be in favor of it. I personally don't mind a woman President. Just not this one. Larry Nekola

A tale of two Easters

Manhattan: To Voicer Marie Walsh: The Five Boro Bike Tour has for many years taken place on the first Sunday of May. Catholic Easter, which follows the Gregorian calendar, was celebrated on March 27 this year. Orthodox Easter, which follows the Julian calendar, is celebrated on the first Sunday after the Jewish holiday of Passover, which turned out to be May 1. In 2015, the two Easters were just a week apart — April 5 and April 12, respectively. In 2017, both Easters will be celebrated on the same date, April 16. It’s unfortunate the bike tour fell on the same day as Pascha (Orthodox Easter) this year. I’m sure no disrespect was intended. Eva Kloot

What the L’s it all for?

Glendale: I would like to know why the L train was suspended weekend after weekend for Sandy repair over the last few years and now there will be a complete shutdown for repairs. What exactly were they doing all those weekends? Angie Rotondo

Don’t Stonewall Trump

Manhattan: It’s only taken 47 years for the Daily News to apologize for its sneering coverage of the Stonewall riot. Will it take that long to apologize for its sneering coverage of Donald Trump? Just asking. Nancy Brenner

Immigrant story

Manhattan: I am of African-American and American Indian descent. According to my mother, we come from the tribes of Ethiopia and the Seminoles here in America. Recently, over and over again, we’ve heard from ignorant racists like Donald Trump, Ted Cruz, etc., about their hatred of immigrants, about building walls, and deporting millions. Let me make something perfectly clear: There are only two nationalities in this country that are not immigrants, the Indians whom this country belonged to, and the Africans who were brought here kicking, screaming and fighting. Everyone else is an immigrant! So, all of you ignorant, hateful fools, go back to where you came from and let the rest of us enjoy our lives in what has become an even greater country since Barack Obama was elected President. Al Peterson

Check the record

Sunnyside: Voicer Ardina Cerra: Do you have any brains in your head? Just look at Trump’s track records with his business, his college, his overall attitude. Give me a break! A true New Yorker he is not. Marlene Alam

Crazy politics

Pompton Plains, N.J.: There are going to be so many loonies at the Republican National Convention, people are going to think they’re filming a sequel to “One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest.” Joseph Brown

Great for whom?

Manhattan: So far, nobody has explained what Trump means when he says he wants to “make America great again.” Does he mean return it to the control of straight white men? Take away the Obamacare benefits of millions of people? Close our borders to certain races or religions? Lower the minimum wage? Put the government in charge of women’s health? Bring back big coal? Make guns more widely available? Torture more suspects? Threaten any country that doesn’t obey our demands? Right now, America is pretty darn great, so why are so many people looking to Trump for what he seems to see as improvement? Carol Robinson

Good for the Jews

Brooklyn: To Voicer Cecile Low: Two years ago, my Yiddishe Mama was hospitalized in Bronxville, which at one time was a “restricted” community. She was given excellent care by a battalion of nurses, aides and even the cleaning staff — none of whom was Jewish or Caucasian. They even allowed me to sleep on a chair in her room and couldn’t have been more attentive to my comfort. Perhaps Ms. Low’s feelings of being slighted by Lenox Hill Hospital in 1991 had more to do with personality than religion. Suzanne Friedman

Time for a do-over

Cincinnati: Now that Ben Rhodes has revealed chapter two of the Obama Deception Operation (chapter one being the Jonathan Gruber effort designed to sell the flawed Obamacare program to “stupid” Americans with equally flawed and even untrue arguments), I wonder if editorial writers and featured columnists at esteemed liberal dailies — those so taken in by the deceptions on the Affordable Care Act and the nuclear agreement with Iran that they enthusiastically supported the targeted policies — will reconsider their opinions as they ponder the uncomfortable prospect that they were, all along, just administration stooges. What are the odds? Paul Bloustein

Fooled over and over

Holtsville, L.I.: So it’s been revealed that the Great Obama Nuke Deal is nothing more then lies — cooked up with phony stories to sell it. No one should be surprised by this. President Obama didn’t do anything he hasn’t been doing since day one. The only people who believed him were his progressive, liberal, Democratic buddies. I hope America wakes up; do you really want four more years of this? Joseph Beyhl

Miss something?

Brooklyn: The Daily News has wasted so many inconsequential front-page stories on Donald Trump, but the deceitful manipulation of the Iran nuclear deal by the Obama administration gets page 26. Your paper is pathetic. Geri Sullivan

Defending the indefensible

Richmond Hill: To Voicer Mike Lyga: Are you actually advocating for sexual predators? That they should be let alone, and never be punished for their crimes? This strikes me as being one of two possibilities: You are a victim who never got justice for himself, and now doesn’t want anyone else to get justice as a result, or you are, or know someone who is or was accused of being a predator. Feel free to clarify your position, though I doubt you will, since I likely won’t be the only person to openly question the motive of your letter. Fredrick Beondo

No horsing around

Maspeth: I was disappointed in the lack of coverage in your paper about the Kentucky Derby. It is an American tradition which millions of people wager on. And there was not one pick from your sportswriters on who they thought would win the race. I am sure now that Nyquist has won the Derby, the coverage for the Preakness will be a lot more informative. John Luby

How proudly does it wave?

Massapequa, L.I.: So, Bruce — sorry, I mean Caitlyn — Jenner will be on the cover of Sports Illustrated magazine wearing nothing but a flag. I am curious to know: Does the flag still have a pole, “Miss” Jenner? Raymond P. Moran

The company he keeps

Port Chester, N.Y.: So Al Sharpton is standing behind Bill de Blasio in the face of accusations of illegal fund-raising. Now I’m sure the mayor is guilty. Rocky Spizzirri