Regardless of which side of the line you fall on, the reality is that today Obamacare is a law and like every other law, we either obey the law or deal with the consequences of breaking it. So, how does Obamacare health insurance affect the average individual?

The Individual mandate is the part of the law which requires that most individuals have health insurance or face a penalty. There are a few exceptions to the individual mandate including;

You’re uninsured for less than 3 months of the year, The lowest-priced coverage available to you would cost more than 8% of your household income, You don’t have to file a tax return because your income is too low, You’re a member of a federally recognized tribe or eligible for services through an Indian Health Services provider, You’re a member of a recognized health care sharing ministry, You’re a member of a recognized religious sect with religious objections to insurance, including Social Security and Medicare, You’re incarcerated (either detained or jailed), and not being held pending disposition of charges, You’re not lawfully present in the U.S., You qualify for a hardship exemption [1].

The penalty for not being insured is calculated either as a percentage of your income or a flat fee – whichever is higher and is assessed when you file your federal tax return. The penalty for 2014 is 1% of your yearly household income or $95 per person for the year ($47.50 per child under 18). The maximum penalty per family using this method is $285. For 2015 the penalty is 2% of your yearly household income or $325 per person ($162.50 per child under 18) and is capped at $975 per household. The penalty increases every year. In 2016 it’s 2.5% of income or $695 per person. After that it's adjusted for inflation [2].

Purchasing health insurance seems like the better option until you consider the cost that goes with it. According to The National Conference of State Legislatures, as of March 2014, annual health insurance premiums edged beyond $16,000 for an average family [3]. No matter how much money you make $16,000 is a huge expense. For those at the lower end of the income scale, $16,000 is impossible. So the question is raised, how can Obamacare require individuals to purchase something they cannot afford. The answer comes by way of financial assistance through a government subsidy.

There are two forms of financial assistance available under the PPACA. Whether or not you are eligible for either of these programs, and how much assistance you may receive, is determined based on the number of individuals in your household and your household income.