Forecasts for Christmas Day call for skies to clear as temperatures fall a bit and winds kick up. But the temperatures will stay far too high for any remote chance of a white Christmas.

Following a soggy Christmas Eve, temperatures reached the 60s overnight, but had already dropped to the high 40s as a "cold front" arrived Christmas morning, said Tom Kines, a meteorologist for AccuWeather.

Kines said as skies turn sunny around midday, temperatures are expected to climb back into the 50s throughout New Jersey, but there will be winds averaging 20 to 30 mph.

"It's good kite-flying weather," Kines said. "It's good for outdoor sports if you don't mind the wind."

With sunnier weather in the forecast, both Mountain Creek ski resort in Vernon, and the Shawnee Mountain Recreation Center in East Stroudsburg, Pa., announced they would be open on Christmas Day, although the weather remains too warm to make new snow.

In a letter posted at Mountain Creek's website, skiers were told: "I know we're all bummed out as we're not waking up to a white Christmas, but to keep the spirit alive, celebrate the holiday today with Mountain Creek."

Vernon Peak at Mountain Creek will be operating from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., with both the Cabriolet and Sugar Quad available. The resort was closed amid the constant rain on Christmas Eve.

Shawnee Mountain announced it would be open from noon to 5 p.m. on Christmas Day. Skiing, snowboarding and snow tubing will all be available.

"We survived the warm weather, but we lost quite a bit of snow," said Jim Tust, a spokesman for Shawnee Mountain.

Ten of Shawnee's 23 ski trails will be open on Christmas Day, and an 11th may open on Friday, he said.

"Hopefully we can survive for the next few days," Tust added. "We're hanging in there."

He noted that with the snow and cold weather around Thanksgiving, "We got off to a flying start," but the recent warm weather has slowed business down a bit.

Some of the trails "are not as wide as we'd like them to be," Tust added.

But he said he expects business to pick up next week with some colder weather.

Ben Horowitz may be reached at bhorowitz@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @HorowitzBen. Find NJ.com on Facebook.