Sioux Falls, SD

South Dakota Junior Football helped put on another event to help moms get a better understanding of football.

Moms took part in drills on offensive, defense and special teams. Some moms even put on shoulder pads and helmets.

A special guest Saturday was Christine Golic. She's the wife of Mike Golic, former NFL defensive lineman and current ESPN Radio Personality. She's been working on an advisory committee with the NFL to help spread the word of preventing concussions by using safe protocols in every level of football.

"I always thought there was probably room for improvement and that's really why I wanted to get involved because I kind of wanted to be a part of the change. I thought the idea of heads-up football and having guidelines for organization like the one out here is a good thing so that everybody is one the same page with what they're teaching and what they're coaching," Golic said.

Golic has traveled across the country hearing concerns from football players' moms as part of the heads-up football program. This is her first stop that wasn't at an NFL facility.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.