Ben Carson, saying he felt had come back home to Regent University, made his case to be the nation’s next president Monday with a message about faith and togetherness.

Carson, who served two terms on Regent’s board, was the last of five Republican candidates seeking the party’s nomination to speak to a forum at the Christian university. Today, Virginians go to the polls for their Super Tuesday primary.

He said the nation had moved away from a virtuous path “because of political correctness that says there is no right, there is no wrong.”

As president, he added, “I would work very hard on eliminating the ban on Christianity in our public schools.”

With biblical allusions, he promised the audience that he’d pick wise counselors and stand firm against radical Islamic terrorism.

“Some people say I can’t be tough because I’m nice. I think David was nice — he was a nice shepherd boy but he was a pretty good warrior, too,” he said.

Ben Carson at Regent Aileen Devlin / Daily Press Presidential candidate Ben Carson speaks during a candidate forum held at Regent University in Virginia Beach on Monday, Feb. 29, 2016. No Mags, No Sales, No Internet, No TV Presidential candidate Ben Carson speaks during a candidate forum held at Regent University in Virginia Beach on Monday, Feb. 29, 2016. No Mags, No Sales, No Internet, No TV (Aileen Devlin / Daily Press)

It was a message that some in the audience traveled far to hear.

“It was good to hear him, without those other clowns interrupting,” said Randy Watkins, who drove two and a half hours from Dinwiddie County to hear Carson.

“He’s the president we need — I hope we get the one we need instead of the one we deserve,” said Carolyn Howard, of Newport News.

It is Carson’s religious faith above all else that convinced her and Watkins and most of his other supporters to listen.

“I had a student he treated, and his family told me he was such a godly man,” said Peggy Schrader, who retired to Suffolk after a career teaching in Maryland.

2016 presidential hopefuls visit Hampton Roads. Check this photo gallery for updates as candidates make campaign stops in Hampton Roads.

“Before he would operate, he would go with the family and pray together,” she said.

In remarks that emphasized faith and the importance of education, Carson told the Regent audience that the nation needs to emphasize those things that bring people together.

Taking a lead from Regent founder Pat Robertson, he bemoaned Washington’s reluctance to blame radical Islam for terrorism, and said the borders were wide open to terrorists.

He outlined a health care reform that would substitute a more flexible version of health savings accounts, in tandem with limited insurance to cover catastrophic illnesses or injuries, to replace the Affordable Care Act.

Later, in a message for Hampton Roads voters, he said it was particularly important to rebuild the military.

“If you don’t get the military right then the rest of it really doesn’t matter,” he said.

He has been running well behind in recent polls, averaging about 9 percent of likely Republican voters, but has rejected calls to drop from the race.

“My candidacy is about restoring the principles of self-government by running as a true citizen-statesman who is accountable to all and beholden to none,” he wrote in an essay posted Monday on the Fox News website.

Raised by a single mother, Carson struggled in his youth with bad grades and a fierce temper but turned himself around, graduating from Yale University and the University of Michigan Medical School.

He directed pediatric neurosurgery at the Johns Hopkins Children’s Center for 29 years and performed the first successful separation of conjoined twins, joined at the back of the head, in 1987.

Ress can be reached by telephone at 757-247-4535.