Two weeks after receiving a chorus of boos from a Washington gathering of Middle Eastern Christians, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, today delivered a biblically inspired speech invoking an Old Testament psalm and calling on social conservatives to hold their values and religious convictions near when faced with adversity.

“Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning,” Cruz repeated, citing Psalm 30:5 at the 2014 Values Voter Summit in Washington.

Addressing a friendly crowd of more than 200 at the Omni Shoreham hotel, where he had been booed Sept. 10, Cruz recounted the story of Meriam Ibrahim Ishag, the young mother sentenced to death in her home country of Sudan for refusing to renounce her Christian faith.

Cruz, one of the most vocal champions for her freedom, met with the 27-year-old mother of two after she was ultimately freed. He said he was struck by her unyielding devotion to God, especially at a time when her faith was tested.

“Anyone who forgets the promise,” Cruz said, “simply remember, ‘joy cometh in the morning.’ ”

>>> 7 in 10 Americans Think Role of Religious Has Decreased in Public Life

Ishag will be honored tomorrow night at the gathering’s concluding banquet.

The Texas Republican and conservative favorite went on to note many other Americans imprisoned around the world, including Christian missionary Kenneth Bae, held in North Korea; government contractor Alan Gross, held in Cuba; and Marine Sgt. Andrew Tahmooressi Army, held in Mexico.

Cruz also struck a personal tone with the audience, telling the story of his own father, Rafael, who was imprisoned in Cuba at age 17. After his mother and father escaped the communist country, Cruz recalled, his father battled with alcoholism and left his mother when the future senator was 3 years old.

But Rafael Cruz found God, his son recounted, and returned to help raise him. Cruz added:

This country was built on a revolution on an idea that our rights don’t come from government, they come from Almighty God. As the Declaration said, ‘We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal and are endowed’ — not by a king, not by a queen, not even by an all-powerful president — but ‘endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights.’

Two weeks ago, Cruz faced criticism from some Christian leaders from the Middle East who booed his remarks in support of Israel and Jews at the first-ever In Defense of Christians conference, also at the Omni Shoreham.

>>> Bishop Who Led Prayer After Cruz Heckling Says Texas Senator ‘Came Out Slugging’

At the Values Voter Summit, Cruz called on attendees to cherish their values and religious liberty because “I’m convinced God isn’t done with America yet.”

And referring to adversity not just on Capitol Hill but around the country, Cruz once again recited the Bible verse he hoped would inspire this crowd: