Poverty and lack of contraception lead to ONE IN THREE Detroit babies being aborted making this American city 'more like a third world country'

Doctors have compared the rate unborn babies are killed to that of a a Third World country

31 per cent of all pregnancies in Detroit ends at an abortion mill, while in the State of Michigan, that number is 14 per cent

Report links high abortion rate to poverty and lack of birth control



Poverty and a lack of contraception means one in three babies are aborted in Detroit.

A new report about the high number of terminations in the Motor City in Detroit have been compared to the worst rates on earth.

'We’re seeing a picture that looks more like some Third World country than someplace in the United States,' Dr. Susan Schooley, head of the Department of Family Medicine at Henry Ford Hospital, told The Detroit News.

Detroit is considered by many to be a failed city because of its financial devastation.

Sad story: Nearly one-third of all pregnancies in the city of Detroit end in abortion, a statistic public health officials blame on rising poverty and dwindling access to affordable contraception

On the rise: The abortion rate for women who reside in Detroit has increased steadily since 2000, even though the statewide abortion rate has decreased

The report reveals that an estimated 31 percent of pregnancies there end in abortion, what one doctor compared to the worst rates on earth

By comparison, some of the very worst abortion rates around the world are some of the most repressive nations.

Vietnam has an rate of 83 abortions per 1,000 women, the Russian Federation, where the rate is 68, and Ukraine, where the rate is 57 per 1,000 women.

Although measured in a slightly different way showed there were 5,693 abortions among 18,360 pregnancies in Detroit during 2012.

Statewide, there were 22,699 abortions among 160,219 pregnancies in Michigan.

It means there were 37.9 per 1,000 women aged 15-44 abortions in 2012, up from 27.5 per 1,000 women in 2001.

Statistics: The abortion rate in Detroit alone is so high is has been compared by some as a Third World country

Overall, the U.S. abortion rate in 2011, the most recent data available, was 17 per 1,000 women.

The report believes poverty in the city is a huge contributing factor.

Detroit has dropped in population over the last few decades as hundreds of thousands of residents have left.

During 2013 the state intervened in its finances because the city was faced with a continued decline in its tax revenue, while costs, especially those for lucrative city pensions negotiated by unions over the years, were skyrocketing.

Last year the state intervened in its finances because of an insurmountable debt facing taxpayers.

Also, there are no longer any taxpayer subsidies for contraceptives. Funding dropped from more than $5 million in 2006 to about $700,000 in 2013.

'It’s another public health challenge for Detroit, which is the most dangerous city in America to be a child, according to a Detroit News study.



Published in January, the study found that the death rate for childre

n 18 and younger is higher in Detroit than in any U.S. city its size or larger.



The highest number of deaths occur in the first year, most related to premature birth. Homicide is the second greatest cause of child deaths in the city,' the News report said.

'Both routine primary care and family planning-specific primary care are not available in Detroit,' Dr Schooley told the Detroit News.



'To the extent that a significant proportion of those (pregnancies) are unplanned, it leads to all these decision-making options of which abortion is one lousy choice.'

Health professionals say they expect Obamacare will reduce abortions by providing funding for more birth control.