The Democratic National Committee has been criticized for scheduling its debates at times when few Americans are likely to be tuning in, like last night: a Saturday before Christmas when voters are out shopping, watching the new “Star Wars,” or vacationing. Hiding the debates is allegedly a plot to help the well-known Hillary Clinton, who, like all front-runners, isn’t eager to give her opponents any extra exposure. And indeed there was at least one well-known political junkie who didn’t bother to watch: Barack Obama.

Obama was on vacation in Hawaii, playing a round at the Kaneohe Klipper Golf Course, while Clinton, Bernie Sanders, and Martin O’Malley spent two hours in New Hampshire debating what each would do as his replacement. If Obama was conspicuously uninterested in what the three candidates had to say, the feeling was mutual. Astonishingly, Barack Obama, the first African-American President, one reëlected with a comfortable four-point margin and whose approval rating among Democrats remains in the eighties, was mentioned by the candidates just four times—once by O’Malley and three times by Clinton.

When Obama was mentioned, it was generally in passing. While delivering an attack on Clinton, O’Malley noted that she had a different position on guns when she ran against Obama, in 2008. When asked about a pledge not to raise taxes on Americans making more than two hundred thousand dollars a year, Clinton said that Obama had made the same pledge. Her second mention of Obama was relatively positive. “I think that we need to build on the work of the policing commissioner that President Obama impanelled,” she said, after being asked about criminal-justice reform. Her final mention of the President was about how crucial it is that she replace him. “I know how important it is that we have a Democrat succeed President Obama in the White House,” Clinton said. “And I will do all that I can in this campaign to reach out and explain what I stand for and what I will do as President.”

The White House spent the last week before Obama left for vacation aggressively making the case that Obama’s second term has been historically significant, and that 2015 was a year filled with accomplishments. White House aides and Obama himself held private briefings for the press pushing this message, and Obama capped it off with a press conference, on Friday afternoon, at which he bragged about his successes this year: the unemployment rate reduced to five per cent, wages growing, a record number of Americans with health insurance, health-care inflation in check, a major climate agreement negotiated in Paris, a nuclear deal made with Iran, improved relations with Cuba, marriage equality legalized in every state, and a bipartisan budget deal. On his most challenging national-security issue, Obama insisted that America was “squeezing ISIL ’s heart,” in Syria and Iraq to “make it harder for them to pump their terror and propaganda to the rest of the world.”

The Democrats running for President, especially Clinton, seem to have missed Obama’s press conference. On the economy, Clinton stressed what was wrong rather than what Obama had fixed. “At the center of my economic policy is raising incomes,” she said, “because people haven’t been able to get ahead, and the cost of everything, from college tuition to prescription drugs, has gone up.”

When asked about the Affordable Care Act, Clinton quickly cited two aspects of the law that were successful, and then moved on to the ways she would improve it. She did not mention that Obama had just signed into law a delay in the so-called Cadillac tax on high-cost insurance plans, a policy she had previously argued was one of the crucial ways in which she would amend the A.C.A.

On foreign policy, Clinton distanced herself even more from Obama. As she has in the past, she noted that Obama rejected her advice on what to do about Syria when the civil war there first started. “I advocated arming the moderate opposition back in the day when I was still Secretary of State, because I worried we would end up exactly where we are now,” Clinton said. Her suggestion seemed to be that if Obama had listened to her, the current situation would not be nearly as dire, an argument Obama has said is a “fantasy.”

In another subtle rebuke to Obama, who has been heavily criticized for stating earlier this month that ISIS had been “contained,” Clinton said, “I have a plan that I’ve put forward to go after ISIS . Not to contain them, but to defeat them.” It was a particularly uncharitable distinction to make, considering that the President’s comment about ISIS being “contained” was in the very specific context of the group’s geographic growth in Iraq and Syria. Moreover, Clinton’s plan to defeat ISIS is little different than Obama’s, with the exception of her call for a no-fly zone, the practical benefits of which are dubious.

Finally, Clinton talked about American leadership in a way that had an awfully familiar ring if you’ve been watching the Republican debates. Clinton oddly took credit for a United Nations Security Council resolution on Syria, which Secretary of State John Kerry helped secure on Friday. “Now that Russia has joined us in the Security Council, has adopted an agreement that we hashed out a long day in Geneva three years ago, now I think we can have those conversations,” she said, without giving any credit to Obama or Kerry.

Later on in the debate, she returned to the subject and suggested, just as many Republicans do, that Obama has failed to show American leadership. “And we finally have a U.N. Security Council Resolution bringing the world together to go after a political transition in Syria. If the United States does not lead, there is not another leader. There is a vacuum. And we have to lead, if we’re going to be successful.” Perhaps this was just a generic statement about American leadership and not actually an implicit criticism of Obama. But it seemed to have an accusatory tone, and it accords with what is known about how Clinton and those around her privately assess Obama’s foreign-policy record.

Any candidate trying to replace a member of her own party as President runs into the issue of how to grapple with the current occupant’s record. There is a natural tension between Obama’s interest in polishing his legacy and emphasizing every achievement in his final months in office and Clinton’s strategic need to respond to the real problems that voters face. But if the balance gets too out of whack, Clinton risks running a campaign that seems more like a repudiation of Obama than one that defines her as his natural heir.

Perhaps things would be better if the candidates watched Obama’s press conferences and Obama watched their debates.