It's a crime: I just read John Archibald's column in the Sunday paper, and I think he's missing the main point. Most people are running out of Mobile because of the crime rate. He mentions race, and we did have a black mayor. But there was a big surplus of money before he came into office and then we had a big deficit when he left. We could have built roads or bought some land from the coal company that left or built a boat launch from downtown, but instead we have to figure out how to make up this deficit. Until we get a handle on the crime rate, people will continue to leave.

No way out: The new I-65 corridor is going to become obsolete. You can use it to get to downtown, but you can't get over to I-10 with the Water Street exits closed. Everyone has an idea of how to make things better, but closing these exits is cutting off a clear access point. Change for its own sake doesn't make it progress.

Best-kept secret: People on the news talk about how much nicer it is in Baldwin County instead of Mobile. They need to keep their mouths shut if they want it to stay that way. All the low-class trash will find a way to move over there if they get tired of living in West Mobile.

Waterlogged: Everyone in Mobile wants to know who the moron is that wants Sam Jones on the water board. The water board members don't want him on there; just ask them. If he was working really working hard, Trinity Gardens wouldn't flood every time it rains. What is wrong with Mobile?

Too quiet: I am bitterly disappointed that the entire Alabama congressional delegation has not spoken out forcefully about the mess in the Veterans' Administration. I find their silence disgusting.

Learn the lesson: The Veterans' Administration is government-run healthcare, and look at how they treat our service people. Now we have Obamacare, and civilians will end up in the same shape. How can the liberals continue to praise this system? It's not benefiting the middle class. It's only designed to help those who are making no effort to help themselves. Maybe they'll open their eyes when it's one of their family members laying in the hospital waiting for the government to make a decision on treatment and they end up dead.

Add your comments to the Press-Register News Sound Off by calling (800) 945-9773 or (251) 219-5780. And don't forget to add your comments to Sports Sound Off by calling (800) 568-4123 or (251) 219-5779. Same rules apply for both -- those who call in with comments for consideration may speak their minds on any sports topics they wish. We reserve the right to edit call-ins and comments for length and clarity.