RoughRiders tops Thompson Valley in four sets to reach state tournament

Roosevelt's Breanne Hankins, middle, spikes the ball past Thompson Valley's Emily Newton, left, and Hannah McCrimmon during set three Saturday, 3 during the Class 4A Regional Volleyball tournament at RHS. (Steve Stoner)

JOHNSTOWN -- Hearing the crowd chanting her name was enough to motivate Aspen Olson, and it may be responsible for landing her team a spot in the state championship tournament.

The Roosevelt senior served for seven-straight points in a decisive fourth set that contributed to her 13 kills against Thompson Valley on Saturday. Her effort shifted the game's momentum in favor of the RoughRiders, who went on to defeat the Eagles (25-22, 21-25, 25-22, 25-20) in their Class 4A regional stage of the postseason.

"It really does build you up. When I hear the cheering, for me specifically, it gets me going and really excited; it makes you want to go for it," Olson said of her home crowd support. "We've been training all season for this, and to make it back to state is an incredible feeling."

Thompson Valley's Hannah McCrimmon sets the ball during game 1 against Roosevelt on Saturday at RHS. Thompson Valley capped its season with a 13-11 record. (Steve Stoner)

Roosevelt and Thompson Valley both faced a must-win situation in hopes of reaching the state championships, setting up a win or go home scenario for the northern Colorado rivals.

The match had a high level of competition right from the start as the teams experienced five ties and three lead changes in the first set, but it was a 5-2 run to close the frame out that allowed Roosevelt to come out on top.

Thompson Valley was quick to answer with a set victory of its own in the following game, making things even going into the break.

"We knew of that competitiveness coming into this one," Roosevelt coach Lindsey Brown said. "Now that we're in the postseason, it's a level playing field. The slate was wiped clean, sending us in here with having the same record as everyone else."

Advertisement

After the second set, the Riders had their eyes set on putting things away not allowing the Eagles to lead again for the rest of the match. A pair of early runs to begin the third and fourth sets put Thompson Valley in a hole that proved to be too big to climb out of, forced to watch Roosevelt claim both of them.

"There are only 12 teams that get to go to state and we had an opportunity to be one of them. Roosevelt was great, they did everything perfectly the way that they needed to and are a great team," Thompson Valley coach Nathan Fristed said. "Of course it (stinks) to lose, but this program is at a level where we're now a driving force, where we weren't before."

Rather than dwell on not making the cut, Fristed and his team are focused on the bigger picture.

Thompson Valley reflects back on its 13-11 season as a step in the right direction with making it to regionals. For the seven seniors on the Eagles roster, this year was about leaving their mark for future classes to look up to.

"It's disappointing to end the season the way we did, but the legacy that the seniors have left for this team is to show that anything is possible," said Hannah McCrimmon, who led TV with 39 assists. "There's a bar set that the next girls will be shooting to reach."

Roosevelt now awaits tournament seeding to be released on Sunday that will decide who it faces in the first round of the state championships at the Denver Coliseum next weekend.

"It's a great privilege to get to play at the Coliseum, it's what we've been working day in and day out for," Brown said. "The fact that the seniors get to end their careers there will be an honor."

Quentin Sickafoose can be reached on Twitter @QSickafoose.