New Jersey’s state and local tax system is fairer than most states, though low- and middle-income residents still devote a larger share of their income to taxes than the wealthy.

A study released Wednesday by New Jersey Policy Perspective and the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy says that despite New Jersey’s progressive income tax system, which charges much higher rates as income rises, sales and property taxes take a disproportionate bite at lower incomes.

New Jersey Policy Perspective president Gordon MacInnes said an income-tax cut, as Gov. Chris Christie suggested though didn’t propose in his State of the State, would increase that imbalance. The report suggests the state instead reverse a cut made in 2010 to the earned income tax credit for the working poor.

“It’s bad enough trying to survive on limited incomes in high-cost New Jersey, but it’s shameful that the state’s tax policies continue to levy the heaviest burden on those struggling the most,” MacInnes said.

Eleven states and the District of Columbia were deemed fairer than New Jersey – in order, Delaware, D.C., California, Oregon, Montana, Vermont, Minnesota, Maine, Idaho, West Virginia, New York and South Carolina – and 38 states less fair.

The report says New Jersey’s poorest households pay 10.7 percent of their income toward taxes, primarily due to property taxes’ impact on their rent but also due to sales and excise taxes.

Meanwhile, the richest households pay 7.1 percent of their income toward state and local taxes, the study found. The levy would be much closer to a level balance if not for the tax-lowering benefit wealthy households receive by using federal income taxes to partially offset their taxes by itemizing deductions.

Households in that wide range in the middle, with incomes between $22,000 and $758,000, generally experience an overall tax bill amounting to around 9 percent of income, though the report says people with incomes between $119,000 and $263,000 have a slightly lower bill through the federal offset.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1IKO7S7