ORLANDO — For older Americans, the days of ending every visit to the doctor with a new prescription could be ending.

Studies show the average 75-year-old American takes more than 10 drugs for various ailments. But overmedication of elders has been linked to falls, kidney failure and even heart attacks, and discussions at the American Geriatrics Society’s annual scientific meeting here this week suggest that physicians are getting serious about paring down older adults’ drug regimens.

One challenge they’re learning how to share with their patients: In a new health care environment where treatments must be based on good medical evidence, there have been few studies of how prescription drugs — including some potent painkillers — actually work in older adults.

Research on their safety and effectiveness has been limited to middle-aged patients who don’t have the overlapping health complications that can cause dangerous, even fatal, drug interactions.

“I would submit that the long-term risks and benefits in older populations remain unknown,” M. Carrington Reid, a geriatrics professor at Weill Cornell Medical College, said at a conference session on opioids for chronic pain. “We’re in an evidence-based era, and yet we don’t have sufficient data to warrant long-term use.”

Coping with the new demands of health care reform was a prominent topic at the four-day conference, which ended Saturday. So was end-of-life care.

But the emerging theme of communicating and partnering with older patients in weighing treatment options that are often limited or risky drew standing-room-only crowds.

Tough choices

Choosing Wisely, a physicians’ initiative that aims to stem the overuse of unnecessary tests and treatments that can be costly or harmful, was the subject of several workshops here.

One, titled “When Patients Want More Despite the Evidence,” was designed to help doctors have honest conversations with older patients and caregivers about the downsides of specific treatments.

Complicating such communication is what doctors call the “pain paradox.” While some patients abuse powerful narcotics without sufficient symptoms to justify their use, others are suffering needlessly.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that 12.5 million Americans take painkillers for unintended reasons, while the Institute of Medicine says some 100 million adults are dealing with chronic pain.

“I’m sure all of you are struggling with this in your own practice,” said Christine Ritchie, a professor at the University of California at San Francisco. “We have this incredible tension that many of us feel, between worries about prescription misuse and the inadequate treatment of persistent pain.”

“Pseudoaddiction” — drug-seeking behavior among people whose pain has gone undertreated — is commonly mistaken for addiction or abuse, Ritchie said. With sparse evidence about what really works in older adults, she said, communication and close monitoring of painkiller use are a doctor’s best options.

“It’s very important to make sure they’re experiencing some benefit in terms of improved functions or quality of life, and that they know the risk factors for harm,” she said. “And patient agreement has to be done carefully with older adults. You might say, ‘Just in case you didn’t know, it’s actually a felony to share your pain medication with somebody else.’ ”

About 10 percent of adults 65 and older take opioids — narcotics like morphine or oxycodone. And 40 percent receive at least one prescription in a given year for NSAIDs — nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen, Aleve and Celebrex. (NSAIDs are also available over the counter, and can be dangerous for people with high blood pressure, heart failure or kidney disease.)

Emphasis on assessing pain by using the 1-to-10 scale, he believes, has led to overtreatment. And studies show that opioids are a significant cause of falls and fractures for older adults.

“What I’ve come to, over 20 years of practice,” said Reid, “is that if an NSAID or opioid is not an option, it’s important to communicate the reason why.

“Not discussing it can be problematic. We need to elicit patients’ beliefs and attitudes about medication, and reinforce the tradeoff aspects of all analgesic prescriptions.”

Adverse reactions

For the typical 75-year-old taking more than 10 prescription drugs, the likelihood of at least one adverse reaction is close to 100 percent, said Michael W. Rich, a cardiology professor at Washington University.

The average number of adverse reactions is four.

Most people taking cardiac medications, he said, have other serious conditions that also need to be addressed.

“NSAIDs are bad for heart failure patients for multiple reasons; they promote water retention and they directly counteract many drugs,” he said. “And yet arthritis symptoms may be the most severe symptoms a person has. We don’t have great alternatives, to this day.”

Patients need to be in control of treatment decisions, Rich added; the most doctors can do is clearly explain possible benefits and risks. He cited a survey of chronic-heart-failure patients, with an average age of 77, half of whom said they would not want to be resuscitated if their hearts stopped.

But when asked if they would be willing to trade the length of their time remaining for more comfort and a higher quality of life, about 70 percent said no.

“I think this is a very individualized issue,” Rich said. “The only way we’re going to know this is by asking the patient.”