Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

From this morning’s LBO Wire:

Business advisory firm Ankura Consulting Group landed a growth equity commitment of $100 million from Madison Dearborn Partners, Laura Cooper reports.

Ankura provides corporate investigation, dispute and litigation support, expert witness, forensic accounting, geopolitical risk assessment, transaction advisory, turnaround, restructuring, valuation and visual communications services. Founded in 2014, the Dallas company has offices in New York, Washington, D.C., Atlanta and Los Angeles.

More stories available to LBO Wire subscribers:

L Catterton made a growth investment in Latin American fitness chain Bodytech Corp., the consumer-focused firm’s first investment in the region...Morgan Stanley Infrastructure closed fundraising for its sophomore offering, raising $3.6 billion the new fund…And Investcorp made a majority investment in Wrench Group, taking over control of the home maintenance and repair services provider from Alpine Investors and Skylight Capital.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere:

Intuit is selling its Quicken segment to H.I.G. Capital about six months after the maker of TurboTax said it was looking to pare down, writes Lisa Beilfuss for The Wall Street Journal.

Sports Authority Holdings Inc. received court approval Thursday to use a portion of its $595 million bankruptcy loan and to begin liquidating a number of its stores, reports Lillian Rizzo for the Journal. Leonard Green & Partners acquired the retailer in a $1.3 billion leveraged buyout in 2006.

Perseus Books Group, backed by Centre Lane Partners, agreed to sell the last remaining piece of its business—its physical and digital distribution services group—to Ingram Content Group for an undisclosed price, writes Jeffrey A. Trachtenberg for the Journal.

Meanwhile, Hachette Book Group agreed to acquire the publishing arm of the Perseus Books Group about a year and a half after its earlier agreement to buy the entire company fell apart, Mr. Trachtenberg writes.

London firm Cinven is nearing a first and final close of 6.5 billion euros for its latest buyout fund, according to people familiar with the matter, report Yolanda Bobeldijk and Shasha Dai for U.K. sister publication Private Equity News. (Subscription required.)

Write to Mike Lucas at michael.lucas@wsj.com