Unhealthy numbers: The NSW health system appears to be including "virtual beds" in its bed count. Photo: Michele Mossop

The beleaguered NSW health system has come under renewed attack with allegations that its bed count includes people sleeping in their own homes, parents staying with sick children and patients being moved between hospitals.

One in 10 hospital bed categories are for "virtual beds", which are defined in a policy directive obtained by NSW Labor as the category to be used when there are no physical beds in the hospital.

They can also be used as "the second or third establishment of the same physical bed".

People taking up "virtual beds" include those on the "hospital in the home" program, mental health, aged and disability patients participating in social day programs, those using mobile beds within a vehicle and relatives staying with patients.

Advertisement

NSW opposition health spokesman Walt Secord said the inclusion of virtual beds was "a glorified paper exercise" designed to create the impression of actual beds.

"The word 'virtual' is, to my mind, a bed that doesn't exist," Mr Secord said.

Health Minister Jillian Skinner claimed in February that NSW was on track to make 1390 additional beds available by March 2015.

According to its annual report, NSW had 21,268 beds in 2013-14, an increase of 576 beds from five years previously.

But there has been a reduction in the number of beds available for admissions from the emergency department, and most of the increase has been met by "other hospital beds", such as day services, and "other beds", such as hospital in the home.

Ms Skinner said on Sunday that she had increased transparency since becoming health minister by separating beds into a range of categories.

This had also helped hospitals to manage patient flow and plan for changes in demand.

"In Opposition, I was highly critical of Labor for lumping beds that were available for transferring patients from the emergency department and other beds, which were not, into one count," she said.

A spokeswoman for NSW Health said hospital in the home was a "nationally recognised and highly valuable service modality" which saved patients from being admitted to hospital.

It was only counted as a hospital bed while that service was provided, she said.

But Mr Secord said Labor would introduce a more comprehensive breakdown of the classifications if it won government.

"When Mrs Skinner says there are record numbers of hospital beds, she's giving the wrong impression that they are genuine hospital beds," Mr Secord said.

"It is no wonder the health system is under pressure and people are waiting in emergency departments for hospital beds."

Fewer than 50 per cent of patients in some western Sydney hospitals were being treated within four hours of arriving at emergency departments, according to hospital quarterly data released on Thursday.

NSW Australian Medical Association president Saxon Smith said it was unclear how many hospital beds had been added to the system under the Coalition, but whatever increase there had been was not adequate to cater to the demand.

"We will be calling for commitment to increased bed numbers so that a target of 85 per cent bed occupancy at 5pm allows for surge capacity in the hospital system and minimises bed block.

"This will help ED patient flow, ambulance offloading and patient care."

But he said virtual beds were created to capture data "in the intersection between hospital and hospital-in-home programs" rather than to inflate delivery of promised bed numbers.

The guidelines surrounding virtual beds are contained in a NSW Health policy directive that was reviewed in 2012 and a NSW Health document on bed type codes.