Age: 69

Family: Married to Kitty (Kirk) Crenshaw for 44 years with two grown daughters and two granddaughters.

Occupation: Investment Banker

Education: Robert E. Lee High School, Jacksonville; University of Georgia,Â B.A. on basketball scholarship; and University of Florida, Law Degree.

Political Experience: Member of Florida State Legislature (1972-1978) after work in the private sector as an attorney. Member of Florida State Senate (1986-1994), and, in 1992, first Republican to be elected President of the Florida State Senate. Continued to work as an investment banker while serving in Florida legislature. Elected United States House of Representatives in 2000.

What do you see as the top three issue in this race?

As the Constitution tells me, my number one priority is to protect our national security;

Growing the economy and creating jobs by cutting heavy-handed regulation and repealing and replacing ObamaCare;

Holding President Obama and the federal government accountable to the American taxpayer.





How can you help voters in a way that others running for this office cannot?

As a lifelong resident of Jacksonville whose family has called Northeast Florida home for more than100 years, I have a deep understanding and connection to the region and its residents. I bring that background and my experience on Capitol Hill as a proven Conservative to the decision-making process in order to reach common-sense goals and positive results for Florida and the nation.

As Chairman of the Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Committee, I have direct oversight over the budgets of 20 federal agencies and am in a position to make sure they listen to taxpayers and use hard-earned taxpayer dollars efficiently and effectively. For example, I led the fight to cut more than a billion dollars from the Internal Revenue Service Budget in the House Fiscal Year 2015 Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Bill.

As the only Floridian on the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, I review every line of the defense budget to make sure that our men and women at First Coast military bases and around the globe have the resources they need to protect our national security.

What would you hope to be remembered for accomplishing after serving in this office?

That I contributed toward creating a safe, bright, and hopeful future for my district, state, and our nation through a strong military, less government regulation, and more government accountability to the American taxpayer.

Campaign Website: AnderCrenshaw.com | Facebook