Employers in West Michigan generally held firm this year in the health coverage they offer employees, incorporating only “mild” changes in benefits packages even as they continued to look for ways to curtail rising costs.

The findings from the 2015 survey of employer health care costs by The Employers’ Association in Grand Rapids indicate that reported benefits changes this year were “not drastic” and employers largely “are just sitting with the status quo,” said Maggie McPhee, the organization’s director of information services.

“There are certainly no wild swings,” McPhee said.

The 2015 results are similar to findings over the last couple of years. While employers continue to search for “anything they possibly can” to contain rising costs, they are not shifting the financial burden for health coverage onto workers as fast or as hard as they once did through higher co-pays and having employees pay a larger percentage of the premiums.

More employers now are looking for different solutions to high costs such as wellness or moving to high-deductible plans with an HSA or HRA attached to a contribution from the company, she said.

“They don’t want to push too much on to the employees. If they can change any other features of the plan, then they can save costs without having to push costs to the employees,” McPhee said. “They look at it as, ‘What can I afford? What did I do last year and what can I do this year to keep this the same as much as possible and still afford it?’”

Some of that thinking stems from a tightening labor market, she said.

As employers have a harder time finding skilled or qualified workers, they become more hesitant to make major changes in their health plans through cost-shifting.

“Right now, attraction and retention is huge in the workplace,” McPhee said. “Nobody can find anybody.”

Many employers generally reported year-to-year premium increases of 3 percent to 5 percent from 2014 to 2015, although some individual employers experienced higher changes — in some instances much higher — depending on the composition of their workforce and their benefits package.

The average annual premium paid this year by the 178 survey respondents for a family health plan in West Michigan is $13,776. The average reported annual premium for a one-person health plan is $5,004.

Average premiums are across all product lines — HMO, PPO and point-of-service plans — and reflect the costs of policies after employers alter benefits to mitigate cost increases.

The moderation of annual rate adjustments the last few years could change in 2016 as a grandfathered clause expires for health plans with benefit packages that do not comply with the Affordable Care Act. That will force those employers to move to ACA-compliant plans that meet federal coverage and affordability mandates and follow different underwriting methods that are used to set rates.

“Next year, things are going to start to get crazy” for employers with grandfathered health plans, McPhee said.



LOWER RATES AHEAD?

Small employers using Priority Health or Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan can, on average, expect small premium decreases for 2016.

Based on claims trends, Blue Cross Blue Shield in the spring projected a 2.2-percent average rate decrease for clients statewide, and an average of 4.8 percent for Blue Care Network policies. West Michigan small businesses could see premium decreases of 1.35 percent for Blues policies and 3.95 percent for Blue Care Network in 2016.

Actual premium adjustments will vary based on an employer’s benefits package and where they are located in the state. Averages also are calculated prior to employers making any changes in their benefits packages when they renew policies.

Priority Health plans to implement an average rate decrease in the small group market of 2.1 percent for HMO policies and 8.3 percent for PPO products, said Chief Marketing Officer Joan Budden.

Nationally, the National Business Group on Health this month reported that large-employer members project average rate increases of 6 percent for 2016 policy renewals before making any benefits changes, and 5 percent after changes.

Among the employers Mick Young works with in the region, one-third generally saw premium increases of 8 percent or more this year. A third had premium increases of 4 percent to 8 percent, and the remaining third had changes of 4 percent or less.

Young, a principal and business leader for benefits firm Mercer in Grand Rapids, doubts whether the rate moderation of the last few years can continue much longer. While changes in claims trends and benefits designs have affected premiums, costs continue to rise at care providers.

“There’s nothing that’s changed in our system of delivery,” Young said. “I see us having to pay the piper for the moderation of the last four to five years.”



GROWTH IN WELLNESS

Elsewhere in The Employers’ Association survey, wellness remains a steady growth area with 42 percent of respondents saying they now offer some form of a workplace wellness program, versus 33 percent in 2010. Employers for years have been showing an increased willingness to invest in wellness to improve the health and productivity of workers and curtail rising medical claims.

“They’d rather pay to keep people healthy overall. That’s certainly more cost-effective,” McPhee said.

Health plans over the years have been offering more products for wellness. One of the latest entries is Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan’s introduction this fall of an online wellness platform from WebMD Health Services for clients who want to start a wellness program.

The WebMD service offers online employee health-risk assessments, plus health coaching and information accessed via a mobile app or website. Blue Cross Blue Shield made the service available at no cost to clients of all sizes, although it may prove most beneficial to small and mid-sized businesses that typically lack the administrative staff needed to run a wellness program.

The service is designed for easy adoption by small and mid-sized employers that have wanted to move into wellness benefits but don’t have the structure to manage it.

“It’s a product that they just implement into their employee base and it just runs itself,” said Cindy Bjorkquist, director of health and wellness programs at Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan. “It was designed to help that small and middle group have this off-the-shelf product that you can implement right away and just go with it.”



PUSH FOR HIGHER DEDUCTIBLES

The Employers’ Association’s 2015 survey results also indicate continued movement toward high-deductible health plans as a long-term cost-saving strategy.

Agents say transitioning to a high-deductible plan can over time affect claims as employees make better decisions about how and when they access the system, largely because they are paying more out-of-pocket costs for their care.

“There’s a change in utilization. The likelihood of going to get those services is diminished to some degree,” said Greg Kuhn, a senior health care adviser with the Grand Rapids office of benefits firm Mercer. “People choose a little wiser as to what services they see and what services they go for.”

As a result, employers with high-deductible plans tend to experience a lower medical claims trend by two to three percentage points, potentially, although “every case is different and based on its demographics and the plan’s experience,” Young said. “It’s hard to generalize.”