BEND, Ore. -

The Pacific Power Foundation recently awarded a $3,000 grant to Volunteers in Medicine Clinic of the Cascades (VIM) to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of medical referrals.

VIM provides healthcare on a donation basis to uninsured, low-income adults that are not eligible for, or able to access, medical care through Affordable Care Act programs. These healthcare services are made possible thanks to the big-hearted efforts of hundreds of donors, more than 250 medical and non-medical volunteers in the VIM clinic, and over 400 community medical partners who are located throughout Central Oregon.

"The community medical partners extend the reach of what we can do in the clinic. They represent 43 different medical specialties and 119 medical groups, clinics and facilities. Through a collaborative effort, VIM patients are able to get the care they need upon referral," said Kat Mastrangelo, Executive Director of VIM. "The Pacific Power Foundation grant will support VIM's referral process to help ensure that our patients are well informed and able to maximize their time with these generous providers."

"We are pleased to present a Pacific Power Foundation grant to VIM to support the outstanding services they provide to the working and uninsured in Central Oregon," shared Angela Price, Pacific Power Regional Community Manager. "Many people in our community would not have access to medical care if it wasn't for VIM."

About Volunteers in Medicine Clinic of the Cascades

Since 2004, Volunteers in Medicine (VIM) has been providing healthcare services to low-income adults in Central Oregon by utilizing the collaborative efforts of over 250 in-clinic volunteers and more than 400 community medical partners. VIM is a 501(c)3 nonprofit that is solely funded by individual and corporate donors, and grants. For more information or to become a patient or volunteer, call 541-330-9001 or visit www.vim-cascades.org.

About the Pacific Power Foundation

The Pacific Power Foundation is part of the PacifiCorp Foundation, one of the largest utility-endowed foundations in the United States. The foundation was created in 1988 by PacifiCorp, an electric utility serving 1.8 million customers in six Western states as Pacific Power (Oregon, Washington and California) and Rocky Mountain Power (Utah, Wyoming and Idaho). The foundation's mission, through charitable investments, is to support the growth and vitality of the communities served by Pacific Power and Rocky Mountain Power. For more information, visit www.pacificpower.net/foundations.