The Morning Ledger from CFO Journal cues up the most important news in corporate finance every weekday morning. Send us tips, suggestions and complaints: david.hall@wsj.com. Get The Morning Ledger emailed to you each weekday morning by clicking here. Follow us on Twitter @CFOJournal.

Investors are swarming around Internet companies that don’t make money. Snapchat, a two-year-old company with no sales and no business model, recently rejected a $3 billion buyout offer from Facebook, Evelyn M. Rusli and Douglas MacMillan report in this WSJ scoop. Co-founder Evan Spiegel is holding out because he hopes his company can get an even higher valuation. Facebook had earlier offered to buy the company for more than $1 billion. And in recent weeks, Facebook representatives contacted Snapchat again to discuss an all-cash offer triple that amount, which would have been Facebook’s largest acquisition to date.

The Snapchat offer is the latest example of investor exuberance for social-media and mobile-messaging upstarts. Twitter, which has yet to turn a profit, has a market value of roughly $25 billion after its IPO last week. And Pinterest last month raised $225 million from investors who valued the company, which like Snapchat has no revenue, at $3.8 billion.

Snapchat’s smartphone app delivers hundreds of millions of messages, mostly from teenagers and young adults. And Mr. Spiegel thinks Snapchat’s user numbers will keep on growing. Still, it isn’t clear how Snapchat might make money, Rusli and MacMIllan write. One path to revenue might be helping marketers craft messages that speak to the service’s young users. Instead of banner ads, the personal nature of Snapchat makes it more suited to stories and characters who interact directly with users, says Julie Ask, principal analyst at Forrester Research. “If you can create content, whether it is a photo or a video or a story, and get it onto one of these instant-messaging apps, it has the potential to go viral so fast because the community of users is so big,” says Ms. Ask.

THE DAY AHEAD:

Wal-Mart is expected to report a modest rise in quarterly earnings today. The retailer is a bellwether of consumer spending because it draws nearly 10% of all nonautomotive retail spending in the U.S., the AP notes. Analysts will want to hear how the retailer’s early push for holiday sales has fared. They’ll also want to get an update on its layaway program and more details on its plans to discount during the season.

Markets flash: Japan led Asia higher after posting better-than-expected GDP data. In Europe, investors are shrugging off dismal growth figures (more on that below.) DJIA futures are higher.

EXCLUSIVE ON CFOJ:

When CFOs talk about Big Data, it’s often just talk. Roughly half of senior finance executives in the U.S. said they wanted to beat their competitors by mastering Big Data, yet less than a quarter said they will focus on implementing that technology over the next year, according to a survey set for release today. A full 40% of respondents said they would not increase spending on Big Data, which is a form of analysis that involves trawling vast amounts of information for insights that aren’t detectable at smaller scales, James Willhite reports. Instead, the most-commonly chosen area of focus, by 44% of the executives, was to better integrate the company’s existing information systems, according to the survey by CFO Research for American Express Global Commercial Payments in September.

Facebook CFO sells stock. Facebook CFO David Ebersman unloaded 8.5% of his stake in the social-media company on Tuesday, Maxwell Murphy reports. Mr. Ebersman sold 911,700 shares, at an average price of about $46.76 apiece, for a total of $42.6 million. Ranking sales of stocks owned directly by CFOs, and excluding those related to the exercise of stock options, it was the single largest total-dollar value sold on the open market in at least a decade. The sales were part of a so-called 10b5-1 pre-arranged-trading plan, which allows an executive to direct his or her broker to sell under certain preset conditions. Such trading plans are designed to protect the executives from the appearance of trading while in possession of material, inside information.

PCAOB to propose auditor-naming rule. The anonymity of corporate auditors could disappear next spring, Emily Chasan reports. The PCAOB expects to propose a rule Dec. 4 that could require public companies to reveal the name of the lead audit partner of their books. The proposal could also force the disclosure of firms subcontracted by auditors to do audit work on foreign subsidiaries of U.S.-listed companies. “I believe it’s a good idea for the capital markets to have it,” said PCAOB Chairman James Doty. Currently only the name of an audit firm, such as PricewaterhouseCoopers or Deloitte & Touche, is signed at the end of corporate annual reports. The move is the PCAOB’s second attempt at increasing transparency around auditors. The watchdog agency first proposed a rule to name audit partners in October 2011. The new version takes into account public comments, and will be open for another round of comments for 60 days. The final rule is expected in the spring.

CORPORATE NEWS:

J.P. Morgan’s fruitful ties to China’s elite. A contract between J.P. Morgan and a consulting firm run by the daughter of former Prime Minister Wen Jiabao points to the bank’s strategy to build its influence in China: Put the relatives of the nation’s ruling elite on the payroll, the NYT reports. U.S. authorities are scrutinizing J.P. Morgan’s ties to Wen Ruchun as part of a wider bribery investigation into whether the bank swapped contracts and jobs for business deals with state-owned Chinese companies. During her two-year consulting stint, J.P. Morgan executives struck a series of deals with Chinese companies closely affiliated with Ms. Wen and her family. J.P. Morgan, which is cooperating with the inquiries and conducting its own internal review, has not been accused of any wrongdoing.

IPO market loses some steam. The roaring market for IPOs has hit some speed bumps in November, with a number of deals attracting less investor enthusiasm than had been the case for much of the year, the WSJ reports. IPOs are still on track for their busiest year since the financial crisis. But some measures show cooling of demand for newly minted stocks. Twitter‘s $2.1 billion IPO, representing 8% of last week’s 13 deals, was the only one that priced above the listing company’s expectations. In contrast, 23% of all U.S.-listed IPOs in 2013 through last week priced above projections. Wednesday, online textbook-rental service Chegg had a rough public debut. The company’s stock fell 23% after the $187.5 million IPO priced above expectations Tuesday evening.

Executives hit sweet spot with stock sales. When corporate executives give favorable stock guidance, sell their own shares, then disclose bad news, investors sometimes grow suspicious, write the Journal’s Susan Pulliam and Rob Barry in this deep dive on executive stock sales. A Wall Street Journal examination of earnings-guidance data identified 1,468 cases since 2005 in which public companies issued so-called upward guidance—saying results looked better than expected—then followed with downward guidance within 120 days. SEC filings show that in 755 of those cases, corporate insiders sold in the window between the up and down, an advantageous time to sell. Among the 2,389 corporate officers who sold between swings in guidance, about 74% would have collected less money had they waited until after guidance was lowered.

Exceptional costs becoming business as usual. It’s tempting for fast-growing companies to stretch conventional accounting rules, but the biggest perception gap in the technology world involves more mature companies, writes the FT’s Richard Waters. It wasn’t long ago that IBM scoffed privately at rivals for publishing pro-forma earnings. But three years ago, IBM gave in to the prevailing mood and started stripping some costs from its preferred measure of earnings. Individually, the companies that try to gloss over charges such as these might have some success in arguing that they are one-offs. But collectively, and with the numbers growing from year to year, it becomes much harder to sweep all the industry’s bad news under the rug, Waters writes.

ECONOMY:

Euro-zone recovery stumbles. The euro-zone economy barely expanded in the third quarter, raising fresh concerns that the region faces a mix of stagnation, weak prices and high unemployment, the WSJ reports. GDP in two of the bloc’s three biggest economies—France and Italy—contracted. Growth in Europe’s largest economy, Germany, slowed sharply. Even if the euro zone is, technically speaking, no longer in recession, it remains stuck in a severe downturn by many measures—including unemployment, wages and inflation.

Yellen: Economy still needs help from Fed. The U.S. economy has made “good progress” since the depths of the recession but has farther to go in regaining what was lost, Fed Vice Chairwoman Janet Yellen will tell lawmakers today during a hearing on her nomination to be the next leader of the Fed. Ms. Yellen’s prepared remarks didn’t send any new signals about Fed policy. It did set up several points she might use to defend the Fed’s $85 billion-a-month bond-buying program, which is likely to draw criticism from Republicans during the hearing, the WSJ’s Victoria McGrane reports.

TAXATION:

Italy investigates Apple for alleged tax fraud. Apple is under investigation in Italy for allegedly hiding €1 billion from the local tax authority, Reuters reports. Milan prosecutors say Apple failed to declare to Italian tax authorities €206 million in 2010 and €853 million in 2011. The Italian subsidiary of Apple booked some of its profit through Irish-based subsidiary Apple Sales International, thus lowering its taxable income in Italy. Apple is the latest prominent company to become the target of a tax inquiry in Italy amid a global crackdown aimed at preventing companies including Google, Amazon and others from avoiding taxes.

Starbucks beats the taxman through Kraft charge. Starbucks’s latest income-tax bill has been cut to zero by a $2.7 billion compensation charge it was ordered to pay Kraft over a contract dispute, the FT reports. In restated accounts, Starbucks said a global tax bill of $832 million that it had expected for the year to Sept. 29, 2013 would instead become a tax credit of $239 million. The company said: “Starbucks does not have any pre-tax income as a result of the arbitration award, therefore we do not have a tax obligation this year. For tax purposes, the payment is deductible. We are still evaluating the ruling to determine the time period for deductibility.”

More taxpayers abandon U.S. This year will set a record for expatriations by U.S. taxpayers, with at least a 33% increase from the previous high in 2011, the WSJ reports. People who renounced last year might have avoided higher taxes on income and estates—including those on long-term capital gains—that took effect in 2013. Those who renounce citizenship or turn in green cards can be subject to an exit tax.

HEALTH CARE:

Obama open to health-law change. The government released numbers showing that far fewer Americans than expected had enrolled in private insurance plans under the new health law—and, in a marked shift, the Obama administration signaled it was open to legislation to fix the troubled rollout, the WSJ reports. The magnitude of Democratic support for a legislative solution will become clearer on Friday, when the House is set to vote on a separate Republican plan to let insurance companies continue to offer policies that were canceled recently.

CFO MOVES:

Bristol-Myers Squibb, a New York-based biopharmaceutical company, said Charles Bancroft, executive vice president and chief financial officer, “will take on an expanded role that includes the business-development and strategy groups.” Mr. Bancroft will be responsible for developing an integrated approach to finance, business development and strategy. Last year, Mr. Bancroft earned compensation valued at $8.6 million, according to the most recent proxy.

CTS, an Elkhart, Ind.-based a maker and distributor of electronic components, said Thomas Kroll, vice president and chief financial officer, plans to retire March 31. Mr. Kroll will be succeeded by Ashish Agrawal. Mr. Agrawal will also serve as the principal financial officer and principal accounting officer. Mr. Agrawal was elected vice president of treasury and corporate development in June 2011. Prior to joining CTS he was the CFO of Dometic Corp. With the new titles his base compensation will increase to $255,000 and he will continue to participate in the company’s bonus programs. His previous base salary was $237,255 and total compensation was valued at $466,539, according to the company’s latest proxy.