LANSING, MI -- Four years after President Barack Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law, Republicans are hoping the glitchy website rollout and controversial coverage mandates will work against Democrats running for office in 2014.

Michigan GOP Chairman Bobby Schostak and U.S. Senate candidate Terri Lynn Land on Monday marked the four-year anniversary of the president's signing ceremony by knocking the law and its backers on a conference call with reporters.

They were joined by residents who said "Obamacare" had negatively effected them, and they reminded reporters that Democrats Gary Peters and Mark Schauer -- now running for senator and governor, respectively -- voted for the measure in the U.S. House in 2010.

"The fact remains that Obamacare is driving up costs, causing people to lose their doctors and their plans, and it's cutting Medicare," Land said in her first press call since declaring her candidacy last year. "These are all promises that were made by Congressman Peters and the president that were broken."

The Peters campaign did not immediately respond to a request for comment, but the candidate has criticized recent Americans for Prosperity ads attacking the law.

Under the Affordable Care Act, most Americans must be enrolled by a health plan by March 31 or pay a penalty. Roughly 144,600 Michigan residents had signed up for a plan on healthcare.gov through February, a figure which slightly bested enrollment targets.

Republicans have repeatedly criticized Obama and other Democrats who promised that "if you like your plan, you can keep it," a statement that Politifact named the "lie of the year" for 2013.

In reality, health plans that don't meet essential service standards will be phased out, and an estimated 225,000 Michigan residents reportedly received discontinuation notices from their insurers late last year.

The Obama administration ended up delaying essential standards requirements through at least 2016, a move that critics contend was designed to help Democrats avoid political blowback at the ballot box, but several Michigan insurers had already made the changes and discontinued policies.

Melissa Davert of Bangor Township said she was one of those 225,000 residents who received a notice from her insurer and was forced to change her health care plan though no choice of her own. She and her two children both have osteogenesis imperfecta, a brittle bone disease, and her husband has cerebral palsy.

The family reportedly fell through a crack in the Affordable Care Act that required them to purchase a more expensive "gold" policy offered on the federal exchange by Blue Cross and Blue Shield. They still have supplemental coverage through the state, but that only covers care directly related to their disabilities.

"We have to sit back and hope our children do not require medical care that's not required for their disability," Davert said "Before, we knew what our out-of-pocket costs were going to be and that they were manageable, and now we're not so sure."

Republicans across the country have marked the fourth anniversary of the Affordable Care Act by beating up on Democrats who voted for it, but Obama took the offensive on Sunday, highlighting benefits of the law and sharing stories of how it has positively impacted some families.

"More Americans with insurance have gained new benefits and protections – the 100 million Americans who've gained the right to free preventive care like mammograms and contraception, the eight million seniors who’ve saved thousands of dollars on their prescription drugs, and the untold number of families who won’t be driven into bankruptcy by out-of-pocket costs, because this law prevents insurers from placing dollar limits on the care you can receive," the president said in a statement.

Land, who served as Michigan's Secretary of State from 2003 to 2011, reiterated her belief that Obamacare needs to be repealed, a move that could become slightly more feasible if Republicans win control of the Senate next year.

She offered her own framework for reducing health care costs, including rules to allow insurers to sell policies across state lines, let residents purchase policies with pre-tax dollars and transfer coverage when they get new jobs.

Asked whether she supports the "Healthy Michigan" plan to expand Medicaid eligibility using funding through the Affordable Care Act, Land twice repeated a statement her spokesperson first made in February, applauding Republican Gov. Rick Snyder for "doing what he thinks is best for Michigan families while complying with a federal mandate."

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Google+ or follow him on Twitter.