The Eye

'Forever' ABC Spoilers: Henry To Take His Own Life In Future Episode? [WATCH PROMO]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook) Ioan Gruffudd portrays Dr. Henry Morgan on "Forever."

A new piece of spoilery information has come out about an upcoming episode of "Forever." Executive producer Matt Miller revealed that although immortal Henry is afraid to die, he'll have to resort to taking his own life in a future episode to escape an undesirable situation.



Miller told Entertainment Weekly that it will be a real struggle for Henry to go through with the act.



In next week's episode, Henry and Jo will investigate the murder of an ex-con, who is being framed for a jewelry store heist.



In the promo, Henry appears to be examining the victim's body when he suddenly discovers a loose diamond. The jewelry store heist he's being framed for resulted in $3.4 million worth in diamonds being stolen.



'Forever' ABC 2014 Spoilers: Henry Back On The Job After Taking A Life, Investigating Wall Street Murder [WATCH PROMO]



There's a connection between the victim and Jo's late husband, district attorney Sean — the victim was put in jail three years earlier by Sean. The case will apparently be very hard for Jo to deal with, emotionally, as the memories of her husband come flooding back.



Jo is shown in the promo watching old video footage of her husband and getting teary-eyed.



Also, flashbacks will show Jo's warm and wonderful relationship with Sean, and Henry will comfort Jo with the pain of her loss.



Other flashbacks will show Henry in an 1816 London prison. His cell mate, a priest, gives Henry a second chance at life. Meanwhile, Abe will try to catch a thief who he believes took a "priceless" antique from the store.



Guest stars are Roger Rees as the priest, Shane McRae as Detective Hugh Dunn and Andy Karl as Sean Moore.



Watch the video:





The next episode of "Forever" airs next Tuesday, Jan. 13 at 10 p.m. on ABC.



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.