carly simon man youre so vain

It’s only taken 44-years for her to do so, but, Carly Simon has finally revealed the name of the douche who inspired her 1972 number one hit, You’re So Vain.

The title subject’s identity has been a matter of speculation ever since the song’s release—with just about every 1970s lusty lothario coming under suspicion at one time or another—including Mick Jagger, David Cassidy, Jack Nicholson, Kris Kristofferson, David Bowie, James Taylor, and Cat Stevens.

Kanye West’s Best, Worst, Most Kanye-Esque Moments Ranked By Greatness

Simon has kept relatively mum on the subject up until now—aside from denying it was about Jagger, who provided un-credited backing vocals on the track.

She also shot down rumors that she was singing about Taylor, whom she was married to, just prior to writing the song—they divorced in 1983 after 11 of marriage, and have two children together.

50 Of The Best (Or Worst) Misquoted Song Lyrics Ever

The 70-year-old has given away a few hints here and there by way of “letter clues” sharing that the subject’s name includes an A, an E, and an R—and, in August 2003, she gave up the full name to NBC sports head honcho, Dick Ebersol—on the proviso that he keep the secret—after he bid $50,000 at a charity auction for the privilege.

Simon also gave it up (for free) to Howard Stern after an interview with him, and Taylor Swift after a joining her on stage during her 2013 tour for a duet performance of the song.

Listen to Our Playlist of the 100 Greatest Number-Two Hits of All-Time

But, us mere mortals have just had to guess…. up till now.

So, who is the self-absorbed douchebag Carly slams as being, “so vain, you probably think this song is about you.”

Drum roll please…..

Warren Beatty….. duh!

Before finally settling down with Annette Benning, whom he married in 1992, Beatty was one of the biggest and most renown man-whores in Hollywood—adding notches to his bedpost courtesy every leading lady and hot music star of the day, it seems.

Popdust 40 Ranks The Greatest, Biggest Artists—And Fame Whores—Of Today

The now 78-year-old’s list of conquests reads like a veritable who’s who in Hollywood, including liaisons with Natalie Wood AND her little sister Lana, Cher, Madonna, Goldie Hawn, Britt Ekland, Diane Sawyer, Joni Mitchell, Shirley Bassey, Stephanie Seymour, Kate Jackson, Diane Keaton, Brigitte Bardot….. and on….. and on…. and on…

Obviously, Beatty also loved and left Simon at some point during his wild oats sowing days, and in his usual, cock sure way, he told an interviewer back in 2007, “Let’s be honest. That song was about me.”

Simon has previously said that Beatty even called her to thank her for immortalizing his doucheness in song form—well, in fairness, at least he OWNED it!

Monumental Marijuana Mixer: Top 15 Albums To Listen To While You Are Sparking Up

The singer is finally giving up the rock history mystery as she starts promotion for her upcoming memoir, Boys in the Trees, which is set to be released later this month.

“I have confirmed that the second verse is Warren,” she tells People magazine.

The Ten Greatest False Rumors in Pop History

For more entertainment, world, music and pop culture updates and news, follow Max Page on Twitter

Loading Next Previous