Topics: 2016 Elections, aol_on, Carly Fiorina, Hewlett Packard, jeffrey sonnenfeld, Republican Party, Elections News, Business News, Politics News

The Republican Party believes businessmen make good presidents. Last election the GOP championed Mitt Romney’s corporate experience as a meaningful indicator of his political acumen. Romney himself argued that we should have a provision in the Constitution that says the “president has to spend at least three years working in business before he could become president.”

This year we have Donald Trump and Carly Fiorina, both of whom have no relevant experience in government. Trump is a bit of a unique case, as his appeal to the nativist elements of the GOP has little to do with his business background. But Fiorina is different. More measured and prudent than Trump, Fiorina calmly argues that her successful tenure as CEO of Hewlett-Packard is proof of her political potential – it’s her primary justification for seeking the presidency. And Republican voters are buying it. According to the latest CNN/ORC poll, Fiorina now sits at second place following last week’s presidential debate.

There are a couple of problems with Fiorina’s argument. First, it’s a false trope that businessmen succeed in presidential politics. To begin with, a country isn’t a business, and overseeing a corporation and deciding national economic policy are not the same. Paul Krugman, among many others, has already explained why this distinction matters.

If you reject the claim that countries and corporations are fundamentally different, history offers other reasons to be weary of businessmen in politics. Two of the worst presidents in modern history, Herbert Hoover and George W. Bush, were former businessmen; their legacies are the Great Depression and the Iraq War, respectively. In 2009, historians ranked America’s presidents, and the results were unsurprising: Only one of the top 10 presidents, Harry Truman, had any business experience at all. Alternatively, many of the worst presidents – Warren Harding, Andrew Johnson, Franklin Pierce, and John Tyler – all had a successful background in business before seeking the presidency.

The other glaring problem with Fiorina’s story is that it’s totally false. Even if you accept that success in the business world translates to success in politics (and you shouldn’t), the fact remains: Fiorina was a terrible businesswoman. In the last presidential debate, Donald Trump referenced a study by Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, a professor at Yale’s School of Management, which refuted Fiorina’s revisionist history of her time at HP. Fiorina, predictably, dismissed Sonnenfeld, saying he “had it out for me from the moment I arrived at Hewlett-Packard.”