In his dissent, Judge Harry Edwards, called the case a "not-so-veiled attempt to gut" Obamacare, and said the ruling "portends disastrous consequences."

Indeed, the 72-page decision threatens to unleash a cascade of effects that could seriously compromise Obamacare's goals of compelling people to get health insurance, and helping them afford it.

"Obviously, were the DC ruling ultimately to stand, it would be a serious blow to trying to extend insurance to all Americans," said Timothy Jost, a Washington and Lee University School of Law professor who has been influential in the debate over Obamacare and the subsidies.

However, the ruling does not and will not ultimately affect the same kinds of taxpayer-fund subsidies the federal government issued to about 2 million people who bought health plans on the 15 exchanges run by individual states and the District of Columbia.

The Obama administration said it will ask the full U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit to reverse the panel's decision, which for now does not have the rule of law.

In its own ruling upholding the legality of the subsidies, a three-judge panel in the Fourth Circuit said that the language detailing how those tax credits are awarded is "ambiguous and subject to multiple interpretations."

But the panel found that it is "clear that widely available tax credits are essential to fulfilling the Act's primary goals and that Congress was aware of their importance when drafting the bill."

"The IRS Rule advances this understanding by ensuring that this essential component exists on a sufficiently large scale," the Fourth Circuit panel wrote.

HealthCare.gov serves residents of the 36 states that did not create their own health insurance marketplace. By the close of open enrollment in mid-April, the federal exchange had enrolled 5.4 million of the 8 million people who signed up for Obamacare plans.

About 4.7 million people, or 86 percent of all HealthCare.gov enrollees, qualified for a subsidy to offset the cost of their coverage this year because they had low or moderate incomes. Many of those people pay less than $100 per month in premiums after their subsidies are factored in.

If upheld, the DC panel's ruling could lead many, if not most of those subsidized customers to abandon their health plans sold on HealthCare.gov because they no longer would find them affordable without the often-lucrative tax credits. And if that coverage then is not affordable for them as defined by the Obamacare law, those people will no longer be bound by the law's mandate to have health insurance by this year or pay a fine next year.

If there were to be a large exodus of subsidized customers from the HealthCare.gov plans, it would in turn likely lead to much higher premium rates for non-subsidized people who would remain in those plans.

Read MoreCourts could cause big Obamacare $$$ hike



The DC panel's ruling also threatens, in the 36 states, to destroy the Obamacare rule starting next year that all employers with 50 or more full-time workers offer affordable insurance or face fines. That's because the rule kicks in if one of their workers buy subsidized coverage on HealthCare.gov.



The DC panel's decision is the most serious threat to the underpinnings of the Affordable Care Act since a challenge to that law's constitutionality was heard by the Supreme Court. The high court in 2012 upheld most of the ACA, including the mandate that most people must get insurance or pay a fine.

If the Obama administration fails to prevail in its planned challenge to Tuesday's bombshell ruling by asking the full DC circuit to reverse the decision, it can ask the Supreme Court to reverse it. Likewise, the plaintiffs who were challenging the subsidies in the Fourth Circuit appeals court could ask that full court to reverse the decision that upheld the legality of the subsidies.

If, after a review by each of the entire circuits' judicial lineup, there is still a split in their decisions, a Supreme Court review is effectively guaranteed. It is not clear that the high court would consider an appeal if there ends up being no split between the circuits.

Two other federal district courts are dealing with similar challenges to the subsidies, but those cases have not reached the appellate level.

"It's in everyone's interest for this issue to be resolved sooner than later," said Jonathan Adler, a Case Western Reserve University law professor who, has been a primary architect of the challenges to the subsidies.