This week, the Camera printed an article and a letter underlining the attitude of hostility that is part of racism. Attitudes enable the racism that is woven into the very fabric of our social, economic, political, educational and criminal justice systems to persist. Black Americans begin life with a serious disadvantage in life prospects. Such a palpably unfair and deeply harmful system continues, in part, because other aspects of racism allow those with the power to effect change, who are mainly white, to accept the system, without feeling bad about themselves.

How does this work? One factor is our refusal or inability to recognize just how damaging the system is. It is invisible to us, especially in suburbia. So we can feel fine about doing nothing. The damage just grows, unacknowledged by those who could change it.

Another factor is our failure to acknowledge the role that luck, including the luck of skin color, has played in our lives. We who are white skinned are privileged just by being white. The elements of white privilege are numerous, and I quote. "If I should need to move, I can be pretty sure of renting or purchasing housing in an area which I can afford and in which I would want to live. I can be pretty sure that my neighbors in such a location will be neutral or pleasant to me. I can go shopping alone most of the time, pretty well assured that I will not be followed or harassed. I can turn on the television or open to the front page of the paper and see people of my race widely represented.

Advertisement

I do not have to educate my children to be aware of systemic racism for their own daily physical protection. I can be sure that my children will be given curricular materials that testify to the existence of their race." (P. McIntosh).

Those in power who are white and middle class just seem unable to see how profoundly advantaged they have been by the color of their skin. As was said of George W. Bush, "he was born on 3rd base and thought he had hit a triple", so we can say of we who are white, that we have been enormously lucky in our race, our education, our families, and indeed our country. If we do not see this and think that we made it all by ourselves, we can feel fine about blaming "them" for their situation. They just made bad choices and so deserve their fate. To blame a child raised in the disaster zone of an inner city for his or her poor choices seems absurd.

Another factor underlies individual racist acts. The fact is we take 'white' to be normal, and see those with non-white skin as "other", as "them". Alas, we humans seem either to show little concern for the welfare of those who are "other", or to be downright hostile to them. I worked for years in a police department and have seen first-hand the process of first dehumanizing the other, and then being able to bring oneself to treat them in truly unforgivable ways.

Deeply damaging, racist systems will change, only if we acknowledge the ongoing damage done by our social systems, and if we recognize our own good fortune, and if we overcome our natural impulse to see others as "other", as "not one of us". The suggestion made last week, to watch "Roots: The Next Generation" is a good one, as seeing what black Americans have endured and (crucially) continue to endure cannot but help to breakdown the deep barrier of "us versus them."

Edna Ralston lives in Boulder.