The Florida Legislature's special session will look good only because the regular session was so bad. That's how low Tallahassee has set the bar.

Most important, as of this week there is a 2015-16 state budget. There wasn't one when the Legislature ended early in April because of a dispute over health care that made passing a budget impossible. Judging by his statement, Gov. Rick Scott will sign the budget, avoiding a government shutdown when the fiscal year ends in 13 days.

Also important, budget negotiators helped hospitals that treat most of the state's uninsured and Medicaid patients. To compensate for the cut in federal Low Income Pool money, the Legislature allocated $400 million in state revenue for next year. That will draw down $626 million in federal money. Most of that roughly $1 billion will go toward higher Medicaid reimbursement rates.

Tony Carvalho is president of the Safety Net Hospital Alliance of Florida, which includes Broward Health and Memorial Healthcare System. He called the state money "critical to averting a financial crisis in the state's Medicaid program in the next two years as federal (Low Income Pool) funding is further reduced and ultimately eliminated."

The Legislature also directed $100 million toward graduate medical education — residency positions — at teaching hospitals like Broward Health, though the money comes from local taxes and the federal government, not from the state. Carvalho said some of the $100 million "will go to hospital costs." The money follows the $80 million directed to graduate medical education in 2013, and is designed to help Florida deal with a projected shortage in 10 years of 7,000 physician specialists.

Gov. Rick Scott gets no credit for any of this partial solution. He helped to create the crisis by including the full Low Income Pool amount in his budget, even though his administration knew that the federal government wanted changes. Rather than negotiate seriously with the Department of Health and Human Services, Scott sued, claiming that the Obama administration was trying to coerce Florida into expanding Medicaid.

The governor also opposed the use of state money — Carvalho said that would have been "disastrous" — likely because he preferred more tax cuts. Then Scott proposed distributing the $1 billion evenly to all hospitals. The Legislature, correctly, will base it on how many Medicaid and uninsured patients a hospital treats. Carvalho said the change amounts to a $300 million difference for hospitals that provide the bulk of charity care. Hospitals are still analyzing the numbers, but Carvalho believes that Broward Health and Memorial will lose just a small amount overall.

Speaking of numbers, Scott will tout the cut in the tax on cellphones, but it will mean a whopping $20 per year. The governor will not talk about the increase in local property taxes for schools that the governor will allow by not lowering the levy known as the Required Local Effort. Since property values are rising, homeowners will pay more than they will save on their cellphone bill.

Due to the aborted regular session, many high-profile bills failed and did not make the special session agenda. In some cases, that was a good thing. Florida did not get a water policy bill that the agriculture industry basically wrote. College students won't be able to have guns on campus. The state won't be able to tell counties how to regulate transportation companies like Uber and Lyft.

And the state's gambling compact with the Seminole Tribe will expire this summer with no resolution. The Legislature didn't agree on changes to the medical marijuana program, which should have started in January. Prison reform failed, though the Department of Corrections will get more money. Legislators may have provoked a lawsuit by not fully funding the land-buying program, as voters demanded last fall by passing Amendment 1.

And, of course, the Legislature didn't expand Medicaid, despite a Senate plan that the state's top economist predicted would mean a net financial gain for the state. Because the House and Scott resisted expansion, the Legislature's backup plan puts off a permanent solution on health care.

Carvalho notes that the Legislature has designated that $400 million as "recurring" money. When legislators begin work on the 2016-17 budget, they will start with recurring expenses, not "non-recurring" expenses.

Still, as Carvalho acknowledged, no number is guaranteed. The Low Income Pool program that had $2.2 billion this year will drop to $600 million in 2016-17. If the Supreme Court this month strikes down subsidies for Floridians who obtained health coverage under the Affordable Care Act, that will mean about 1.3 million more uninsured Floridians. This in addition to the 800,000-plus who might have obtained insurance had the Legislature expanded Medicaid.

According to the Tampa Bay Times/Miami Herald, legislators stuck lots of member projects — pork — into the budget during the last hours of negotiations. So, yes, there is a state budget. It just isn't one that Tallahassee should brag about.