The subject of affordable housing in Ames is an issue that has been a focal point of conversations between city residents and leaders for many years. The issue is often complicated and pushed by two sides of the discussion; the desire to create a community that welcomes residents of all income levels and the reality of land available for development. Those two opposing forces seem to have kept the issue as a main concern for almost every resident of Ames, as well as stopping any significant amount of forward progress.

In a five-year consolidated plan for housing and community development completed in 2014 by the city’s planning and housing department to establish and address the housing needs of Ames, the city was shown to have several housing problems that were caused mainly by an increase in population. According to the plan, between 2000 and 2012, the total population in Ames increased by 20 percent, from 50,731 to 60,634. The number of housing units also increased in that time period, but with the higher demand for housing, the cost of housing also increased.

Between 2000 and 2012, the median home value in Ames increased by 36 percent, from $125,300 to $170,600, and median rental prices went from $532 a month to $651, an increase of 22 percent. However, during that same period of time the increase of the median household income in the city was only 15 percent, from $36,042 to $41,561, which means that many of the people who work in Ames are unable to live here due to both the cost of housing and housing availability.

Vanessa Baker-Latimer, an Ames housing coordinator, said part of the problem with addressing the affordable housing issues of the city is getting a clear definition of what affordable housing is.

“Well, that varies depending on who you are talking to as well. We have those at the higher end of the scale that say there’s not enough choice for what they can afford, and then we kind of have those at the lower or moderate income scale that say there’s not a lot of choice to what they have access to and then we have those on the very low end of the scale that there’s not enough affordability or availability on their scale,” Baker-Latimer said.

Even though the idea of what is considered to be affordable may vary depending on each individuals personal income level, the percentage of that income a person spends each month on housing is typically suggested to be the same. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development has said that ideally, people shouldn’t spend more than 30 percent of their income on housing.

According to the consolidated plan, about 14 percent of homeowners and 59 percent of renters in Ames are experiencing a housing cost burden, which means they pay more than the suggested 30 percent. The plan also outlined what it would take for a person to pay rent on a minimum wage salary for a Story County rental property that cost $726 per month.

In order to afford a two-bedroom apartment, a minimum wage worker would need to work 77 hours per week, 52 weeks per year, or a household would need to have 1.9 minimum wage earners working 40 hours per week year-round.

Jan Flora, a sociology professor at Iowa State University and a Mid-Iowa Organizing Strategy member, said the increase in enrollment at ISU has also effected the housing market in Ames because students either occupy single-family homes that would otherwise be available to long-term residents and because students are often low-wage earners working service industry jobs who need access to housing in their price range.

“There’s a substantial number of people who have difficulty paying the rent or they end up not paying something else,” Flora said.

Flora said he sees a few potential plans that could lead to improvements for affordable housing in the area. Among those is the creation of a housing trust fund that would dedicate sources of public funding to support affordable housing and increase access to decent homes.

“Because not only would it allow us to access those state funds, but more importantly, I think, it brings people together so that you have a group, a formal group, that continuously works on housing stability,” Flora said.

Flora also said that he believes there are opportunities in the city for the creation of low-cost housing developments, including property north of city hall that is owned by the city, as well as the middle parcel of the Breckenridge property, or the old middle school.

“We think that’s a real opportunity for developing a significant amount of housing for low and moderate income people,” Flora said.

Ames City Councilman Chris Nelson said those projects are still in the planning stages and there’s not a lot of information available about what they will consist of, but he said the project at the old middle school property would be purchased with community development block grant funding, which would require at least half of the units to be priced for lower income residents.

Nelson said the property north of City Hall is in the planning stages as well, because the council is searching for ways to keep the costs of development down.

“At this point it looks like a nine-unit rental type project and we’re looking to figure out if we need to package that with another property to make it large enough so it qualifies for other state and federal programs for financing to make it more financially feasible for a developer,” Nelson said.

To make the project large enough to receive additional funding, Nelson said it might include combining it with projects in other parts of the city.

“The big picture is that if we make it a larger project we have more financial resources available than we would otherwise, which is great because it helps more people, too,” Nelson said.

Other opportunities to create more housing options in the city include creating high-density apartment complexes that could house students and increase the amount of single-family homes available for rent or purchase. There is also land that is ready to be developed in the northern growth area of the city, but those projects, which are expected to begin in the spring of 2016, will most likely not be priced for lower income ranges, according to Nelson.

“They’ll probably be houses that people move up into. But hopefully that’s clearing stock in the city of less expensive houses that people can move into,” said Nelson, who is seeking re-election and is being challenged by Dan DeGeest in Ames’ fourth ward.

According to Nelson, the housing crunch in Ames will probably not see rapid improvement. Housing demands are still high and the population continues to increase. Until the housing supply is able to catch the demand, the need for affordable housing for all income levels will continue to be a problem the city faces.

“The demand is such that, even if you look back at the affordable housing projects that the city has going on, the scale is such that the city doesn’t have the resources to really fix the problem. You do the best you can and you try to help the most people you can and it’s going to take a number of fronts to try to help the underlying issue. If it were easy, it’d be done already,” Nelson said.