Late in the evening of November 23, 2013, President Obama’s legacy moment was announced: a tentative deal with Iran resolving its nuclear enrichment issue. But as details of the plan come more into focus, alarms are being raised that the Islamic republic is playing a high-stakes game of ‘Deal or No Deal’ that is allowing it to advance its nuclear program.

While the White House initially did not recognize the Islamic republic has a right to enrich, Bernadette Meehan, a spokeswoman with the White House National Security Council, told the Washington Free Beacon that “we are prepared to negotiate a strictly limited enrichment program in the end state” on December 3.

Meehan went on to say that the Iranians have indicated for the first time that they are prepared to accept “rigorous monitoring and limits on level, scope, capacity and stockpiles.”

“Any such program,” she said, “would be subject to strict and verifiable curbs on its capacity and stockpiles of enriched uranium for a significant number of years and tied to practical energy needs that will remain minimal for years to come.”

On December 4, 2013, the Jerusalem Post reported Israel’s opposition to any permanent enrichment capacity. Even at low levels, Israeli officials argue, the infrastructure required for such enrichment leaves Iran perilously close to the ability to manufacture a nuclear weapon.

This past September, the Russians handed over operational control of the Russian-made Bushehr nuclear power plant to Iran, and are still trying to close a deal to build more nuclear power plants in Iran. IRINN-TV quoted Iran’s Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif on December 11, 2013 as saying the two countries are close to an agreement on building additional nuclear plants.

Following Turkey’s announcement in early January that it had struck a deal with Japan to build nuclear facilities in its country, Iran said it too wanted Japan to help build nuclear plants. Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Abbas Araqchi said he believes Iran and Japan can work together to build facilities that generate electricity.

“Japan obtains the most advanced technologies in nuclear energy and exports them abroad,” Araqchi said. “There are good prospects for Iran and Japan to cooperate in the construction of the nuclear power plants.”

Adding further tension to this diplomatic game of Deal or No Deal, Zarif said U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry was wrong when he bragged the agreement would result in Iran trashing some of its enrichment uranium stockpiles.

“We did not agree to dismantle anything.” Zarif told CNN, adding that his country was allowed to continue enriching up to 5-percent and the deal was “reversible.”

Secretary Kerry also claimed that Iran agreed to “dismantle some infrastructure that makes higher-level uranium enrichment possible.” However, on Wednesday Iranian FM Zarif accused the Obama White House of misrepresenting the deal relating to Iran’s controversial nuclear program.