Chris Pratt got very, very drunk to deliver a very, very strange speech on life, liberty, and the pursuit of an acting career. And somehow, amid all the weirdness, the Jurassic World actor managed to stay sexy, reported Us Weekly.

Pratt chug-a-lugged Fireball whisky before launching into his unusual lecture, during which he described various situations that might occur and provided acting tips on what to do.

“Let’s say you get pulled over and you have a bunch of weed in your glove box,” suggested a clearly drunk Chris. “Simple, you do this: ‘Officer, I don’t have weed in my glove box.'”

Watch the rest below.

And he also offered some parting words of semi-wisdom.

“This has been acting with Chris Pratt, I hope it helps. I’m sure it won’t. Just work out a lot and use sunscreen.”

The reference to working out, however, isn’t a joke. As the Inquisitr reported, Pratt lost 60 pounds by exercising diligently and following a Paleo-style low carb diet.

In addition to banning booze (except for that GQ acting lecture), Chris slashed carbohydrates. He also did a variety of fitness, including CrossFit.

Paleo diets require eliminating specific food groups entirely, such as grains. The low-carb diet plan emphasizes protein such as fish and chicken, natural fats such as avocado, fresh fruits, and non-starchy vegetables. Pratt feels that his eating philosophy requires that same all-or-nothing mentality.

“I’m done with that,” he says with reference to starchy foods and guzzling booze.

But how did Chris end up getting drunk, then? He explained that it was at the end of a photo session for GQ, reported the Huffington Post.

“We’re at the end of a GQ photoshoot and we’re supposed to do an acting DVD, acting video kind of bit for YouTube. Truth is, it’s hot as hell and I’m drunk,” confessed Pratt.

In addition to the weed warning, Chris provided details on “How to act when you see a T-Rex at a Jamba Juice” and “How to act when you see a snake.”

Now facing his tour for Jurassic World, Pratt decided to apologize before he even started, reported CNET.

“I want to make a heartfelt apology for whatever it is I end up accidentally saying during the forthcoming ‪#‎JurassicWorld‬ press tour,” posted Chris on Facebook.

“I am not in the business of making excuses. I am just dumb. Plain and simple. I try. I REALLY try! When I do (potentially) commit the offensive act for which I am now (pre) apologizing you must understand I (will likely have been) tired and exhausted when I (potentially) said that thing I (will have had) said that (will have had) crossed the line.”

[Images Via Chris Pratt/Facebook]