New exchange enrollment data released by the Obama administration on Friday reveal in multiple ways that ObamaCare is failing to live up to its goal of providing affordable care.

That’s no small problem when the law mandates that people buy coverage or face a fine. The fact that enrollment grew only modestly in the law’s third year despite the ramping up of the mandate penalty underscores the reality that ObamaCare only offers poor options to far too many millions of people.

No one is getting a worse deal than the people of Mississippi. Despite the fact that the state ranked near the bottom last year with enrollment of just 38% of those eligible for subsidies, the number of people signing up for subsidized exchange plans in 2016 was virtually flat from a year ago (97,943 vs 97,606 in 2015).

Centene Wins, Mississippi Loses

IBD predicted last fall that Mississippi would be “ground zero for ObamaCare’s individual mandate” because stagnant state sign-ups looked like a sure bet with after-subsidy premiums set to jump on the order of 60%, far more than in any of the 36 other states using HealthCare.gov last year.

For 30-year-olds in Yazoo City earning about $25,000 (214% of the poverty level), the after-subsidy cost of the cheapest bronze plan spiked by about $550 to just under $1,500, or 6% of pay. Because this plan from Ambetter, a unit of Centene (CNC), covers little before the $6,800 deductible is met, it may make the $695 mandate tax look like the best among bad options for someone who isn’t expecting big medical bills.

It’s becoming clear that millions of working-class Americans face a choice between paying a penalty they surely can’t afford and buying a policy — if they can foot the bill — that may still wreck their finances if they land in the hospital.

While this reality is pretty pervasive, it’s especially harsh in some areas, Mississippi and Washington state among them, partly due to competitive pricing decisions made by Centene. While the cheapest bronze-plan premium (before subsidies) rose about $250 in Mississippi for a $25,000-earner, the subsidy fell $300, yielding the $550 increase. That came about because the subsidies are tied to the cost of the second-cheapest silver plan, and Centene cornered the market on low-cost plans in a number of states this year by attaching bronze-like deductibles ($5,500 and $6,500) to silver plans.

Centene took the same tack in Washington state, with a similar result. This year, Washington’s exchange signed up 140,000 people for subsidized plans. At first blush, the 10.5% growth over last year’s 126,650 total looks good, but it’s deceptive because last year, unlike this year, the state only counted paid enrollment. Once nonpayers are scrubbed from the total, the number of subsidized customers in 2016 may end up being equal to, perhaps even lower than, last year’s.

Centene, along with other Medicaid managed care players like Molina Health (MOH), moved into the individual market with the launch of ObamaCare and has been credited with navigating the market more adeptly than bigger players such as UnitedHealth (UNH).

Still, Centene’s subsidy-squeezing shift isn’t widespread yet. Overall, the average HealthCare.gov subsidy rose 10.3% to $290 per month from $263 a year ago, as the average share of premiums paid by those eligible for subsidies rose just under 5%, to $106 a month from $101.

Young And Restless

The Department of Health and Human Services also revealed that the exchanges ended 2015 with just under 8.8 million paid enrollees nationwide, down 25% from the 11.7 million sign-ups to start the year. As of last March, once the unpaid total was culled, there were 10.2 million members.

The data also indicate that the paid ObamaCare insurance pool gets older as the year progresses. Among the 5.6 million people who renewed their HealthCare.gov coverage this year (out of 6.3 million who held policies at year-end), just 1.35 million, or 24%, were in age 18 to 34. That’s down from a 28% young-adult share of sign-ups in the 2015 enrollment period.

It’s worth recalling that the Obama administration and Kaiser Family Foundation both set a target of about 2.8 million young-adult enrollees in ObamaCare’s first year, or roughly 40% of the total, in keeping with the young-adult share of the eligible population. It’s clear that the exchanges ended the second year far below that initial target, with as few as 2.1 million 18- to 34-year-olds. This year, 3.5 million of the 12.7 million sign-ups are age 18 to 34, though it remains to be seen how many fail to pay or later exit the exchanges if they get workplace insurance.

A higher share of young adults could help keep down premiums because, under ObamaCare’s age-rating limit, younger people are charged more than their expected cost to restrain premiums for older adults. This helps turn ObamaCare’s market upside-down relative to pre-2014 markets, with a bronze plan now costing $1,000 more for a 30-year-old than for a 60-year-old if both earn $25,000.

Still, there is some evidence in the new data that the higher individual mandate penalty may be convincing people to enroll. About 38% of the additional sign-ups compared to a year ago chose bronze or catastrophic plans. Generally, people who are signing up to avoid a penalty can be expected to lean toward the cheapest plan available.

The number of people with subsidized coverage via HealthCare.gov rose just 6.1% from a year ago. While a clear assessment won’t be possible until we know how many people actually pay for their coverage, the weak sign-up total has left ObamaCare in much the same place that it was a year ago.

Millions of people are benefiting from the exchanges, especially near-poor households that qualify for the most generous subsidies and people with pre-existing conditions that no longer have to pay an arm and a leg. But likely fewer than 1 in 3 people with income from 150% to 250% of the poverty level are now getting silver coverage that will protect their finances if they land in the hospital. The vast majority even in this modest-income group either have high-deductible bronze coverage, remain uninsured or are ineligible because they, or a spouse, work full-time for an employer who offers insurance — even if that insurance is far from affordable.