4759377

“…it is a wise father that knows his own child. Well, old man: I will tell you news of your son: give me your blessing: truth will come to light; murder cannot be hid long; a man’s son may, but at length truth will out.” (Merchant of Venice, Act II Scene 2) “You are of your father the devil, and your will is to do your father’s desires. He was a murderer from the beginning, and does not stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he lies, he speaks out of his own character, for he is a liar and the father of his own.” (John 8:44) “It results from the nature of despotic power that the man who exerts it alone gives it to be exerted by another who does the same” (Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws, Part I, Bk. I, Ch. V)

While preserving the outward façade of representative government, an elitist faction clique is presently moving toward dictatorial power in the United States. So they are reshaping the features of all branches of the U.S. government in the image of the dictatorship with which they mean to replace true constitutional government. As I write these words. Paul Ryan is seeking to take over as Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives on terms intended to guarantee his ability openly to do what John Boehner was excoriated for doing behind the scenes.

Like the kings of old he is trying to extort an oath of fealty from his colleagues, openly transforming them from representatives of the people in their Districts into pliable tools of the elitist faction dictatorship. I invite those who may object to the word “extortion” to consider the implications of Sen. Harry Reid’s conveniently timed expression of admiration for Mr. Ryan. The leader of the U.S. Senate Democrats said Ryan “appears to me to be one of the people over there that would be reasonable.” Ryan’s record of complicity with the Obama faction Democrats on almost every issue of concern to the GOP’s riled grassroots constituency justifies Reid’s satisfaction.

But the Democrat’s praise also raises the possibility that Congressional Democrats might look the other way if some of their colleagues offered to help Ryan win the Speakership if and when faithful conservative members of the House refused to betray the voters who elected them. Nancy Pelosi seems open to negotiating such an approach. It may be unlikely, the Democrats’ chatter may lend the possibility just enough credibility to tip the balance of terror against the courage of some of the supposedly conservative members of the GOP caucus whose convictions are, in any case, rooted in shifting sand.

Be that as it may, Reid’s suspiciously timed gesture of goodwill should force some conservatives still blind to the reality of the twin party sham, to open their eyes. I have tried for years now to get them to see that the GOP quisling leaders are not the cowering, timorous, gutless, half-wits they would have to be in order to explain their continual round of flight from, or capitulation to, Barack Obama, for as long as he has occupied the Oval Office.

The simple explanation is that they have no allegiance to the people they are supposed to represent. They have no allegiance to the Constitutional government of, by and for the people Americans are supposed to enjoy. The divide in American political life is no longer between the Democrats and the Republicans. It’s between the elitist faction opportunists in politics and every other walk of life, and the people they now seek to corrupt and subdue, in order effectively to overturn their constitutional sovereignty and rule over them without real regard for their consent.

The election for Speaker of the House is revealing itself to be a more or less openly dictated elitist faction ploy. I expected as much. Which is why I entreated sincere conservatives in the House to forego the ambition driven antics characteristic of the elitist faction’s wickedly demagogic lie, and agree on a conservative of national stature, from outside their ranks, whom they could lift up as a national point for grassroots conservatives throughout the country.

Now Paul Ryan is maneuvering to box House conservatives into a corner to punish them for showing signs of sincere loyalty to the people who elected them. Once they have been cowed into swearing the feudal oath Ryan demands, it will be used to browbeat conservatives into swallowing treacherous legislation, Ryan and his fellow quislings have cooked up with their elitist faction buddies on the Democrat side. It will serve as a kind of dunce cap the conservatives can wear in the run up to the 2016 election, making them less popular with their conservative constituents. This will leave them more vulnerable to a challenge from some hollow “conservative” quisling clone; or else starving for elitist faction money and media support. Either way, elitist faction dictatorship increases in power.

I pray daily that at some point grassroots conservatives still blind to the utter senselessness of their continued participation in the GOP sham will comes to their senses. Paul Ryan blathers about being a “unifying” speaker, but as far as conservatives are concerned it’s the unity Cain achieved when he rose up in the field to meet his brother Abel.

Remember 2012, when Ryan was posed to be the true “conservative,” intended to quiet grassroots concerns as the facts came out about Romney’s dry run for Obamacare in Massachusetts; and the initiative he took to enforce homosexual marriage in the state? Ryan helped people to ignore those inconvenient truths, only to create an array of new ones, for himself, during the last few years in Congress.

But just as conservatives were supposed to hang on in the GOP on the slim hope Ryan offered in 2012, so they are being seduced into hanging on by the lure of Donald Trump’s freshly roused enthusiasm for enforcement of our borders and immigration laws, despite his long record as a typically self-serving and unprincipled elitist faction toy; or by Ben Carson’s outward shows of reverence for America’s God-acknowledging principles, despite his actions (re: pro-abortion candidates like Monica Wehby, or the Supreme Court’s anti-constitutional Obergefell decision) denying the power thereof.

If either or both of them are elected, no matter in which order (as president or VP), I predict it won’t be long before conservatives will be groaning about their betrayal of stands any reasonably alert person already has good grounds to believe neither of them actually means to follow through on if elected.

I wonder: Which will come to an end first — this purblind, conservative folly or the constitutional republic conservatives profess to uphold, protect and defend? If they keep their heads buried in the GOP sandbox, that sandbox could very well turn out to be their weedy burial plot, right next to the Republic’s grave.