New Haven Mayor Toni N. Harp, right, listens to Lubbie Harper Jr. speak before swearing her in at inauguration ceremonies at Hill Regional Career High School in New Haven Wednesday. Harp’s children, from left, Djana Harp, Jamil Harp and Matthew Harp, joined her on stage. Arnold Gold — New Haven Register

NEW HAVEN >> Toni Nathaniel Harp was sworn in as the city’s 50th mayor and first female to hold that office on Wednesday, and spoke on themes of social justice and chose to concentrate on the city’s attributes, rather than problems, characterizing its prospects for economic development as “dazzling.”

It was standing-room only for a crowd that packed the auditorium and spilled over into a separate room at Career High School, a facility designed by her late husband, Wendell Harp.

The racially mixed crowd was excited that New Haven has its second African-African mayor in a city that has a majority of minority residents.

Harp, 66, shared the stage with Gov. Dannel P. Malloy and the rest of the statewide elected officers, both U.S. senators and U.S. Rep. Rosa L. DeLauro, D-3.

Advertisement

It was a testament to the powerful Democratic Party here and the votes it has turned out for Malloy, U.S. Sen. Richard Blumenthal and U.S. Sen. Chris Murphy in their tough fights for office, with Malloy expected to seek a second term in November.

Harp was administered the oath by her old friend Lubbie Harper Jr., who began his career as a teacher and then a school administrator in New Haven, before becoming a lawyer and advancing to the Connecticut Supreme Court, from which he recently retired. The new mayor’s grown children — Jamil, Matthew and Djana Harp — held the Bible as she was sworn in.

The loudest applause from the large audience was elicited each time a speaker spoke about the importance of women in leadership.

“When women succeed, America succeeds,” DeLauro said to sustained cheers.

Throughout the long primary campaign and then the run-up to the election, Harp emphasized her connections to Hartford and a smoother, more consistent relationship with the governor than was always the case with outgoing Mayor John DeStefano Jr., who beat Malloy in a 2006 primary battle for the gubernatorial nomination.

Malloy played into that, promising to work with her “to change a parking lot to a thriving community,” refering to LiveWorkPlayLearn plans for housing and other construction that needs infrastructure help in connecting roads across Route 34 to make it happen.

He also promised “to revitalize the train station,” a plan that would add retail and eventually housing to that portion of Union Avenue, and a more direct connection to downtown.

While the tone of her address was overwhelmingly positive, Harp took the reins of government some 12 hours after a shooting that left a 20-year-old man in critical condition. The mayor said she and other officials are putting a lot of faith in community policing and Project Longevity to help stem the violence. New Haven ended 2013 with 20 homicides.

Harp reiterated her support for Dean Esserman to stay on as police chief and said they both share an ideology “that puts crime prevention on equal footing with law enforcement.”

She said it was important to intervene to help those who are beginning to despair “so they choose a more sustainable path and reach a destination on the right side of the law.”

Harp said of those who make bad decisions, “there, but for the grace of a loving parent, inspiring teacher, caring member of the clergy, or someone else who got involved, could be virtually any one of us.”

“No first-grade student, when asked what he or she wants to be when grown-up, answers ‘embezzler,’ ‘drug dealer’ or ‘murderer.’ I’m confident that the vast majority of those who commit crimes do so from desperation, not as a career destination. Each of these people has a story; no matter how heinous or deplorable a crime might be, it’s the behavior that’s reprehensible — even abhorrent — and rarely the perpetrator,” she told the audience.

Harp said she intends to have the “feet on the street” needed to determine who is taking advantage of these diversionary programs. She said none of these observations should be viewed as “soft on crime.” The mayor said community policing will not compromise safety.

Harp said those who turn their backs on “constructive alternatives” to crime will have more consciously chosen “crimimnal behavior and will be treated accordingly.”

Beyond the major themes of health care, education, crime reduction and jobs, there was something concrete for everyone from the new mayor.

Harp said a priority is to rebuild the seawall, “so residents on the East Shore can rest assured their homes are safe and secure,” an area that voted for her opponent in the general election, Alderman Justin Elicker.

Harp also committed to rebuilding the Q House in the Dixwell neighborhood, a fondly remembered, but shuttered, facility for youth programs that a new study found would cost $13.4 million to replace. The lack of youth programs was a major election theme for all the candidates. The mayor also pledged to find a way to “breathe new life into the Latino Youth Development program.”

As the former mayor of Stamford, Malloy had some advice for Harp, telling her that she should expect to be frequently stopped by her constituents as she goes about things as mundane as grocery shopping.

“Mayors own the city and the city owns the mayor,” Malloy told her as she begins her two-year term. “I know that New Haven is prepared for Toni Harp and I know that Toni Harp is prepared for New Haven.”

DeStefano was mayor for 20 years and, while they didn’t always get along, Harp made a special point of thanking him.

“Any new administration at every level of government stands on the shoulders of the previous administrations and works to build on its accomplishments. I want to personally extend my thanks for your commitment, steadfast dedication and achievements over the past ten terms,” Harp said. DeStefano wasn’t at the ceremony.

Harp reflected on the changing cycle of leadership in the city, both public and private, with the first new Yale University president in two decades, in addition to a new mayor and new superintendent of schools. Harp said the city’s “collective potential is positively inspiring.”

Harp’s areas of concentration as a state senator for 21 years were health care, criminal justice and education. She praised the federal Affordable Care Act and pledged to make its promise of insurance a fact for needy New Haven residents.

Harp said it was “an egregious moral failure for city residents to go without or be denied adequate health care while living figuratively across the street from one of the world’s foremost medical centers,” referring to Yale-New Haven Hospital.

The new mayor, pledging to continue many initiatives already under way in New Haven, said hunger continues to impact “an intolerable number” of residents, saying, “Hunger must not be allowed a place at the table of plenty that is Connecticut.”

She wants to deal with the so-called “food deserts” in certain neighborhoods where it is hard to get fresh fruits and vegetables.

Harp is on board with the increasing supplemental role of schools that provide meals and health clinics in addition to teaching. She is high on community schools that look beyond academics and said she wants foreign languages and STEM courses — science, technology, engineering and math — stressed in city schools.

She pitched New Haven to businesses, stating the city is within 500 miles of some one-third of the U.S. economy and two-thirds of the Canadian economy. She said its location is complemented by its educated workforce and the entrepreneurs who are coming out of the local colleges. Harp said New Haven and Connecticut remain committed to small businesses and the state has top-ten rankings in venture capital closings.

The inaugural ceremony stressed family, with City-Town Clerk Michael Smart accompanied by his neices, one of whom, attorney Kristina Allen, swore him in. Mariah Smart from Music Haven sang the national anthem, while the locally grown group Salt and Pepper also sang. The Unity Boys Choir got a standing ovation; Lisa Fluker sang an original song.

There were numerous Democrats from earlier administrations, as well as people who hadn’t been engaged in politics before this past election. Also, sitting near the front was Yale President Peter Salovey, his wife, Marta Elisa Moret, and Bruce Alexander, Yale’s vice president.

“I appreciated that she started her speech with such impassioned comments about the need to build economically and create jobs because that is an area that we are committing to also at Yale. Virtually every theme that she had represents an area where we could have partnerships, or do, whether it is economic development, community policing, reducing crime, public health, food security and nutrition, school reform, all areas where we work together. I was very energized by her speech,” Salovey said, as he made his way to the receiving line for Harp.