After Colorado State coach Jim McElwain discussed the Florida opening with Gators athletic director Jeremy Foley on Saturday night, CSU president Tony Frank Monday responded — in limited fashion — to talk about McElwain’s future.

“CSU doesn’t comment on speculation about its coaches,” Frank said. “The fact that Mac’s name is being tossed around in such discussions is a great tribute to him and his staff and team, and it reflects positively on far our program has come and where it is going.”

Through an athletic department spokesman, CSU interim athletic director John Morris declined to comment, including on whether Florida — seeking a successor to the fired Will Muschamp — had contacted him and asked for permission to speak with McElwain.

McElwain was said to be carrying through on his plans to be on the road, recruiting, during the Rams’ week off from practice before beginning bowl game preparations next week. CSU concluded its regular season Friday with a 27-24 loss at Air Force that snapped the Rams’ winning streak at nine and dropped them to 10-2 — and 5-2 in the Mountain West. Because Boise State routed Utah State on Saturday, the Rams wouldn’t have made the MW title game even with a win.

In Gainesville, Florida officials said in a statement that they had “made no job offers to anyone, and reports claiming that are false.” That was in response to reports that Mississippi’s Hugh Freeze had an offer on the table.

Another candidate also emerged, with word that former Broncos head coach Josh McDaniels, now back with the New England Patriots, had expressed interest in the job.

McElwain’s initial $7.5 million buyout is specified in a new five-year contract signed (including by then-athletic director Jack Graham) in June and announced in August, shortly after Graham’s falling-out with Frank led to his firing.

The contract includes “achievement” clauses that would additionally bump up McElwain’s salary, already scheduled for annual increases from the $1.5 million he earned this season. For example, if the Rams finished in the College Football Playoff top 25 rankings, McElwain’s base salary would have jumped to $2 million.

The buyout would be equal to his remaining salary in what would be presumed to be a five-year deal because of the annual one-year rollover clauses in the deal that can be triggered by either side.

It does include an “extenuating circumstances” clause that could apply if McElwain signals his intention to terminate the contract “without cause,” opening the way for possible discussions about reducing the buyout, technically McElwain’s responsibility. However, the contract states that CSU “has no obligation” to agree to reduce or eliminate the buyout.

CSU will learn its bowl assignment Sunday. If Boise State is the highest-ranked champion from a “non-power” conference in the College Football Playoff top 25 and thus is slotted in a major bowl, CSU could land in the Dec. 20 Las Vegas Bowl against a Pac-12 opponent.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei