Covered California Signups Molina Healthcare is hosting Covered California enrollment events San Bernardino County next week. Trained bilingual staff will be available to answer questions individuals may have about the Affordable Care Act and to assist in the enrollment process. Wednesday 5:30p.m. – 6:30p.m. Molina Medical Group 17500 Foothill Blvd., #A-2 Fontana Thursday 5:30p.m. – 6:30p.m. Molina Medical Group 790 E. Foothill Blvd. Rialto

Registration numbers for Covered California in San Bernardino County soared in a report recently issued by Covered California.

As of Jan. 31, the county reached 96 percent of its goal for the March 31 deadline, up from the 45 percent level reported at the end of December, which was the lowest in the state for numbers released late last year.

Covered California is the state’s marketplace for the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. In a partnership with the California Department of Health Care Services, the newly created state agency is charged with creating a new health insurance marketplace for businesses and individuals.

Once significantly behind Fresno and Riverside counties, San Bernardino County has blasted ahead of both.

Riverside County registered 61 percent while Fresno County has hit the 75 percent mark in the most recent state figures, up from 58 percent and 47 percent, respectively, in the Dec. 31 report.

The increase for San Bernardino County was the result of increasing staff to answer consumer calls, adding phone lines, improving website efficiency, expanding its live Web chat function and upgrading its Spanish-language Web pages, said Edith Lara-Trad, a regional spokeswoman for Covered California.

Total enrollment is now 34,428, just 1,264 persons shy of the county’s goal of 35,692 people.

Sign-ups for this year will cease after March 31, but resume again in the fall for coverage in 2015.

“They are moving in the right direction, but there is a lot of work yet to do,” said Alex Barrios, spokesman for state Sen. Norma J. Torres, D-Chino.

The people who were “banging down the door” wanting health insurance coverage have already signed up, he said.

“The real work begins now,” he said, as far as reaching those who haven’t signed up.

Last month, Torres introduced S.B. 972, bipartisan legislation to change the composition of Covered California’s board of directors.

“Covered California needs help improving its customer service, fixing technology glitches and enrolling a high number of Latinos and young consumers,” Torres said in a prepared statement. “Accountability starts at the top. After almost three years on the job, it is indisputable that this board of directors needs additional expertise to provide oversight of staff in areas where improvement is needed.”

Advertisement

S.B. 972 would increase the number of board members from five to seven, with the two additional board members being appointed by the governor.

The bill would add marketing of health insurance products, information technology system management, consumer service delivery research and best practices to the list of areas of expertise.