Stringari to University of Colorado; Till to Abilene Christian

Canon City High School senior Trenton Stringari signed his official letter of intent to attend University of Colorado and run track and field for the Buffaloes. (Courtesy Photo)

2014 Top Sports Stories No. 10: Claflin, Fluck qualify for state tennis singles No. 9: Tigers football gets in record books No. 8: Cañon City softball into playoffs No. 7: Huskies baseball qualifies for state No. 6: Aubrey Till returns to podium No. 5: Stringari, Till ink D1 scholarships No. 4: Saturday No. 3: Monday No. 2: Tuesday No. 1: Wednesday

The year saw two prep athletes do something so uncommon, that no one's even sure the last time it happened.

On Nov. 6, Trenton Stringari committed to run track at the University of Colorado, and then Nov. 12, Aubrey Till signed her national letter of intent to run cross country at Abilene Christian University.

Having two prepsters sign Division I letters of intent is the Daily Record's No. 5-ranked sports story of 2014.

"CU is almost like a family tradition," Stringari told the Daily Record in a phone interview the night he committed.

Stringari's sister Demi Stringari (a 2013 CCHS grad) also goes to CU, his grandpa played football for the Buffaloes, and his aunt and cousin also went to the school.

Stringari had narrowed his options to three schools: CU, University of Iowa, and University of Mississippi. Other schools who recruited Stringari were: Florida, USC, UCLA, North Carolina and Nebraska, among many others.

Advertisement

"It hasn't hit me yet, I don't think," Till said after signing her letter and taking pictures with her friends and family who gathered at CCHS to watch the moment Nov. 12. "I still don't feel like a senior."

Till finished her prep cross country career last month when she took 10th at the Class 4A state meet at Norris Penrose Event Center in Colorado Springs. It was the latest chapter in a distinguished career for the Tigers that saw her take fourth as a freshman, eighth as a sophomore and 52nd as a junior.

Through it all, she stayed firm in her faith and often said during interviews that whatever God's plan was for her was what she wanted. It was her foundation in God that was a big reason she chose ACU.

"That was definitely a big factor in this," Till said. "... It's going to be an environment where I'm not going to be in such a liberal place, where it's going to be hard to keep my faith and take a stand in what I believe in."

After much success at the Division II level, ACU is now on the Division I stage. The school joined the ranks in 2013, according to their website, when they joined the Southland Conference.

Brandon Hopper: 719-276-7644, hopperb@canoncity dailyrecord.com