WASHINGTON -- An advisor to Hillary Clinton shared the presidential hopeful's health policy priorities, from expanding the Affordable Care Act (ACA) to tackling the Zika virus.

In a presentation at the National Hispanic Medical Association conference, Ann O'Leary, senior policy advisor at Hillary for America, recounted the multiple ways that Clinton has worked to improve healthcare in the U.S., and began her remarks with a history lesson.

She pointed out that Clinton has been fighting to expand healthcare access since the 1990s.

"When she didn't win that battle, she didn't give up," O'Leary said.

Instead Clinton turned her focus to the most vulnerable population -- children. Clinton was instrumental in the passage of the Children Health Insurance Program (CHIP), building coalitions and creating partnerships. The late Sen. Ted Kennedy (D-Mass.), said the bill wouldn't have passed without her, O'Leary said.

Despite significant increases in coverage through CHIP, "We have much more work to do in terms of closing the coverage gap, particularly for Hispanic children, and it's something that [Clinton] will continue to work on," O'Leary said.

O'Leary stressed that Clinton is the only presidential candidate who supports the ACA, and is looking to expand it to cover those who are "left out," such as "many immigrants and many people who are here undocumented."

"Hillary wants to do what she can to ensure that we're expanding to those populations; that we're aggressively supporting states like California and others that have been really innovative in terms of supporting undocumented children in particular. And that's something we're going to keep looking at."

O'Leary also spoke of Clinton's recent work in Flint, Mich., helping communities who had been drinking lead-tainted water for months.

"One of the things that we know in terms of lead poisoning is that if you can get good nutrition to [people], it does mitigate some of the impacts," she said. But places like Flint often have a dearth of grocery stores, she noted.

Clinton visited Flint several times and helped to fund community efforts that ensured families were getting clean water and food, despite living in a "food desert." She also partnered with Flint's mayor to launch a program for "opportunity youth," which empowers young people, who are unemployed or out of school, to deliver water and help fix pipelines.

"Even as this national [presidential ]campaign is swirling about, she's not forgetting when a community is in dire need of her leadership," O'Leary said.

O'Leary also noted that there are many places in the same situation -- or worse -- than Flint, with lead in the water, or in the school buildings, or in residences.

"[Clinton is] very focused on what can we do to end lead poisoning in our country within 5 years," O'Leary said.

She also said that Clinton sent aides, including O'Leary, to Puerto Rico in April for a fact-finding mission on the Zika virus.

"We know Zika virus is particularly dangerous for women of childbearing age, and that pregnant women have a much higher likelihood of having a child with microcephaly," she said, adding that one in five Puerto Ricans is expected to develop Zika this summer.

During her visit, O'Leary and colleagues met with local health officials to find out "whether they're getting the resources they need, and what more we can do."