The highest-paid Sonoma County government employee doesn’t run for office every four years or oversee a large department.

He’s a sheriff’s deputy patrolling the coast who racked up $169,000 in overtime last year for total gross earnings of $292,000.

Deputy Gerald Turney made $15,000 more than the next-highest paid employee, Farhad Mansourian, general manager of the Sonoma-Marin Area Rail Transit, and $40,000 more than Veronica Ferguson, county administrator.

His boss, Sheriff Steve Freitas, the sixth-highest-paid employee, said Turney’s compensation is not surprising in light of staffing shortages requiring deputies to log an average of 55 overtime hours a month.

The department is down 30 sworn positions, in part because employees are leaving for better paying law enforcement jobs elsewhere, Freitas said.

“Basically, we’re running on overtime right now,” Freitas said Tuesday. “It’s a global issue at the Sheriff’s Office.”

The county salary information is contained in a database recently posted on The Press Democrat’s website. To view the database, click here.

The searchable format lists employees from all departments and shows regular, overtime and other pay as well employer-paid retirement amounts. The database includes a handful of agencies that aren’t included in Sonoma County’s budget, but whose payroll is handled by the county, such as SMART and the Sonoma County Law Library.

All told, 5,295 people worked for the county or related agencies in 2014, up about 5 percent from the year before. The numbers include about 1,200 part-time and temporary employees.

Total payroll was about $330 million or about 1 percent over 2013.

Many new employees were hired in response to two state mandates — the shift of state prison inmates to county jails and the Affordable Care Act, said David Sundstrom, the county’s auditor-controller.

The Human Services and Health departments did the majority of hiring followed by the Sheriff’s Office and Probation Department, he said.

He said the increases were modest and remain below previous staffing levels before the economic downturn in 2008. He said the county cut 200 positions in that period.

“When you’re coming back from a recession you’re going to have metered growth,” Sundstrom said. “The Board of Supervisors and the county administrator make departments jump through hoops to add positions. It’s not easy. The justifications have to be very strong and they are closely scrutinized.”

But government watchdogs criticized the hiring, saying the county can’t afford it. Ken Churchill, director of the group New Sonoma, which urges overhauling government pensions, said more employees will increase retirement obligations.

“I have a hard time understanding why the supervisors are adding people considering where we are financially,” Churchill said. “It seems to me they should be cutting.”

As for salaries, employees being paid more than $100,000 dropped to 885 from 956 in 2013, while those getting more than $200,000 rose to 24, up from 22 the previous year.

Of those in the over-$200,000 group, 11 work for the Sheriff’s Office. Four sheriff’s deputies made more than $100,000 in overtime alone.

Deputies Mark Provost and David Berges each exceeded $200,000 in total pay, eclipsing water agency head Grant Davis and Sundstrom, who had $226,000.

Mental health director Gary Bravo was next followed by County Counsel Bruce Goldstein. The 10th-highest paid employee was Julia Wyne, the county’s retirement administrator, with $220,000.