Support for the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, has increased in California as the Golden State prepares for the second enrollment period of the ACA.

The Covered California insurance exchange has reportedly aimed to have 1.2 million Californians renew their health insurance plans for 2015. According to the Los Angeles Times, Covered California and 10 participating health insurance companies are trying to "simplify" the renewal process for their consumers. For example, one method to ease the process is to automatically renew applications by Dec. 15 unless the consumer requests a change in their insurance policy.

While approximately 90 percent of Covered California's enrollees received federal money to assist in insurance payments, an individual's government subsidy for next year could arrive late in 2015.

Covered California's plans to promote the state's health insurance exchange include television advertisements. Covered California has a budget of $74 million and aims to increase enrollment to 1.7 million people by early 2015.

The second enrollment period begins Nov. 15. Unlike the first enrollment period, which was open for six months, the second period will last three months, ending in February.

Covered California health insurance premiums are expected to increase by 4.2 percent for 2015. Some insurance companies, such as Anthem Blue Cross, are increasing their premium rates by double-digit figures. To improve competition, insurer Kaiser Permanente plans to cut its rates in several components of its policies. California's health care watchdog determines the final rate that a health insurance company can charge. The final rates for next year are scheduled to be set by Sept. 30.

According to a Field Poll, a majority of Californians support the ACA law. Among registered voters, 56 percent of Californians are satisfied with the law, while 35 percent are opposed. In comparison to a similar poll in 2013, the favorability of the ACA increased by 15 percentage points. Sixty percent of Californians also think the state successfully implemented Obamacare, while 30 percent disagree.

"The biggest increase in support or the largest reduction in opposition are coming from those groups that were previously opposed or evenly divided in prior years," said Field Poll Director Mark DiCamillo.

"The poll's findings related to increased satisfaction among voters with the performance of the health care system in our state indicate that the hard work of policymakers, advocates and others is paying off," said California Wellness Foundation President and CEO Judy Belk.

According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 10.2 million Latinos are uninsured. The HHS noted 8.1 million of the eligible uninsured Latinos may qualify for either tax credits to purchase insurance coverage in the Health Insurance Marketplace, Medicaid or the Children's Health Insurance Program.

According to HHS' Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation's Emily Gee, California is the state with the largest number of uninsured Latinos with 2.8 million, or 28 percent of the 10.2 million. In a report by Gee, California has 11.8 million Latinos that are eligible for insurance, and most live in the Los Angeles-Long Beach metropolitan area.