A hit-and-run accident near the University of Arizona campus sent four students to the hospital Saturday night.



Investigators determined that a group of five students crossed Euclid Avenue at 5th Street when a car traveling north hit four of them and drove away, according to Sergeant Pete Dugan with the Tucson Police Department.



Injuries ranged from critical condition for one student, serious injuries for two others and minor pains for the fourth, according to Dugan. He said the driver turned himself in several hours after the crash.



News of the accident traveled around the University of Arizona campus. Sunday afternoon, some students admitted that they’re extra cautious when walking around Tucson after this accident.



Claire Lorenzetti said she and some friends avoided major roadways Saturday night after hearing about what happened on Euclid.



“We were walking to dinner and just kind of took the back roads because we were afraid of the main cars getting to us,” she said.



Austin Martin, who lives in a nearby dorm, said he immediately thought of his roommates when he heard the news.



“The fact that it was so close to where we live, so close to home that for me it’s so scary,” he said. “It gets to me that it could have been one of us.”



Martin said he will be looking both ways several times before crossing any streets and no longer trusting cars with turn signals on until they make the turn.



Javier Ortega, who said he’s seen close calls in the same area as the accident, said there’s not much more that pedestrians can do to stay safe, so it’s up to the drivers around campus.



“When it’s someone careening through a crosswalk you don’t really have much control over that, unfortunately,” Ortega said. “It definitely makes me think twice about where I’m going and paying attention to my surroundings.”



University of Arizona President Ann Weaver Hart released the following statement about the accident:

"We all hurt when tragedy strikes the Wildcat family and it is especially painful when several students are involved. The thoughts and best wishes of all of us are with our students injured in yesterday's incident and with their families. I also want

to thank the emergency medical staff and police who responded so quickly to help. We hope for a complete recovery for all and their swift return to campus."





Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.