A bill designed to make it even harder for women to obtain abortion coverage — by preventing anyone buying insurance plans in the Affordable Care Act from purchasing additional coverage that would cover abortions — moved Arizona state Rep. Victoria Steele (D) to share a secret of her own, according Mother Jones.

During testimony last Wednesday, Steele choked up while debating a woman’s right to have an abortion, confessing that she herself had been sexually molested as a child, when a committee chairperson asked her if she thought abortion was a medical service. Steele surprised everyone, including herself, when she responded from a place that was personal.

“When I was a child, I was molested for years by one particular person,” Steele testified, according to Mother Jones. “This is health care. Having the ability to get an abortion. This is health care. And that’s why I see this as necessary.”

Steele thought she was the only victim of a male relative, and like many children, didn’t tell anyone until years after she’d grown up and left home. Rarely do molesters have only one victim, and this time was no different. Steele later found out there were many victims. One of them told her their molester said he’d “stick a pencil up there and take care of it” if she ever ended up pregnant.

SB 1318, which ended up passing the state House Committee 5-3 along party lines, would traumatize the victims of rape all over again. The bill will now go to the full House for a vote. Victims who have recently been raped and find themselves pregnant as a result would have to go through the tortuous experience of telling their insurance panel, and possibly their agent, about the ordeal they went through. And the bill puts a target on the back of doctors, according to Steele, because doctors performing abortions would become part of the public record.

According to The Arizona Republic, Steele was shaken for a couple of hours after giving her testimony, and her abuse took place in the early 1970s. Imagine how difficult, or impossible, it would be to have to relive such a horrific experience in front of strangers who are judging you.

Rape victims shouldn’t be victimized all over again to satisfy the right-wing ideology of the GOP. Republicans have been corrupting the laws, trying to deny women and girls the ability to obtain abortions not only due to rape and incest, but in cases where they are victims of human trafficking as well.

Abortion is a protective right that all women should have, regardless of their circumstances. The choice should be between a woman and her doctor, not dictated by lawmakers who don’t even understand simple anatomy.

H/T: Mother Jones, Arizona Central