Cheryl Miller

The subtitle tells it all: Quiet - The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking. In this book Susan Cain explains why and when our society began placing more value on extroversion in such areas as education, business, industry, and politics; she believes we continue to do so at our peril. Cain supports her views with fifty pages of acknowledgments and notes; however, she intersperses stories with statistics to make the book quite readable.

I had an experience recently which strongly resonated to Cain's book. My experience? A high school graduation. Black robes floated above the stadium floor. With this continuous inky flow, my monkey brain soon began looking for other distractions. I soon noted the various footwear beneath the dark stream. As hundreds of students filed into rows of folding chairs, I began to imagine how the graduates of 2013 might be stepping into their futures.

Glitzy six-inch heels hobbled across the polished wood floor. I feared these foundations showed all too clearly what stability their owners were bringing to their futures - in spite of scattered cheers from the audience. In contrast, some young ladies strode easily in flat black shoes. I imagined this no-nonsense approach to footwear might serve them well in life.

Of course, that serious element also appeared among the young men. Black shoes and trousers walked silently across the huge expanse. One pair of pajama bottoms and house slippers were greeted with some laughter. However, the audience burst into cheers as several pairs of white basketball shorts peeked between strides. These graduation gown Oreo cookies swaggered above white knee-high socks and athletic shoes.

Advertisement

Four school officials lined up on the stage to congratulate the students. As graduates with honor society asterisks and with Asian surnames passed along this gauntlet, the audience was generally silent. Occasionally a respectful clap acknowledged someone's accomplishments. The principal at the end of the line politely shook hands. However, as the jocks and glams sauntered and tottered across the platform, many in the audience went wild - cheering, chanting names, blowing air horns. The principal greeted these students with hugs and slaps on the back; apparently he knew them well.

In our program was a request that the audience endow the commemoration with the seriousness it deserved. Those who didn't follow this request might be asked to leave. Of course, no school board hires bouncers for its graduation ceremony. In this case bouncers could only apply Band-Aids to a fundamental issue of our society.

I was struck with how this observance corresponded with points Cain brings forth in Quiet. However, she does not stop at identifying the problem. She includes techniques for parents, teachers, and employers to better utilize skills of introverts. She also gives introverts ideas for better performance. If you are interested in creating a productive balance between introversion and extroversion in our country, you may find some insightful ideas in Quiet by Susan Cain.

If you would like to write a book review for possible publication, please email: lperi60@yahoo.com.