Margo Nielsen packed up her office at Rockwall County Helping Hands weeks before she left.

As executive director, she has seen the organization grow from a 2,400-square-foot storefront on Kenway Street to two campuses occupying 28,000 square feet.

Now, she’s retiring after 25 years with the organization. In late February, she’ll move to Denison to be close to family.

Nielsen will work with Jon Bailey, who was chosen to take over the helm of the nonprofit, which provides food, clothing, financial assistance and affordable health care to locals.

Nielsen said she’ll miss working directly with people the agency served the most.

“As you rise to the top, you lose contact with your clients and your patients,” she said. “That’s the reason you get into this kind of work. I’m going to miss that.”

In early December, Rockwall County Helping Hands board of directors named Bailey the organization’s new executive director; his first day at the agency was Jan. 5. Bailey grew up in Rockwall, graduating from Rockwall High School in 1992 and from Texas A&M-Commerce in 1997. He serves as a Rockwall ISD school board member, is past president of the Rockwall Rotary Club and is a member of the Rockwall Chamber of Commerce board of directors.

Though Nielsen is staying on board through mid-February to help Bailey transition into his new role, a retirement celebration that will also serve as a fundraiser for the nonprofit is set for Jan. 24. The black-tie event is called The Magic Of Margo and comes just weeks before her 70th birthday.

Melody Hail, Helping Hands director of development, said the event “is an opportunity for the community to come out and thank Margo for her service.”

Agency budget grows

Nielsen became the first executive director of Helping Hands in 1989, just four years after she moved to Rockwall with her husband.

Under her direction, the agency grew from a storefront to a four-building complex on more than 10 acres with an annual budget of $2.7 million. When Nielsen came to the agency, the nonprofit had a budget of $60,000 and there was no food pantry.

“I think the capacity has been the biggest change,” she said.

Nielsen said most of the agency’s clients were working-class families who were struggling to get by. Now it’s people who never bounced back from the recession.

“A lot of people lost jobs,” she said. “Some of them never got jobs again. They’ve adjusted. They’ve downsized.”

The organization relies on donations, but they do receive grants designated for the health care center. And about 40 percent of the organization’s budget comes from the thrift store, Nielsen said. The thrift store saw more than $1 million in profits in 2014, she said.

“That’s exciting for my last year. It’s kind of a record,” Nielsen said.

The organization now relies on 40 employees and 150 regular volunteers.

The health center, which has three nurse practitioners and six volunteer physicians, opened in 2000 when the area found itself without women’s health care options. The county contracted with Helping Hands as a provider for women’s health care. In 2004, it expanded to become a primary health care facility.

“Our practice is starting to grow,” Nielsen said. “Even with the Affordable Care Act, we’ve started seeing a lot of people who don’t have health insurance and still can’t afford it.”

The most recent estimates put Rockwall County’s uninsured population at about 13 percent, or about 11,000 people, according to the U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey.

While the clinic is not free, services are provided on a sliding scale for Rockwall County residents who meet income criteria. For those who don’t qualify or have insurance, the clinic is still an option.

“We’re trying to avoid having people go into the emergency room because that’s the most expensive care you can get,” Nielsen said.

The clinic is open to the public 60 hours a week and sees 6,000 to 7,000 patients a year, she said.

“I never dreamed that I would be able to be a health care provider,” she said. “We’ve gone from almost zero capacity to an agency that can meet a whole lot of needs.”

Involved in the community

Nielsen has also been very active outside of Helping Hands. She’s been involved in the Rockwall Rotary Club, the Rockwall Agricultural Extension Service and the Rockwall MusicFest and has served on numerous nonprofit boards and commissions, including the Rockwall County Child Protective Services Board. She was appointed to the City Council in 2005, where she served for seven years.

Heath Mayor Lorne Liechty said Nielsen has been an important part of the community for nearly as long as she’s lived there.

“Margo has been not only critical to Helping Hands, but she has been one of the foundational people in Rockwall County,” said Liechty, who also serves as chairman of Helping Hands’ board of directors. “This large effort has been built thanks to Margo.”

Nielsen said she’s proud of the work she’s been doing for 25 years.

“It’s an honor to do this. I got thanked the other day at Wal-Mart by people who wanted me to know they had been helped,” she said.

Neighborsgo reporter Julissa Treviño can be reached at 214-977-8023.

THE MAGIC OF MARGO

What: A cocktail reception and dinner will serve as a retirement party for longtime Helping Hands executive director Margo Nielsen and fundraiser for the organization.

When: 5:30 p.m. Jan. 24 at the Hilton Dallas/Rockwall Lakefront

Cost: Individual tickets are $150

More info: Visit rockwallhelpinghands.

com/event/the-magic-of-margo