The range in age among the four is only five years. The range in personalities among Avalanche forwards Gabe Landeskog, Ryan O’Reilly, Matt Duchene and Nathan MacKinnon is much larger. “I’d say we’re all pretty different guys,” Landeskog said, “but we all share the same passion for our job.”

And talent.

The Avs’ young foursome, all 23 or younger, represent the present and future of the franchise, which has had one of the greatest turnaround seasons in Denver sports history. A team that finished 29th in the 30-team NHL last year is bound for the playoffs as a potential division champion with one day left in the regular season. All four players have had sensational seasons and offer promise of even better days ahead — including, perhaps, a Stanley Cup. Or several.

“Assuming the Avs keep those guys together and keep adding around the edges, I don’t see why they won’t compete for a Cup for many years to come,” said former Avalanche player Dave Reid, an NHL analyst with Canada’s TSN. “Those four are really talented players who have already proven themselves, and they probably haven’t hit their peak. There’s a lot to look forward to if you’re an Avs fan.”

There are similarities in how the Avs built their way back to prominence with how Chicago constructed its Stanley Cup championship team. Blackhawks star Jonathan Toews, like Landeskog, is a team captain who was drafted third overall. MacKinnon, like Chicago’s Patrick Kane, is a former No. 1 pick. Add in Duchene and O’Reilly, the old guys at 23, and it’s possible the Avs soon will eclipse Chicago in young star power up front. A Stanley Cup would put them in that territory.

“We know we haven’t won anything yet,” Landeskog said. “We’ve had a great season, but the playoffs is what it’s all about. But we also know we should have a good team for a while.”

If there is one common denominator among the Avalanche’s foursome, it’s their hockey-centric upbringing.

Landeskog’s father, Tony, is the son of a former Swedish pro player. Duchene’s uncle, Newell Brown, is an assistant coach with the Phoenix Coyotes. O’Reilly’s father, Brian, is a life coach who has worked with several professional teams and has another son, Cal, who played in the NHL. MacKinnon’s father, Graham, is a former junior hockey goalie. All four are close with their parents.

It’s hard to believe, but at the start of the season, MacKinnon was still considered a minor under Colorado law (he was 17 at the time). The other three like to kid MacKinnon that they are parental figures to him. Well, maybe that applies only to Duchene, Landeskog said with a laugh.)

“He loves to talk, he loves to be in every conversation and it’s not a lot of times where he’s wrong about something,” Landeskog said of MacKinnon. “He’s a great guy. Among us, he feels like he’s been here a while and he knows everything, so he tries to teach us things, but we take it with a grain of salt.”

Come to think of it, Landeskog said, O’Reilly might be the one who tries to be more like the parent to MacKinnon, along with young defenseman Tyson Barrie.

“He’s tried to mentor those guys, but Ryan is the quiet guy among all of us,” Landeskog said. “He’s very calm. I wouldn’t say he’s on his own page, but there’s a lot of stuff that he does that’s obviously a little different.”

O’Reilly is a devout practitioner of yoga who lives in a snazzy downtown loft decorated in a mix of Feng Shui and modern industrial cool. He likes to wear a porkpie hat. He plays the ukulele and the mandolin. And he listens to Billie Holliday jazz albums.

While his profile and salary have skyrocketed since his early days as a pro, O’Reilly is the same rink rat as when he signed his first contract. A year ago, he appeared to be on his way out of town because of a contract stalemate that got nasty. Now, with fences mended, it would seem he has a long future in Denver.

“I’m real happy here and just am glad we’re having some real good success,” O’Reilly said. “The last few years, there were some tough times for us as a team, but we’ve overcome it and it’s great to be a part of it.”

Duchene is sidelined with an injury and per team policy, kept away from the media. Which, come to think of it, might be almost as much of a hardship for Duchene as his injured knee. The pride of Haliburton, Ontario, he talks almost as fast as he skates and, as Landeskog noted, can come off as a know-it-all on all subjects. The thing is, he knows a lot.

He graduated at the top of his high school class, plays guitar, is an accomplished artist (he designed the logo for his high school hockey team as a player) and is an excellent writer. But you wouldn’t necessarily know it at first glance. Duchene’s wardrobe is a frequent target of teammate barbs (think farm-boy chic), and he’s almost as comfortable with a fishing pole in his hand as a hockey stick. His dog is named Paisley, after country singer Brad.

“He’s one of those guys who has a lot of different interests. But he’s really serious about his No. 1 job, which his hockey,” said teammate Jan Hejda. “He’s always positive, always chirping and upbeat.”

MacKinnon, meanwhile, has lived all season in the finished basement of teammate Jean-Sebastien Giguere but plans to move out before next season. He has a bit of a “pig pen” reputation for not keeping his locker stall clean, and MacKinnon is the first to admit things like learning how to cook and do laundry are not yet on his life bucket list.

But he has earned high marks for being a good, hardworking rookie, who even picked up the tab at the Avalanche’s rookie dinner during an off night in Chicago. That tab ran into the thousands of dollars. But there is the general feeling around the Avs that he will be able to withstand that financial hit.

“The kid might have a future in this league,” Landeskog joked. “Hopefully, we all can hang with him for a while.”

Gabe Landeskog, 21

Youngest captain in NHL history; a clotheshorse with 100-watt smile

Nathan MacKinnon, 18

Spent rookie year living in basement of teammate Jean-Sebastien Giguere

Ryan O’Reilly, 23

Yoga enthusiast; plays the ukulele and the mandolin

Matt Duchene, 23

Chatty country boy who favors pickup trucks and loves to fish

Wild West

The Avs will know what’s at stake when they lace ’em up for the final time in the regular season Sunday night at Anaheim:

ANAHEIM (112 points)

Clinched the Pacific Division and needed one point late Saturday at Los Angeles to clinch the No. 1 seed by virtue of owning the tiebreaker over Colorado and St. Louis because of more nonshootout wins. A regulation loss Saturday night would mean the Avs-Ducks game would be for the top seed, with the Ducks needing a win or overtime/shootout loss to clinch.

COLORADO (111 points)

Led the Central Division and held the No. 2 seed because of the nonshootout wins tiebreaker over St. Louis. The Avs still could finish as the No. 1 seed, No. 2 seed or second-place finisher in the Central Division.

If St. Louis loses Sunday morning against Detroit in regulation, the Avs win the division. If Anaheim got at least one point Saturday night and St. Louis loses Sunday, the Avs will be the Central champ and No. 2 seed. If Anaheim lost Saturday in regulation, the Avs can get the top seed with a win in regulation.

ST. LOUIS (111 points)

Second in the Central Division. Plays Detroit on Sunday. No. 1 seed not possible, but Central Division title still on the line.

COLORADO AT ANAHEIM

6 p.m. Sunday, ALT; 950 AM, 104.3 FM

Spotlight on Stefan Elliott:The Avalanche recalled the 23-year-old defenseman from Lake Erie on Saturday, presumably in response to the upper-body injury suffered by Tyson Barrie against San Jose on Friday. Elliott had 14 goals and 14 assists in 61 games for the Monsters.

NOTEBOOK

Avalanche: Colorado didn’t practice Saturday and offered no update on Tyson Barrie’s injury and prognosis. … Because of the 5 p.m. PDT start, the Avalanche won’t have a morning skate Sunday. … There’s a chance the Avalanche will know going in that it already has the Central Division title clinched, which would happen if St. Louis loses to Detroit in regulation Sunday afternoon. If the Blues get a point or two, the Avs need to match that against the Ducks to win the division and draw Minnesota or Dallas as a first-round opponent in the playoffs, which start this week.

Ducks: Anaheim played the Los Angeles Kings at the Staples Center on Saturday night and needed only a point to clinch the top playoff seed in the Western Conference. If the Ducks lost to the Kings, Colorado still could claim the West’s top seed with a win over the Ducks.

Terry Frei, The Denver Post