On FOX News Sunday this week, columnist George Will called on Republicans to at least consider President Obama's nominee to the Supreme Court. Will criticized Republicans for using the "Biden rule" as an excuse to deny Judge Merrick Garland, Obama's nominee, a hearing.



Will said it was disheartening to hear "my friend Mitch McConnell" be unwilling to consider President Obama's Supreme Court nominee and hold confirmation hearings. Will scolded Republicans for saying this is a way to protest executive overreach, when this is a "clear constitution right and duty of the president."



Will would later lecture Republicans for not taking the nominee Obama has offered, warning them if Hillary Clinton is elected president her choice will be much more liberal and much younger than Garland, who is 63.



"If Trump is president we'll have to guess who will be the nominee," Will warned on FOX News Sunday this morning.



"Do Republicans really think Donald Trump will make a good Supreme Court choice?" Will asked in his column this week.



"The Republican Party’s incoherent response to the Supreme Court vacancy is a partisan reflex in search of a justifying principle. The multiplicity of Republican rationalizations for their refusal to even consider Merrick B. Garland radiates insincerity," Will wrote.



McConnell later told Meet the Press moderator Chuck Todd he disagrees with his assessment.



Transcript of Will's FOX News Sunday commentary:





GEORGE WILL: The Republicans have two reasons for taking that position. One is to demonstrate to the Republican base something that they now very much doubt which is there is some reason to want the Republicans to control the Senate. They can't defund Planned Parenthood, they can't repeal Obamacare. They can't even prevent the reauthorization of the Export-Import bank. This they can stand up and say we can actually do something.



Second, this is a way they say of protesting executive overreach by the president. Although this is a clear constitutional right and duty of the president to nominate people to the federal judiciary. What's puzzling is the Republican Senate leaders who are saying this have all said of course they will support Donald Trump if he's the party nominee. So they're saying we're quite content to have judicial nominations made by Mr. Trump whose qualifications for doing so are foggy.



And it's puzzling to hear my friend Mitch McConnell saying with reverence that we must follow the 'Biden rule.' A Biden rule endorsed with equal reverence by Harry Reid. The Biden rule said no confirmations during a political season. When are we not in a political season? It's just not an election year? By what principle do we decide when a president's ability to nominate people becomes progressively attenuated? After the midterm elections of the second term of a president? When is it? I don't understand.