Jason Schneider

As the cost of prescription medicines generates increased controversy, two of the nation’s largest pharmacy benefits managers are removing still more medicines from their list of drugs that are covered, which are known as formularies.

In recent days, CVS Caremark began notifying customers that 95 medicines will be excluded in 2015, up from 72 this year. Various efforts to manage its formulary lists, which began in 2012, are expected to save $3.5 billion through next year, a spokeswoman says.

And last week, Express Scripts told its customers that 66 medicines will be excluded in 2015, up from 48 this year, a spokesman says. By excluding these drugs, the pharmacy benefits manager expects to generate more than $1 billion in savings next year.

“Drug therapy options in some [drug] classes are larger than ever, with many high-priced products ultimately failing to deliver tangibly better health outcomes than more affordable alternatives,” he writes us. The exclusions will affect less than 1% percent of 25 million people covered by Express Scripts, he adds.

Among the noteworthy changes – Express Scripts is keeping the Advair respiratory treatment sold by GlaxoSmithKline, but not will reimburse for the Breo follow-up drug. The benefits manager is also excluding the controversial Zohydro ER painkiller.

We asked the manufacturers for comment and will update you with any replies (see the UPDATE below for their responses). Also, both benefits managers have targeted testosterone treatments, which have been linked to cardiovascular risks in some studies, notes the Drug Channels blog, which first published the lists.

The moves come as a national debate intensifies over prices paid for medicines, an issue that spans many of the newest and most innovative treatments for cancer and rare diseases to some generic pills used to combat more common ailments.

The problem has been typified this year by the Sovaldi treatment for hepatitis C, which studies show can cures nine of 10 sufferers, but costs $84,000 over 12 weeks. Insurers and state Medicaid programs worry will bust budgets as more people are treated in a relatively short time span.

The drug has become a sort of proxy for the larger discussion over the ability of private and public health insurance programs to pay for medicines, and the extent to which restrictions are needed to reduce costs.

Express Scripts, in fact, has been one of the most vocal critics of the Sovaldi pricing and drug costs, in general. Last month, for instance, the benefits manager began blocking coverage for about 1,000 active ingredients used to make compounded medicines to create pain ointments and creams.

For consumers, the formulary changes may require extra effort by physicians to seek exemptions. For drug makers, the changes reflect the need to make ongoing choices about when to offer rebates to pharmacy benefit managers.

“Brand-name drugs in highly generic classes will continue to face enormous pressure for price and rebate concessions,” writes Adam Fein of Pembroke Consulting on his Drug Channels blog.

In a follow-up note, he writes us that “exclusion lists will keep expanding, but physicians and consumers are starting to push back when access to valuable therapies get blocked.” He points out that CVS Caremark had previously indicated its 2015 list would exclude 200 drugs, but the final list has fewer than 100 products.

[UPDATE: A Glaxo spokesman sent us note to point out that, while Express Scripts dropped Advair, the medicine was add to the CVS Caremark formulary. And while he acknowledged that the Breo follow-up drug will not be available on the Express Scripts national formulary, the drug will be available on a basic formulary plan that offers mid-value reimbursement coverage.

[Separately, a spokesman for Zogenix, which sells the Zohydro ER painkiller, writes the drug maker has a contract with Express Scripts that provides coverage of Zohydro ER for about 75% of Express Scripts customers, even though the drug was excluded from the national formulary].