Topics: Football, NFC championship, NFL, richard sherman, San Francisco 49erts, Seattle Seahawks, Super Bowl, Life News, Entertainment News

For the record, Richard Sherman doesn’t need my defense. His many accomplishments would exist whether I validated them or not. As he so eloquently dictated last year to Skip Bayless on Bayless’ own show, ESPN’s “First Take,” he is “better at life than you.” I believe him.

By now, the infamous Erin Andrews interview has been talked about at length, much more than Sherman’s dazzling game-saving defensive play against the San Francisco 49ers’ Michael Crabtree to punch his team’s ticket to the Super Bowl. I’m not really interested in rehashing what has been said about the video other than to say the Twitter backlash — the bantering and bullying — seemed on par with just about every swell of trending Internet fodder that rises and crests on an almost daily basis. If you are looking for some good stuff that has been written already, you can check it out here, here and here. Also, if you are interested in reading Sherman’s own thoughts on what transpired, go here. He also held a press conference on Wednesday that’s worth watching. There is a method to his madness (though I would hardly call him “mad” or any derivative thereof). I can’t say the same for his legion of trolls.

I watched the game at a bar in New York where nearly everyone was from the Bay Area (California). It felt like home: belligerent fans belched obscenities toward the television screen, patrons flaunted their red and gold around the bar and high-fived following every 49er first down. After each 49er score the bar erupted with joy; every Seahawks conversion deflated the high in the room. I cheered only enough to remain unnoticed and blend in with the crowd. I drank my beer. Then I drank more and more, like any good American football fan. I was consumed by the game. Even more so when you consider I was watching with more than those inside the bar.

Since I grew up in Northern California, in and around the Bay Area, you might guess whose side I leaned toward. You might also imagine the barrage of posts I encountered before, during and after the NFC Championship on my social feeds. Though I tend to refrain from scrolling endlessly through my timeline — and, in many instances, I go so far as to unsubscribe to posts that congest my feed — Sunday’s game was impossible to escape.

Following the epic Sherman interview, many at the bar became infuriated: I watched a fan rip the red cap from his head, walk outside, and hurl it into the intersection, only to follow up that emotional release by sparring with the side of a brick wall; his friends let it ride. The rest of the dejected and downtrodden took to social media. I simply watched the carnage, the same way I watched NaVorro Bowman’s knee disassemble moments earlier (ad nauseam).

An incoming text message shed more inglorious wisdom on the night’s events: “Congratulations Richard Sherman, everyone in America outside of Washington wants to see you lose. Not that they care.”