Author Richard M. Lytle is surprised by how many northern Indiana residents have never heard of “the great circus train wreck of 1918” in northwest Indiana.

Lytle, a former resident of Niles and Plymouth who now lives in Hammond, where the headline-making rail tragedy happened nearly a century ago, decided true details of the account deserved a book treatment. “The Great Circus Train Wreck of 1918: Tragedy on the Indiana Lakeshore” (2013 History Press $19.99), is his 109-page archive-photo filled paperback to chronicle the freak accident of the local railways.

“Mine is not the first book to be written on this subject,” Lytle said.

“A previous book titled ‘No Performance Today’ was published in 1972 by Warren A. Reeder Jr., past president of the Hammond Historical Society and trustee for the Hammond Public Library. It was Warren who had begged his father to take him to the circus on that fateful day of June 22, 1918.”

Lytle is the local history librarian at Hammond Public Library and an officer of the Hammond Historical Society. When he began his position at the library nearly a decade ago, he was fascinated with the library archive’s collection of unpublished train wreck photos. The idea to publish a new book on the subject was born. The first edition was published in 2010.

“While working at the library, I found that because there are still so many railroad families who live in Hammond, for patrons of a certain age, they know about the circus train wreck,” Lytle said.

“But for so many more people from a younger generation or those who live outside of Hammond, this has been a long forgotten news headline.”

Lytle was born in Peru, Ind., the famed area of the Hoosier state noted as “the old circus winter quarters” and now home to The International Circus Hall of Fame. His fascination with circus life started early and continued after he moved with his parents to Niles, where he graduated from Brandywine High School in 1965. After time in the military, he earned his library science degree from Indiana University in Bloomington and then lived in Plymouth.

When new interested minds hear about Lytle’s book and the true incident, many of the questions are common repeats.

“First of all, there were no animals, exotic or otherwise, involved in the wreck,” he reminds.

“This traveling circus has two train segments and the train pulling the cars with the animals was dispatched prior to the secondary train which carried all of the performers and workers. The reason for this was the weight of pulling all of the cars with both animals and performers would have been too much for one train engine. Also, the animals were better off sent ahead on the first train so they could be unloaded and fed in a timely manner.”

As so neatly explained by Lytle, in the cool, predawn hours on that June night in 1918, a train engineer closed his cab window as he chugged toward Hammond. He drifted to sleep, and his train bore down on the idle Hagenbeck-Wallace Circus Train. Soon after, the sleeping engineer’s locomotive plowed into the circus train.

In the subsequent wreckage and blaze, more than 200 circus performers were injured and 86 were killed, most of whom were interred in a mass grave in the Showmen’s Rest Section of Chicago’s Woodlawn Cemetery.

“While doing my research for this new circus wreck book, I had access to new records from area hospitals, which had not been previously available detailing those who were injured,” he said.

“One new detail I discovered was that some of the victims in the tragedy were originally thought to be some of the black men who were porters on the train. However, as it turned out, these were white men whose bodies were burned so badly, at that time, doctors were not able to even distinguish the true skin tone.”