Cross-checks to the head are worse than glove punches to the same region. I hope Rangers captain Ryan McDonagh returns from a concussion soon because he’s a special player. But the punch he absorbed from the Flyers’ Wayne Simmonds on Feb. 6 was not as dangerous as the cross-check that he delivered.

I’m not saying McDonagh got what he deserved. But I deem Simmonds’ response on the play acceptable under the circumstances, and the NHL got it right with the penalties they ultimately levied. McDonagh was given cross-checking and slashing minors and Simmonds a game misconduct.

The play: McDonagh tried protecting himself from a check against the boards by raising his stick to Simmonds’ face. That’s like playing bumper cars and stabbing the person trying to bump you. Simmonds came up swinging and knocked McDonagh out with a big left.

Despite McDonagh’s injury, the NHL didn’t penalize the punch because it couldn’t ignore the more serious cross-check. Originally, Simmonds was only ejected from the game for throwing his stick at an official. Afterward, the penalties were drawn up based on what started it all — the defensive cross-check.

But here’s an idea: The NHL, and hockey in general, needs to penalize every shot to the head, including the seemingly harmless glove punches during a minor scrum after the whistle. If McDonagh wasn’t injured, the referees should have given McDonagh and Simmonds game misconducts. Sending two uninjured players to the dressing room will help keep sticks down and gloves on the stick, opposed to into a guy’s face.

In college hockey, cross-checks to the head and glove punches occur frequently and often go unpenalized. The protection is greater, but the brain gets knocked around just the same.

In the NHL and other professional leagues, plus major-junior and junior-A, visors expose the lower half of the face and there is no chin guard to keep them in place. I’m a big proponent of visors or no protection at all. Full cages, metal or plastic, turn players into gladiators. More protection for the head leads to more shots to the head.

McDonagh played at the University of Wisconsin. I’m assuming he learned the defensive two-handed cross-check in college hockey, which often is as barbaric as the Feb. 5 Rangers-Flyers game.

Fifty/50. The Avalanche is actively seeking to acquire a top-four defenseman (or two) before the Feb. 29 trade deadline. However, the Avs are the league’s only team with a maximum 50 player contracts, thus they can’t take on more players than they trade away. If this wasn’t a concern, Colorado would not be trying to rid themselves of defenseman Nate Guenin, who on Friday was placed on waivers for the second consecutive month.

Bottom line: Colorado did not do enough in free agency last summer to shore up its blueline and the Avs overvalued Nikita Zadorov, 20, who isn’t quite ready for prime time.

Mike Chambers: mchambers @denverpost.com or @mikechambers

Spotlight on …

Connor McDavid, C, Oilers

When: The Avalanche visits Edmonton on Saturday and gets its first up-close look at McDavid in a “Hockey Night in Canada” telecast. The game follows Colorado’s Wednesday contest against the visiting Montreal Canadiens.

What’s up: McDavid had five points Thursday in a 5-2 win over the visiting Toronto Maple Leafs, giving him 12 points in six games since returning from a broken collarbone. The young superstar — now centering Benoit Pouliot and Jordan Eberle — was injured Nov. 15 against Philadelphia after producing 12 points (five goals) in his first 12 complete NHL games. In 19 games overall, his shooting percentage is a lofty 23.1.

Background: McDavid is the “generational” player from Richmond, Ontario, who was selected No. 1 overall in the June draft last year. In his last season in junior, McDavid amassed 44 goals and 120 points in only 47 games. Equally impressive were his 21 goals and 49 points in 20 playoff games.

Chambers’ take: I’m excited as anybody to see McDavid play live and not rely on cameras to prove his Superman skills. Watching a guy like this away from the puck or behind the play is a bonus. An athlete who defies logic is exciting.