What better way to celebrate July 4th than with a senseless decree from an illegitimate ruler and his many minions. English? No you don't need to speak that. It's racism to even require it.

Now let's have illegal alien amnesty, whose advocates promise that the illegals will be forced to learn to speak English (nope), pay their taxes (receive Earned Income Credits) and contribute to the economy (ObamaCare, disability, Section 8).

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), a federal agency tasked with enforcing workplace discrimination laws, is suing a private American business for firing a group of Hispanic and Asian employees over their inability to speak English at work, claiming that the English-language requirement in a U.S. business constitutes “discrimination.” Judicial Watch reported Tuesday that the government is accusing Wisconsin Plastics, Inc. of violating Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits discrimination based on “national origin.” The government argues this includes the “linguistic characteristics of a national origin group.”

That argument is so wrong it could have only come from Obama. No one is discriminating them because they speak another language. The problem is that they don't speak English.

Can the EEOC argue with a straight face that not knowing English is the characteristic of a national origin group? Why not.

According to a news release from the EEOC, Chicago Regional Attorney John C. Hendrickson said the Green Bay-based company’s English requirement is based on “superficial” reasoning. "Our experience at the EEOC has been that so-called 'English only' rules and requirements of English fluency are often employed to make what is really discrimination appear acceptable. But superficial appearances are not fooling anyone,” Hendrickson said in the release. “When speaking English fluently is not, in fact, required for the safe and effective performance of a job, nor for the successful operation of the employer’s business, requiring employees to be fluent in English usually constitutes employment discrimination on the basis of national origin — and thus violates federal law.”

Speaking English fluently is always required at any job. If you can't communicate with an employee, then the employee can't properly be instructed and will have problems interacting with customers or other employees making for an inefficient and unfriendly workplace.

Serious language warning. And nothing a white comedian could get away with today.