Most sophisticated foreign observers, including our friends and enemies alike, have already concluded that the Obama administration is all but over. The various professional foreign ministries and national intelligence staffs have, by now, all reviewed our various media reports and talked to their various contacts in Washington, and have advised their respective political departments that, while they might want or need to simulate business as usual for one reason or another, there has been a huge power shift in Washington.

Thus will conclude paragraph one of their assessments. Paragraph two will probably be intended to distinguish our latest elections from those of 1994 and 2010, and would go something like this:



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Barack Obama]

Both of those elections, we may recall, were off-season elections during the first term of Presidents Bill Clinton and Barrack Obama, respectively. The difference was that Clinton, the consummate wheeler-dealer with Congress, quickly “triangulated” his politics with Republicans and was able to be re-elected and finish his two terms as a reasonably effective president, despite being impeached for lying under oath.

In 2010, Obama lost some support in Congress, but hung on to the majorities he needed to be re-elected in 2012 and force through his agenda, mostly implementing a hugely complex and unpopular Affordable Care Act that benefited mostly low-income people at the expense of the working, younger and healthy middle class. The extent of this, and other social programs designed to increase the number of voters dependent on government (especially plans to allow hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants to stay in the country), was carefully managed in the White House and spun, with a happily compliant media, through Obama’s re-election in 2012, only to become undone as public awareness and criticism sharply increased, and the popularity of the president and his social programs plummeted to historic lows. The 2014 election simply demonstrated that broad based disfavor.

“OK” scribbles the prime minister on such a paper given to him or her by his or her senior advisers last week, “but what do I do now, and whom do I deal with that will get us past Obama and into the next administration?” Answering this question, the next paper probably says something like this: “We will need to observe protocols of course (that is, when you have to deal with Obama), but the person who will have the most contact and influence with the Congress and the U.S. foreign policy establishment is Secretary of State John Kerry and his senior people”



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Congress]

The paper will likely go on to note that Kerry ran for president (and may again), that he was a long time senator – both a member of the intelligence committee and chairman of the foreign relations committee – and that he has enormous family wealth and deep contacts with the various old school establishments in Washington (contacts that Obama was never able to cultivate as a one term senator from Illinois). Finally, it will note that he has never had any particular loyalties to Obama. In short, Kerry and Obama came from two different political worlds and have remained in such.

And, we can imagine that such a paper might also pose the following: “The key question is whether Kerry will get our message to the State Department bureaus and Congress, even if it is at odds with what Obama may want to do.”

The practical answer to this key question is largely dependent on the size and loyalties of the various senior staffs that now surround Obama and Kerry, respectively. And, in this aspect of the matrix, Kerry has an enormous bureaucratic advantage over Obama; the only question is whether he will use it to isolate Obama and the White House.

(To further complicate this dynamic, we shouldn’t be surprised to see Obama isolating himself, in that he will probably be doing much more foreign travel and junketing than he has done in the first six years of his presidency. This leaves Vice President Joe Biden at home to cover the bases, another long time Washington establishment guy with very little in common with Obama.)



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on 2014 Congressional Elections]

At this point in the discussion, one wonders who the remaining Obama loyalists are (i.e., the ones he brought with him and have remained with him throughout his presidency). The first person that would come to mind is Susan Rice, president Obama's national security adviser, who, but not for her outrageous spinning on Benghazi, would no doubt already be the secretary of state and be able to cover for Obama during his final two years. But Rice is in the White House and – like Obama – will be largely dependent on the foreign policy feed she gets from Kerry.

The other foreign policy Obama loyalist is United Nations Ambassador Samantha Power,, but that post is traditionally isolated from the State Department, as they often have competing policy goals and interests. In short, Powers will be of little or no help, as will the few other Obama insiders, most of whom have chosen to stay in the White House and close to their sponsor.

While our media obsesses mostly with the president’s relationship with Congress, the next two years will be an even more interesting study in how the various foreign policy establishments treat a lame duck president, especially a president with very little personal footprint in the massive bureaucracies that support the national security and foreign relations functions of our government. These are extremely ambitious people, many of whom are more interested in their own near-term political and personal futures than they are Obama’s. To them, 2016 will be here – and Obama and his people will be gone – in no time at all!