The operator of a North Charleston call center is eliminating up to 150 local jobs and shutting its Upstate office, blaming the moves on an unexpected and “severe” decline in its health care business.

DialAmerica Marketing notified the state Department of Employment and Workforce on Friday that it would permanently lay off workers at its 8085 Rivers Ave. location over three weeks starting Jan. 30.

It also said in the formal notice that it would keep the call center open “and continue its other services that operate out of that facility.”

The Mahwah, N.J.-based telemarketing business opened in Rivers Park Business Center near Greenridge Road in 1997. The company blamed the cutbacks in part on a drop in business from health insurance clients after their annual enrollment periods ended.

It also said a customer from that industry is moving some work offshore, resulting in “a negative impact ... in a few of our locations,” according to a statement DialAmerica provided to The Post and Courier on Tuesday.

In addition to the North Charleston layoffs, the company said it will be closing locations in Greenville and Amherst, N.Y.

In its Jan. 8 notice to a state labor official, DialAmerica said UnitedHealth Group’s XLHealth division “unexpectedly” cut back its call center requirements Jan. 4. It also said it was unable to provide affected employees with the required 60-day advance notice about the layoffs “because of this unforeseeable business circumstance.”

All operations related to the XLHealth contract will be eliminated by Feb. 12.

DialAmerica said it is working with the U.S. Department of Labor’s Rapid Response Team for Employment and Workforce Development to “provide our employees with assistance in job placement with area employers and other related services.”

The company was on the front end of a wave of corporate call centers that flocked to the Charleston region starting in the late 1990s. Others have included Verizon Wireless, Intercontinental Hotels and iQor US Inc.

On its website, DialAmerica said its U.S. centers place or field more than 300,000 calls a day on behalf of customers in industries that range from consumer products to financial services to travel.

Last summer, the company was looking to recruit licensed health insurance agents to work at its North Charleston office and others in response to the Affordable Care Act. They were to handle inbound and outbound calls from plan members, renew accounts, and sell products and services.

After the closings in the Upstate and New York, DialAmerica will have 19 U.S. locations. The firm shut down a 70-worker North Augusta call center in 2007.

Contact John McDermott at 843-937-5572.