Suddenly, the battle over one of the hottest measures on the November ballot is looking more like a rout.

Support for Proposition 46, which would raise California's four-decade-old $250,000 cap on medical malpractice awards for "pain and suffering," has plunged since early summer, and the measure is now failing, a new Field Poll shows. And support for Proposition 45, which would let the state insurance commissioner veto medical insurance rate hikes, is also losing steam.

Already the target of a blistering "no" campaign, the malpractice measure is now supported by only 34 percent of likely voters, while 37 percent oppose it and 29 percent are undecided. In a Field survey conducted from late June through mid-July, the measure was winning nearly 2 to 1.

The proposition, which would also require random drug testing for doctors, was launched by Bob and Carmen Pack, of Danville, whose two children were killed by a drugged driver in 2003.

Proposition 45 is faring somewhat better: 41 percent support the measure, 26 percent oppose it and 33 percent are undecided. But that's a staggering drop from the early summer poll, which showed the measure leading by more than 4 to 1.

The poll numbers read like an epitaph for Proposition 46, especially given that the measure's foes -- funded by the medical and insurance industries -- have about 16 times as much money to spend through November as do the lawyers and consumer advocates supporting it, Field Poll director Mark DiCamillo said.

Advertisement

Based on polling about 200 past ballot measures, "once the no side starts to get ahead of the yes side, the chances of passage are really quite low," DiCamillo said.

Opponents, he added, have it easier: "All they have to do is raise doubts and uncertainty; the yes side has to make the sale, convince voters why this change in law is needed."

Foes of Proposition 46 began airing TV and radio commercials in August, and Proposition 45 opponents launched radio and Internet ads last week. But proponents of the measures say they won't start their media campaigns in earnest until the end of this month.

Shaun Bowler, a UC Riverside political science professor and an expert on the initiative process, said earlier polls are likelier to show higher support, as the signature drives required to put measures on the ballot often are run without much visible or vocal opposition.

"Only after it gets onto the ballot do potential opponents really get to hear about it and mobilize," he said, agreeing with DiCamillo that the prospects for both measures -- especially Proposition 46 -- are dim.

Jason Kinney, spokesman for the campaign against Proposition 46, wasn't quite ready Wednesday to pronounce the measure dead. But, he said, it "certainly appears to have begun sinking under the weight of its three unrelated, onerous provisions that would significantly increase costs, reduce health access and threaten personal privacy."

Supporters of the two measures tried to put the best spin on the new numbers.

Jamie Court, president for Consumer Watchdog, a Santa Monica-based nonprofit backing both measures, argued that Proposition 46 wasn't a lost cause.

He said insurance companies are "misleading the public about what is really in the patient safety measure" and that support will increase after voters hear from patients and victims of impaired doctors. "All we have to do is tell them that it's the insurance companies on the opposing side lying to them," Court said.

The funding disparity for Proposition 45 is even more pronounced, with opponents -- mostly health insurers -- appearing to have more than 100 times as much money to spend on this general election as its supporters.

Robin Swanson, spokeswoman for the No on Prop. 45 campaign, said she wasn't surprised that support for the measure is dropping. "The more voters learn about the deceptive agenda behind Prop. 45, the less they like it," she said.

The initiative, she said, takes health care decisions away from Covered California, the state's health insurance exchange created by the new federal health care law, and "hands it over to one politician."

At its board meeting last month, Covered California Executive Director Peter Lee and some board members warned that the measure would threaten the state's ability to implement the health law, commonly called Obamacare. They said that if Proposition 45 passed, it would impede the exchange's ability to negotiate with health insurers over rates and threaten the companies' participation in the exchange.

Covered California in July announced that next year's rates for individual policies would increase 4.2 percent on average. But skeptics said the health insurance rates may have been kept artificially low because higher rates would drive voters to pass Proposition 45.

Follow Josh Richman at Twitter.com/Josh_Richman and Tracy Seipel at Twitter.com/TASeipel. Read the Political Blotter at IBAbuzz.com/politics.