Video

Image Tania Hird slams AFL over suspension 0:38 Play video Tania Hird has blasted the AFL over the Essendon supplements scandal, saying her husband is a scapegoat.

GREG Poynton was having fun.

He sang and danced on TV each Saturday night, along with Dannii Minogue and Joey Perrone, on Young Talent Time.

Yet it was during his five years of celebrity in the 1980s that his parents split up. His mother Robyn was forced to return to work full-time as a pharmacist.

His younger sister Tania, the second oldest of four children, took over many of the domestic duties at their East Keilor home. She was 12 or 13.

As Poynton puts it, she became the family “brick”. The “comfort and the confidante and the mum”.

“Exactly as you see now,” he says of his sister, now known as the wife of James Hird. “We thrived in adversity.”

Yet this glowing reference, according to Poynton, understates her qualities. For one, his sister may have been a better dancer than he was. Forget the disco lights and adoring fans of TV studios. She was the real star.

She played the violin and the piano, and is qualified to teach both. Tania was a champion swimmer and wielded a sharp mind; the oft-repeated story goes that she topped both the law and commerce faculties at Melbourne University.

The quality most obvious in recent days, to both her loved ones and her critics, is her unerring penchant for saying what she thinks.

None of this “moving forward” corporate jargon, either, the patter trotted out by the heavies who labelled her defence of her husband last week a “distraction”.

Hird has had something they have not. Armed with bottled outrage, she has seemed answerable to no one but her better judgment.

As crafted as she has always been on the Brownlow Medal red carpet since the 1990s (typically elegant in J’Aton), Tania Hird has been unshackled.

Yet it has been a polarising approach. She won’t be “bullied”, she has said, but casting her family as “victims”, suggests one acquaintance, is problematic, given the tiresome history of the Essendon supplements saga.

There are also the optics: the doorstop press conferences in the Toorak driveway, talk of their children doing a school term in a European school while her husband, in essence, is paid a lot of money to take a year off for doing the wrong thing.

The timing before Essendon’s first-round game has roused heavy criticism. As her comments raised queries about her “scapegoat” husband’s tenure at the club, James Hird was said to be en route to France to begin an elite business course paid for, in part, by Essendon.

Gold Coast Suns coach Guy McKenna was frank — Tania Hird should have stayed silent. AFL commissioner Bill Kelty said the saga was about player welfare, not the politicking of James Hird or the AFL executive.

Essendon president Paul Little on Friday said James Hird needed to “control” those around him. Little wondered what the coach knew of Tania’s comments and what motivated them.

Poynton can offer Little some answers, at least. He says the Hirds are “uncompromising people” of “unwavering morals”. He says they have been compelled to keep quiet while people “shoot off at the mouth”.

“This whole conundrum has shaken their world,” he says.

“A lot of people have let them down.”

ONLINE surveys are hardly the stuff of empirical measure, but they do gauge the mood: more than three in four Herald Sun readers, after Tania Hird’s interview, felt her husband should be sacked by Essendon.

One person who knows her says “she wears the pants” in the relationship; another, describing the same dynamic, admires how she is so “fiercely protective of her brood”. One Essendon insider who knows them both well has little doubt that James Hird would have had intimate knowledge beforehand of his wife’s intention to speak out.

Hird’s reliance on his wife for advice is no secret; indeed, he has spoken of it as the great strength: “She doesn’t tell me how to play footy, she never has, but for moral and all sorts of support, she’s been the one.”

Hird herself spoke of frustration with recent penalties, a gag placed on her husband after he was found to have brought the game into disrepute. A source tells the Sunday Herald Sun that her children have been abused in the street. There was anger in the process of Hird’s suspension last August.

Tania sat in at AFL Commission hearings and, according to one report, angrily confronted the AFL’s Gillon McLachlan, a former fellow law student at Melbourne University.

Plainly, the Hirds, who brought along a QC best known for his human rights advocacy, felt they were denied natural justice.

Last December, Tania Hird told the Herald Sun her husband was being paid by Essendon while he was suspended.

She chose to introduce the bombshell to the public arena. AFL chief executive Andrew Demetriou looked out of touch when he (mistakenly) declared in response that Hird was not being paid.

One whisper goes that Tania was incensed by platitudes heaped on Demetriou after he announced several weeks ago that he would stand down as AFL chief executive at the end of the season.

Yet perhaps the biggest surprise about the fallout from the Tania Hird interview on the ABC last Thursday night, at least for those who know her, is that anyone was at all surprised she gave the interview.

She has always stood up for herself. It’s the sort of self-assuredness that sounds open to interpretation.

Poynton calls it a product of being “solid stock”. Someone else who knows her well calls it a “self-centredness” that distorts her ability to see how the world perceives her and her family.

Her confidence was evident, says one source, when she turned up in polka dot bikinis at a surf club many years ago. Or as a corporate lawyer in her 20s. Or the time she first met her future husband.

She was working, according to Poynton, at the Grand Hotel in Essendon, behind the bar or as a waitress. It was one night after footy training. Hird was just a skinny kid; the lifelong adulation of his silk and grit came later.

No one had heard of him when he encountered the pretty blonde. He asked her out. She said no.

DECADES and four kids on, as a couple both hailed and derided as “Team Hird”, Poynton draws parallels between the teenage kid who cooked and cleaned at home and the woman who followed her criticisms of the AFL last week with another flurry the following day.

He says the thinking remains the same. It does not go: why are we in this situation? Instead, it is: how do we fix this situation?

Poynton knows the wider Hird family.

“There is a commonality through both our families,” he says. “We’ve been brought up from the cradle to stand up for ourselves. People being able to say basically whatever they like and not really having the right of reply has been so difficult. It’s been hard for them (James and Tania) and it’s been hard for the extended family as well.”

Fabled spin doctor Ian Hanke has worked for the Hirds. He argues that Tania Hird had always been told she could tell her story. The problem was that the right time for the club, or for the good of the game, never seemed to eventuate.

“The fact is that at some time or another she felt the need to tell her story because she is protective,” he surmises. “She felt there had been egregious damage done to her family and I can understand it because she cares for them so much.”

A source familiar with the inner workings of Essendon football club, as well as the Hirds, believes that both parties have suffered from tunnel vision.

Both camps have argued the finer points at the expense of the bigger picture. Neither camp, the source says, has grasped the risks to players. Both camps have been dazzled by “belief in their brand”.

As for Tania Hird’s tip-off claim about Demetriou that bumped the search for MH370 from newspaper front pages?

“In reality, that phone call has nothing to do with anything,” the source points out. “It doesn’t change whether Essendon took substances or not.”