Ever since the CMA Awards co-hosting duties went to Brad Paisley and Carrie Underwood in 2008, their monologues just keep getting stronger. With their shared kinship and clever skits, it’s no wonder why the comedic pair takes charge of the stage, bringing on the hilarity every year.

As the 49th Annual CMA Awards approach, we can all breathe a sigh of relief knowing that the dynamic duo will, once again, grace the stage. Their comedic energies feed our TV screens with quirky little ditties, “Country Music’s Biggest Night”, and now, it’s time to reflect on some noteworthy moments by Brad and Carrie.

Here are eight memorable Brad Paisley and Carrie Underwood CMA Awards moments.

8. Paying Tribute to Hank Jr. While Mocking the NFL, 2011

2011 marked the end of Hank Williams Jr.‘s long tenure with ESPN and “Monday Night Football” after he went public with commentary regarding Hitler and President Obama.

Paisley and Underwood took this moment to recognize some of Williams Jr.’s most iconic song’s including, “All My Rowdy Friends” and “Family Tradition”, but it was the southern rocker’s unexpected appearance that made for an unforgettable night.

7. Uncontrollably Dancing to PSY’s ‘Gangnam Style’, 2012

Let’s face it, when the song first came out, none of us knew what the words to “Gangnam Style” even meant. We can all agree, however, that the dance was really addictive, and we just couldn’t get that catchy beat out of our heads. Even Paisley and Underwood had difficulty avoiding the K-pop style number.

As the saying goes, If you can’t beat ’em, join ’em, and in this skit you can see how Paisley throws on the sunglasses to let the inevitable happen, while Underwood tries to fight it. Seriously though, has there been a more epic, countrified version of this dance since?

6. Tim McGraw and Faith Hill Barbie Dolls, 2011

For older women who have outgrown their childhood toys, Paisley and Underwood took the nostalgia up a notch when they gifted each other Barbies, but not just any Barbies: Faith Hill and Tim McGraw Barbie dolls.

Okay, so it’s not that big of a shocker that the McGraw power couple comes in doll-form. After all, they’re pretty much perfect humans, but the fact that the co-hosts began to play with the figurines in front of a live audience is priceless.

5. Feeling Hot Instead of “Blue”, 2009

Remember when Swine Flu, otherwise known as the H1N1 virus, first appeared in the U.S.? Well, we’re not entirely sure if Underwood had it during the 2009 CMA Awards, or even sure whether or not the “Smoke Break” singer was even sick, but when Paisley checked Underwood’s forehead and told her she was ‘hot’, it seemed to be that there was only one cure to make that ‘hotness’ go away.

No, it wasn’t more cowbell. It was singing a song about the illness along to the melody of LeAnn Rimes‘ “Blue.”

4. When Miss Piggy Tried to Nab Carrie’s Co-Host Gig, 2011

Anyone who is anyone knows Miss Piggy is quite the diva. The Muppet star took to the 2011 CMA Awards in a vulgar attempt to steal Underwood’s co-hosting spot by locking the American Idol winner in her dressing room.

Unfortunately for Miss Piggy, her blond locks and glittery dress didn’t match up to Underwood’s natural beauty and kind heart. Sorry, Miss Piggy.

3. Ramblin’ About Lady Gaga, Not Lady Antebellum, 2010

Luckily for Paisley, he can always count on Underwood to bail him out of just about any silly mistake he ends up making at the CMA Awards, especially when he’s paying tribute to an artist such as Lady Antebellum through song.

In 2010, the “Crushin’ It” singer jokingly confused Lady A with Lady Gaga by playing short snippets of “Paparazzi” and “Alejandro”. Sure, both artists have the word Lady attached to their name, but c’mon Brad, you could’ve googled that one.

2. The Obamacare Technology Blunder, 2013

In 2013, Paisley and Underwood mocked America’s Government Health Care system. Paisley jokingly used the term ‘twerking’ in order to describe his back problems. In an effort to help Paisley get signed up for healthcare through the Obamacare enrollment website, Underwood whips out her trusty laptop and begins to punch in a few keys only to realize that signing up takes forever.

This leads to, of course, the two breaking into song — their version of George Strait‘s Amarillo By Morning”. Needless to say, the skit was a hit with the audience.

1. Postpartum Taylor Swift Disorder (PPTSD), 2014

Last year, Paisley and Underwood poked fun at Taylor Swift when they acknowledged that the country star, who recently went pop, gave up her seat at the CMA Awards. This led to the co-hosts saying that we’ve all been hit by Postpartum Taylor Swift Disorder.

Making light of the conversation, Paisley joked with Underwood by saying that he knew first-hand that President Obama did not care about the issue.

The 49th Annual CMA Awards will air live from Nashville’s Bridgestone Arena on Nov. 4 (8-11 PM/ET) on ABC.

Next: Watch Brad Paisley and Carrie Underwood Hilariously ‘Prep’ for the 49th CMA Awards