Wausau Community Cat Action Team spokeswoman explains why the policy is good for cats and the whole community.

"Trap, neuter, return" is a sensible and humane solution that would improve on the status quo, which has feral cat populations increasing. (Photo: Getty Images/Design Pics RF)

In December, I attended an informational meeting at the Humane Society on the "trap, neuter and return" program. Since that time, I have become involved with the Community Cat Action Team, a local group that is working to bring TNR to our area.

Yes, I like cats and have three of my own. But my main reason for getting involved with this group is there is a problem and it needs a sensible and humane solution.

First, some background. You likely heard that in 2014, Wausau, Schofield and Weston entered into a contract with The Humane Society of Marathon County for handling of its stray cats. Under this contract, strays can only be brought in from these areas via law enforcement. Further, the number of cats contracted for is significantly lower than the actual numbers of cats brought in from those areas in previous years.

The result: There are increasing numbers of free-roaming feral cats, also called community cats, that are reproducing unchecked in our area.

Cats reach reproductive maturity at six months and have an average of about 10 kittens per year. This amounts to literally exponential population growth each year. There are people who will say that their community doesn't have a problem with community cats. Many people are unaware of the existence of these cats because the cats are not tame; they aren't interested in contact with humans. They often only become visible when they are engaged in mating-related behaviors such as spraying, fighting and howling.

While TNR may be new to this area, it is a program that is used in communities across the country to control feral cat populations. In a nutshell, here is how it works:

• Trained volunteers and caregivers humanely trap community cats.

• The cats are provided with a basic health exam, rabies vaccination, spay or neuter surgery, and post-surgical care.

• The tip of the left ear is clipped for future visual identification.

• The cats are returned to their home territory and allowed to live out their lives, often assisted by colony caregivers who feed, shelter and facilitate any additional needs, including neighborhood concerns.

Besides the obvious benefits of TNR, euthanasia and disposal rates are reduced over time, resulting in a reduction of cost to taxpayers. To put it in black and white, when a cat comes in under the current contract, HSMC is required to hold it for 7 days. Then, if it is not adoptable, it can be euthanized. The cost for the care, euthanasia and disposal is $185. If that same cat came into the TNR program, it could be spayed or neutered and vaccinated for $40.

Nuisance behaviors are greatly reduced once cats are fixed and are no longer mating. The fixed cats that are returned also act as a deterrent to unfixed animals moving in.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Cat lovers from around the area met in Wausau to begin planning a cat-neutering program. Volunteers will form the group and present it to the city for a possible endorsement to complement ongoing animal control efforts. Nora G. Hertel/Daily Herald Media

Letter: Trap, neuter and release is for feral cats

Here are some common questions I hear regarding TNR:

Why don't we just round up and euthanize these cats? Trap-Kill is a temporary solution. There is a documented phenomenon called the vacuum effect — other cats move into the vacated area. Furthermore, there is still significant cost, and most people do not support the killing of healthy cats.

Doesn't TNR make cats feral? TNR doesn't turn cats feral. TNR is a program for dealing with cats that are already feral. Adoptable cats and kittens can still be brought to HSMC.

I've heard that feral cats kill a lot of birds. Feral cats can kill small numbers of birds, but are much more likely to go after rodents. Also, remember that the goal of TNR is to reduce the number of community cats over time. Under the current plan, these numbers are growing.

Won't these cats starve to death? Compassionate people in our community are already feeding many of these cats and would continue to care for them after surgery.

Who would pay for TNR services? CCAT has received donated funds to get started and there are grants available through various organizations for TNR programs.

Buy Photo Amie Leonoff is a spokeswoman for CCAT. (Photo: T'xer Zhon Kha/Daily Herald Media)

Why does the Humane Society have to hold cats for seven days? Law requires that they be held so that if someone's beloved pet gets out and is trapped, they have time to claim it before it is euthanized.

What if someone's pet is inadvertently trapped? It's best to keep pet cats indoors, but if a pet is not wearing identification and is trapped, it will be fixed, vaccinated, and returned to the area where it came from. Unless cats are being used for breeding, they should be spayed or neutered anyway.

For more information on TNR, you can visit www.alleycat.org or www.neighborhoodcats.org. This is a program that can work in our community, as it does in hundreds of other communities.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1Ho6KPX