By Paul Bremmer



Are you feeling frustrated, disaffected or just plain angry at the Obama administration and the progressive left in general? That’s exactly how they want you to feel, according to award-winning journalist David Kupelian.

“We’ve got to overcome anger because people don’t realize that not only does all this crazy stuff going on make them angry, which is understandable because [the left is] destroying the country, but causing the anger is strategic,” said Kupelian in a recent interview on “The Jesse Lee Peterson Radio Show.” “You are intended to become angry.”

In his new book, “The Snapping of the American Mind,” Kupelian writes that stoking anger and resentment is a key tactic employed by the left.

It’s done because the ultimate goal is to radically transform society, and the people will not be in the mood for a revolution if they are calm and happy. In fact, stirring up anger is absolutely essential to the fundamental transformation of America, according to Kupelian.

“It doesn’t work if people don’t get mad,” he told Peterson’s audience. “Let me put it another way: It’s totally dependent on your reaction, your overreaction, your [hate]. When you’re angry and upset and ticked off and frustrated, you’re not on your game. You’re not thinking right. It’s almost like a temporary insanity.”

He observed that the word “mad” can mean either angry or insane, which is appropriate, because people do become a little insane when they’re very angry.

SPECIAL OFFER: Get your copy of David Kupelian’s “The Snapping of the American Mind: Healing a Nation Broken by a Lawless Government and Godless Culture” – autographed and personalized – at a special discount at the WND Superstore!

Conservatives would argue President Obama has done a lot to drive Americans mad. For example, he has granted a path to citizenship to millions of illegal aliens. He has sided with protesters rather than police officers. He has struck a nuclear deal with Iran. Then there’s Obamacare, marriage and abortion.

“What Obama has brought to the table is he has taken cans of gasoline and poured it all over this fire that has already been burning in our country, and he’s accelerating it,” Kupelian said. “He’s like an arsonist. He’s creating this conflagration.”

The Rev. Jesse Lee Peterson, author of the forthcoming book “The Antidote,” supported Kupelian’s arguments.

“I’ve seen good people just go off the deep end because they became so frustrated at Obama and what he’s doing,” said Peterson, who also writes a WND column. “It’s as though he’s going around the country looking for everything that’s good and attacking it. And then when you get mad at him and point it out, he lies about it, but yet he continues with the frustration; and a lot of people don’t know how to handle that type of evil. And I can totally see and have seen why they do snap.”

Peterson said it doesn’t help that many black pastors encourage their parishioners to be angry.

“The unfortunate thing is there are men in churches that have taught their congregations that anger is good and that you should learn to control your anger. but you need the anger. And these people who have been taught that are very unhappy with the anger, but they’re trying to hold onto it, because the preacher said it’s good to have,” he said.

Kupelian pointed out the consequences can be dire when anger causes Americans to snap.

“He has lit a match to where we have the school shootings, the mass shootings are happening more often,” he said. “You have young people born in the greatest country on Earth, the United States of America, they haul off and go to Syria so they can become barbarians or sex slaves, joining ISIS. So we are snapping more rapidly than ever.”

The two authors agreed the country needs to heal, as evidenced by the fact that the subtitles of both of their new books begin with the word “healing.”

Watch the interview:

“America needs a healing, and it needs it real badly. And we need the healing sooner rather than later, and so we need to have some honest, insightful discussion about what’s really, really going on,” Peterson said.

Kupelian warned Americans not to disengage from the political process or the culture wars, because that will only make it easier for the left to achieve its goals.

Said Kupelian: “I know a lot of people who don’t listen to the news anymore and don’t vote, because it’s so upsetting to them that they just for their own peace of mind say: ‘I can’t watch it anymore. I can’t stand Obama.’ You know what? The bad guys win when the good guys stay home.”

Kupelian said the key is for right-leaning Americans to realize the left wants to make them angry and upset. Then they need to stand up to the left in a firm but non-angry way.

“They want us to be angry and upset and frustrated and snapping, and we need to frustrate them by saying: ‘Uh-uh. You are insane. … You guys are nuts. You’ve been doing this to us for a hundred years. We’re not taking it anymore.’ But we can do it in a dignified way, and there’s great power in that.”

Peterson confessed that he himself was driven by anger as a young man. What he didn’t realize at the time was that his anger was causing him to make bad decisions.

“I didn’t know at the time that that was going on,” he said. “It wasn’t until the anger was removed from me by God that I see, ‘Wow, no wonder my life was so messed up.’ I couldn’t see what I was doing.”

SPECIAL OFFER: Get your copy of David Kupelian’s “The Snapping of the American Mind: Healing a Nation Broken by a Lawless Government and Godless Culture” – autographed and personalized – at a special discount at the WND Superstore!

Also, get Kupelian’s culture-war bestseller, “The Marketing of Evil” – now available in paperback – and the acclaimed sequel, “How Evil Works,” also in paperback – all available, autographed by the author, at the WND Superstore!