Topics: bail, Big Pharma, Big Tobacco, Congress, criminal defense, critical infrastructure, infrastructure, John Oliver, last week tonight with john oliver, Medicaid expansion, pharmaceutical industry, Police, Prison, public defenders, Same-sex marriage, Transgender, Entertainment News, News, Politics News

John Oliver is a comic genius, but he’s also one of the greatest public servants when it comes to issues that face the nation… even if you had no idea the issue even existed. Thanks to Oliver, many of us learned about the intricacies of the criminal defense system, messed up bail requirements, municipal fines that can land you in jail if you can’t pay and prisoner reentry complications when you get out.

Despite being British, he’s a damn national treasure. Here are the 13 stories that were the best and most important of 2015.

1. Destroying Big Pharma’s outrageous spending to influence doctors

17-minutes of a scathing attack on the pharmacutical industry’s bypass of the expertise of doctors and marketing straight to the consumer.

“Drug companies are like high school boyfriends,” Oliver joked. “They’re more interested in getting inside you than in being effective once they are there.”

2. John Oliver on Big Tobacco: “The agricultural equivalent of U2″

If there is one thing tobacco companies love to do it’s finding new creative ways to put their products into the hands of new users who have long lives of usage ahead of them. Many countries are fighting back. There are fewer users and yet the tobacco industry is more profitable than ever.

“It’s an aging product that’s decreasing in popularity and yet it just can’t stop making money,” says Oliver. “It’s basically the agricultural equivalent of U2.”

3. John Oliver eviscerates Congress over America’s crumbling infrastructure

One of the most terrifying things John Oliver has covered. Our roads and bridges all over the country are falling apart. This will make you think twice before you drive over a river with a sketchy bridge.

“Much like most Botox recipients and competitive cloggers, the average dam is 52 years old and has something deeply broken inside of it,” said Oliver. “Infrastructure is like Legos. Building is fun, destroying is fun, but a Lego maintenance set would be the most boring fucking toy in the world.”

4. John Oliver reveals the stunningly racist history behind why some U.S. territories can’t vote

Over 100-year-old racist rulings that decide that those born in the U.S. territories don’t have the same constitutional rights as those born in the United States.

“The American part of American Samoa is really a title that doesn’t mean anything,” said Oliver, “like ‘People’s Choice award nominee’ or ‘social media expert.'”

5. A “fuckbarrel” of fines: John Oliver reveals the disturbing way police are preying on the working poor

There are far too many people living paycheck to paycheck who can’t pay fines upfront when slapped with them. If you can’t pay the fine you’re issued another fine on top of that. Eventually, there are so many fines people go to jail. It’s a never ending cycle that many can’t get out of.

“That situation is ridiculous,” Oliver said. “The only people who should be that excited about people waiting in line to hand over way too much money are Apple executives. That’s the only time.”

6. John Oliver perfectly sums up everything that’s wrong with standardized testing

The scariest two words in any school among both students and teachers are “standardized tests.” There are even parents who are opting their children out because the tests are so ridiculous. But apparently everything that you are as a kid boils down to one test. It’s messed up and Oliver tells the world why.

“Something is wrong with our system when we just assume a certain number of kids will vomit,” Oliver said. “Tests are supposed to be assessments of skills, not a rap battle on 8 Mile Road.”

7. John Oliver rips America’s disgraceful maternity leave policy: Thanks for giving us life — “now get the fuck back to work”

Fun fact: The U.S. is one of only two countries in the world that doesn’t offer paid time off for new moms.

“This is not how its supposed to work,” Oliver said. “Mothers shouldn’t have to stitch together time to recover from childbirth the same way that we plan a four-day weekend in Atlantic City.”

8. John Oliver blasts the U.S. bail system for locking up poor people regardless of guilt