Republican Senate candidate Monica Wehby released a scathing open letter to Vice President Joe Biden Wednesday, hours before he's set to campaign for Democratic Sen. Jeff Merkley in Portland.

Wehby sarcastically suggests that Biden is taking a break from his "apology tour" to "come pitch the same empty promises of a stronger economy" in Oregon that the Obama administration has been pushing for years.

Wehby, a pediatric neurosurgeon, concludes by saying that she believes the U.S. should instead reduce regulations, lower taxes and revamp educational and health care policies.

All of that, she writes would be a "f***ing big deal," a reference to the remark Biden whispered to President Barack Obama -- and picked up by microphones -- on the day in 2010 when the president signed the Affordable Care Act into law.

Here's the full text of Wehby's letter:

An Open Letter to Vice President Biden

Hello Mr. Vice President,

Welcome to Oregon!

We're glad you could take time away from your apology tour to come pitch the same empty promises of a stronger economy, and better paying jobs that Senator Merkley has been force feeding Oregonians for the last six years. Unfortunately for you, six years of that broken record doesn't sound as good as it once did. With Oregon's unemployment still above 7%, and our labor force the weakest it's been in recorded history, it'd be a tough sell even for your boss, let alone someone with your oratory prowess.

But, maybe I'm not giving you enough credit.

After all, you once convinced a group of seniors the only way to keep our nation from going bankrupt was to spend more money; managed to sell a very expensive, very broken healthcare system to an entire country; and, I would be remiss not to mention the goodwill you recently built with our allies overseas – you know, the ones we're expecting to help us fight that terrorist group your boss called the "JV"?

You are going to need that experience and more if you are going to sell the status quo to the people of Oregon. Your agenda, which Senator Merkley has arrogantly rubberstamped, is one that's led to one-in-five Oregonians being put on food stamps! It's why our children's education system ranks near the bottom in the country; it's what led to 150,000 Oregonians losing their health insurance; it's what's responsible for an increase in our poverty, a decrease in our incomes, and the destruction of the American middle class.

Like I said, it's a tough sell.

But, once again, maybe I'm underestimating you. You do have over forty years of Washington, D.C. experience (a number Senator Merkley is undoubtedly envious of) and of course, despite all the gaffes, all the controversy, and all the bad policy you still managed to make your way into the White House (no matter how much you might regret it ).

As a doctor, I don't have the political experience or bravado to sell that bill of goods. That's why I've decided to pitch Oregon something entirely different.

I believe we need to lift burdensome regulations, and job-killing taxes to help get Oregonians back to work. I trust our teachers and schools to educate our children with a bottom-up, rather than a federally mandated, top-down approach. I think healthcare should be put in the hands of patients, not D.C. bureaucrats; And, I believe America is safer and more secure when we don't shy away from the world stage.

Of course, doing all that would be a "big f***ing deal". But, you don't need me to tell you that.

- Dr. Monica Wehby, U.S. Senate Candidate

-- Jeff Mapes