Welcome to WJCT First Read, your daily weekday morning round-up of stories from the First Coast, around Florida, and across the country. We'll also preview some of WJCT's upcoming news programming.

Sebelius works to set health reform record straight in Jax: U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius spoke in Jacksonville on the Affordable Care Act and Florida's attempts to stall it's implementation.

Driver in weekend pedestrian death same as in fatal crash 4 years earlier: Michael Fortunato, the 66-year-old who struck and killed Esther Ohayon as she crossed San Jose Blvd. on Friday, hit and killed a 6-year-old in 2009 just blocks away.

Local retired Admiral on Navy Yard shootings: Jacksonville resident and Retired Rear Admiral Victor Guillory calls yesterday's mass shooting "unreal." (News4Jax)

State officials say San Jose Blvd. pedestrian overpass not feasible: Responding to a request from a rabbi for a pedestrian overpass on the street where Esther Ohayon was killed Friday, state transportation officials said the cost was too much for the few people who would use it. (First Coast News)

State Supreme Court weighs necessity of redistricting testimony: The state's highest court heard arguments yesterday for and against the release of more information and testimony related to the state's legislative redistricting process. (Tampa Bay Times)

Florida university heads advocate for immigration reform: Four leaders of state institutions of higher learning testified before Congress yesterday on the need for immigration reform. (Orlando Sun Sentinel)

Data shows justifiable homicides up 200 percent in Florida: Data released in advance of a U.S. Senate committee hearing today on "Stand Your Ground" legislation shows an average increase in reported justifiable homicides of 53 percent across the country, but 200 percent in Florida. (Mother Jones)

Today on First Coast Connect, Duval County Sheriff John Rutherford joins us to take your questions .

You can get all the latest headlines online at WJCTNews.org, on our Facebook page, and on Twitter @WJCTJax.