Fort Hood shooting rampage survivor's family details terrifying seven hour wait for call from injured soldier

Theodis Westbrook, father of injured Sgt Jonathan Westbrook, said he is 'grateful' his son is alive

The soldier was shot four times - twice each in the arm and chest

His wife said she also didn't hear from him for hours



The father of one of the victims of the horrific Fort Hood shooting has spoken of the tense hours between when his son was shot and when they finally learned he was still alive.

Sgt. Jonathan Westbrook’s father Theodis Westbrook drove nearly halfway across the country after learning his son was one of 16 wounded during Specialist Ivan Lopez’s shooting spree. Three people also died during the rampage.

He told ABC News of the emotional roller coaster he and his wife went on while waiting to hear the married father of three was still alive. His wife also spoke to the traumatic hours until hearing from the father of their three children.



Injured: Sgt. Jonathan Westbrook was shot during the Fort Hood rampage

‘I can’t tell you how happy I am as a dad, as the parent, that I am here to celebrate with my son… and not here to go the other way,’ the relieved father said.

His son was shot four times – twice each in the arm and chest, he said.

The worried father admitted thinking ‘how different it could have been’ during his 10 hour drive from Mississippi to the Texas Army base.

‘How much worst it could have been, how much worse the news could have been and how our lives would have been changed had it gone the other way,’ all crossed his mind, he said.

Theodis Westbrook told of how he felt helpless as the shooting raged on.

‘Ever since my kids were very, very small, I was afraid that something [would] cause pain and hurt to them and I did everything in my power to prevent that… for this to happen, it is the realization of the worst nightmare.’

Cocnerned: Theodis Westbrook, father of the injured soldier, said the wait to hear about his son was agonizing

Happy couple: Renee and Jonathan Westbrook have three children together

His soldier son served last year in Afghanistan, but the pain caused by the Fort Hood shooting is more than had anything happened during combat, the father said.

‘Bombs, missiles and all sorts of weapons used against him and he survived all of that and he came back here to a U.S. military installation that is secure and almost lost his life and got wounded.

‘It is just unbelievable.’

The injured soldier's wife, Renee Westbrook, said her husband did mainly administrative work after being blown several feet by a bomb while in Afghanistan.

He suffered minor nerve damage and received treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder but was otherwise okay, she explained.



Seven hours passed before Jonathan was able to contact his parents.

‘We walked the floor, we cried, we prayed,’ said Theodis Westbrook. ‘We had no information … we allowed ourselves to think the very worst.’

In memorial: Flowers hang at the East Gate of the army base Friday at Fort Hood

The Sergeant’s parents admitted that the longer time went by, the more they were convinced something very bad had happened.

‘We have just been to hell and back,’ he lamented.

Jonathan finally was able to call his parents, he told them of the terrifying ordeal.

‘The very first person that was hit died,’ Theodis Westbrook said his son told him. ‘And, then the gun was turned on my son.

People scrambled for cover, turning over desks and tables for protection, he was told.

The shooter soon left and started randomly shooting people he encountered.

Renee Westbrook, was flown Friday by the military to Fort Hood to see her husband, and she couldn't wait to assure their children their father was okay.

' I just thank God that he gave my husband a second chance,' she said.



Officials have since said the shooting likely happened after a verbal altercation caused Lopez to ‘snap,’ it wasn’t premeditated.