Medicaid is a $23 billion annual government program that provides critical health care for more than 2 million children in Florida, yet by just about any measure it is a broken system. The Herald-Tribune will be exploring many facets of Medicaid – including ways to fix it – and we need your help. We want to hear about your experience with Medicaid, good or bad, big or small. Call or text health reporter Maggie Clark at 727-877-5724 and help us write the stories that need to be told.

Medicaid, the state and federal insurance program covering low-income children, elderly, people with disabilities and some low-income adults with children, is projected to add nearly 250,000 Floridians next year. That would boost the program to just over 4 million people and account for nearly one-third of Florida's state budget, according to projections from the Legislatures's top economist during a committee hearing Tuesday.

Locally, more than 30,000 people in Sarasota County and more than 40,000 people in Manatee County are covered by Medicaid, according to the most recent U.S. Census data on health insurance coverage. Nearly half of all Medicaid enrollees — about 2 million — are poor children, according to budget documents.

The increase in enrollment for the coming years, economist Amy Baker told the state's joint legislative budget committee, is due to increased awareness of insurance in general, not because people are getting poorer.

“With the Affordable Care Act, the whole paradigm has shifted so that the emphasis is on getting coverage,” said Baker, the coordinator of the Florida Office of Economic and Demographic Research. “It's not that people have lower incomes or that somehow we've added more poverty in Florida. The new enrollees always qualified for Medicaid; they just didn't know, or didn't come in and sign up.”

Costs are up, Baker said in response to questions from lawmakers, because of increases in the cost of specialty prescription drugs and the lingering costs of the state's transition of Medicaid services to private insurance companies, known as statewide Medicaid managed care.

Health cost debate

The forecast came with state lawmakers still at odds over how to address rising health care costs in Medicaid, and calls mounting from health advocates across the state to accept billions in federal dollars to cover even more people under Medicaid as part of the Affordable Care Act.

State lawmakers have so far declined the money, and key legislative leaders, including Senate health policy chairman Aaron Bean, R-Jacksonville, have said they may not pursue expansion in next year's session.

Last year's regular legislative session ended in a stalemate after legislators could not agree on whether to take the federal money.

Instead of expanding coverage, lawmakers and the governor are looking at ways to control health costs, such as telemedicine, alternative payments and closer fiscal scrutiny.

With his own concerns about growth in Medicaid spending, Gov. Rick Scott created a commission to study the way hospitals use Medicaid money, and has ordered audits of more than 100 hospitals in the state to determine if they are getting paid more by Medicaid insurance companies than is legally allowed.

Managed care concerns

Legislators on the committee were concerned that the rising Medicaid costs come just one year after Florida rolled its millions of Medicaid members into private insurance plans, and paid a flat rate to insurance companies, to control state spending on Medicaid.

But those insurance companies lost money this year and secured a 7.7 percent rate increase from the Florida Agency for Healthcare Administration last month. The increase was cited by Baker as one of the reasons for anticipated Medicaid cost increases next year.

That left Rep. Janet Cruz, D-Tampa, to question the logic of managed care in the first place during Tuesday's hearing.

“I continually heard that we could contain costs with managed care, but I'm not seeing it,” Cruz said. “I'm very concerned that we were sold a bill of goods when we were told that moving Medicaid members into managed care would contain costs.”

Baker cautioned that since the statewide managed care transition is only one year old, companies needed more time to work out the kinks in the program.

Enrollment increases will also likely strain health care providers, who say they are already struggling to keep up with the growing caseloads and declining reimbursement from Medicaid insurance companies.

In a 10-year lawsuit still working its way through the Southern District Court of Florida in Miami, pediatricians and parents are fighting the state for higher reimbursement rates from insurance companies and higher standards of care for kids.

The case's judge recently determined that Florida's Medicaid program had failed to provide adequate preventive and routine care to children, as more than one-third of Florida children on Medicaid are not receiving the preventative medical care they are supposed to.

Judge Adlabetro Jordan also found that Florida's Medicaid program was in violation of federal law for the way it set its physician reimbursement rates.

The state is appealing the determination, and litigation is ongoing.