Larimer County Republican Party chair says group opposes display of flag, despite Facebook post

Debates about displaying the confederate flag and its significance have heightened across the country since the shooting at Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, S.C. — including in Larimer County.

A post on the Larimer County Republicans Facebook page a couple of weeks ago brought that discussion into public view as individuals and political groups joined the discussion.

After the shooting and amid calls to remove the flag from the South Carolina Capitol, retailers have pulled the flags from their shelves and online — Wal-Mart, Sears, Amazon and eBay included.

For opponents of displaying the flag, it's about much more than the flag itself — the flag symbolizes the acceptance of systemic issues of racism and inequalities.

But proponents claim taking the flag down is an attempt at erasing history and the flag symbolizes Southern pride.

The Larimer County Republican Party's Facebook post said those calling for a ban on the flag, President Barack Obama included, are uninformed.

"The Confederate flag is not, nor has it ever been, a symbol of racism. Unauthorized adoption by racist groups as well as vastly misinformed media have led many to believe it represents racist sentiments. It does not. It's primary purpose was to represent freedom & to differentiate southern armies from northern armies as the original Confederate flags were very similar to the Stars & Stripes, creating confusion on the battlefield."

Advertisement

The post went on to read that many people think the Civil War was fought over slavery but asserts that it was not.

"It was fought over the rights of states and secession versus the rights of the Federal government. Slavery was only a small part of that equation," it continued.

And the post stated that calls for bans are "wrong," "foolish" and a "continuation of runaway political correctness," followed by several comments from the administrator on the post.

It was signed CR and authored by Greg Lenderink.

Later that week, another post went up about the issue.

Lenderink refused to comment when contacted for an interview — saying he gave up on talking to media — other than to confirm he writes the posts on the Facebook page and is the party's webmaster and Facebook page administrator.

This isn't the first time the party's Facebook posts have come under scrutiny — posts about the pope and other issues have also caused concern among some members in the past.

Larimer County Commissioner and party member Tom Donnelly called the post "ridiculous," "inappropriate" and one that is not relevant to the Larimer County Republican Party's operations.

Donnelly said Lenderink has posted other controversial items in the past that members don't believe are representative of the party, and they've approached the chair about them, but they continue to pop up.

While Lenderink is entitled to his opinion, Donnelly said, it's not appropriate material for the party's Facebook page.

"Our party has always had the opinion that (the Confederate) flag was a symbol of racism and is fundamentally at odds with our values and principles of our nation," Donnelly said.

Larimer County Republican Party Chairman Jim Cook said he asked Lenderink to take the post down, along with some others, a few days after they were posted when he found out about them.

"In this case, one party member voiced his positions without any prior authorization," Cook said.

And he said he made it clear that the Facebook page could not serve as a "sound-off" page for individuals as it had in the past.

As for the flag itself, Cook said the flag's only place is in museums where it can be exhibited in the context of "keeping us mindful of the need to treat each other with kindness, with equality, with respect."

"The Confederate flag was the official flag of the regime that supported the enslavement of other human beings," he said.

The flag, he added, is indicative of much more than just the symbol.

"I suspect that part of the angst over the Confederate flag is not the Confederate flag so much or the history behind it, but it's become the focal point for a lot of people to vent a lot of legitimate frustration," Cook said, citing race relations, income inequality and the future of the country.

"If there's one segment of the population that has a serious concern about something, then it's all of our concern," he said.

Cook said the Larimer County Republican Party is trying to reach across party lines to find common ground, be more inclusive, do a lot of listening, "bring down the temperature" and work with others to find solutions to problems without worrying about which party gets the credit.

Larimer County Democratic Party Chair James Thompson refused to comment for an interview but released the following statement via email, "The Confederate Flag is not a Republican or a Democratic issue. As we've seen most recently in Charleston, racism is still a huge problem in America, and for many people the flag is a stark reminder of that fact."

He declined to elaborate further but to state "Democrats support policies that encourage diversity, awareness, inclusiveness, and equal opportunity for all."

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050, ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.