In 2003, Angela Long discovered a difference in density between her breasts. She didn't think much of it.

During her annual check-up, her doctor noticed it, too, but wasn't concerned either. There were no lumps. Angela was 34 and had none of the risk factors associated with breast cancer.

Her physician did prescribe a mammogram, but Angela postponed getting it done because she was a busy mom — her two children, Connor and Avery, were 5 and 2 at the time.

"I put it on the kitchen table and it kept getting moved around as part of my to-do list," she says.

But one day, she noticed a distinct physical change. The mammogram and other tests led to a diagnosis of HER2 positive breast cancer. HER2 is a protein which promotes the growth of cancer cells and is more aggressive than other types of breast cancer. By then, it was stage 2, meaning it had spread to her lymph nodes.

Angela felt so overwhelmed that she lost all initiative and became passive about her treatment.

"I was just in shock," she remembers. "I said, 'OK, just tell me what I need to do.'"

Fortunately, Brian, her husband, stepped up and became Mr. Mom — as needed — and more importantly, her health advocate.

"I call him the Google doctor, because he is the online researcher for me," Angela says.

As a result of Brian's investigations, Angela and her doctors decided to go for breast conservation by doing eight rounds of chemotherapy first to shrink the tumor.

Her son, Connor, seemed unaffected by her hair loss. But Avery was at the age where she read a lot of picture books about princesses, who all had long, flowing hair, and she'd ask, "How come you don't grow hair like a princess, Mommy?"

"When she saw me without my wig, she'd always touch and rub my head. It fascinated her," Angela recalls.

When the tumor was taken out via lumpectomy, it did not have clear margins — meaning the cancer was not contained — requiring the removal of the left breast and some lymph nodes.

At that point, Angela decided on a radical bilateral mastectomy. She came to her decision through a lot of sadness and tears.

"Having gone through this experience over several months, I opted to have both of my breasts taken," she says. "That was my hardest decision because it was the first time I felt it was my choice," Angela says.

The good news was that the lymph nodes that were removed came out clean. Following the surgery, Angela took Herceptin for a year. The drug specifically targets HER2.

"It's kind of a miracle drug and it's what we hope medicine goes toward — rather than killing everything good or bad, zeroing in on the specifics of the cancer," Angela says.

In some patients, Herceptin can weaken the heart, so Angela had regular heart scans. Everything went smoothly without side effects.

Physical recovery was another matter. The greatest difficulty Angela encountered was lack of strength in her arms.

"My daughter was 2, and I couldn't lift her out of the car and had to work it so she could climb out holding my hand," she recalls. "She wanted to be picked up all the time, and I couldn't do it, wasn't supposed to do it. That was one of the most heart-breaking things."

If she had to do it over again, she admits she would engage in physical therapy to help speed her recovery. While she has good mobility now — she can reach both arms up, straight overhead — muscles are still tight, and she is careful when she grabs or lifts objects.

This coming February will be her 10-year anniversary of being cancer free.

Along the way, her doctors and friends referred other young women diagnosed with breast cancer to her, to talk to and offer support. Knowing from personal experience how lonely the journey can be for someone like her, she was glad to do it.

"I met some wonderful ladies at the treatment center, but no one was able to help with what I was dealing with as a young woman, young mother and young wife," Angela explains. "When I started offering support, I was getting emotionally healed myself. It was very cathartic talking about my story and sharing it with others."

She also got involved in advocacy, becoming a fundraiser for the American Cancer Society's Reach to Recovery program. A friend helped her form a team for the annual Making Strides against Breast Cancer walk, and Angela has been one of the top local fundraisers every year for the past 10 years.

In addition, she has become involved in teaching women about breast self-awareness and early detection through a support group she helped found. Initially, young women met in different restaurants to bond, have fun and talk. Since the cancer support Center for Building Hope moved to Lakewood Ranch, the group has held its monthly meetings there.

In 2008, Angela decided to start an informational website, www.breastinvestigators.com, about various aspects of breast cancer and its care. In the process, she had to learn how to gather information, find resources, use social media for promotion, and write a blog. The site also acts as a forum where health care professionals — doctors, nurses, nutritionists and cancer care providers — can share their knowledge.

In the last couple of years, she has been more in demand as a writer and speaker. She has been asked to become a regular columnist for a national breast cancer wellness magazine, and she is excited about that. To overcome her fear of facing the public, she joined Toastmasters.

"I decided I needed to get over this and force myself to do it," she says.

In fact, at 44, she is enjoying stepping out on her own. Her days are filled with activities.

"I hate to refer to cancer as a gift, but the adversity has opened my eyes to being able to look fear in the face and not let it control my life," she says. "I now say yes to things I would typically say no to before, and really start living and taking chances."

Her children, now 15 and 12, are still her number one priority. But she has the energy now to do more. She recently started a monthly forum called "Girl Talk on Health," not just for breast cancer survivors but for all women interested in their health. Each meeting features an expert in women's health issues.

"I'm really passionate about it," she says. "I think we take our health for granted until it's gone. But we don't have to do that. We can have a real conversation about preserving our health and preventing disease or the recurrence of disease."