Colorado’s elected officials and our public colleges and universities share the goal of making the best and most affordable higher education options accessible to Colorado students and families across the state. Colorado enjoys an amazing array of public colleges and universities, and we are known for delivering more quality degrees and certificates for less money than almost any other state (including tuition and fees).

Nevertheless, it is up to Colorado policymakers to ensure that our system continues to serve the state’s growing economy while meeting the diverse needs of all our students.

As House speaker during the 2014 legislative session, I led an effort to better align the higher education policy goals of the state with how we spend taxpayer dollars and do so in a way that is more transparent and understandable. Last session, House Bill 1319 passed with overwhelming bipartisan support.

Since the bill was signed in May, the Colorado Commission on Higher Education and Department of Higher Education built an inclusive and transparent project structure, garnering the input of hundreds of interested parties across the state, to create a new funding model. Expert teams from the public and private sector joined legislators and higher education leaders to consider data and policy options in an open and public process.

Similar to other states, the new model prescribed by HB 1319 creates outcome-based incentives to institutions for delivering more degrees and certificates. It also supports the Colorado Opportunity Fund stipend — the funding that follows the student — and has factors that recognize the unique attributes of our diverse institutions. Importantly, there are added incentives for institutions to provide extra support for low-income and underrepresented minority students. Unlike other states, the new Colorado funding model will apply to virtually all operating funds appropriated by the General Assembly and will be supported by real-time, student-level data that can be updated every year.

I am especially pleased that the Colorado Commission on Higher Education endorsed the new funding methodology that was unanimously recommended by the robust HB 1319 process structure and is unanimously supported by all affected institutions. Of course, dividing the pie in a brand new way means that some institutions benefit more than others. This is what the General Assembly expected.

I commend the hundreds of stakeholders who helped launch a more transparent higher education funding system based on data and incentives aligned with the policy goals of the General Assembly. I look forward to seeing the new funding model grow and evolve to reflect the changing needs of the students and the state.

Mark Ferrandino is the chief financial officer for Denver Public Schools and a former Democratic state legislator who served as speaker of the House.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.