Although President Obama’s days in the White House are dwindling down, we are seeing proof of the positive impact he’s made while leading our country. According to a new report, almost nine out of every 10 adults have health insurance. The data marks a major milestone for President Obama and his administration, as one of his goals was to create affordable healthcare for all. “The Affordable Care Act had three major objectives: increase coverage, slow the rate of increase in costs, and improve health,” said Dan Witters, research director for the data released by the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index. “The first one is clearly a win. Coverage is increasing; there is no question about it.” Nearly 14.7 million adults have enrolled in healthcare plans since the fall of 2013. Read more.

Beyoncé’s Mom, Tina Knowles, Reportedly Ties the Knot

There’s love all over the Knowles family. Last year, songstress Solange Knowles broke the internet with her fab wedding photos, and now her mother Tina Knowles has finally found love again. According to reports, the 61-year-old tied the knot with actor Richard Lawson. The two got married this weekend on a yacht along the California coast. Beyoncé, Solange, Jay Z and Blue Ivy all attended the ceremony. This is Knowles’ second marriage. She divorced Mathew Knowles six years ago after more than 30 years of marriage. “I’m at my happiest I’ve been in a long, long time,” she said during an interview. Read more.

Bobby Brown Makes First Appearance Since Bobbi Kristina Was Hospitalized

Singer Bobby Brown took the stage for the first time since his daughter Bobbi Kristina Brown was hospitalized. He made an appearance at the Soul Food Festival near Downtown Los Angeles on Saturday. While on stage, he gave thanks to all of the fans who have been supporting him and his family during this troubling time. “I want to think all y’all for coming out tonight and supporting me and my family,” he said. “Rough times are rough times. Hard times are hard times. I don’t know what the hell I’m going through right now but I’m giving it to God and lettin’ him deal with it.” Bobbi Kristina still remains in a medically-induced coma. Read more.

PHOTO CREDIT: Getty