Rep. Fred Upton, chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, is among the committee heads seeking to streamline the subpoena process. Andrew Harrer / Bloomberg News

House Republicans are beefing up their investigative efforts.

The number of GOP chairmen empowered to issue subpoenas without holding a committee vote first is expected to double to 12 by the end of the month, GOP aides said. The change would enable committee chairmen to avoid facing Democratic questions or criticism in a public hearing before issuing subpoenas, which require administration officials to produce documents or testify on Capitol Hill.

House rules already give all committees the ability to issue subpoenas and each panel establishes its own procedures for doing so. If a committee doesn’t adopt any special rules, it must vote on whether to issue a subpoena. A simple majority is needed to approve one. In the last session of Congress, six panels had adopted rules allowing their chairman to issue a subpoena without holding a committee meeting first, according to GOP aides.

This month, six more committees are expected to follow suit, with procedures varying slightly by committee, according to a GOP aide. A majority of each committee must approve the new rules. GOP leaders, including House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R., Calif.), have encouraged Republican chairmen to use this tool to bolster their efforts to oversee and often challenge White House activities, aides said.

“If you’re trying to go after fraud and abuse, why not use all the tools in the toolbox to get at it as quick as you can, rather than seeing a drip drip drip for who knows how long?” said House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton (R., Mich.) “It does streamline the process.”

Mr. Upton’s panel is expected to vote Tuesday on a rule that would allow him to issue subpoenas on his own. He would be required to notify the panel’s top Democrat, currently Rep. Frank Pallone of New Jersey, preferably at least 72 hours before the subpoena is issued, and must notify the full committee within a week once the subpoena has been issued, according to a draft of the rule.

Previously, Mr. Upton had the power to issue a subpoena without holding a committee vote only if the panel’s top Democrat agreed or if the House was in a recess of three or more days, according to a committee aide.

Democrats said the push would spread the tactics of former House Oversight and Government Reform Chairman Darrell Issa (R., Calif.), one of the most active critics of the Obama administration. Democrats said Mr. Issa issued more than 100 subpoenas without committee debate or vote over the four years he was chairman, from 2011 until the end of last year.

“The Republican playbook is clear: obstruct, distract, subpoena, repeat,” said Drew Hammill, spokesman for House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) “This change will inevitably to widespread abuses of power as Republicans infect the other committees with the poisonous process that Issa has so abused during his chairmanship.”

On Tuesday, the Financial Services Committee voted to allow Chairman Jeb Hensarling (R., Texas) to send a subpoena without a committee vote. The panel is expected to be at the center of a GOP push this year to pare back the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial overhaul in the face of Democratic resistance.

“Hopefully, it will never need to be used because the officials, agencies and entities the committee oversees will be fully accountable, responsive and transparent,” committee spokesman David Popp said, adding that there were no pending probes in which the panel believes a subpoena is needed.

Last year, the committee voted to subpoena three officials at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, to compel them to testify as part of a probe of alleged discrimination against minorities and women at the regulator.

The House Judiciary Committee is also expected to give Chairman Bob Goodlatte (R., Va.) the ability to issue subpoenas on his own, as well as three other panels that have not yet announced the change, according to GOP aides.

The six panels that previously enabled their leaders to issue subpoenas are the Oversight, Ways and Means, Foreign Affairs, Transportation and Infrastructure, Education and Workforce and Intelligence committees. They must approve their rules again at the start of the new two-year session of Congress.

Once a committee or chairman has approved issuing a subpoena, it becomes a part of the public record.