NEW YORK (CBSNewYork) — Former President Bill Clinton told David Letterman Monday that he does not know whether his wife will be running for president in 2016.

In a taping of “The Late Show with David Letterman” for Monday night, former President Clinton said he did not know if his wife planned to run – alternately taking a jocular and serious tone on the subject.

“If she’s running, to your knowledge, blink twice,” Letterman said.

Clinton blinked once, and pointed out that he had done so.

He later added that the former secretary of state is busy with numerous projects.

“There’s a lot of stuff out there, and she’s just – she’s still finishing her book. She’s still setting up or project, ‘Too Small to Fail’ – a children’s effort through our foundation, and we’re having a lot of fun – going to movies and restaurants, and taking walks — being a normal person,” former President Clinton said. “I mean, you know, at our age, that counts for something – being able to have a little fun.”

Former President Clinton said there are more important issues to focus on, including the threat of a government shutdown, the possibility that President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act may be stalled, and possible cuts to food stamp assistance. But ultimately, he said he truly did not know if former Secretary Clinton was planning a run for the White House.

“You know that if I did know, I wouldn’t tell you. But I honestly don’t know. Chelsea doesn’t know, and Hillary doesn’t know,” he said. “And that’s a good thing for America. We should be focusing on these big challenges now, and talking about how to get this country back on track.”

Former Secretary of State Clinton recently gave her first interview since stepping down.

When asked whether she wrestles with running, Clinton responded: “I do, But I’m both pragmatic and realistic.”

The former secretary of state, U.S. senator and first lady went on to say: “I’m not in a hurry…. I think it’s a serious decision, not to be made lightly, but it’s also not one that has to be made soon.”

Clinton spoke to reporter Joe Hagan.

“She’s come out for the first time here and said, you know, I’m thinking about it,” Hagan said. “So she’s weighing it.”

All three Clintons now work for the newly-renamed Bill, Hillary, and Chelsea Clinton Foundation.

You May Also Be Interested In These Stories