Feds rejected Medicaid mandate Corbett proposed

Governor's proposal calls for work search requirement; similar idea rejected in Utah.

Unlike Corbett's plan, however, Utah's proposal was not part of a possible reform of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare.

A key element in Gov. Tom Corbett's plan to reform the state's Medicaid program is a work requirement for Medicaid patients. But federal health officials rejected a similar proposal from Utah in 2012.

Utah asked for a waiver in its Medicaid program so that it could ask recipients "to give a few hours of their time each week and contribute back to the community that helps to fund their health care," the waiver request states. The U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services rejected the request because it imposed an obligation on recipients trying to access benefits.

Corbett, in the Lehigh Valley on Tuesday to promote the reform program, said he didn't want to talk about the "barriers" to his proposal.

"I would be scratching my head, seriously" if federal health authorities shot down a work requirement for Medicaid patients, Corbett said. "There's nothing wrong … with a reasonable work search requirement."

Corbett's "Healthy Pennsylvania" plan, announced Monday, seeks to require most unemployed Medicaid beneficiaries to be looking for work and it proposes lower premiums for active job-seekers and participants in job-training programs.

In the case of Utah, the legislation signed by Gov. Gary Herbert would have created a pilot program of 100 new Medicaid recipients earning between $15,396 to $17,235 annually to perform eight hours a month of community service as a condition for staying in the program.

CMS acting Administrator Marilyn Tavenner shot down the request.

"The foundation of the Medicaid program is the provision of health care coverage and services to low-income individuals and families," according to Tavenner's April 6, 2012, reply. "The state's community service proposal would impose an obligation on beneficiaries for access to health care coverage and services that is unrelated to the provision of health care coverage and services."

Joan Alker, executive director of the Center for Children and Families at Georgetown University, said a work requirement is illegal.

"It's unlawful to tie Medicaid eligibility to work requirements," she said. "The federal government, not only do I think they will not grant that, they can't."

A health policy analyst with Voices for Utah Children, a family advocacy group, said Utah hasn't figured out how to make policy back workable.

"Like Pennsylvania, we've still been debating what to do around Medicaid expansion, but I think our experience with that waiver has provided a good lesson to the state in terms of what we can and cannot do," Lincoln Nehring said.

Medicaid, a joint federal-state program, provides health care services primarily to single mothers, disabled people and the elderly in nursing homes. Major changes to the program require federal approval, and Corbett has said he would not expand coverage to poor childless individuals and families, as President Barack Obama wants under Obamacare, without a "reasonable" work requirement.