HARTFORD, Conn. — One day before Connecticut voters weigh in on the 2016 presidential race, former President Bill Clinton visited Hartford Monday to rally support for his wife's Democratic campaign.

Joined by former Arizona Congresswoman and gun safety advocate Gabby Giffords and her husband Mark Kelly, Clinton made his case for why voters should back his wife in Tuesday's primary election.

Speaking to supporters who filled the Samuel V. Arroyo Center at Pope Park, he touted the former secretary of state's proposals to provide debt-free higher education, create jobs and overhaul the criminal justice system, among others.

"She has the best ideas to increase employment, increase incomes and good-paying jobs and reduce inequality," Clinton said. "She has the best ideas to make it possible for all of our young people to graduate from college debt-free and to have the debt they do have to be manageable.... She understands that if we don't tear down the barriers that are keeping some people from participating, including the educational barriers, we can't all rise together."

The former president also took aim at Democratic presidential hopeful Bernie Sanders' claims that the Affordable Care Act doesn't do enough to overhaul health care.

"Last November the Democrats lost the Senate — I think they'll get it back in this election if you vote for Hillary — and a lot of them lost their seats because they voted for the health care law," he said. "So a lot of the people you might imagine are a little sensitive when they hear Hillary's opponent say how meaningless it is that for the first time in our history that (so many) of our people have insurance."

Giffords, who was critically wounded during a January 2011 shooting in Tucson, Arizona, said although it's difficult for her to speak in the wake of her injuries, there is one phrase she's looking forward to saying: "Madam President."

"Let's work together to make Hillary our president," she said.

Kelly, a retired astronaut, said his decision to support the former secretary of state was easy to make.

"There was only one candidate running for president that had the record and the position that's going to protect communities and family members from gun violence and that candidate is Hillary Clinton," he said.

Hartford Mayor Luke Bronin called on Connecticut voters to turn out in support of the former secretary of state, who he contended is the best candidate to take over the White House — particularly when it comes to tackling issues like gun violence.

"Ours is a state that has seen the tragedy of gun violence up close. We've seen it in mass casualty incidents that defy words at Sandy Hook. We've also seen the all-too-common daily tragedies that happen in our city and cities like Hartford," he said. "Secretary Clinton has been a strong, consistent and clear voice that we need to address the issue of gun violence.... So, tomorrow, when we go out, let's send a strong message that the state of Connecticut stands behind our next president of the United States, Hillary Clinton."

Bill Clinton's stop came just days after his wife traveled to the city for a public discussion with anti-gun-violence advocates and Connecticut families affected by firearms-related deaths.

Sanders, meanwhile, rallied thousands of supporters in the Connecticut capital early Monday.

Despite the Clinton campaign's focus on gun violence, a recent Quinnipiac University Poll found that just 3 percent of likely voters in both Connecticut's Democratic and Republican primaries see gun policies as the most important issue in the 2016 election.

The former first lady holds a nearly six-point lead over Sanders heading into Connecticut's primary, according to RealClearPolitics' polling averages.