The financial crash of 2008 was a frightening turn of events that resulted in enormous bailouts to keep the world’s financial system from cratering.

The malfeasance that fed the crisis has been no simple matter to unravel, and thus all these years later prosecutors are continuing to pursue those who had a hand in it.

In the last week, two such enforcement actions with significant Colorado connections have come to light.

We’re referring to the $7 billion Citigroup settlement, which was pursued by Colorado U.S. Attorney John Walsh, and two lawsuits alleging substantial foreclosure fraud filed by Colorado Attorney General John Suthers.

The wrongdoing by Citigroup was stunning for both its scope and systematic disregard for financial rules and laws.

In a nutshell, Citigroup knowingly took bad mortgages and packaged them into securities labeled as being of better quality than they were.

In fact, many of the underlying loans lacked proper documentation or sound appraisals and involved borrowers who lacked sufficient credit scores.

The defects eventually resulted in enormous investor losses when the deficient mortgages went into default.

Walsh tells us the case was pieced together in Denver by a “war room” of financial analysts, document reviewers and paralegals led by civil division chief Kevin Traskos and Assistant U.S. Attorneys J. Chris Larson and Lila Bateman.

They spent 18 months combing through millions of documents and took investigatory testimony from 50 people.

In conjunction with the U.S. Attorney’s office in the eastern district of New York, they put together a case that allowed the Justice Department to forge a deal that includes a $4 billion civil penalty and $2.5 billion for consumer relief.

And there are more financial institutions that will face similar scrutiny.

“We’re not done yet,” Walsh told us.

In the Colorado foreclosure case, Suthers’ office filed civil lawsuits against two law firms. The lawsuits allege the firms took advantage of homeowners in distress by inflating costs.

Both the foreclosure and mortgage security cases involve complex financial matters that took significant time and resources to dissect.

It’s heartening to see Colorado officials pursuing those who helped cause so much financial misery. Perhaps it will serve as a deterrent to others who contemplate similar misdeeds in the future.