During the month that followed the Supreme Court’s refusal to take up any of the same-sex marriage cases that awaited the start of the new term on Oct. 6, I filled an occasional idle moment with this thought: What would it be like right now to be Jeff Sutton?

The court’s unexpected non-action made Jeffrey S. Sutton, hardly a household name but a very well-known federal appeals court judge, the judge of the hour. I’m not making the exaggerated claim that he held the future of same-sex marriage in his hands; the tide of history now running in favor of equality is greater than any one judge or group of judges, and will eventually swamp those who stand in its way. But history is open-ended and a Supreme Court term is finite. I’m offering the more modest claim that on the first Monday of October, Judge Sutton became the one person in the country with the power to make the question of same-sex marriage eligible, in the minds of the justices, for timely Supreme Court review.

As of Oct. 6, there was no conflict among the federal appellate circuits on the question of whether the Constitution granted a right to marry someone of the same sex. All three circuits that had ruled had said yes: the Fourth Circuit, striking down Virginia’s law; the Seventh Circuit (Indiana and Wisconsin); and the 10th Circuit (Oklahoma and Utah). A three-judge panel of the Sixth Circuit, including Judge Sutton, had heard a consolidated argument two months earlier in cases from Ohio, Michigan, Kentucky and Tennessee.

I didn’t attend the Aug. 6 argument at the federal courthouse in Cincinnati, but those who did came away uniformly of the opinion that the panel would be split. One judge, Martha Craig Daughtrey, was clearly unpersuaded by the states’ defense of their same-sex marriage bans, while another, Judge Deborah L. Cook, spoke little but seemed a clear vote to uphold the laws. Judge Sutton was in the middle, a likely vote for the states but not a sure bet for either side.

Then in mid-September, with the Sixth Circuit case still undecided and the clock ticking toward the opening of the Supreme Court term, the increasingly chatty Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg told a law school audience in Minneapolis that unless and until the Sixth Circuit departed from the other circuits’ pattern, there was “no need for us to rush” into the debate. But “there will be some urgency,” she said, if the Sixth Circuit were to rule the other way and create a circuit conflict — the chief marker of a case the justices deem worthy of their attention. (Although not always: Recall the justices’ unseemly move earlier this month to accept the latest challenge to the Affordable Care Act.) Over to you, Jeff Sutton.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Three years earlier, Judge Sutton was in a similar position when the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act’s individual insurance mandate came before the Sixth Circuit. Republican-appointed federal district court judges had declared the mandate unconstitutional, but there was not yet a conflict in the circuits; the 11th Circuit would soon declare the mandate unconstitutional and provide the vehicle for the eventual Supreme Court case. With one member of the Sixth Circuit panel voting to uphold the mandate and another voting to strike it down, Judge Sutton was the judge in the middle. By his vote, he became the first Republican-appointed judge on the federal bench to find the mandate within the constitutional authority of Congress to regulate interstate commerce.

In his opinion, he rejected the challengers’ argument that Congress lacked authority to regulate what they deemed “inaction” — an individual’s failure to purchase health insurance. “No one is inactive when deciding how to pay for health care, as self-insurance and private insurance are two forms of action for addressing the same risk,” Judge Sutton wrote, adding, “Each requires affirmative choices; one is no less active than the other; and both affect commerce.”

Along the way, he rejected the government’s fallback position that the mandate operated as a tax that could be upheld under Congress’s tax power. (This was, of course, the basis on which Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. a year later cast the deciding vote that upheld the mandate.) Without saying so explicitly, Judge Sutton suggested that the tax argument was a dodge that should “not allow a court to avoid a difficult constitutional question,” namely the extent of the commerce power.

In the superheated atmosphere of the summer of 2011, this was a highly noteworthy opinion, placing Judge Sutton in a bright spotlight that I suspect was at once uncomfortable and thrilling. Now 54 years old, he has for years been near the top of most short lists of potential Republican Supreme Court nominees. As Ohio’s state solicitor in the late 1990s, he earned a reputation as a top-flight Supreme Court advocate, arguing and winning a series of important Rehnquist court federalism cases for his state and a coalition of others. His nomination to the Sixth Circuit by President George W. Bush was blocked for two years by the Senate’s Democrats — unfairly, I thought, given his obvious ability and his credentials as a former law clerk to Justices Lewis F. Powell Jr. and Antonin Scalia. He finally won confirmation in 2003.

And now, as the days after the first Monday crept by, the spotlight was back; hence my Jeff Sutton musings as October turned to November. Then on Nov. 6, exactly a month after the Supreme Court denied review in the earlier cases, the Sixth Circuit issued its opinion, DeBoer v. Snyder. As forecast, Judge Cook voted to uphold the four states’ laws and Judge Daughtrey voted to strike them down. And there was Judge Sutton, writing the majority opinion in favor of the states. He maintained that the appeals court had no choice but to rule against same-sex marriage because the Supreme Court itself had settled the question 42 years ago by means of an unsigned one-line order in a case called Baker v. Nelson.

What a disappointment.

Baker v. Nelson, a challenge by two men to Minnesota’s refusal to issue them a marriage license, was the first case to reach the Supreme Court claiming a right to same-sex marriage. The Minnesota Supreme Court had rejected the claim, citing “common sense” and the book of Genesis, among other sources. Under the statute that then governed the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction over constitutional cases decided by state courts, the case reached the justices as a mandatory appeal, meaning that while the Supreme Court didn’t have to hear argument or issue a full opinion, its disposition would be treated as a judgment with precedential weight. On Oct. 10, 1972, the court decided Baker v. Nelson this way: “The appeal is dismissed for want of a substantial federal question.”

I last wrote about Baker v. Nelson in March of last year, recounting my trip to the Library of Congress to see whether, in the justices’ papers housed there, there was any indication that the court had taken the case seriously. There wasn’t. Clearly, the justices didn’t regard the question of same-sex marriage as substantial enough even to present a constitutional issue for their consideration.

This once-obscure case was being widely invoked by opponents of same-sex marriage as a way of shutting down further argument. What’s fascinating is how one federal judge after another has repudiated the effort. Here is how decisions leading up to the Sixth Circuit’s ruling have treated the question in recent months:

* The Fourth Circuit in Bostic v. Schaefer, the Virginia case: The majority held that in cases decided since 1972, the Supreme Court “has meaningfully altered the way it views both sex and sexual orientation through the equal protection lens.” The opinion by Judge Henry F. Floyd continued, “In light of the Supreme Court’s apparent abandonment of Baker and the significant doctrinal developments that occurred after the court issued its summary dismissal in that case, we decline to view Baker as binding precedent and proceed to the meat” of the arguments on same-sex marriage.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

* The Seventh Circuit in Baskin v. Bogan, the Indiana and Wisconsin case. Judge Richard A. Posner was even more dismissive: "Baker was decided in 1972 — 42 years ago and the dark ages so far as litigation over discrimination against homosexuals is concerned. Subsequent decisions such as Romer v. Evans; Lawrence v. Texas; and United States v. Windsor [the 2013 decision that struck down a portion of the Defense of Marriage Act] are distinguishable from the present two cases but make clear that Baker is no longer authoritative.”

*The Ninth Circuit, in Latta v. Otter, striking down same-sex marriage bans in Idaho and Nevada: In this opinion, Judge Stephen Reinhardt noted that other circuits “all agree that Baker no longer precludes review.” He declared, “As any observer of the Supreme Court cannot help but realize, this case and others like it present not only substantial but pressing federal questions.”

* The 10th Circuit, in Kitchen v. Herbert, striking down Utah’s same-sex marriage ban: Judge Carlos F. Lucero wrote for the majority that “although reasonable judges may disagree on the merits of the same-sex marriage question, we think it is clear that doctrinal developments foreclose the conclusion that the issue is, as Baker determined, wholly insubstantial.”

Earlier comments by the indispensable Justice Ginsburg are perhaps even more enlightening. During the Supreme Court argument in March of last year on the constitutionality of California’s Proposition 8, she engaged Charles J. Cooper, the lawyer defending the proposition (which overturned same-sex marriage in California), in a colloquy on whether Baker v. Nelson continues to mean anything.

“The constitutional issues that have been presented to the court are not of first impression here,” Mr. Cooper began. “In Baker v. Nelson, this court unanimously dismissed for want of a substantial federal question.”