The Thwaites Glacier in Western Antarctica is melting. (AFP/Getty Images)

Correction: Thursday's newsletter incorrectly stated that Rodney King died in a police beating. King's injuries in the 1991 incident were not fatal, and he died in 2012.

"It's not a ghost. It's gravity," Matthew McConaughey's character says in one of the initial scenes of "Interstellar." In the movie, gravitational anomalies allow humanity a chance to escape to the stars as an unspecified environmental catastrophe destroys earth's capacity for agriculture.

The film is science fiction, but sometimes the facts are even more remarkable:

The great ice sheets of the world, like West Antarctica, are so massive that, at present, they exert a gravitational pull on the surrounding ocean, which slopes upward toward them. However, the loss of West Antarctica would lead to less gravitational pull and more water spreading out across the ocean — a secondary effect that would further contribute to sea-level rise worldwide.

That's from Chris Mooney and Joby Warrick's article in The Washington Post on new research showing that the West Antarctic ice sheet is melting more rapidly than scientists had previously believed. At some point, the sheet could become unstable, and its eventual collapse and complete disintegration into the sea would be unavoidable.

Ever so slightly, over thousands upon thousands of watery miles, gravity warps the surface of the ocean. It is a wonderful, mysterious force -- but it is not beneficent. There are no dispensations from physical laws, and rather than special favors, gravity is likely to send just a little bit more bilge our way as the earth warms. When it comes to climate change, we're on our own.

Welcome to Wonkbook. To subscribe by e-mail, click here. Send comments, criticism or ideas to Wonkbook at Washpost dot com. Follow Wonkblog on Twitter and Facebook.

What's in Wonkbook: 1) Police reform in Cleveland 2) Opinions: Democrats, immigration, work-life balance 3) New Republic editor out 4) Bargain-hunting and Obamacare 5) Europeans hate American food, and more

Number of the day: $1.999. That's the price of a gallon of gasoline at a station in Oklahoma City on Wednesday, marking the first time any station in the United States has sold gasoline for less than $2 a gallon since 2010. Lynn Doan and Margaret Newkirk for Bloomberg.

Chart of the day:





Fifty years ago, the economic opportunities were greatest for the poor. Now, the income of the poorest Americans is no longer increasing. Matt O'Brien in The Washington Post.

1. Holder announces reforms for Cleveland police



A federal report found the department engaged in systematic brutality. Concluding an investigation that began last year, the Justice Department and the city will appoint an independent monitor to oversee changes. Holder made the announcement 16 days after an officer there shot and killed a 12-year-old boy who was playing with a toy gun. Jerry Markon and Sari Horwitz in The Washington Post.

Primary source: The report.

Police are too quick to pull the trigger, the report found. Officers discharged their weapons in all kinds of situations -- aiming at moving cars, firing at civilians as they were being handcuffed, shooting a hostage and pulling the trigger on accident. Sara Dorn in The Plain Dealer.

Protests of the Eric Garner decision continued across the country. "The protests drew crowds in New York, Boston, Chicago, Pittsburgh and Washington. Many chanted...: “I can’t breathe.” In some places, they grew disruptive, snarled traffic on major arteries and lay down in the streets. "Ashley Southall in The New York Times.

Reform has suddenly become a priority for departments nationwide. "Police officials in New York, Los Angeles and other major cities are moving to develop new training rules as well as beginning to adopt equipment such as body cameras." Pervaiz Shallwani, Zusha Elinson and Gary Fields in The Wall Street Journal.

Loretta Lynch, nominated to replace Holder, will handle the Garner case for the feds. In her current position as U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of New York, Lynch will conduct a federal civil-rights investigation into Garner's death after a grand jury declined to indict Officer Daniel Pantaleo. Republicans said they would scrutinize her handling of the case. Carl Hulse in The New York Times.

SINGAL: Body cameras won't solve everything, but they might still be a good investment. Body cameras wouldn't have changed the outcome of the Garner case, where there was abundant video evidence, but over time, they might change the way police and civilians behave toward one another. New York.

It wasn't just the chokehold. When an obese person is forced onto his or her stomach, breathing can become impossible. The officers arresting Garner were evidently poorly trained. His death also reveals the problem with the policy of "broken windows" policing -- it can be an excuse for aggression on the part of police. The New York Times.

Hip hop interlude, with Kermit the Frog: The Muppets cover Naughty by Nature's "Hip Hop Hooray" (Tommy Boy Records, 1993).

2. Top opinions

KRAUTHAMMER: The real fight is among Democrats. The administration's priorities -- Obamacare and immigration reform -- have alienated the white working class, who don't feel that the party has anything for them. That's led to fierce debate and harsh words. The Washington Post.

BEUTLER: Republicans played themselves into a corner on immigration. They've known for years that refusing to compromise with Democrats would eventually lead Obama to act on his own, but they didn't budge. The New Republic.

RAMPELL: Work-life balance starts with the tax code. Most men say they want egalitarian marriages in which both partners share housework while pursuing their professional ambitions. The problem is that our system discourages these kinds of relationships by taxing a wife's choice to work outside the home at a higher marginal rate, after a couple's income is combined. The Washington Post.

3. Foer, Wieseltier are out at The New Republic

The magazine's editor as well as its literary editor "abruptly resigned" Thursday. Many on the staff threatened to follow. The company's new owner, Chris Hughes of Facebook, and his newly appointed chief executive, Guy Vidra of Yahoo, plan to cut the frequency of the print publication by half. Ravi Somaiya at The New York Times.

WEMPLE: Foer learned he was being replaced before his superiors told him. He got word that Snyder had been hired through colleagues. The Washington Post.

KLEIN: The New Republic belongs to a dying era. Once upon a time, a few small magazines were what people who were serious about solving the nation's problems read in Washington, D.C. Now, the conversation about ideas has moved online, and those magazines can no longer keep up with their digital competition, which creates tensions between publishers and journalists. Vox.

These changes could be positive for the magazine. "It's clear that the new leadership of the magazine—with all their greasy Facebook money—is dead set on ruining a (historically racist) publication no one ever read in the first place, and was on the slow road to Irrelevance City." Leah Finnegan at Gawker.

4. Administration asks Obamacare enrollees to shop around

Seven in 10 consumers will be able to find a cheaper plan if they hunt for a bargain. That's the message from the Obama administration, which is worried that consumers will be passing up on $2 billion in savings by sticking with their current plan. They have ten days left to switch. Bargain-hunting by consumers could lead insurers to offer lower premiums next year. Sophie Novack in National Journal.

The structure of the tax credit is one reason to look for a better deal. Tax credits for people who can't afford insurance are calculated based on the price of the second-cheapest "silver" plan in each area. If that plan is cheaper this year than last, some consumers with less money to spare could get a smaller credit. Jason Millman in The Washington Post.

KRUGMAN: Democrats are wrong to attack Obamacare. The law has helped millions get health insurance while containing the cost of premiums. And if Democrats had been willing to stand behind their work and explain the benefits to the public instead of criticizing the law, then Obamacare might have more support now. The New York Times.

Peter Pan interlude: Last night's musical-theater revival on NBC was charming and fun, if a bit bland. Hank Stuever in The Washington Post.

"Some of us are unironically watching Peter Pan live. The others watching are pretending to not be unironically watching Peter Pan live" -- @AdamSerwer

5. In case you missed it

Construction of religious buildings is at a new low. Religious organizations will build 10.3 million square feet this year, an 80 percent decline since 2002. The decline indicates a shift in the preferences of believers away from megachurches and toward more intimate, traditional settings. Ben Leubsdorf in The Wall Street Journal.

Europeans hate American food so much, it's endangering a trade deal. Public opposition to a free-trade partnership between the United States and Europe is an obstacle for Obama. "Hormone-boosted beef. Chlorine-washed chicken... In France, food is about pleasure, about taste. But in the United States, they put anything in their mouths. No, this must be stopped," one French farmer said. Anthony Faiola in The Washington Post.

Lawmakers near a deal to extend terrorism insurance. Which is a thing that you can buy, ever since Sept. 11, 2001, when insurance companies paid $40 billion on claims resulting from the attacks. Insurers were wary of covering terrorism after that day, so Congress intervened to subsidize the cost. Billy House in National Journal.