BOCA RATON, Fla., May 2, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- MyHealth.Us reached agreement with My Academy of Health Excellence LLC of Florida, the operator of Health Exellence Select, a member only nation-wide medical expense cost sharing plan recognized by the Affordable Care Act, to issue MyHealth.Us Life Codes to all Health Excellence Select members. MyHealth.Us gathers, stores and manages medical records and personal health history in one simple to use, secure database accessible via phone or computer to get faster, less expensive medical care with better outcomes and more preventive care.

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160502/362146

As of April 1, 2015, all current and future members of Health Excellence Select are automatically enrolled in MyHealth.Us and are receiving new membership cards from Health Excellence Select that includes a unique MyHealth.Us Life Code, MyQR code and toll-free number for immediate assistance. This is in addition to all the other health and concierge benefits Health Excellence Select provides its members. MyHealth.Us is certified HIPAA compliant. MyHealth members and their approved emergency contacts can quickly upload or record files, photos and even dictate information about patients' activities, medication, health, diet, condition, environment that is useful to caregivers and for future diagnosis. MyQR QR codes on membership cards, wristbands, labels and shoe tags can be scanned by first responders to access emergency data and treatment options.

"Our vision has always been to make life saving information rapidly, easily and safely accessible to healthcare providers when it is most critical to deliver quality medical care to patients," said CJ Wilson, founder and CEO of MyHealth.Us.

The Health Excellence Select members program was launched in 2014 by My Academy of Health Excellence, as part of a health sharing organization whose members have significant freedom in choosing care providers, sharing the cost of healthcare, and proactively encouraging and delivering better health, along with life-long health solutions. Any qualified doctor or healthcare expense is shareable under Health Excellence Select's program after a member's minimal financial responsibility. Health assessments, community support, personal assistants and other healthy living services are included.

Rod Maxson, CEO of My Academy of Health Excellence, stated, "Partnering with MyHealth.US was a no brainer. HES is a program that seeks to have a solution to whatever expected or unexpected circumstance a member may encounter. Having a Life Code like this now safeguards our members against a situation where they may be unable to communicate about any medical issues a first responder would need to be aware of."

Jeff Kanter, co-founder of My Academy of Health Excellence, stated, "We are always seeking ways to bulletproof our member's health, especially in areas where they might never foresee the need until it was too late. MyHealth.US' Life Code is a powerful tool that ensures our members' safety and health."

ABOUT MYHEALTH.Us – Established in 2013, MyHealth.Us, owned by MyInfo LLC, is a health technology organization that delivers highly effective patient-centric health solutions. "We Save Lives!" is our mission. And our core belief is that better patient engagement and better managed health data leads to more effective outcomes for all patients and their healthcare providers. For more information, please visit www.MyHealth.Us.

ABOUT My Academy of Health Excellence - Founded by C. Rod Maxson and Jeff Kanter in 2014 delivers free market solutions to an engaged, health conscious community of members using active and dynamic solutions to healthcare and healthcare costs. For more information, please visit www.HealthExcellenceSelect.com.

Contact:

Tom Hogue

(855) 777-7008

Email

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/life-saving-access-to-medical-records-and-health-services-on-phone-wallet-card-and-wrist-bracelet-comes-to-health-excellence-select-300260713.html

SOURCE MyHealth.Us

Related Links

http://www.myhealth.us