The Poinsett Bridge, originally called Gap Creek Bridge, was named in honor of Charleston native Joel Poinsett, who led the state's effort to build a new road between Charleston and North Carolina. It's one of the few that survive along the original route.

TIGERVILLE - Shortly after the War of 1812, South Carolina began splurging on a new system of canals and roads, including a new highway that would link Charleston with North Carolina through what today is northern Greenville County.

Little remains of that road today except for a stone bridge with a 15-foot-tall Gothic arch that has stood in the woods here since it was built in 1820.

Originally called Gap Creek Bridge, it was renamed after Charleston native Joel Poinsett, who oversaw its construction as his role as president of the state's Board of Public Works.

The job of maintaining the bridge today falls to Sean Taylor, an archaeologist with the S.C. Department of Natural Resources.

"It's a beautiful, wonderful thing, and you don't want it to change or get worse," Taylor said. "But this thing is like owning an old house. It's always something."

A big upgrade

The bridge has received attention in recent years, as the state established a heritage preserve in the 120 acres surrounding the bridge, which sits just down a hill off Callahan Mountain Road -a road that follows part of the original highway route.

The deal helped ensure the preservation of not only the bridge but also its natural setting, which looks as if it has changed little since the early 19th century.

Ty Houck, greenways, natural and historic resources director for the Greenville County Department of Parks Recreation and Tourism, said the setting is part of the site's charm.

"You get a close sensation of what it must have been like" when the bridge was first used, he said. "When you're standing on the bridge, you think, 'This is where people herded turkeys.'"

The county and state currently work together to monitor the site, and they also collaborated on a recent project to install a parking area across Callahan Mountain Road. The work also involved buildnig a retaining wall and viewing platform designed to minimize stormwater washing onto the bridge surface and to afford handicapped visitors a better view.

Houck said the improvements have led to more visitors -and that may helped reduce the problem of graffiti.

"We've had a lot of vandalism over the years, a lot of spraypainting," Taylor said. "Knock on wood, that has subsided."

"More good activity has a tendency to push out the bad activity," Houck added.

Maintenance plan

The larger concern these days is how much the bridge's surface has eroded.

Taylor has taken survey measurements and soon will compare them to previous measurements taken as far back as 1996.

The results will help shape some maintenance work that Taylor hopes to get done in the current fiscal year.

"If it (the dirt roadbed) erodes enough, it will get to the top of the arch, and that won't be a good thing," he said. "We don't want that to happen."

The work also could involve repointing some of the joints between the stones and possibly even replacing some stones, but Taylor said a full restoration is not an option.

"It would be a lot of money, and if you think about it, at the end of the day, what would you have? You'd have a brand new bridge," he said. "We don't want it to look like a shiny penny."

Taylor said the state also might install some intepretive signs along the metal rails on the viewing platform and stairs, but that's about it.

"We don't have any plans to develop it further because if we did, you'd lose the feel of what you have now," Houck said. "You'd lose the feel that gives you a sense of it a long time ago."

Reach Robert Behre at 937-5771.