Summer 2013: Three black female community organizers — Alicia Garza, Patrisse Cullors and Opal Tometi — cofound Black Lives Matter after the acquittal of George Zimmerman in the shooting death of Travyon Martin. #BlackLivesMatter starts as a social media hashtag.

July 2014: Eric Garner, 43, dies in Staten Island, New York, after police place him in a chokehold. Black Lives Matter protests the killing.

August 2014: Black Lives Matter becomes more nationally recognized for its street demonstrations after the death of Michael Brown Jr., 18, at the hands of a Ferguson, Missouri, police officer.

November 2014: Tamir Rice, 12, is killed in Cleveland after his toy pistol is mistaken for the real thing. Rice’s death helps turn Black Lives Matter into a nationwide movement.

April 4: Walter Scott, 50, is shot in the back as he flees police unarmed during a daytime traffic stop in South Carolina. Black Lives Matter protests Scott’s death.

April 12: Freddie Gray Jr., 25, is arrested by the Baltimore Police Department. Gray falls into a coma in the police van and eventually dies. Black Lives Matter protests Gray’s death.

Aug. 8: A speech by Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders is disrupted by the Seattle chapter of Black Lives Matter. A woman walks on stage and seizes the microphone from Sanders.

Aug. 13: A rally by Republican presidential candidate Jeb Bush is interrupted by activists chanting “Black Lives Matter” in Las Vegas.

Oct. 22: President Barack Obama defends Black Lives Matter, saying the protests are giving voice to a problem happening only in African-American communities.

Oct. 30: Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton’s speech about race and criminal justice reform is interrupted by Black Lives Matter activists at the Atlantic University Center.

Nov. 22: Republican presidential frontrunner Donald Trump’s rally in Birmingham, Alabama, is interrupted by a Black Lives Matter protester. The man was pushed and shoved by people in the crowd and escorted out of the building by security.

Nov. 24: Police arrest three people in connection with the shooting of five during a Black Lives Matter protest Monday outside a police precinct in Minneapolis.