State insurance Commissioner Thomas B. Leonardi is, as the old Ricky Nelson song goes, a travelin' man who has made a lot of stops all over the world. The question: Is his travel excessive?

The Courant's Dave Altimari and Matthew Kauffman recently reported that Mr. Leonardi has made more than 115 business trips in the past 31/2 years. He was away for all or part of 287 of the 850 workdays — 34 percent — between March 24, 2011, and Aug. 19, 2014.

Some trips by state employees — those where travel expenses are covered by private entities — must be reported to the Office of State Ethics, as part of a law that prohibits the acceptance of speaking fees and gifts. The Courant found that from June 2011 to August 2014, Mr. Leonardi reported 64 trips, more than double the number reported by any other state employee. His travels have taken him to Rome, Zurich, Beijing and other world capitals.

Why is the head of this relatively small state agency such a frequent flier?

Big Wheel

Mr. Leonardi is a prominent figure in the industry and is often asked to speak. Many of his trips were to board meetings for two international insurance groups — the National Association of Insurance Commissioners and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, headquartered in Basel, Switzerland — in which he holds leadership positions. He said in a telephone interview Tuesday that he has to travel extensively to do his job properly.

First, he said, Connecticut's insurance industry is one of the largest in the world, a keystone of the state's economy. With the passage of the Affordable Care Act, Dodd-Frank and other laws, the industry is in a period of flux and change. He said he has to be there to influence policy and promote the state's interests. "If you're not at the table, you're on the menu," he said.

It can well be argued that in the U.S. system of state-based insurance regulation of national and international companies — which Mr. Leonardi champions — there must be regulatory coordination among states and countries, common standards and a search for best practices. The insurance industry has been important to the state for a long time.

Duties

But the purpose of the insurance department is to protect consumers by licensing and regulating insurance companies so that their rules, rates and programs meet state standards; examine the financial condition and the market conduct of companies; and handle insurance complaints.

Does he needs to be away more than a third of the time to do this work? How many dozen meetings of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners does it take? He is being paid to run a department, not be an itinerant rock star, insofar as that is possible in insurance regulation.

Mr. Leonardi stressed that he is in touch by phone or email, as needed, and has an excellent staff back at the office. And that organizations such as the National Association of Insurance Commissioners — not the taxpayers — pay for nearly all of his travel. The association gets a small amount of money from state dues, but most from insurance-related services it sells to clients.

In general, it's good for state employees to travel, for professional development or to promote the state. The editorial page has encouraged the governor to attend trade shows, on the state's dime, to generate business. But there needs to be a limit, and Mr. Leonardi may be a little north of it. When he spoke by phone on Tuesday, he was about to fly back from Hawaii, where he attended an international conference as part of a 16-day trip that included a stop in Hong Kong. As even he concedes, it is a lot of travel.