Buy Photo Justin Jones, a Fisk University student, speaks during a rally in support of Insure Tennessee at Legislative Plaza. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Three years ago, the Tennessee General Assembly put handcuffs on Gov. Bill Haslam, and has shown no willingness to release him from their custody.

The legislature insured that the governor could not accept expanded federal funding for Medicaid under provisions of the Affordable Care Act without getting its approval.

It took the governor 21 months of negotiating to craft a plan that he thought might pass legislative muster, but in February 2015 the General Assembly rejected his alternative expansion plan, Insure Tennessee, without bringing it to a vote.

While citizen, religious and hospital groups have continued to pressure the legislature to reconsider, the 2016 session will end without considering a plan to provide insurance to more than 200,000 working poor in Tennessee.

Until the November elections, no amount of pressure will achieve a different outcome.

“Something has to change”

When Nashville businesswoman and philanthropist Martha Ingram joined a group of pro-Insure Tennessee citizens financing a series of billboards across the state urging legislators to re-consider the plan, Speaker of the House Beth Harwell, R-Nashville, and a recalcitrant General Assembly shrugged off the pressure.

After the abrupt lack-of-reception his plan received in the last session, Haslam has consistently said that something, meaning political winds, had to change for him to re-invest time into passing the plan. His office reiterated that position Tuesday.

"The need still exists, and Insure Tennessee is the right idea," said Jennifer Donnals, Haslam's press secretary. "The governor always said something would have to change for that to happen this legislative session, and we haven't seen that opening."

Economic sense

According to a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation report released this month, which looked at data from 11 states that expanded Medicaid, the economic rationale for expanding is convincing.

“State Medicaid spending grew more slowly in states that expanded than in those that did not. State Medicaid spending in expansion states grew by half as much as spending in non-expansion states between FY 2014 and FY 2015 (3.4% compared to 6.9%).”

While overall Medicaid spending growth was slower in expansion states, healthcare related job growth was 33 percent higher – 2.4 percent job growth versus 1.8 percent.

The foundation report concluded:

“States that have expanded Medicaid continue to report financial benefits related to expansion. Expansion states generate savings and revenue that can be used for other state priorities or, starting in 2017, can offset the state costs of expansion. Beyond the state budget benefits, Medicaid expansion states are seeing broader benefits including job growth, deep reductions in uninsurance, and related decreases in hospital uncompensated care costs.

“In turn, the climbing rate of insured patients is helping to stabilize struggling hospitals, particularly rural facilities.”

Given the legislature’s concerns over any increase in state funds going to Medicaid, the governor’s Insure Tennessee plan included a tax on hospitals that covered the scheduled reduction in federal expansion payments.

Political sense

But the economic case, including about $1.77 billion in lost hospital revenue during the last two years, has had no impact in the face of dogged anti-Obamacare politics.

Insure Tennessee supporters will have to re-focus, and re-double, their efforts during the legislative primary season during the upcoming summer if they want to create more amenable political environment in the 2017 legislative session.

The Tennessee Hospital Association, whose members would benefit from reduced uncompensated care expenses if Insure Tennessee passed, has decided that educating voters about the positives of the plan is their best strategy.

Craig Becker, president of the Tennessee Hospital Association, wants the new organization, Tennesseans for a Responsible Future, to tout Insure Tennessee as a “very Republican approach to health care with premiums, with copays, with personal responsibility.”

“That’s right out of the Republican playbook,” he said. “It’s not Obamacare.”

That educational effort could help business-friendly Republicans fend off primary challenges, but it will take a lot more effort than that to create a more amenable legislature.

Reach Frank Daniels III: fdanielsiii@tennessean.com, 615-881-7039, or on Twitter @fdanielsiii

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MsH7B2