Finance experts: Negotiated bond sales overused, but have their place

Types of municipal bond sales Competitive sale: Bonds are advertised for sale by way of a notice that includes both the terms of the sale and the terms of the bond issue. Broker dealers or dealer banks may bid on the bonds, which are then awarded to the bidder offering the lowest interest cost. Negotiated sale: An underwriter is selected to purchase the bonds. That underwriter, in turn, sells the bonds to its investor customers. The terms of the bonds are tailored to meet the demands of both the underwriter's clients and the needs of the issuer. Source: munibondadvisor.com

Boulder voters are being asked this fall to allow the city to use negotiated rather than competitive bond sales when the City Council deems it appropriate.

The city charter has required competitive bond sales for years, and with its strong credit rating, the city's general obligation and revenue bonds perform well in the marketplace.

However, a new city electric utility wouldn't have a track record -- financial or otherwise -- to reassure investors. What it would have is a story based on the city's modeling efforts, a story of a new kind of electric utility that supplies more than half its power from renewable sources while maintaining good financial performance.

A bond sale to finance the start of a potential new electric utility is just the kind of situation where a negotiated bond sale is appropriate, Boulder Finance Director Bob Eichem said.

The Boulder City Council unanimously backed placing Issue 2F on the ballot to allow for negotiated bond sales when the City Council determines it is in the city's best interests to do so.

Negotiated bond sales are used for the majority of public bond issues in Colorado -- 82 percent in 2003 and 2004, according to a study by Mark Robbins and Bill Simonsen of the University of Connecticut -- including in situations where the bonds are highly rated and likely would do well in competitive sales.

Negotiated bonds have a questionable history in school bond elections, where underwriters often contribute substantially to and even run school bond elections in a practice known as "pay-to-play."

Though many experts in public finance believe negotiated bond sales are overused, they generally agreed that situations like Boulder's, where the debt would be issued for a new entity without a track record, are the ones where a case can be made.

'It is so broad'

However, some question why Boulder is not pursuing a very limited authority for a negotiated sale just for the start-up debt that would be needed for any potential city-run utility.

Bob Smartt, a Boulder County venture capitalist who worked in municipal bonds for 15 years with Goldman Sachs, pressured Boulder County and the Boulder Valley School District to move away from negotiated bond sales in the early 2000s.

Smartt sees the case for using negotiated sales for a Boulder utility, at least the first time.

"If I were the king of the world, I would probably have a negotiated sale for the very first bond sale of the new electric utility," he said. "They will probably do better in the market if a negotiated underwriter spends a lot of time talking to the major purchasers of utility bonds. The second through the nth time, by then they're in the market place and Moody's and Standard and Poor's have issued ratings and they're probably better candidates for competitive bonds."

However, if he lived in the city, he would vote against 2F, he said.

"It is so broad," he said. "It opens it up to any bond sale."

Voter guide For more information on all Boulder County and Broomfield candidates and ballot issues, please see the Daily Camera's full Voter Guide 2013.

Eichem said he recommended charter language that allows for negotiated sales in other situations to provide future flexibility. He can't imagine right now other circumstances where the city would benefit from using negotiated sales, but, he said, that doesn't mean they won't arise.

The decision to use negotiated sales would be made by the City Council based on a recommendations from the finance staff.

Todd Ely, assistant professor in the school of public affairs at the University of Colorado-Denver, said he understands the concerns about authorizing broader use of negotiated bond sales, but the requirement for a City Council vote creates some transparency.

"It sounds like there would at least be a public check and some scrutiny of the actions of the City Council," he said.

Ely said that for many years, research strongly favored the use of competitive bond sales because they netted lower interest rates on debt for taxpayers and ratepayers of public utilities.

However, more recent research has tried to account for the information asymmetry that leads entities to use negotiated bond sales, and those studies have found much smaller differences in interest rates and the total cost of debt.

Telling the story

Professor Mac Clouse of Denver University's Daniels College of Business said underwriters are highly motivated to sell bonds, whether the sale is competitive or negotiated, and they would "tell the story" behind the bond either way.

Eichem said he worries Boulder would pay higher interest rates on electric utility debt in a competitive sale. That's because the underwriter would build in a higher rate to cover his risk, in case there was little appetite for a new product from an untested entity.

In competitive sales, underwriters want to sell bonds quickly before the market conditions on which they made their calculations change.

In contrast, the underwriter in a negotiated sale could spend months lining up prospective buyers interested in investing in Boulder's new, green utility and could have more confidence he could sell the bonds.

Ely said that argument was "not unreasonable."

Richard Keevey, a former state budget director in New Jersey who is now a visiting professor at Princeton University's Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, said his preference is almost always for competitive sales because the market determines the price for the bonds and everything is transparent, with little opportunity for favoritism.

However, negotiated sales are more common for revenue bonds, which the utility's debt would be, and there's some validity to the argument that it would be harder for Boulder to get enough information in front of investors in a competitive sale.

Simonsen, of the University of Connecticut, said negotiated bonds can be "easier and safer," but even the need for them should raise questions.

"The best way to know if you received the market rate is to use competitive bidding," he said. "If there is a reason to believe only a small number of underwriters would bid, than obviously you lose the power of competitive bidding. If it is such a risky bond, however, such that underwriters won't want to bid, then you probably should be thinking about whether this is a wise course to take."

Local investors

Using a negotiated bond sale also would allow Boulder investors to buy into the new utility, Eichem said. The city could make that a condition of the contract with the underwriter, that sales be opened to people in Boulder zip codes a day before the official bond sale.

That provision was important to several City Council members, particularly Macon Cowles.

Eichem said the city would seek bids to find an underwriter so that the process would be transparent, and the city would use a separate financial adviser to guide the development of criteria for the bidding process and selection of the underwriter.

Keevey said that practice would significantly reduce the risk of favoritism in negotiated sales.

Joy Howard, a St. Louis, Mo.-based financial adviser specializing in municipal finance, said there is an element of faith involved in negotiated bond sales. They aren't as black-and-white as finding the lowest bid.

However, she was so confident a negotiated bond sale would be the right route for a new utility, she cut off a reporter's question to answer with an emphatic, "It's new? Then it should be done by negotiation."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere.