Reuters Soon-to-be Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell probably will preside over two years of fruitlessness before the Democrats will win the White House again.

WASHINGTON (MarketWatch) — President Barack Obama has probably long since abandoned the hope he expressed in the stirring 2004 convention speech that catapulted him to national prominence: This country is not divided into red states and blue states.

But he might be comforted by the controversial analysis from a Republican analyst that there is now a “Blue Wall” block of states that virtually guarantees a Democrat will win the presidential contest in 2016 and for the foreseeable future.

Chris Ladd, a moderate conservative who blogs for the Houston Chronicle, has mounted a compelling argument that the seemingly smashing victory of the Republicans in the midterm elections is merely the prelude to a “spectacular, catastrophic failure” in 2016.

“It became apparent from the numbers last week that no Republican candidate has a credible shot at the White House in 2016,” Ladd concludes, “and the chance of the GOP holding the Senate for longer than two years is precisely zero.”

Ladd argues that Republican support grew deeper, but not broader, in the 2014 midterms as the party swept the traditional red states but made no inroads in blue states, which now include New Hampshire and Virginia.

‘The next presidential election, and all subsequent ones until a future party realignment, will be decided in the Democratic primary.’ Chris Ladd, political blogger

In his initial post-election analysis, Ladd was not firmly decided about Virginia, but concluded in a subsequent blog that if Republicans could not oust a Democratic incumbent like Mark Warner even in a midterm year with everything going for them, then the state belongs behind the Blue Wall.

This means that these firmly blue states, the Blue Wall that Ladd is describing, account for 270 electoral votes — the number needed to be elected president. Firmly red states, by contrast, add up to only 149.

In short, a Republican candidate can win only by capturing all nine swing states and flipping a dyed-in-the-wool blue state, which Ladd considers virtually impossible.

“This means that the next presidential election, and all subsequent ones until a future party realignment, will be decided in the Democratic primary,” Ladd writes.

This analyst sees the midterm elections confirming a trend that has been growing over the past two decades.

“Republicans are disappearing from the competitive landscape at the national level across the most heavily populated sections of the country,” he says, “while intensifying their hold on a declining electoral bloc of aging, white, rural voters.”

Ladd buttresses his argument with several other observations. Democrats have consolidated their support in those parts of the country that generate most of the country’s wealth outside the energy sector, he notes.

Almost half the Republican congressional delegation comes from the former Confederacy. (“Total coincidence,” Ladd adds tongue in cheek. “Just pointing that out.”)

Every major Democratic ballot initiative, like minimum wage increases, won, even in red states, while every personhood amendment failed.

Ladd treats as an anomaly that some new governor candidates won in states that vote blue for president. “Their success was very specific and did not translate down the ballot at all,” he says. These candidates, such as Bruce Rauner in Illinois, did not run on social issues, Obama or opposition to the Affordable Care Act.

There has been, needless to say, considerable pushback on Ladd’s view of the Blue Wall, including from leftist commentators. These critics attribute greater significance to governors like Republican Scott Walker in blue Wisconsin, and are not willing to accept the blueness of Virginia, for instance, as anything like permanent.

They want to average out red and blue in the four presidential elections since 2000, whereas Ladd perceives a trend going in one direction. They don’t believe, as Martin Longman put it in the Washington Monthly, that things are as “static” as Ladd maintains, and argue that “the Blue Wall is not as impenetrable as it may seem.”

Whether or not there is a Blue Wall, it is the reason that Ladd gives for this shrinking Republican base that is perhaps more telling.

In an age of disruptive technologies and “staggering challenges” that is “built for Republican solutions” given the party’s “traditional leadership on commercial issues,” the GOP is missing the target, he says.

“What are we getting from Republicans?” Ladd asks rhetorically. “Climate denial, theocracy, thinly veiled racism, paranoia, and Benghazi hearings.”

Despite efforts new Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky to be conciliatory, he will not be able to hinder what Ladd predicts will be “intense, horrifying stupidity” in the next two years.

Perhaps there is a new Ronald Reagan out there transformative enough to break down that Blue Wall, though Reagan was hardly an overnight success and there is no sign of anyone even close to his charisma at this point.

Until then, the notion of a Blue Wall may indeed be as predictive as this Republican analyst believes.