Reuters President Barack Obama greets people as he stops at Franklin Barbecue during a visit to Austin, Texas on July 10.

Secret Service, stressed: President Barack Obama’s forays outside the White House bubble are causing heartburn for the Secret Service agents charged with protecting his life, the Hill writes. The more frequently “the bear gets loose,” as Obama and top staffers jokingly refer to impromptu walks and trips to restaurants, the more stressful it is for his security detail. Obama himself acknowledges this: He told a crowd in New York earlier this year that “Secret Service gets a little stressed” when he takes walks. Secret Service spokesman Ed Donovan tells the Hill: “Any time the president leaves the White House complex, there are risks involved.”

Keep your distance: Senate Republican contenders in battleground states aren’t racing to Sarah Palin’s side to impeach President Obama. The Washington Post reached out to the campaigns of leading GOP candidates in a dozen races this fall that are likely to decide which party will control the chamber. Some were silent, while others said they disagree with former vice-presidential candidate Palin. None endorsed her position.

GM back on the hot seat: General Motors Co. CEO Mary Barra returns to Capitol Hill this week for what may be her last and toughest hearing with lawmakers over the auto maker’s botched response to a faulty ignition switch, The Wall Street Journal writes. Barra will face Sen. Richard Blumenthal, a Connecticut Democrat, who is one of her harshest critics, and Sen. Claire McCaskill, a Missouri Democrat, who remains skeptical of GM’s response to the issue. The hearing is scheduled for 10 a.m. on Thursday in a Senate Commerce subcommittee.

Dead wrong: Sen. Rand Paul, a Kentucky Republican, has those choice words to describe Texas Gov. Rick Perry’s characterization of the Paul foreign policy. Writing in Politico, Paul says Perry has written a “fictionalized account” of Paul’s foreign policy that’s so mischaracterizing he wonders if Perry even read any of his policy papers. “In fact,” Paul writes, “some of Perry’s solutions for the current chaos in Iraq aren’t much different from what I’ve proposed, something he fails to mention.”

Obamacare ruling looms: An Obamacare court ruling this week could dominate the news if plaintiffs succeed in convincing a judge that the Affordable Care Act doesn’t allow federally run insurance exchanges to distribute premium subsidies. The Hill writes the case has the potential to blow hole in the health-care law’s coverage scheme and deal a serious loss to the administration. The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals could issue its ruling as early as Tuesday.

Want to read the latest and most interesting stories and analysis to come out of D.C.? Subscribe to the WSJ’s email newsletter, Capital Journal Daybreak.

– Robert Schroeder

Follow @mktwrobs



Follow @capitolreport

More must-reads from MarketWatch:

Tech, bank earnings to test economic recovery

2,000 days of Obama: How have stocks done?

Sheldon Adelson, Warren Buffett agree on at least one thing…