Von Miller has always had his own way of looking at the world. His perspective was unique when the world revolved around him, as it does for nearly all young people. And it’s no less interesting since circumstances awoke him to the realization that the world is best when shared.

His story has been one of redemption. Anybody out there believe 18 months ago the Broncos would have been better off getting rid of him? A portion of the fan base did. Countless angry e-mails and tweets are proof.

“Sometimes, you get one shot,” Miller said last week. “You blew it, you’re done. I made some mistakes, but I have a second chance to get all of that back. You know that story, ‘All Dogs Go To Heaven’? He’s living crazy, he died, he said, ‘Man, if I can go back, I’ll be better.’ It’s kind of like that. I got another opportunity, and I want to take full advantage of that.”

Beautiful, Von. It remains possible for a young man to maintain innocence in one sense and mature in others. A pass-rushing outside linebacker with 30 sacks and two Pro Bowl appearances in his first two seasons, Miller’s third year was a nightmare. He was suspended the first six games last season for what the NFL determined was an aggravated violation of its banned substance policy, then was sidelined the final four games, including the Broncos’ two AFC playoff victories and Super Bowl loss, after suffering a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee.

Broncos Mailbag: Pose a question for Mike Klis

The Broncos showed faith, not only sticking with Miller this season but picking up a contract option that will pay him $9.754 million in 2015.

In turn, Miller proved he was far from a lost cause. He never missed a game this season and had 14 sacks, the sixth-highest total in the league. He was better against the run this season and less vulnerable in pass coverage.

And he’s not finished. The Broncos play a divisional-round playoff game next Sunday at home.

“Some of what he went through was self-imposed,” said Broncos defensive tackle Terrance Knighton. “I’m not sure it’s redemption. I think it’s more so a road to maturity.”

Initially, Miller deflected the suggestion that he has been a feel-good comeback story. A story of redemption that warms the heart of the most callous Broncos fan.

“I’ve never looked at it like that,” Miller said. “I’ve never looked at this as a short-term deal. When I came back from my suspension, I said I can’t promise anything right now. Over time I can get all that trust back. It’s only been a year. I’ve still got a long way to go. You have struggles every day, but I feel like I’m better with those. I’m at a point in my life where I’m living the dream again.”

There’s been more of the serious Miller since his suspension ordeal. The unwanted attention steeled him, thickened his skin, stitched his joyful soul with a lining of caution.

But the kid didn’t disappear. “All Dogs Go To Heaven” is an animated film that was hardly a blockbuster at the box office in 1989, the year Miller was born, only to later set records in DVD sales, as kids such as Miller aged into young adults.

And by all accounts, he is growing up.

“Von’s on time. He doesn’t miss anything. No off-the-field issues,” Knighton said. “He’s focused. I think he understands that with the ability he’s been given, he has a responsibility to be a leader and do things the right way. He’s seen other guys in the league step their games up. Guys like J.J. Watt and Justin Houston get 20 sacks. I’m pretty sure that motivates him.”

“I can’t be outdone by a cornerback”

Knighton must know Miller pretty well. Considering the limitations Miller had with his knee, he had a very good season. Through 13 games, he had 13 sacks.

Considering the type of player Miller wants to become, the regular season left him desiring more. Houston and Watt each had six sacks in their final three games to finish with 22 and 20½, respectively. Miller had one sack in his final three games and wound up with 14.

Asked to critique his season, Miller said: “It was all right. I’m not all the way back. I’m playing at an elite level, I feel, but my whole purpose was doing something that hasn’t been done before. I haven’t done that, yet. Next year I’ll be completely healthy. I gauge my right leg off my left leg. It’s not exactly like my left leg, yet. Getting that back to 100 percent next year, I think I’ll be better.”

Chris Harris was the Broncos’ recipient of the Ed Block Courage Award this season because of his own comeback from ACL surgery. But it could have gone to Miller, whose knee damage was more severe.

Or the honor could have gone to defensive lineman Derek Wolfe, who overcame strokelike symptoms, or safety Rahim Moore, who overcame a life-threatening circulation disorder in his leg.

Come again how the Broncos’ defense reached the Super Bowl last year? Among that group, Miller may have had the furthest to go because he needed both physical reconstruction and psychological rehabilitation.

First, the right knee. It buckled early in the Broncos’ game Dec. 22, 2013, at Houston, and because of the swelling, surgery wasn’t done until 18 days later.

Miller didn’t waste a minute of lost time.

“As soon as I woke up from Dr. (James) Andrews’ surgery, I was talking to rehab guys and I asked them, ‘What can I do today?’ ” Miller said. “They said ‘nothing. You’ve just got to rest.’ I was like, there has to be something I can do.”

Upon returning to Denver, Miller found Harris to be a companion in rehabilitation misery. Harris had a 30 percent tear, while Miller’s was more extensive.

“He’s a cornerback. I can’t be outdone by a cornerback,” Miller said. “We had a healthy competition. I think we pushed each other. Had Chris not tore his ACL I’m not sure where my recovery would be. And maybe I helped Chris with his recovery.”

Second, Miller had to get himself right in ways of the mind, heart and soul. Or wherever growing up comes from. In psychology, maturity is defined as the ability to respond to the environment in an appropriate manner. Wikipedia quotes psychologist Jerome Bruner as defining immaturity as a “time of experimental play without serious consequences.”

Oh, boy, does that sound familiar. And not only for Von Miller.

“It’s like all young people. You’re hoping for maturity and growth as they move along,” said Broncos coach John Fox. “Whether it’s the National Football League or raising four children myself or with your own kids, you try to teach guys the right way. Sometimes they make mistakes, but I’ve seen tremendous growth, I think not only as a football player but as a young man.

“I’ve been very pleased and proud of what he’s done and how he’s come back, whether it was off a suspension or whether it was off an ACL, which is a very serious injury and a very grueling injury to recover from. I think it speaks volumes for him and the way he attacked that.”

The old Von, it was said, had to be constantly reminded about meetings, if not all but escorted to them. But Jack Del Rio, the Broncos’ defensive coordinator, said it’s an exaggeration to say Miller used to miss meetings or show up late for them.

“I mean, Coach Fox wouldn’t allow that,” Del Rio said. “But there’s a difference between being there and participating and (just) being there. I think the maturity level is there in participating in the meetings. And in some cases leading the meetings. That part has dramatically changed over the last three years.”

“I want to get in the Hall of Fame”

So what was the most difficult obstacle Miller overcame? The recovery from an ACL tear or rehabilitation of his reputation?

Miller said it was dealing with both at once.

“When I tore my ACL, the easy thing would have been, ‘Man, I’m not dealing with all this,’ ” he said. “With the media on me, with the rehab, I’m just going to walk away from it all. That would have been the easy thing to do. But for me, I just couldn’t take that for an answer.

“I got my priorities in order. I’ve always loved playing football. Let’s start there. I wouldn’t be here, I wouldn’t have fought through all that adversity, if I didn’t love playing football. This is not all about collecting a paycheck, making plays, sometimes. That’s not what it’s about for me. It’s about being consistent over time. It’s about being great. Eventually, I want to get in the Hall of Fame. I want to be the greatest at what I do.”

He might as well. He has the ability.

People who knew Miller aren’t surprised by his comeback. He was always a good person at heart. He could mess up with the best of them, but he was always kind to teammates. Always had a good word for them, never a critical one.

Here’s another definition of maturity: It’s about thinking of others first, then yourself. It’s why being on time is considered a characteristic of maturity. Showing up late may be a personal choice, but others are affected.

Miller gets it. He admits the execution continues to be a work in progress. But he gets it.

“I know the game, I know the calls. I’m definitely a better linebacker than I was,” Miller said. “But it’s not only about me. I’ve got to start inspiring other guys to play at an elite level.

“We’ve had opportunities to win a Super Bowl before, but not like it is now. I can’t really explain it. Now, it’s like we’ve got to do this for the Broncos organization that believed in me. That did all this stuff not just for me, but all of these guys. Bringing in all the guys that we have. Aqib (Talib), T.J. (Ward), even Peyton (Manning), we brought him in three years ago. The (new) indoor facility. All the things we have are because of this one moment.”

The grown-up Von Miller wants all Broncos to experience football heaven.