Eight different players score in Cougars' blowout win

Resurrection Christian's Hunter Hop (5) skates along the boards in the first period against Palmer on Saturday at the NoCo Ice Center in Windsor. ( Steve Stoner )

FORT COLLINS -- After each game Resurrection Christian hockey coach Jake Pence gives out game pucks to kids who perform well, like hat tricks or other areas of the game they excelled.

Each puck has their accomplishment, name of the opponent, date and score written on tape around the edge of the puck. There were a lot of pucks to hand out Saturday afternoon in an 11-4 win over Palmer at NoCo Ice Center.

In total, eight different players scored a goal and 13 recorded a point to help the Cougars pick up their third win of the season and continue the team's torrid offensive start to the season.

"It's good to see those guys getting rewarded for their hard work. They put a lot into it, so it's fun to see that," Pence said after the game. "We still see a lot of stuff we have to work on, so that's encouraging because I want to make sure we get something out of every competition that we have."

Even with the lopsided scoreline, the game was close, at least for a while. Rez scored the first goal 26 seconds in, but the Terrors responded with back-to-back goals to grab a 2-1 edge. The Cougars answered next with two more of their own to lead after the first 3-2.

They never looked back.

Advertisement

Rez exploded in the second period for four more scores, three of which came on the power play after a 5-minute major penalty against Palmer. The outburst pushed the Cougars' lead to an insurmountable 7-3. Just for good measure, Rez scored four again in the third and gave up only one, which came on the power play with 12 seconds remaining in the game.

Junior Tim Van Tuinen tallied three goals in the game, one in each period, adding to an absolute hot streak. Van Tuinen has now put up a hat trick in three-consecutive games, but still doesn't really consider himself a goal scorer. Maybe it's time to rethink that.

Resurrection Christian's Zach Lish (12) works up the ice in the first period against Palmer on Saturday at the NoCo Ice Center in Windsor. ( Steve Stoner )

"I'm feeling hot. It feels amazing. Normally I struggle scoring goals and I don't know, overnight for this season I've turned it on, so it feels great," he said. "I'm going to do my best to keep it up every game. Definitely it's all about the team. My team sets me up and I couldn't do it without every single one of these guys."

Van Tuinen wasn't the only standout in the game, however. Sophomore Hunter Hop had two goals and an assist, while junior Zach Lish totaled the most points with four, all on assists. Eight separate players had multi-point games.

Games like this help really in two key areas: confidence and getting young players quality ice time. Rez was able to do both and hopefully capture some momentum going forward.

"We got a lot of players in there that might not have as much ice time and you really get to expose some stuff to those guys. I was really happy to see that happen," Pence said. "We really have to put it on ourselves to make sure we're bearing down and not taking shifts off. The whole idea here is to never get too high or too low, so I think they did a pretty good job."

Cris Tiller can be reached at 669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or on Twitter @cristiller.

Cougars 11, Terrors 4

At NoCo Ice Center

Palmer 2 1 1 -- 4

Resurrection Christian 3 4 4 -- 11

Scoring summary

First Period -- 1. Rez, Hunter Hop (George Lund), 0:26. 2. Palmer, Sam Horning (Brandon Driscoll), 7:53. 3. Palmer, Connor Downs (Parker Downs), 10:43. 4. Rez, Lund (Zach Lish), 10:49. 5. Rez, Tim Van Tuinen, 16:37 (SH).

Second Period -- 6. Rez, Blake Ekblad (Lish, Jake Cooley), 1:39. 7. Rez, Tad Strohauer (Lish), 4:26. 8. Palmer, Horning (Zach Donovan), 6:12 (PP). 9. Rez, Van Tuinen (Hunter McFerran, Brayden Dawson), 12:13 (PP). 10. Rez, Hunter McFerran (Brayden Dawson, Garrett Devine), 13:10 (PP).

Third Period -- 11. Resurrection Christian - Tim Vantuinen (Blake Ekblad) , 1:50. 12. Rez, Hop (Strohauer, John Tower), 3:15. 13. Rez, Ryan Baer (Hop, Quinn Finer), 6:48 (PP). 14. Rez, Garrett Devine (Lish), 7:45. 15. Palmer, Horning (Nolan Nussbaum), 16:48 (PP).

Shots on goal -- Rez 48, Palmer 27.

Power Plays -- Rez 3 for 4; Palmer 1 for 4.

Goalies -- Rez, Joey Halstrom (27 shots-23 saves); Palmer, Christian Kelly (30-25), Josh Robinson (16-12).