Crack-smoking Toronto Mayor Rob Ford is more popular than Obama and U.S. Congress, survey shows



Toronto Mayor Rob Ford has admitted to smoking crack cocaine and being a raging alcoholic, ranted about killing someone on tape and knocked down an elderly councilwoman - and yet he has a higher approval rating than the president of the United States.



According to the latest poll carried out by Forum Research, the foul-mouthed, irascible Toronto mayor continues to enjoy a 42 per cent job performance rating.



The results of the survey of more than 1,000 responders were made public Wednesday - two days after Toronto City Council overwhelmingly voted to strip Ford of most of his mayoral powers.



Popularity contest: According to the latest poll, Rob Ford (left) got a 42 per cent approval rating, compared to President Obama's (right) 37 per cent



Although his approval rating has dropped two points from two weeks ago, right around the time Ford admitted that he had lied for six months about his crack habit, he is still more popular that President Obama and the U.S. Congress, according to the Los Angeles Times.



In the wake of the disastrous Obamacare roll-out and embarrassing revelations about NSA eavesdropping on European leaders, Mr Obama’s approval rating has plummeted to an all-time low of 37 per cent this week, according to a CBS poll released Wednesday.

Mayor Ford’s job performance rating is also five times higher than the U.S. Congress, which on average currently stands at paltry 7.5 per cent.



‘There is your personal life and all the crazy stuff that you do -- and for sure he's got some crazy things there -- and then there is what you deliver on your job,’ Forum Research President Lorne Bozinoff told the Sun News Network.

Embarrassing number: Mayor Ford's job performance rating is five times higher than the U.S. Congress, which stands at 7.5 per cent

To their credit, the majority of Toronto residents still want to see Ford gone.



The automated telephone survey of 1,049 people found that 60 per cent of the responders approved of the decision to transfer much of his authority to his deputy mayor.