Sioux Falls, SD

Cooking mishaps are the leading cause of house fires. So be sure to add extra servings of safety as you prepare your holiday meal. The improper usage of turkey fryers can be a recipe for disaster.

Sioux Falls Fire Rescue is taking on the role of worst Thanksgiving cooks ever to show you what can go wrong with a turkey fryer.

It takes less time to prepare a deep-fried turkey and many people think they taste far better than an oven-cooked bird. But a major fryer faux pas is cutting corners by not completely thawing the turkey.

"They make the common mistake of being partially-thawed thinking it will cook faster if it's frozen. But just make sure it's thawed completely, taken out days before," Sioux Falls Fire Rescue Capt. Doug Medema said.

Experts say the cooking oil should go about a half-inch over the top of the turkey. But many people put way too much oil in.

"And that totally depends upon the size of the turkey," Medema said.

Fire Rescue purposely flooded this fryer with a whopping four gallons of oil. It's a matter of simple cooking chemistry. Oil and water don't mix. And neither do a frozen turkey and an overfilled fryer.

"When you add the frozen turkey in there, the water molecules that are frozen inside is what reacts with the oil," Medema said.

A frozen turkey placed inside a boiling fryer can cause the oil to erupt like lava from a volcano, creating a Thanksgiving meal ruined by an overflowing fryer and operator error.

One trick you can use to make sure you have the right amount of oil is filling the fryer with water and mark the level. Then pour the water out, add oil and make sure your turkey is dry.

Thursday's cold temperatures might tempt some people to fire-up their turkey fryers in the garage. But fryers should always be used outside, at a safe distance from any buildings.

The propane tank used to heat the fryer should be at least a couple of feet away in case the oil spatters.

Plus, wear long sleeves to make sure you don't get burned.