Topics: anacondas, animal abuse, Conservation, Discovery Channel, Editor's Picks, endangered species, Rainforest, the amazon, wildlife, Sustainability News, Entertainment News

My biggest question for Paul Rosolie, the man Discovery Channel claims will be eaten alive in a “documentary” airing Sunday night — really, my only question for him — was, why?

Rosolie’s a dedicated naturalist who has made protecting the Amazon and its species his life’s mission. The book he published earlier this year,”Mother of God,” combines adrenaline-fueled stories about his adventures in the rainforest with an earnest call to preserve the natural world. Reading through it, as Rosolie suggested his critics do, one’s struck by the passion he obviously felt for an ecosystem under threat, and particularly by the caution and respect with which he treated the anacondas he encountered there. Almost all of that is missing from “Eaten Alive’s” trailer, which comes off, as Salon’s Joanna Rothkopf put it, as an attempt at entertainment that “crosses the line from bad taste to outright… animal abuse.” A Change.org petition attempting to prevent it from airing has more than 37,000 signatures as of this writing.

Is it really possible that Rosolie abandoned his principles entirely for the benefit of the network that brought us “Shark Week”? It will be impossible to know before the show itself airs, but the reality of what really happened may be somewhere in the middle. Rosolie wasn’t able to reveal much about the stunt itself, but from what he did say, the whole “getting eaten alive by an anaconda” thing is sort of a bait-and-switch: come for the drama, stay for the important message about conservation (or, as he calls it, the “vegetables”).

Salon spoke with Rosolie about his critics’ concerns and about why he feels saving the Amazon is in dire need of rebranding. This interview has been lightly edited for clarity.

I expect you’re not actually going to be able to tell me whether or not you were eaten by an anaconda, right?

[Laughs] Jumping right into it, huh? No. That’s one thing they want me to keep until the end, just like they don’t tell you if Nik Wallenda makes it across the tightrope. You just have to wait until Sunday.

A lot of people think it’s going to be fake. There was one expert online saying it would probably be impossible, even for a large snake, to swallow a human…

Well, I don’t know who the “expert” was but I’ve worked with anacondas for years in the Amazon and I’ve seen them eat animals significantly bigger than humans. One of the factors that makes it difficult for an anaconda to potentially eat a human is that, unlike a deer that goes from head to neck to shoulders very gradually, humans have this sharp angle where their shoulders go out. That’s one of the things that makes it difficult, but these things crush their prey to death before they eat, so once a human ribcage is collapsed and your clavicle is snapped, your shoulders aren’t so much of a problem. Actually, my cook, when I was a guide for ecotours in the Amazon — her father was eaten by an anaconda.

A lot of people are saying things they think are true, but anacondas are a pretty powerful species. They live in an environment with black caiman that grow to be 18 feet, with jaguars that can grow to be 250 pounds. Humans aren’t that formidable; we don’t have any claws or spikes or teeth to speak of, you know?

That’s horrifying about your cook. I’m assuming, since I’m speaking with you, that you weren’t crushed quite in the same way?

The carbon-fiber suit that was designed to protect me during the stunt — we tested it to make sure that I wouldn’t get crushed to death while doing this.

I read a bit of your book and I know you care a lot about conservation. Obviously the point of the documentary wasn’t to see whether or not you could be eaten alive. Could you tell me a little bit more about what you are hoping to achieve with it?

Absolutely. I have worked in the Amazon for almost a decade now, and when you’re actually there… I’ve seen the Trans-Amazon Highway cut through thousands of miles of forest, I’ve seen illegal gold mining completely raze what was once pristine rainforest to the ground. I’ve been on the front lines of this developing story for a while now, and I’ve seen scientists writing papers, I’ve seen activists starting petitions, but I still feel like the world still turns.

I look at the Amazon as: It produces a fifth of our planet’s oxygen and contains another fifth of our planet’s fresh water. There’s more biological diversity here than anywhere else on the planet, so whether you’re a politician in Tokyo or you live in New York or L.A., our planet’s weather is heavily influenced by this one gigantic forest biome. It’s not just about saving the animals or saving the rainforest, it’s something at the crossroads of global politics and the health of life on Earth.

For me, getting eaten by an anaconda addresses a lot of people’s worst fears and nightmares, but it’s also a chance for us to start studying this really awesome, beautiful, charismatic animal — we call it a flagship species in conservation, when we can use a charismatic ambassador for the ecosystem. If you can protect an apex predator, you can protect everything else in the ecosystem. By doing this show… I mean, look, just the trailer on YouTube got 15 million views in a week; when you search “Eaten Alive” on Google you get something like 250,000 results of articles written. People all over the world are interested, offended, curious, and people are talking to experts and asking questions about anacondas, about the Amazon, about why this guy would do this. For me, that’s a huge success. I would like wildlife and the natural world to be a greater part of the dialogue in our culture.