Hispanic Heritage Month, or “Mes de la Herencia Hispana,” begins on September 15, the anniversary of independence for five Latin American countries: Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua. It continues through October 15, and during that month, Mexico, Chile and Belize also celebrate their independence days.

Let’s take this opportunity to highlight five of the most remarkable women who represent the Latin world in the U.S., and celebrate them for their strength, values, cultural heritage, and the passion they bring to their work.

1. Dolores Huerta, activist

Dolores Huerta, who is of Mexican descent, was born in 1930 in New Mexico, but grew up in Stockton, in the heart of California’s San Joaquin Valley, where much of the U.S.’s produce is grown. Shocked by seeing farm workers exhausted by backbreaking labor, she became a powerful advocate for those farm workers, organizing the fight for fair pay and for better working conditions. In 1962 she and Cesar Chavez co-founded the United Farm Workers, a farm workers’ union that continues standing up for workers’ rights today.

Throughout her life she has continued to fight for the rights of the working poor, women, and children, and at 85, Dolores Huerta shows no signs of stopping. She has received numerous awards for her outstanding work, including The Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award in the United States, which she received from President Obama in 2012.

Photo Credit: The Official White House Photostream

2. Sonia Sotomayor, judge

Federal judge Sonia Sotomayor was born in the South Bronx area of New York City, in 1954. Her parents were from Puerto Rico, but moved to the U.S. to raise their children. Sotomayor’s family functioned on a very modest income; her mother was a nurse at a methadone clinic, and her father was a tool-and-die worker. After he died in 1963, her mother pushed hard for her children to succeed, and Sonia Sotomayor graduated summa cum laude from Princeton in 1976 and subsequently entered Yale Law School.

She was elected to the bench for the Supreme Court in 2009, becoming its first Hispanic member in history. At the time she declared:

“Although I am an American, love my country and could achieve its opportunity of succeeding at anything I worked for, I also have a Latina soul and heart, with the magic that carries.”

In June 2015, Sotomayor made history again when she was among the majority in two landmark Supreme Court rulings: the King v. Burwell ruling, upholding a critical component of the 2010 Affordable Care Act, and the Obergefell v. Hodges case that made same sex marriage legal in all 50 states.

Photo Credit: NASA

3. Ellen Ochoa, astronaut

Born in Los Angeles of Mexican descent, Ellen Ochoa will always be remembered as the first Latina astronaut in space when she served as the only female crew member of Discovery space shuttle in 1993. By 1999, with three missions behind her, Ochoa had logged a total of 720 hours of space time.

Since then, she has flown in space four times, logging nearly 1,000 hours in orbit. Prior to her astronaut career, she was a research engineer and inventor, with three different patents for optical systems. She made history again when in 2012 she became the first Hispanic and second female director of NASA’s Johnson Space Center.

Photo Credit: wikimedia

4. Rita Moreno, actress

What’s not to love about this tremendously talented actress and singer? Rita Moreno was born in Puerto Rico in 1931 and is the only Hispanic to have won the four most prestigious awards in American entertainment: the Oscar, the Tony, the Emmy and the Grammy. She has also received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, and the National Medal of Arts, as well as the Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award.

Moreno is probably best known as Anita in “West Side Story” in 1961, a role that earned her an Oscar for Best Supporting Actress, making her the first Latina actress to win the honor. Following on this wonderful accomplishment, she became the second Puerto Rican to receive an Oscar. Today at 83, Moreno is still as active as ever in her profession. Moreno’s impressive work opened doors for Latinas and Latinos in Hollywood. What an inspiration and role model!

Photo Credit: wikimedia

5. Nydia Velazquez, politician

Nydia Velazquez was born in Yabucoa, Puerto Rico, in 1953. Her father was active in working for better wages and conditions for workers in the sugarcane fields, and his daughter followed in his footsteps: as a teenager, she fought for a variety of causes including the improvement of the sanitary conditions at her school. One of nine children, she was the first person in her family to receive a college diploma.

Velazquez came to the U.S. to pursue a master’s degree in political science from New York University and in 1992, became the first Puerto Rican woman to be elected to the U.S. House of Representatives. As a Democrat representing New York, she was the chair of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus until January of 2011. Velazquez is currently serving her twelfth term as Representative for New York’s 7th Congressional District. She is the Ranking Member of the House Small Business Committee and a senior member of the Financial Services Committee.