Suzanne Delbanco

March 4, 2014

Editor’s note: This is the second post in a Health Affairs Blog series by Catalyst for Payment Reform Executive Director Suzanne Delbanco. Over the coming months, Delbanco will examine how different methods of payment reform are being employed and how well they’re working. The first post in the series provided an overview of payment reform; this post examines pay-for-performance.

One of our core beliefs at Catalyst for Payment Reform (CPR) is that we need to move away from fee-for-service, toward new models that pay for care based on value, not volume. And while our National Scorecard on Payment Reform shows these new payment models are spreading, we still don’t know if they are really delivering the value we hope for — higher-quality care at more affordable prices. So we decided to make 2014 a year “all about the evidence,” taking an in-depth look at different payment reform models and assessing whether they are proving to enhance value. We’re delighted Health Affairs Blog is our partner in this journey. This month we examine pay-for-performance.

What is pay-for-performance? Is it widespread?

A pay-for-performance (P4P) model provides what are typically financial incentives to providers to improve the quality of the care they deliver and/or reduce costs. In CPR’s terminology, pay-for-performance is an “upside only” method of payment reform. The model gives health care providers the chance for a financial upside – such as a bonus — but no added financial risk, or downside. Our 2013 National Scorecard on Payment Reform demonstrated that almost 11 percent of commercial payments are value-oriented; approximately 1.6 percent of commercial payments are fee-for-service with pay-for-performance.

Despite the small portion of dollars flowing through pay-for-performance programs, we know it is a relatively popular model of payment reform. According to a 2010 report issued by the National Conference on State Legislatures (NCSL), an estimated 85 percent of state Medicaid programs were expected to operate some type of pay-for-performance program by 2011. Provisions in the Affordable Care Act expand the amount of pay-for-performance in Medicare as well.

Does it work?

Historically the evidence has been mixed as to whether pay-for-performance models improve quality and affordability. Throughout the U.S., there are several examples of pay-for-performance models; many of these were examined in a Health Affairs/Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Health Policy Brief on the topic in 2012. That brief concluded, “Despite limited evidence of effectiveness, pay-for-performance remains popular among policy makers and public and private insurers as a tool for improving quality of care and containing health care costs.”

A CPR examination of several models in effect during the last decade produced similar conclusions. For example, SoonerCare in Oklahoma demonstrated that pay-for-performance could raise rates of early periodic screening, diagnostic, and treatment requirements (EPSDT) for children. The California P4P program, managed by the Integrated Healthcare Association (IHA) on behalf of eight health plans representing 10 million insured persons, the largest non-governmental physician incentive program in the United States, has shown the model can raise quality scores for participating physicians.

And yet, these and other examples have shown that the model often does little to contain costs and improve affordability. CMS’ Premier Hospital Quality Demonstration, which ran from 2003 to 2009, showed only small improvements in quality and no effect on expenditures. The California P4P program is shifting to a new paradigm, incorporating additional metrics that measure resource use and cost, in addition to quality. While the program has shown pay-for-performance can improve the quality of physician organizations, it has done little to rein in costs. The new value-based payment model attempts to accomplish both.

Meanwhile, other experts have voiced concerns that the model can encourage providers to focus only on those outcomes measured, and that it can disadvantage safety net providers, who may be unable to meet certain quality standards with their case mix of patients.

How and when is P4P most likely to enhance value?

Some of the most recent studies tell us more about how pay-for-performance can produce the results we desire. A 2013 study conducted by Adams Dudley revealed that pay-for-performance programs may work best when they are highly-targeted and the rewards go directly to individual clinicians.

Pay-for-performance may also be one the first available options for reform where fee-for-service is the underlying payment model, or with providers who are unwilling to accept new forms of payment, especially those that put them at potential financial risk for their performance. Implementing an upside-only payment model can ease implementation in markets where payment reform historically has been difficult and unsuccessful. Additionally, this model can also provide a stepping stone toward shifting providers into payment arrangements with some downside risk.

Does it get us far enough?

Pay-for-performance is a general concept that can be applied on top of various payment methods and with varying levels of intensity. Historically, potential bonuses for providers have been small and easily absorbed into the noise of the myriad payment schemes providers experience in their practices. We have yet to know conclusively how large potential bonuses must be to change provider behavior in a significant way (although some CMS research tells us, not surprisingly, that larger incentives generally provide more motivation).

Furthermore, those who pay for care may find that they have little tolerance for adding onto payments that already feel unsustainable, especially since they perceive the quality standards P4P is designed to inspire to be standards providers should be meeting anyway. Building pay-for-performance on top of fee-for-service will also perpetuate potentially conflicting and more powerful incentives for providers to deliver more, and more expensive, care.

However, in a predominately fee-for-service payment system, pay-for-performance offers a relatively easy starting point for tying payment to performance, especially compared to other methods. While we wait for our underlying payment methods to shift, we can make incremental reforms to fee-for-service that begin to align incentives in the right direction.

After all, financial incentives matter. One CPR hypothesis is that payment methods may be most powerful when there is some potential downside financial risk for providers. If this hypothesis holds true, pay-for-performance models will have better results when they morph into shared-risk arrangements. We’ll look at the evidence for those models in Health Affairs Blog in future months.