It is beginning. As the presidential race heats up, the candidates are already busy setting forth what purport to be their bold “new” ideas for saving the middle class and fixing the economy. The need for newish-ness is especially pressing among politicians with names that tend to be … familiar. For Jeb Bush, the big new idea is to raise the retirement age to 68 or 70. For Hillary Clinton, it’s universal debt-free college tuition. For Lincoln Chafee, it’s U.S. adoption of the metric system (yes, that’s right).

Successful political campaigns are built on the promise of new things under the sun. It is impossible to imagine an American presidential candidate today campaigning using the slogan of West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer in 1957: “ Keine experimente! [No experiments!]”

Story Continued Below

So let’s set things straight while there’s still time: There are no new ideas. A Rip Van Winkle who fell asleep near the Potomac during the 1990s would look around today’s Washington, listen to what’s being said, shrug, and go back to bed (not least because of a possible Clinton vs. Bush presidential campaign).

Whether they are good or bad, most of what will be packaged as fresh, bold, new ideas in public policy put forth by this presidential candidate or that party in the next year and a half will in fact be stale, old, familiar ideas—some better than others.

Of all of the ideas offered by candidates for the presidency so far in this year’s cycle, the one that may have received the most attention is Chafee’s proposal that the U.S. join the rest of the world in adopting the metric system. This, of course, is a proposal that was extensively debated in the 1970s. As a new idea that is actually a retro idea, the proposed abandonment of yards for meters illustrates a basic truth about today’s American political debate: There are no new ideas.

The minimum wage provides an example. The idea that every worker in the United States should be paid a decent minimum dates back to the living wage movement of the nineteenth century. The federal minimum wage was enacted into law by the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938. Over the intervening decades, the real value of the minimum wage has gone up or down, depending on whether Congress increased it or allowed it to be reduced by cumulative inflation. Raising the minimum wage, a reform favored by most progressives and President Obama, is a good idea, but it is not a new one, given that the federal minimum wage is 77 years old this year.

Ironically, given the historic suspicion of institutional innovation by conservatives and their respect for time-hallowed precedent, American conservatives are far more devoted to big new policy ideas than are American progressives. The reason is simple. “Modern Republicans” such as Eisenhower and Nixon who accepted post-New Deal government but wanted to put it on a more solvent basis. But since the Reagan era, most conservatives have been counter-revolutionaries. Their goal has been, not to tweak Social Security and Medicare and other existing economic security programs, but to abolish them and replace them with completely different systems on radically different principles. They reach not for the tweezers but the axe.

This counter-revolutionary radicalism naturally gives the wonketariat on the right an edge over the center-left intelligentsia when it comes to proposing sweeping reforms. Many progressives would like to slightly expand Social Security, while keeping the program otherwise as it is today. Likewise, if it had been politically possible, most on the left would have addressed health care access by the simple if expensive policy of universalizing the existing Medicare program.

But many conservatives and libertarians want to replace Social Security altogether with some system of tax-favored, pre-funded individual savings accounts. Conservative experts propose replacing Medicare and Medicaid with some system of vouchers even more market-friendly than the Affordable Care Act. They also propose using vouchers to privatize public education. Really radical innovation in institutional design is a monopoly of the right.

Yet even the most radical ideas of the right for replacing Social Security, Medicare and public education are far from original. Many of today’s conservative policy ideas, including the replacement of progressive income taxes with a flat tax and the reduction of poverty by use of wage subsidies like the earned income tax credit (EITC), are inspired by Milton Friedman’s book Capitalism and Freedom. Friedman’s book was published in 1962. I was born in 1962. I am not young.

The extension of civil rights to gay, lesbian, bi and transgendered Americans is a genuinely revolutionary development. So are many of the debates about the environment and climate change, which involve relatively recent data and some new technologies. As are debates over Internet privacy that would have baffled Americans as recently as the early 1990s.

But when it comes to the basic questions of political economy, I can’t think of a single proposal being debated today that is not a variation of an idea proposed or passed into law between the first election of Franklin Roosevelt in 1932 and the passage of Medicare in 1965, a period that includes Milton Friedman’s influential masterpiece. The nearly five decades since have been marked by the same pattern, in which progressives defend and seek to extend the legacy of the New Deal and Great Society, while conservatives, and some neoliberal “New Democrats,” propose variations of the ideas set forth by Friedman in Capitalism and Freedom.

The debate about the Affordable Care Act illustrates the point. Since the 1960s, the alternative ways to provide near-universal health insurance had been clear: expand Medicare or Medicaid, expand employer-provided health insurance (the option favored by President Nixon), or subsidize the purchase of private insurance by individuals. Bringing to mind the definition of a camel as a horse designed by a committee, the Affordable Care Act mixed all three approaches, expanding Medicaid, preserving employer-provided insurance for those who have it and creating an individual mandate and exchanges for the uninsured.

On the right, the entire debate over school vouchers and charter schools echoes Friedman’s thinking back in the 1960s. So does the perennial Republican obsession with a flat tax. So does the idea that tax subsidies to the poor like the EITC are better than a higher minimum wage. In the words of David Frum, this is the same pizza in different boxes.

Even what appears to be a profound debate among contemporary conservative policy wonks turns out, upon inspection, to be merely a clash among different factions of Miltonism-Friedmanism. Proposals by Senators Marco Rubio (R-FL) and Mike Lee (R-Utah) for a larger child tax credit, reflecting one Friedmanite approach, have been criticized by conservatives who think the focus should be on another one of Uncle Milty’s ideas—flattening federal income tax rates. The debate on the right remains not whether to cut federal taxes, but how.

The static nature of our national debate over public policy, between those on the left who would defend or expand New Deal-Great Society institutions versus and those on the right who would replace them with Milton Friedman-style alternatives, does not reflect any lack of originality and intelligence on the part of today’s politicians and policy wonks. It reflects, rather, the fact that there are only a fixed number of ways to achieve particular objectives, and most if not all of them have already been thought of.

If you want to increase the income of low-wage workers, you can use regulation (the minimum wage) or you can top up low wages with tax subsidies (such as a larger EITC). If you want to increase the retirement security of most Americans, you can either raise Social Security benefits or encourage more individual savings or more employer pensions. Or you can combine elements of these approaches—for example, by blending individual savings and traditional pensions, as the Guaranteed Retirement Accounts (GRA’s) proposed by Theresa Ghilarducci of the New School and the California Secure Choice Act try to do. As a French proverb has it, there are not thirty-six ways to do a thing.

In foreign policy, the broad options are just as limited and just as familiar. In the case of the chaos in the Middle East, the broad strategic options—dive in, bug out, or engage in limited intervention—are clear. In this case, it is unlikely that the national security thinkers of either party will come up with a brilliant and completely unimagined fourth option for American policy.

Here’s an idea for our candidates for office—instead of feigning originality, why not just rally around a few good ideas, no matter how old and familiar they are? This would require individual politicians, of the left, right or center, to subordinate their desire to differentiate themselves from all the rest to a shared partisan commitment to a single reform or set of reforms.

Republican candidates for the presidency, for example, could announce their support of some one or another existing set of conservative tax proposals, instead of feeling pressured to come up with their own personal, unique, new and improved tax plans (remember Herman Cain’s “9-9-9”?) For their part, most or all Democratic candidates could agree on the same small set of party progressive policy proposals, while debating who could best promote this shared agenda as chief magistrate of the United States.

Otherwise, this cycle’s presidential candidates of both parties, by pretending to be innovators, will deserve the classic academic putdown: “Your thesis is both true and original. What is true is not original, and what is original is not true.”