The Game Of Thrones finale was simply shocking, which was to be expected given the nature of the popular HBO show, but no one actually thought that [spoiler alert] Jon Snow would be killed! Most people were just getting over the tragic burning of Shireen Baratheon from last week, but there was little time to reminisce.

On the season finale, fans said goodbye to several people including Selyse Baratheon, Stannis Baratheon, Myranda, and Meryn Trant, who was stabbed in the eyes by Arya Stark. While it may have been easy to make peace with these losses, most viewers were left with their jaws on the floor when the show ended.

Jon Snow was stabbed numerous times by his fellow Night’s Watch brothers. And no, he’s not coming back.

Game Of Thrones is almost always shocking, and a season finale isn’t complete without some level of depression, though this one has most of the previous ones beat, save for Season 3’s Red Wedding. According to Entertainment Weekly, Jon Snow will not be returning to the show in any capacity — which means that theories of him coming back as a White Walker are out the window. Kit Harrington, who played (that past tense actually hurts) Snow, recently opened up about a potential return, and said that it’s not happening.

“I had a sit-down with Dan and David, we did the Tony Soprano walk [letting an actor know they’re being whacked]. They said, ‘Look, you’re gone, it’s done,’ ” Harrington said. In regard to him getting a raise next season, Kit says that he’s been told there is no “next season” for him.

“As far as the salary thing goes, that angered me when that story came out. I don’t know where it came from, but it was inaccurate in many ways. It’s going to put questions into your head and into fans’ heads that things are not what they are. Quite honestly, I have never been told the future of things in this show, but this is the one time I have. They sat me down and said, ‘This is how it is.’ If anything in the future is not like that, then I don’t know about it — it’s only in David and Dan and George’s heads. But I’ve been told I’m dead. I’m dead. I’m not coming back next season. So that’s all I can tell you, really.”

The Game Of Thrones actor also said that he really liked the way his character went out — that he knew it was coming, and that the way it was written was really well done. This was a great way for Jon Snow to go out, and Kit was happy with how things played out.

“I kind of knew it was coming. I didn’t read [George R.R. Martin’s novel] A Dance with Dragons. But I read the other books and I had heard this is what happens. So I had an inkling it should be this season. I didn’t realize it would be the final shot of the season and that made it extra special. It’s always kind of nice really when you’re the last thing that happens in that episode. I loved how they brought Olly in to be the person who kills me. I love how the storyline with Thorne was wrapped up. I think it was really well crafted. It felt like the right way for it to happen.”

Of course, Kit isn’t too thrilled to be out of a job, and to be leaving the cast that he’s grown so attached to over the years. Saying goodbye was quite emotional for him.

“I got a big wrap and, like any of the actors who die on Thrones, I just wanted to f**k off out of there. I got a tear in my eye. I was more moved and emotional than I thought I’d be,” he said.

And while many people thought that Jon Snow was actually going to conquer the kingdoms, marry Khaleesi (a stretch), and live happily ever after, Game Of Thrones fans should know better. According to the Daily Beast, Snow got a bit of power this season, but it didn’t work out for him. The politics ended up eating him alive, and his major battle loss meant he had to go.

If you simply can’t get enough Game Of Thrones, and you want more Jon Snow without being reminded of his death, check out this video. As previously reported by the Inquisitr, the show was made into a fun musical for Red Nose Day, and it’s totally worth the watch.

[Photo by Rob Kim / Getty Images]