Press Release Pricing | News by Category | News by Country | News by US Region | Recent News | PR.com News on Your Site Press Releases Signal Behavioral Health Network Press Release

Receive press releases from Signal Behavioral Health Network: By Email RSS Feeds: New CEO Announced for Signal Behavioral Health Network

Denver, CO, February 15, 2014 --(



Signal Behavioral Health Network (Signal) is a non-profit managed service organization (MSO) responsible for directing the largest network of substance use treatment services in Colorado. In existence since 1997, its mission is to develop, organize and manage behavioral health resources and services focusing on the needs of indigent clients. Signal works in partnership with its providers to improve their capacity to deliver quality services. Perhaps most importantly, Signal’s core focus is to administer funding for services across a network of providers and to ensure the accessibility and quality of those services.



EnVision Talent Solutions assisted the Signal Board of Directors in the search for the Chief Executive Officer and the Board unanimously selected Sue Williamson as Signal’s new leader. They believe her ability to build rapport and credibility with all constituent groups will be a tremendous asset to the organization. Her vast expertise in health care will also be a great asset, which will help Signal with long range planning and organizational strategy. The Board also believes that Sue will set the tone of the organization by inspiring others and by being a strong and passionate advocate for substance use disorder treatment services. Dr. Robert House, MD, Signal Board President and Denver Health’s Director of Behavioral Health Services states, “Signal is in an exciting period of change and the Board believes that Sue Williamson is the right leader to take the organization in the right direction. She is a seasoned professional who brings the expertise, leadership and vision that Signal needs to ensure our success in the future.”



Sue Williamson most recently served as the Health Care Portfolio Director for The Colorado Health Foundation where she developed the health care area grant making strategies, managed a $35 million annual budget, and analyzed portfolio performance for continued strategic recommendations. Sue has also served as COO for the Colorado Children’s Campaign, Deputy Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, and HRSA Grant Administrator for the State of Colorado, Office of the Governor. In her spare time, Sue enjoys playing the piano, cooking up new creations in the kitchen, and having lots of adventures (both imagined and real) with her grandchildren.



Sue states: “I am very excited to be the new CEO of Signal Behavioral Health Network. Signal has a rich tradition in supporting its providers in the use of evidence-based practices in delivery of substance use disorder services that lead to improved health and well-being of many Coloradoans. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has expanded the availability of substance use disorder services for many new patients and I look forward to Signal’s continued role as part of that conversation.”



Sue officially started her role as Signal’s CEO on Monday, February 10th. To reach Sue directly, her phone number is 720-263-4855. Denver, CO, February 15, 2014 --( PR.com )-- The Board of Directors of Signal Behavioral Health Network is proud to announce that it has selected Sue Williamson as the new Chief Executive Officer for Signal Behavioral Health Network. Sue comes to Signal as a 20-year veteran in both the public and private health care sectors, she holds a BA in Sociology from the University of Colorado and obtained a Juris Doctorate from the University of Denver - College of Law. She specializes in health policy, grant management, strategic operations and project management.Signal Behavioral Health Network (Signal) is a non-profit managed service organization (MSO) responsible for directing the largest network of substance use treatment services in Colorado. In existence since 1997, its mission is to develop, organize and manage behavioral health resources and services focusing on the needs of indigent clients. Signal works in partnership with its providers to improve their capacity to deliver quality services. Perhaps most importantly, Signal’s core focus is to administer funding for services across a network of providers and to ensure the accessibility and quality of those services.EnVision Talent Solutions assisted the Signal Board of Directors in the search for the Chief Executive Officer and the Board unanimously selected Sue Williamson as Signal’s new leader. They believe her ability to build rapport and credibility with all constituent groups will be a tremendous asset to the organization. Her vast expertise in health care will also be a great asset, which will help Signal with long range planning and organizational strategy. The Board also believes that Sue will set the tone of the organization by inspiring others and by being a strong and passionate advocate for substance use disorder treatment services. Dr. Robert House, MD, Signal Board President and Denver Health’s Director of Behavioral Health Services states, “Signal is in an exciting period of change and the Board believes that Sue Williamson is the right leader to take the organization in the right direction. She is a seasoned professional who brings the expertise, leadership and vision that Signal needs to ensure our success in the future.”Sue Williamson most recently served as the Health Care Portfolio Director for The Colorado Health Foundation where she developed the health care area grant making strategies, managed a $35 million annual budget, and analyzed portfolio performance for continued strategic recommendations. Sue has also served as COO for the Colorado Children’s Campaign, Deputy Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Health Care Policy and Financing, and HRSA Grant Administrator for the State of Colorado, Office of the Governor. In her spare time, Sue enjoys playing the piano, cooking up new creations in the kitchen, and having lots of adventures (both imagined and real) with her grandchildren.Sue states: “I am very excited to be the new CEO of Signal Behavioral Health Network. Signal has a rich tradition in supporting its providers in the use of evidence-based practices in delivery of substance use disorder services that lead to improved health and well-being of many Coloradoans. The Affordable Care Act (ACA) has expanded the availability of substance use disorder services for many new patients and I look forward to Signal’s continued role as part of that conversation.”Sue officially started her role as Signal’s CEO on Monday, February 10th. To reach Sue directly, her phone number is 720-263-4855. Contact Information Signal Behavioral Health Network

Kristy Jordan

303-639-9320



www.signalbhn.org



Click here to view the list of recent Press Releases from Signal Behavioral Health Network Promote Your Business Affiliate Program Link To Us Email this page to a friend