The Victorian Health Department is investigating a potentially fraudulent campaign designed to destabilise the paramedics' union and end its long-running dispute with the government over pay and conditions.

In what the opposition is labelling "grubby underhanded politics", the Health Department's principal industrial relations consultant, Michael Felle, has been accused of disseminating a letter from an allegedly fake group called "Pissed Off Paramedics" in an effort to pressure the union into accepting a new pay deal.

On September 21, dozens of Ambulance Victoria staff received an email from "Gerard Nelson" titled "Letter to Steve McGhie" – secretary of the paramedics' union – that included several attachments.

One attachment was a letter from the group "Pissed Off Paramedics" or "POP'.

Advertisement

Another attachment was personal correspondence between Mr Felle and the Australian Taxation Office.

The "letter to Steve McGhie" was purportedly from "a long-term paramedic and now a member of POP". It accused Mr McGhie and the union of acting like a branch of the ALP, and said members of POP wanted to accept the latest pay offer from Ambulance Victoria to sign a new EBA.

Mr McGhie said he had never heard of a group called POP and suspected it was a fictitious creation by Health Department staff to try to fracture the union and pressure it into accepting a deal.

"It just goes to show what they will stoop to rather than putting their efforts into a positive negotiation process to try to get a positive outcome for all parties. I think it's a pretty low act," he said.

Mr McGhie said Mr Felle had represented the Health Department on behalf of the Victorian government and Health Minister David Davis at every meeting with the union since they started negotiating a new EBA in August 2012. If the POP group had been concocted by departmental staff, Mr McGhie said Mr Davis or some of his advisers were "probably" aware of it.

"There certainly needs to be some explanation to it," he said.

On Friday, opposition health spokesman Gavin Jennings questioned whether Mr Davis was involved in the creation of the potentially fake group and its letter, saying he had been at war with paramedics for more than two years.

"In that time, Mr Davis labelled paramedics 'hardline' and 'thugs', and accused them of exploiting the crisis in ambulance for their own benefit. But now we know that Mr Davis' representative at the negotiating table has been engaging in grubby underhanded politics," he said.

A spokesman for Mr Davis did not answer questions about whether he had seen the letter or been involved in its creation. But he said the Health Department was seeking further information about "the document in question and its origins".

Mr Felle did not comment.