During his 2008 presidential campaign, Barack Obama often criticized then-President George W. Bush for exceeding his constitutional authority. Since he’s been in office, however, he has shown his predecessors what constitutional disrespect really looks like.

“This is all part of the whole theory of George Bush that he can make laws as he’s going along. I disagree with that,” then-Sen. Obama said while campaigning in May 2008. “I taught the Constitution for 10 years. I believe in the Constitution.”

Watch the following clip compiled by Breitbart News:

But, as U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, told conservative talk radio host Mark Levin, Obama has been anything but respectful to the Constitution.

Levin asked Cruz Thursday night about President Obama’s use of executive power to change congressionally enacted laws, according to CNS News.

“It is one of the most profoundly troubling aspects of the Obama administration, is the degree to which this is a lawless administration. Looking at the president’s speech today, where he simply says, ‘OK, these parts of the law we’re not going to enforce,’” Cruz said. “Article II of the Constitution puts a responsibility on the president to ‘take care that the law be faithfully executed.’ Not only does this president not take care to faithfully execute the laws, but throughout his administration, we’ve never seen a president that picks and chooses the way this president does.”

Cruz then listed specific examples.

“He says, ‘Immigration laws, I’m not going to enforce those. Drug laws, I’m not going to enforce those. Obamacare, well, I’m not going to enforce it against Big Business, I’m not going to enforce it against members of Congress, and now, I’m going to pick some of your plans, if I like them, I won’t enforce it against them — except on alternate Tuesdays, when I’m wearing a yellow hat,'” Cruz said.

“It is the antithesis of rule of law. It is rule by arbitrary whim and discretion,” he added. “And, as you know well, that is profoundly dangerous. For millennia, we had societies where monarchs ruled by whim. And the natural result of that is tyranny and loss of freedom of the citizenry.”

Listen to the exchange, then if you haven’t already, be sure to check out Mitt Romney earns Nostradamus reputation.

[poll id=”138″]