Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

5

»

If an unemployed Roman glassblower from the time of Christ walked into Angelo Ambrosia's Longmont glass art studio, he could get to work without much training.

"It's one of the things I joke a lot about — that there are no (push) buttons in here. It's all handmade, and that's why it hasn't changed much in centuries," Ambrosia said.

This art form eventually led European churches to commission and install stained glass windows illustrative of the Christmas story and other biblical narratives for a bookless, largely illiterate society.

But artists here also find a focus in pop culture, as was the case for one stay-at-home Longmont dad inspired by his son to paint superheroes.

They paint together now. Sometimes, in the backyard.

Another artist left teaching sixth grade to use her hands making jewelry and "living out this little dream of mine," she said.

A small Boulder puzzle company battles "copycats" with both creative design and with unusually friendly customer service. Free puzzle pieces go to customers who report lost or damaged pieces. Staff only requests in exchange two photos: one of the completed puzzle with empty spaces and one of the dog that chewed those pieces.

For more back story on artists committed to "Made in Boulder County," read on and visit Arts Longmont and Boulder County Arts Alliance for a more complete listing.

Superhero Nap Time

Superhero Nap Time, a pop culture-inspired small art company in Longmont, is the artistic brainchild of freelance graphic designer Cole Brenner, and it's a very personal endeavor. While taking some time off work after his father passed away two years ago, Brenner started painting and making toys as part of the healing process.

Brenner, 33, works from home and simultaneously takes care of his son.

Longmont artist Cole Brenner works on an acrylic painting in his basement studio Monday morning. Brenner, 33, is the son of comedian David Brenner, who passed away last year. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

"My son Wes is two years old; I don't have much time," said Brenner, 33. "And art's tough. There's a fun part where you're painting and then there's a marketing part, a selling part and shows. It's not like I have a ton of time to divide between freelance design and this."

Wes, though, provides the inspiration for Superhero Nap Time, and he even came up with the name. Through reading stories such as " The Giving Tree," "Winnie the Pooh" and "Where the Wild Things Are" to his son, Brenner is able to add to his initially abstract images.

Wes helps with the painting too.

"He'll always bust out paint markers and paint, usually at the start," Brenner said. "Once I get past about 70 percent, I'm like 'OK, no more painting on this one.'"

As we start to think about gifts for the holiday season, Brenner has a few gems that would delight both nostalgia-loving adults and children. The "My Bomb to Bear" vinyl toys run at $40 per piece, while there are greetings cards for sale at $5. Plus, you can't go wrong with a print for the wall.

Visit superheronaptime.com for more information.

— Brett Callwood

Blooms & Shrooms

The name of Jillian Martineau's small jewelry business, Blooms & Shrooms, comes from the Martineau's love of the woods, while also referring to the balance of light and dark.

It's the pretty blooms with the lowly shroom, and finding beauty in both of them.

The name of Jillian Martineau's small jewelry business, Blooms & Shrooms, comes from the Martineau's love of the woods, while also referring to the balance of light and dark. (Jillian Martineau / Courtesy photo)

Martineau, 28, took a jewelry class in high school and loved it, but her life went in a different direction and she wound up teaching sixth grade. After three years of that, she missed working creatively with her hands, so she quit her day job and Blooms & Shrooms was born.

While there have been slow times and inevitable challenges since then, Martineau believes that it's going well.

"I'm doing it — living out this little dream of mine," she said. "I'm determined to make it work. It's fun selling online too. It's so cool to ship boxes out that go to Australia and Europe. It's cool to connect with people that way."

Martineau's inspiration comes from the outdoors, the natural environment. A hike with her can take hours, because she'll continually stop to photograph a leaf or pick up a feather. It's no surprise, then, that she describes her style as "woodsy."

"I love mixing high quality items with a lowly metal like copper," said Martineau, who works out of her Longmont home but sells only online. "That's my style - I wear ripped jeans and a nice sweater, so I take that into my jewelry too."

Martineau is currently promoting her feather bangles, made from raw copper or ethically mined silver.

"I can personalize them with a date or a name," she said. "These are part of my feather project, and 10 percent goes to organizations that provide support to indigenous people around the world."

The bangles run at $50, and there are more products available at etsy.com/shop/bloomsandshrooms.

— Brett Callwood

Liberty Puzzles

The soft-spoken, mild-mannered puzzle designer hunkered over his sketchbook in the morning sunshine looks anything but loathsome.

Yet, Liberty Puzzle customers love to hate him.

"He's had a lot of profanity directed at him," said Chris Wirth, who co-owns the Boulder-based company with Jeff Eldridge.

Wirth, 48, is only half joking, and that's money in the bank.

Lynon Aksamit's designs force players away from the usual outside-in puzzle building method.

For more information on locally made art and crafts, visit: Arts Longmont at http://artslongmont.org/longmont-colorado-art-concerts-shows/artists Boulder County Arts Alliance at www.bouldercountyarts.org/resources_links#Galleries

For example, he splits the telltale corner pieces. Then, he brings fresh oddity to all the other pieces, draws them freehand with borders reminiscent of Chile's southern coast — a texture of inlets, peninsulas and twisty causeways that mirror other pieces with keyhole precision on a Lilliputian scale.

In this forest of irregular shapes laser cut on the underside of the puzzle's quarter inch-thick maple plywood, Aksamit also embeds so-called whimsy pieces.

A movie star with two paparazzi. A skier and a snowflake. A man sitting cross-legged on a bench strumming a guitar.

About 35 contemporary artists, including locals such as Louisville resident Janice Larson, provide original art for some of the 500-plus puzzles featured on the company's website.

Other puzzle scenes include vintage Harper's Magazine covers and classical art, such as Leonardo da Vinci's "Annunciation" oil painting.

Puzzles range from extra small, 80-piece puzzles for $39 to extra large, 1,534-piece puzzles for $425.

The 10-year-old company with 35 employees also designs and manufactures Little Liberty Puzzles for kids and customizes puzzle designs with family photographs and submitted images not otherwise licensed by, say, the Denver Broncos or Disney.

"This is decidedly non-digital entertainment," Wirth said. "... And it is something too specialized to farm out, just not something a big factory in China can figure out."

Visit www.libertypuzzles.com for more information.

— Pam Mellskog

Ambrosia Glass Art

Hellish temperatures let him blow heavenly Christmas ornaments as if the glob of molten glass at the end of his furnace pipe were no more than a bubble forming on a child's plastic wand.

"At 2,150 degrees (Fahrenheit), glass is like honey in the microwave," Angelo Ambrosia, owner of Ambrosia Glass Art in Longmont, said.

After rolling the hot clear glass in colored glass chips, he guides the pipe into a second furnace heated to 2,300 degrees.

Ambrosia distributes the color with finessed turns before gently blowing through a plastic hose attached to the pipe's cool end to inflate the glass as if it were a balloon.

He's got about 15 seconds after that to shape the sphere with waxed jacks that work like tweezers as he turns the inflated molten glass more in a wet, cherry wood block shaped like an old-fashioned scoop.

Time is so tight at this stage that Ambrosia, 43, needs silence and sometimes three assistants when he creates larger pieces of glass art simply called vessels in glassblower parlance.

"This takes patience because all of the colors want to move differently. So we either dance with it or battle it," he said, laughing.

Ornaments sell for $20 each at the Muse Gallery, 356 Main St., Longmont, or by appointment at Ambrosia's studio, 34 Boston Court, D, Longmont.

Ambrosia also offers a mini workshop for $40, which includes the ornament cost, for those hoping to blow their own baubles this year.

Larger sculpted glass art costs upwards $2,200, he said.

"It takes patience and a bunch of years to get good at this," Ambrosia, who took his first class in 2003 and opened his Longmont studio ten years ago, said.

He recycles less cracked and shattered glass off the floor these days.

"But here we will always have lots of broken conversations," he said.

Visit www.ambrosiaglassart.com for more information.

— Pam Mellskog

Brett Callwood can be reached at callwoodb@timescall.com or at 303-684-5274. Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or at 303-746-0942.