Topics: Antonin Scalia, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Robert Bork, Supreme Court, Ted Cruz, Innovation News, News, Politics News

“Constitutional hardball.” That’s the term for what we’re seeing now in the GOP’s apparent staunch refusal to allow President Obama to fill a Supreme Court vacancy following Antonin Scalia’s death. And the one good thing about their refusal is that it brings the concept of constitutional hardball out into the open so that we can get a much better fix on what they’re up to—and what they have been up to for quite some time now.

The term was coined by Mark Tushnet in a 2004 paper of the same name. As he explained:

[I]t consists of political claims and practices–legislative and executive initiatives–that are without much question within the bounds of existing constitutional doctrine and practice but that are nonetheless in some tension with existing pre-constitutional understandings.

Of course, the Senate can refuse to vote on a presidential nominee; there’s nothing in the Constitution that specifically prohibits it. It’s just never been even considered, much less done, before. That’s some tension, all right! Could it be because of Obama’s race? Or just because he’s a Democrat? Tushnet continues:

It is hardball because its practitioners see themselves as playing for keeps in a special kind of way; they believe the stakes of the political controversy their actions provoke are quite high, and that their defeat and their opponents’ victory would be a serious, perhaps permanent setback to the political positions they hold.

Let’s see, Roe v. Wade, the Voting Rights Act, Citizens United, executive orders on climate change and immigration, just to name a few–yes, I’d say the stakes are high. As for “a serious, perhaps permanent setback,” that might be harder to say, but it’s certainly something that conservatives believe.

So, there’s really no question this is the sort of thing that Tushnet was talking about. In fact, it seems to me an even more clear-cut example than ones he cites in his paper, such as Democrats’ filibuster of specific judicial nominations in 2002-2003, mid-decade redistricting efforts in Colorado and Texas and the impeachment of President Clinton. Yet, for whatever reason, Tushnet only told the New York Times that it “probably” qualified.

Constitutional Hardball in Transition Periods

We’ll return to what he said, but first I want to dig a bit deeper into the concept and how to understand it. At one point, Tushnet writes, “My suggestion is that constitutional hardball is the way constitutional law is practiced distinctively during periods of constitutional transformation,” such as that which occurred during the New Deal. Constitutional transformations replace one constitutional order with another one, each involving a set of assumptions about fundamental institutional arrangements, “the relations between President and Congress, the mechanisms by which politicians organize support among the public, and the principles that politicians take to guide the development of public policy.”

As one illustrative example, Tushnet notes:

[P]rior to the New Deal, Congress initiated legislation subject to modest review by the President, whereas after the New Deal the President initiated legislation subject to modest review by Congress. And, during the transformative period when Franklin D. Roosevelt was attempting to construct a new constitutional order, his efforts to seize the legislative initiative were understood to be challenges to settled pre-constitutional understandings about the relation between President and Congress–and, as such, revolutionary.

While constitutional transformations may often occur relatively rapidly, this need not be case, Tushnet argues. In fact, he believes, “the concept of constitutional hardball does seem to describe a lot of recent, that is, post-1980, political practices. The reason, I believe, is that we have been experiencing a quite extended period of constitutional transformation.” The result is an “extended period in which political leaders played constitutional hardball. Indeed, it might come to seem as if constitutional hardball was the normal state of things rather than a symptom of the possibility of constitutional transformation. Transformation might seem like an ever-receding light at the end of the tunnel, and constitutional hardball the way politicians play day-to-day politics.”

There is, of course, a profound irony here: those trying to transform the constitutional order call themselves “conservatives,” even as they drive the process of striving for radical constitutional transformation. Liberals play hardball, too, of course, as Tushnet describes it, but the prime example he gives, mentioned above—the judicial filibuster of Bush appointees in 2001-2003—was a clearly defensive move, was turned to reluctantly, and was deployed against a limited number of targets. There was, throughout the process, a prudential conservative element in the Democrat’s thinking, which made good sense: they were trying to (re-)normalize things, trying to appeal to traditional notions of comity. Even if they had to take an extraordinary action in order to do so, they wanted their extraordinary action to be as reasonable and restricted as possible, while still achieving their goal—which was inherently a limited, defensive one.

The Case at Hand

With all this in mind, let’s return to what Tushnet told the New York Times:

The argument for calling it hardball is that there might be a reasonably settled understanding that it’s undesirable for the Supreme Court to operate ‘too long’ without a full complement of judges, and, as a result of that understanding, that the Senate will consider nominations sent to it reasonably far in advance of a presidential election.

But I believe what’s going on here is potentially much more radical than Tushnet’s description allows. The actual settled understanding is much clearer, and has nothing to do with presidential elections. That’s just a convenient ruse Republicans are using in their propaganda war. The Constitution (Article II, Clause 2) says the President “shall nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of the Supreme Court….” To repeat: “shall nominate.” Not “may nominate.” It is a presidential duty, an obligation of the office, not a presidential right, which some may contest because they do not like him personally. It’s a duty of his office as long as he’s in office. There is no cut-off date. Thus, what Republican senators have almost immediately said is that President Obama should not do his duty.

To further underscore what the settled understanding is, we can look to the historical record. Since the time of George Washington, 196 nominations have been made, with 160 confirmations, while 36 declined, withdrew or were defeated,. Of those 160 confirmations, 10 were confirmed the same day they were nominated, 53 within a week, and 88—more than half—within a month. Only six nominees have taken more than three months to get a vote. Of these, two were rejected, one withdrawn and three confirmed. Only one nominee took more than four months for a vote—Louis Brandeis, who was confirmed 47-22. These last six examples represents the outer limits of delay, compared to the 11 months that Obama has remaining in his term. He could appoint three of the most contentious nominees ever in the time remaining.

While it’s true that the process has grown more intensive in the television age, the basic understanding has not changed. Since Richard Nixon took office, the average time from submission to vote has been notably longer than in the pre-television era, but it’s still only a fraction over 60 days, the longest being 114 days for Robert Bork. Again, we are nowhere near to any sort of time limit, other than the time limit that Obama should never be allowed to act as president at any time whatsoever.

But that view of theirs is entirely at odds with the universal understanding of what the office of the president entails. So what we have here is not a situation which is “probably” constitutional hardball. It is constitutional hardball on steroids. They want to cripple the president—at least until they control the Oval Office again, at which point, well, who knows? Because this is where I think Tushnet’s argument needs some refinement. I think he’s absolutely right about the prolonged period of constitutional transformation and constitutional hardball, but for whatever reasons, conservatives and Republicans have been unable to clearly formulate the constitutional order they wish to achieve, beyond simply keeping Democrats out of power. If they have the White House, they’ll make it as powerful as possible. If they don’t, they’ll cripple it. This is not a recipe for a constitutional order, it’s a recipe for constitutional disorder—and incoherence in terms of defending it. And they’re only getting better and better at it over time.

Oh, and just in case you might think being in an election year matters, at SCOTUSBlog, Amy Howe reports that “The historical record does not reveal any instances since at least 1900 of the president failing to nominate and/or the Senate failing to confirm a nominee in a presidential election year because of the impending election,” and then goes on to describe the record. Woodrow Wilson actually nominated two justices in 1916. Both were confirmed. So the idea that a president should hold off and “let the people decide” has never been taken seriously in practice. The people already did decide when they voted in the previous election.

Confusion, Inc.

Of course, conservatives and Republicans have gone all out on obscuring the issue. It’s what they do. And Media Matters has been going all out in batting them down. For example, they highlight Hugh Hewitt on CNN making up a new rule, “Lame ducks don’t make lifetime appointments.” And just to be clear Hewitt explicitly was framing it as a sort of marching order for the entire GOP:

If I were a Republican, whether the majority leader all the way down to the county clerk and every nominee, I would say very simply, no hearings, no votes. Lame ducks don’t make lifetime appointments….

It’s a nifty rhetorical contrast—lame duck vs. lifetime appointment—but it’s utterly without substance, since “lame duck” is a term referring to someone who has either lost or not run for re-election, and is simply serving out “dead time,” waiting for their successor to take office. It is simply ludicrous to refer to a two-term president in their last year in office as a “lame duck”: they have no elected successor, and all the normal responsibilities of their office still require their attention—including the appointment of Supreme Court justices.

The CNN host Dana Bash tried to question this canard, but Hewitt easily danced away into spinning further irrelevancies:

DANA BASH: And he’s a lame duck even a year out? HEWITT: Easily. The last time — Justice Kennedy has been referred to a lot — was nominated in November of 1987 after Judge Bork had been blocked. That vacancy occurred in June of 1987. So there is no precedent. And I would simply add, the base will not forgive anyone. Senators will lose their jobs if they block the blockade. There should be an absolute blockade on this. And [Sen.] Patrick Leahy [(D-VT)], who was your guest earlier, voted 27 times to deny a vote or a hearing to Republican nominees between 2001 and 2003. Patrick Leahy created the conditions that he was decrying right now.

I’ll have more to say about Bork below, and while it’s true that Leahy took unusual steps—it’s the first example of constitutional hardball that Tushnet considers in his paper—his actions were all directed against specific nominees who had been named, and deemed too extreme or otherwise unfit. Neither Leahy nor any other Democrat sought to block all Bush nominees… none of whom were to the Supreme Court. Nor, of course, did anyone dream of telling Bush he couldn’t make such nominations in the first place. That’s four key points of difference between what Leahy did and what Hewitt—and others—are calling for now.

So what you see here is a typical performance of ill-informed conservative outrage, which seems to help fuel the dynamics of constitutional hardball in a way that’s quite satisfied to never settle down into a new constitutional order, but simply to move from one crisis formulation to the next, playing hardball all the way.