Sen. Ted Cruz compared America under President Obama to a corrupt dictatorship in which the chief executive decides which laws to follow and which to ignore. He cited the Obama administration delay of the employer mandate under the Affordable Health Care Act. He said the directive to ease deportation of immigrant parents and not to defend the federal ban on marijuana in states like Colorado and Washington that choose to legalize it were other examples of the president's “consistent pattern of lawlessness.”

“If the president of the United States can simply pick and choose which laws to follow… we know what that looks like,” Cruz told small-government conservatives Friday. “There are countries on this globe where that is how the law works. You look at corrupt countries where the rule of law is meaningless, where dictators are in power and they have things they call law. But what does law mean?”

Cruz, who delivered an extended speech on the Senate floor against Obamacare and was a prime factor in last year’s government shutdown, told a conference of the Texas Public Policy Foundation he has not given up the fight to repeal the federal health care law. At a news conference afterwards, Cruz declined to say whether he would use upcoming budget battles in Congress to press the administration and potentially shut down government again. But he leveled a sharp critique against the Obama administration as an “extraordinary threat to the liberty of this country. A president who is not bound by the law is no longer a president. And if you love liberty that should concern you greatly.”

Phillip Martin, deputy director of the left-leaning Progress Texas, said Cruz’s opposition to Obamacare has hurt Texans, not helped them. “Ted Cruz's temper tantrums cost taxpayers billions of dollars and did nothing for the 6 million Texans without health insurance,” he said.

Cruz, who is considered a potential candidate for president in 2016, was introduced by former Sen. Phil Gramm. Gramm compared Cruz’s effort to derail Obamacare — against the wishes of some in his own party — to the siege of the Alamo. Gramm acknowledged Republicans were hurt politically by the government shutdown, according to polls. Gramm said when Col. Travis drew a line in the sand to fight, some volunteers crossed it and some did not. “The ones who didn't cross the line died too. But no one remembered their names,” he said. Actually, according to the story of the Alamo, only one person didn’t cross the line and he left safely before the fight. In all likelihood, he has died since — as it was 178 years ago. His name was Moses Rose.

zp8497586rq