By Dennis Seid

Daily Journal

TUPELO – The employment of nursing assistants and orderlies is projected to grow 21 percent until 2022, faster than the average for all occupations, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Nursing assistants – also known as Certified Nursing Assistants – and orderlies help provide basic care for patients in hospitals and residents of long-term care facilities, such as nursing homes.

CNA programs are offered at community colleges, including Itawamba Community College and Northeast Mississippi Community College, but another option is offered by the Medical 2 Training Institute in Tupelo.

The for-profit school is the first brick-and-mortar location for Florida-based Medical 2 Inc., which has offered online training programs since 1999.

The Medical 2 Training Institute in Tupelo is licensed by the Mississippi Commission on Proprietary School and College Registration. Steele said the institute opened on June 1 only after seven months of applications and inspections by the commission and the Department of Health, Nursing Division.

In Tupelo, Donna Steele is the director of the institute, where students take a six-week course that includes 96 hours of classroom instruction, lab training and clinical hands-on experience. The supervised clinical practice is done at Courtyards and Tupelo Nursing and Rehab. The Greenhouses and Sanctuary Hospice House are joining the rotation as well, she said.

“We graduated our first class in July, with nine students,” Steele said. “We have 30 students graduating in September.”

Students spend five weeks in the classroom and one week in clinicals. Weekday classes are offered in four-hour blocks either in the morning or afternoon for six weeks, while Saturday-only classes are 8-hour sessions lasting for 12 weeks.

Steele said there are “many opportunities for CNAs – they work in hospitals, nursing homes, in-home care, hospice care … they’re the personal care team for a patient, as compared to a nurse, who takes care of the physical needs of the patients. CNAs make sure they’re groomed, fed, bathed, getting turned in the bed and into a wheelchair, just getting out.”

The BLS says nursing assistants and orderlies “work in nursing and residential care facilities and in hospitals. They are frequently active and may need to help lift or move patients.”

The demand for CNAs and orderlies, BLS says, will increase in long-term care facilities because of the growing elderly population.

Steele said one of the reasons Medical 2 wanted to open in Tupelo was because it saw an opportunity to meet a growing demand for CNAs in the area.

“We have nursing homes and in-home companies calling us almost every day asking if we have people we can send them,” she said.

“There really hasn’t been anything available as far training other than the two community colleges,” Steele said. “Our students have to get certification as well, and they have to take the state board, they have to know their 22 skills and they have to take a written test, too. … The only difference is we’re learning at a much faster pace.”

Students are instructed in such skills as basic nursing, measuring vital signs, documentation, bathing, hygiene, dressing skills, movement of patients, infection control, making beds, nutrition and eating assistance.

“We have students from all over North Mississippi,” Steele said. “The students can complete the course in six weeks, sit for the state board and have a new career in less than three months.

“We have students hired at NMMC, The Greenhouses, Total Health Care, Right at Home and Courtyards. Certified Nurse Assistants can work at hospitals, nursing homes, home care, hospice, rehab homes, and home health agencies.”

Gail Lee was among the first graduates of the institute in July, and she works at Total Health Care.

“It’s a great program,” she said.

“They teach you everything you need to know before you leave and they make sure you’ve learned it before you go get certified.

Lee said she loves her job at Total Health Care, and was glad that Medical 2 was an available option.

“I was actually licensed as a CNA nine years ago, but I had let it lapse,” she said. “Some of the things were the same, but a lot has changed over the years. I’m glad I could get certified again in just six weeks.”

As for pay, Steele said CNAs are paid $9 to $11 per hour, depending on the setting and any shift differential.

The BLS, in its most recent report last year, said the median annual wage for nursing assistants was $24,420 in May 2012.

“A lot of CNAs see it as a stepping stone to a nursing career, and it’s not uncommon to be a CNA part-time while going to nursing school,” Steele said.

She also said the institute plans to offer additional training classes in the future.

For more information, call the Medical 2 Training Institute at (877) 741-1996 or (662) 844-9400. It is located at 1830 N. Gloster Street, Suite A.

dennis.seid@journalinc.com

Twitter: @dennisseid