On a sunny day last October, 1st Lt. William "Billy" Parker Cook was laid to rest at an Oakland cemetery with full military honors, surrounded by a small group of family members who had never met him.

That's because the ceremony took place almost 70 years after the World War II bomber pilot had been killed in action.

"We were all born after he died, but it still was a very emotional day," said his nephew, Bruce Cook. "He had been a ghost. And then suddenly, he was a ghost who came to life."

One of the U.S. military's bedrock principles is to never, ever leave a service member behind. But as the country prepares to once again pause on Memorial Day and remember those who perished in uniform, more than 83,000 Americans who served from World War II through the post-9/11 conflicts still are missing.

Bruce Hallberg holds a photo of his brother, U.S. Army Staff Sergeant Roger C. Hallberg, a Palo Alto High School graduate who disappeared in 1967 in Vietnam, at his home in San Jose, Calif., on Thursday, May 21, 2015. (LiPo Ching/Bay Area News Group) ( LiPo Ching )

Billy Cook, of Alameda, and five crew members were among them after their B-26G Marauder disappeared into the fog of war during the Battle of the Bulge on Dec. 23, 1944. But when the wreckage was found decades later in Belgium, the discovery began a long process to recover the remains, identify three of the airmen and return them home.

"It's easy to say, 'Well, it happened a long time ago and ask why are we doing this,' " said Bruce Cook, 62, of Newport Beach. "But I've learned about the great lengths our country goes to return the fallen."

While it may be a duty-bound vow to never stop looking, the search effort for America's missing war dead long has been a troubled one. The Pentagon, under harsh criticism from Congress, merged two agencies into one POW-MIA department earlier this year with the hope of finding more service members.

Advertisement

A test of the new office could come this summer, when searchers are scheduled to return to the tiny South Pacific atoll of Tarawa and examine a site where Bill Niven, an amateur historian from Morgan Hill, believes 40 Marines who died in a bloody 1943 battle can be found. Niven's research played a role in the 2014 recovery of Pfc. Jack Redman, who was buried last weekend in his hometown of Watseka, Illinois.

"It might be a cliché, but the word that keeps coming up is closure," said Merrill Redman, 85, choking up as he spoke of his brother. "Now that it's finally happened, it feels just like it did 70 years ago. But it's wonderful to have him home."

Hoping for answers

For many military families, there are only unanswered questions.

Sgt. 1st Class Roger C. Hallberg, a Palo Alto High graduate and an Army Special Forces Green Beret, went missing in Vietnam on March 23, 1967. He stayed behind with a wounded comrade after a firefight. When would-be rescuers returned the next day, neither man was found.

U.S. Army Staff Sergeant Roger C. Hallberg, at Fort Bragg in North Carolina. Hallberg is a Palo Alto High School graduate who disappeared in 1967 in Vietnam. Photo provided by Bruce Hallberg.

"It's always been a raw wound for our family," said his brother Bruce Hallberg, 68, a retired Palo Alto Fire Department captain. "My sister and I will do whatever it takes to find answers. For us, there's nothing to mourn because we just don't know. I'll put flowers on my parents' graves, and there's a spot for my brother, but nothing is there. There's no name on any stone."

Vera Bigham, 92, who lives in the California Gold Country town of Jamestown, lost her husband in the Korean War when Air Force Capt. Donald Gaile Bigham's plane crashed at sea near an island on Jan. 9, 1951, after being struck by anti-aircraft fire. While he might have been taken prisoner, the military declared him dead as the war ended.

His widow and daughter, Gaile Bigham-Smith, now 74, have never given up on the possibility that he might be brought home.

"Anything is possible," Vera Bigham said. "It would be good to find him, especially for my daughter. I really don't expect it, but you never know what tomorrow is going to bring. They're still looking for remains, and we won't stop hoping."

Families interviewed for this story largely praised the military's search for their loved ones. But that sentiment isn't shared by Congress, which has labeled the effort as woefully mismanaged.

The Pentagon's response was a reorganization in January to create a new Department of Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency that now is under pressure to identify 200 sets of remains annually. The recent numbers have been far lower -- 67 in 2013, 68 in 2014 and 30 so far this year.

"It's the same focus, but we're trying to be more efficient now that it's one, big effort," said spokeswoman Sgt. 1st Class Shelia Cooper. "This is about completing a noble, honorable mission."

Of the 83,126 Americans still unaccounted for, nearly half -- 41,000 -- are presumed lost at sea and likely will never be found. But not only can finding any remains be a needle-in-a-haystack endeavor, the recovery and identification process is complex even when they are located.

In 2001, the remnants of a B-24 Liberator shot down on April 10, 1944, were found in New Guinea. But it wasn't until this spring that San Francisco native Sgt. Charles A. Gardner and seven other crew members were buried at the Arlington National Cemetery.

That sort of snail's pace is one of the reasons why critics had demanded new leadership to streamline the recovery effort.

The military sometimes has struggled to locate remains even when they are in a relatively confined location. Consider the small island of Betio in Tarawa Atoll, which is roughly half the size of New York City's Central Park. More than 1,000 Americans died capturing the Japanese stronghold in 1943, and Marines still are buried there in unmarked graves.

Niven has spent more than two decades researching where many of them may be and believes he finally has persuaded the new agency to explore one of those sites -- working with civilian members of DPAA to refine the coordinates.

On May 16, he was in Illinois to attend the funeral of Jack Redman, which was a somber, townwide event. Niven is hoping for more such bittersweet memorials for the Marines of Tarawa.

"If a man is willing to give his life, then the very least he deserves is a marker with his name on it," Niven said. "They all deserve what Jack Redman received."

Last fall, it was Billy Cook's turn to be honored.

A devastating loss

He might have become a fine example of the "Greatest Generation" who, after winning World War II, led the country into unprecedented prosperity.

"I was always told that he had an incredible personality and was so intelligent," said Bruce Cook, who was given the middle names of William Parker, after his uncle. "He was the golden child of the family. His death was never spoken of, especially by my grandparents. They were devastated and never really got over it."

A UC Berkeley graduate, Billy Cook had planned to be a doctor. He married his sweetheart before enlisting, had future presidential candidate Barry Goldwater as a flight instructor and became an accomplished pilot.

On his final mission, he flew the lead plane in an attack on a key enemy bridge in Eller, Germany. His plane was shot down on the way back and went undiscovered until 2006, when amateur aviation researchers discovered the crash site.

"I thought it was a joke when I got a call from someone in the government," Bruce Cook said. "It took a moment to realize that they were serious."

About a year ago, it was confirmed that Billy Cook had been identified through personal items and the forensic identification technique of matching mitochondrial DNA with maternal-line cousins.

"He's where he belongs now -- with the rest of his family," Bruce Cook said.

Not forgotten

Bigham-Smith said she still can remember the day when she and her two younger brothers were told by their mother about the terrible telegram. They were never going to see their beloved father again. But it wasn't until she was in her mid-20s that she truly accepted that he was gone.

Her family would welcome the news if he were found. They attend periodic gatherings where the military briefs families about search efforts. There are discussions about erecting a marker for him.

The most important thing for Bigham-Smith, though, is not that they have a place to mourn her father, but that he is never forgotten.

"When I walk my dogs, it must look crazy because I'm talking to myself," she said. "I'm really just talking to my father. Somehow, it makes me feel better. Maybe we don't need a place to go when he's in your heart."

Follow Mark Emmons at Twitter.com/markedwinemmons.