This Wednesday, March 23, marks the sixth anniversary of the signing of the Affordable Care Act, but industry observers aren’t so sure President Barack Obama’s controversial health care law will get the same attention in this contentious election cycle as it has in years past.



That’s not say the law has been a resounding success — many would argue it hasn’t — but the Republicans have “lots of other things they’re going to claim are wrong with the country,” said Joe White, a Case Western Reserve political science professor with a focus on health care policy.



Republicans will likely use it as a rallying event, White added, and if the Democrats have the cash and “any sense” they’ll launch a spirited effort to explain what the law has done.



But in an election where intense emotions tend to take precedence over fact-fueled debates, it remains to be seen whether an educational campaign about the law would do any good.



Bill Ryan, president and CEO of the Center for Health Affairs and a former state Medicaid official, said he hasn’t heard a fact-based discussion about the law yet during the primary campaigns.



“It’s all about emotion,” he said. “It’s all about firing up people who are angry about something.”



On the Democratic side, he said millennials are expressing frustration with limited economic opportunity. As for the Republicans, they’re feeling as if they’re losing control of the country.



“I think it’s going to be challenging because you’ve got one party that has determined that the current solution is unacceptable,” Ryan said.



“It’s the sixth anniversary, and yet there still hasn’t been a meaningful piece of legislation that’s gone through the Congress to address this. You don’t like the Affordable Care Act, what’s your alternative?”

Down to the numbers

Since 2010, an estimated 20 million people have gained health insurance coverage because of the Affordable Care Act, according to estimates released early this month by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.



That’s one of the law’s more notable accomplishments, said Lori Maite, Columbus-based executive director in Ernst & Young’s national Affordable Care Act practice.



Maite considers several other outcomes of the law successful: The Medicaid expansion in Ohio and in many other states, dependents’ ability to stay covered until the age of 26 and opening the door to people with preexisting conditions to get insurance. But there are many other things the Affordable Care Act set within its goals “that we aren’t quite there yet,” she said.



For one, there are still “significant numbers” of people without insurance, and gender parity within health plans hasn’t taken hold. Individual mandates, in which uninsured people are fined, are beginning to take hold and will continue to increase each year. The employer mandate is also coming online this year with required reporting and a higher threshold of employees who must be covered — 95% versus 70% last year, which wasn’t all that difficult for many to meet, Maite said.



“Once they’re able to issue reports and understand if they’re meeting the 95% threshold, a lot of companies are starting to understand or get their arms around what the overall cost of the Affordable Care Act is to them — the cost of compliance with the Affordable Care Act and all of its nuances,” she said.



While the law is covering more Americans, many consumers remain frustrated with costs.



On one level, Ryan said, more people are protected from life-altering medical bills that come with a significant health event. But on the other hand, the Affordable Care Act isn’t doing much to change the health status of communities and individuals; to improve access to primary and preventative care or change incentives for people to live healthier lifestyles, he said.



“And as a result, we’re not changing the health care expenditure curve at all,” Ryan said. “Health insurance isn’t set up to keep people healthy. Now that’s a second part of what the Affordable Care Act is trying to do, and that’s probably the place where it has had the most difficulty.”

And the solution is?

Robert J. Klonk, CEO of Oswald Cos., a Cleveland-based insurance brokerage, spent time in Washington, D.C., before the law was approved educating politicians on the law’s potential effect on employers. A lot of those concerns have come to pass, he said, such as administrative burdens on employers and high premiums and deductibles for employees.





But even this critic of the law points to several positive outcomes. Those with pre-existing conditions cannot be refused insurance. This was needed, “no doubt about it,” Klonk said. Subsidies for low-income Americans, a shift to value-based care and the ability to keep dependents on health plans until they are 26 years old were all needed.“There are some good aspects of what has happened in the ACA,” Klonk said. “Just the way it was structured was structured not to be sustainable.”Carriers are considering pulling back, cost projections are rising and employers are spending time and money trying to understand rules that can later change, he said.Ryan of the Center for Health Affairs said he understands the political frustrations, “but absent a strategy to address those issues, our health care system is going to collapse.”Case’s White said how much this plays into the election depends largely on who the nominees are. Currently leading Republican candidate Donald Trump, for instance, would do a good job of rallying the base.“The Republicans who think it’s terrible, terrible, terrible and awful will be reminded they ought to turn out to vote so they can get rid of terrible, terrible, terrible, awful,” he said.White said Hillary Clinton, now the frontrunner in the Democratic race, and the party should “try to remind people how silly so much of this discussion has been.”There haven’t been a lot of facts out there, Klonk said.“One side thinks it’s working great, the other side wants to repeal and replace it,” he said. “Neither one are the answer. It needs to be fixed. It needs to be fixed quickly.”