Does your company pay for spousal travel? (Photo: Sarah Coward, The News-Press) Story Highlights Business frequent fliers 83% more likely to try new products or services first

Airports have "high dwell time environment, and deliver a captive audience," survey finds

Fla. airport working to boost display capability, quality

FORT MYERS, Fla. — It's an airport, not a seaport. Still, there's a 22½-foot Grady-White recreation boat just inside passenger terminal Door 2 at Southwest Florida International.

A Porsche Cayman sports car is parked inside near door Door 5.

Local dealers put these grown-ups' toys in the airport terminal, and they're loving the response.

"We moved the boat in less than a month ago, and we're averaging more than a call a day. This time of year ... we're more than satisfied," said Ray Jahn, general manager for Fish Tale Sales & Service on Fort Myers Beach.

Mark Busalacchi is properties and contracts director for Lee County Port Authority, the airport's operator. Although ad revenues have a long way to go before reaching their prerecession peak, he's encouraged. The estimate for fiscal year 2013 is $749,176. Those are down from heights reached before the national recession, but the number is up from 2012.

Airport advertising is big business nationally. A 2011 Scarborough survey on behalf of Clear Channel Outdoor Holding's airport advertising division found business frequent fliers are 83% more likely than all U.S. adults to be the first to try or to buy new products and services.

Airports have a "high dwell time environment, and deliver a captive audience," the survey found. It also said about three in four frequent fliers and business frequent fliers notice airport advertising, and take time to read the message. Frequent fliers were defined as adults who took three or more round-trip flights in the past year. Business frequent fliers took three or more round-trip flights per year for business.

On at least two occasions, Busalacchi has heard about a local dealership selling a Porsche to an airport passenger less than a week after seeing one at the terminal.

Also, the airport's advertising client mix is diversifying from a roster that started out heavy on real estate development before the downturn.

"We finally got Chico's in here, which is a big deal," Busalacchi said, referring to the national casual apparel designer and retailer based in Fort Myers.

Miromar Outlets and Miromar Lakes and Ave Maria Development are longstanding clients, as is WCI Communities. Stock Development has advertised at the terminal since it opened in September 2005.

The boat and the sports car are among the more recent and sexy examples of how an airport can be a great advertising medium. The more typical ads include static signs at baggage carousels and near escalators, scrolling, backlighted signs on or near concourses and near the bag carousels and hotel-centric text and photos at information kiosks. Airport shuttle buses also have ad placards.

The Grady-White and the Porsche occupy two out of four "static display" locations that each fetch a rate of $2,000 per month. More common advertising placements range from as low as $750 for a double-sided sign on a bag claim carousel to $4,700 a month for a wall-mounted display strategically placed in a specific concourse or above an escalator in either the East or West Atrium, depending on the package and time of year.

Advertising income is important, airport officials say, because it helps them contain rates and fees charged to airlines, allowing carriers to focus on offering more flights.

Southwest Florida International relies on nonaeronautical revenue from such things as concessions sales and advertising, for about 65% of its operating budget

In September 2010, the port authority took its ad sales program in-house, largely to avoid service fees of about $200,000 annually, according to Busalacchi. Sue Phelan is the day-to-day manager of the program, which has gotten more flexible. Advertisers can request seasonal contracts for as little as four months. And, if clients want to target certain origination markets, they can designate a concourse that has the most flights from those geographic areas.

The port authority next hopes to build clientele by updating display technology. It will replace the scrolling signs with LCD units over the next 12 to 18 months, Busalacchi said. This will provide crisper images and greater flexibility in the number and presentation of advertisements.

"People can be in an airport longer than they are in a plane," Busalacchi said. "People want technology."

Boat dealer Jahn expects great things from the Grady-White's time at the airport.

"Our lifestyle in this state is boating. After things started to pick up in the economy, this made sense."

Laura Ruane also writes for The Fort Myers (Fla.) News-Press.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1f6Yjej