Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Education, Getting Schooled, high-school, Memoirs, Must-Do, Public School, teaching, What to Read, Entertainment News

Before coming out with his new book, “Getting Schooled: The Reeducation of an American Teacher,” Garret Keizer published popular treatises on privacy and on quiet; each was about how modern Americans enjoy less and less of those two blessed conditions. In that light, you could call “Getting Schooled” a book about books. One of its less happy refrains has to do with how little books rate in the lives of the public high school students Keizer taught when he returned to the profession after a 14-year hiatus.

A running motif in this chronicle of the one-year stint Keizer spent as an English teacher in rural Vermont is a collection of Library of America volumes (from the series of archival-quality collections of work by great American writers). Keizer spots a pyramidal stack of these books in a display in the school library, but they’re just being used as risers for an assortment of “graphic novels and topical books of particular interest to teens.” In fact, the Library of America volumes are “discards” because no student has checked out any of them in ages. Dismayed, Keizer resolves to reinstate the books in the library’s collection before his year is up. “School libraries exist to serve all the students, yes,” he writes, “but they also exist to serve that student who only comes along once every 25 years,” that unicorn-rare creature who still has time and attention for Walt Whitman.

Keizer is nothing if not rooted. He returned to the same school where he taught for 16 years before he left to devote himself to writing full-time. He’s both a local guy made good and a Vermont exemplar. He has been married to the same woman and lived in a nearby town for over three decades. He distrusts cellphones and what he calls “digital bling” (“‘the digital age’ is not my god any more than the ‘global marketplace'”). He’s disgusted by the encroachment of commercialism and bureaucracy into the once-sacred groves of private thought and feeling. He intends “to live or die on the value of books.” He once contemplated pasting a bumper sticker reading “I’m a homeschoolin’ gun-totin’ Bible-bangin’ …. SOCIALIST” onto his car. He’s a contributing editor to Harper’s, for crying out loud — all of which is to say that Keizer fits the profile of a neo-curmudgeon thinker in the vein of Sven Birkerts or Wendell Berry, leftist champions of old-fashioned rural ways, print books, earnestness and deep thought.

Now, the knee-jerk, smarty-pants Internet-opiner’s response to neo-curmudgeonly assertions is supposed to be a saucy, skeptical dismissal — perhaps with lashings “golly!” and “gee!” or similarly arch exclamations. What a dinosaur! How can Keizer so completely not get it? But this is one curmudgeon who can’t be easily written off. First, all that time he’s spent alone with the printed page and his own thoughts has produced admirable results. “Getting Schooled” is one of those books in which you find yourself underlining something on nearly every page. Its author constitutes Exhibit A for the argument that if you give yourself time and space to ruminate, you’re more likely to come up with some sterling and well-expressed insights. Imagine that.

Second, although one of Keizer’s colleagues tells him, “I’m afraid that the day of the teacher as artist is dead,” this book offers ample proof that her mourning is premature. Keizer can be tough and demanding, but the trickiest parts of his job, of all high-school teachers’ jobs, involve the delicate handling of adolescent psyches, kids who are both exquisitely sensitive and chronically inattentive. “A teacher should never underestimate the factor of selective listening,” he writes. “Simply to use the word ‘stupid’ risks having the kid believe, or claim to believe, that you’ve called him stupid. He hears the word and nothing else.” And then there’s this ninja technique for preventing students from cribbing their work from online sources like SparkNotes: An exam that reprints one of the chapter summaries from the SparkNotes website and asks students to describe the ways it gets the book wrong.

Keizer, who returned to the classroom so that his family could keep their health insurance while his speech-therapist wife took a break from her own school-system job, was assigned to teach average students. He was reminded again and again that many of them arrived in his classroom from homes with neglectful, absent or outright abusive adults. Some of them pined for the small family farms that had been lost to big agriculture. Despite the popular image of rural Vermont as the essence of wholesome, bedrock American values, poverty — material, but also emotional and cultural — has blighted many of their young lives. Meanwhile, at the state’s celebrated town meetings, where every tax measure was battled down to the penny, “countrified transplants who’ve sent their children to the best private colleges money can buy evoke the Vermont tradition of making do with less.”