On Wednesday, Gov. Rick Scott and the Florida Cabinet may hire the next chief insurance regulator. Before they choose, Scott and the Cabinet should ask much harder questions than they did a month ago.

At their March meeting, Scott, Chief Financial Officer Jeff Atwater, Attorney General Pam Bondi and Agriculture Commissioner Adam Putnam couldn't agree on a successor to Insurance Commissioner Kevin McCarty. Scott wanted Jeffrey Bragg, who ran the federal terrorism insurance program. Atwater preferred state Rep. Bill Hager, R-Boca Raton, who was Iowa's insurance commissioner nearly three decades ago and has spent most of his career working for the insurance industry.

Scott and Atwater must be among the voting majority. In the last month, Scott has met with Hager and Atwater has spoken with some of the now 71 applicants, up from 55. Most of them, however, won't get serious consideration. Even the deputy commissioner doesn't appear to be in the running.

Sadly, Bragg and Hager didn't get grilled at the March meeting. Bragg said the Office of Insurance Regulation is "doing very well." To which Putnam asked, "How do we get there on the property side?" Translation: Why are most homeowner premiums still rising, even though the last bad hurricane season was in 2005? Discussion of that vital issue soon ended.

Hager claimed that Florida has "vibrant (insurance) markets now." Really? Tell that to the South Florida policyholders who each year have one choice for hurricane coverage. Tell that to the drivers whose auto policies keep going up even if they haven't filed claims. Yet no one challenged Hager's assertion.

Hager also played to personal, partisan politics. Bondi joined the unsuccessful lawsuit against the Affordable Care Act. In 2013, the Obama administration began hiring "navigators" to sign up people for coverage through the law. Bondi claimed that Florida should require background checks for the navigators. What about possible identity theft?

Federal officials pointed out that for years similar in-person counseling had helped Floridians enroll in Medicare or Medicaid. There had been no abuses. The Obama administration also debunked rumors that navigators would ask for personal health information.

Nevertheless, the Legislature in 2013 required fingerprint checks for navigators — something the Legislature did not require this year of Uber and Lyft drivers. Hager proudly told Bondi that he voted for the legislation.

That 2013 bill, however, also prohibited the Office of Insurance Regulation from negotiating lower rates for health care coverage. The ban, which lasted for two years, applied to no other lines of insurance.

The clear intent by Republicans was to force health premiums as high as possible, to make the Affordable Care Act look as bad as possible. Republicans pretended the federal government could provide the regulation, but the law didn't give the government that power. Insurance regulation long has been a state-by-state issue.

Since Hager voted to strip the Office of Insurance Regulation of power in such a key area, one question he ought to get next week is: Why should you be Florida's insurance commissioner if you didn't want the current one to do his job? Floridians need to hear about policy, not whether Bondi "knows Bill Hager personally," as she said last month in expressing support for him.

Policy Example 1: Florida allows property insurers to seek rate increases of up to 15 percent without a full hearing. Such a hearing into a company's finances might show regulators that the increase isn't justified.

This month, the state's fourth-largest home insurer filed for an increase of 14.9 percent. The hike would apply to former customers of state-run Citizens. That's a big bump to undergo a comparatively cursory review. Many companies come near that rate ceiling. Should the Legislature lower it?

Policy Example 2: Citizens wants to give customers an unspecified discount for allowing the company to manage a claim, down to the hiring of a contractor. Is that a good idea?

Policy Example 3: Insurers want Florida to make it harder for policyholders to assign benefits to repair companies. Is that a good idea?

This week, McCarty said he would delay his departure until 45 days after Scott and the Cabinet pick a successor. That pick should be someone who will keep the industry honest. Consumers should have no question about that.

Randy Schultz is the former editorial page editor of The Palm Beach Post. He also blogs for Boca Raton Magazine. randyshultz@bellsouth.net