U.S. Rep. Martha Roby’s opponents in Tuesday’s Republican primary want to turn the contest into a referendum – not just on Roby, but what they see as problems with Washington’s governing structure.

U.S. Capitol at Night (Photo: Fuse, Getty Images/Fuse)

“She has a failed voting record,” says Becky Gerritson, a consultant and Tea Party activist challenging the three-term Montgomery Republican, citing votes on items such as the Highway Bill and the Farm Bill. “Her record is worse than the Democrat she replaced.”

Bob Rogers, an electrician from Montgomery, says he’s running against “career politicians.”

“We need someone who’s going to stand up to Congress and stand up to interest groups, and I will be a more assertive voice,” he said.

Roby, for her part, welcomes those debate terms, accusing Gerritson of putting more stock in ideological scores compiled by “outside Washington groups” than the practical needs of her southeastern Alabama district.

“I’m focused on continuing to do my job,” she said in a phone interview. “I think that’s what people want. I am a conservative who wants to solve problems, not someone who wants to cause problems for conservatives.”

The winner will face Democrat Nathan Mathis in the general election.

As with most primaries, the candidates differ less over ideology than execution. Roby, Gerritson, and Rogers are all anti-abortion, pro-gun rights and anti-Obamacare, with an approach to immigration issues focused mainly on security.

Buy Photo U.S. Rep Martha Roby meets with representatives of the VA hospitals and Alabama hospitals to discuss how to build a network of community health care providers to improve services offered to Alabama veterans on Thursday morning January 21, 2016 in Montgomery, Ala. (Photo: Mickey Welsh / Advertiser)

No one could mistake the Second Congressional District for a blue area, and any shades of purple are subtle. Embracing Montgomery and the Wiregrass – and shaped like an iron holding a picket sign – the region has been a Republican stronghold for decades. Only one Democrat – former Montgomery mayor Bobby Bright – has represented the area in Congress in the last 50 years.

Buy Photo Becky Gerritson (Photo: Shannon Heupel/Advertiser file)

In a phone interview, Roby stressed her work within the district, including efforts to maintain Maxwell-Gunter Air Force base in Montgomery and Fort Rucker in Dale County, as well as ongoing efforts to investigate and correct abuse and dysfunction in the Veterans Affairs Administration. In early February, the U.S. House of Representatives passed her bill to require the VA to identify and intervene in hospitals with failing records. Roby has pushed for greater scrutiny of the system and the removal of personnel.

Bob Rogers (Photo: PATRICIAWHITE)

“What we uncovered in the Central Alabama VA was an absolute disaster,” she said. “Now the entire chain of command has been replaced. That’s a sign of progress.”

Gerritson argues the firings are “not good enough for what these veterans have gone through,” and like Roby wants to see additional improvements in services, like bringing more doctors into the system.

“I don’t have a perfect plan,” she said. “I would be open to looking at everything.”

Gerritson’s strongest criticism of Roby come on votes taken on federal bills, including the $305 billion Highway Bill last December and the Farm Bill in 2014. Both votes have drawn tea party anger, with some groups accusing Congress putting unnecessary projects in the items. The Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank, criticized the Highway Bill for failing to “reform the bloated, unsustainable federal highway and transit system.”

“Taxes are collected and are allowed to be collected for roads and bridges,” Gerritson said. “But with a transportation program like that that is full of all kinds of non-necessary items, that’s where we draw the line.”

Gerritson also critiques the Farm Bill for not pulling out food stamps.

Roby says the services provided in both bills are critical to agricultural and infrastructure needs in the district, with the highway bill funding being particularly important for local officials. The representative criticizes votes taken for ideological purity.

“Some put other agendas ahead of the local interest in Alabama, and quite frankly, common sense,” she said.

Roby also suggested that votes on budgets, as graded by some groups, would have a detrimental effect on the district, particularly the military bases.

“If I had voted the way these outsider Washington groups wanted me to, I would have voted to cut $35 billion from military budgets in 2014 and 2015,” she said.

Rogers said he entered the race over the passage of the Affordable Care Act and says he wants to “cut the strings of government” from insurance.

“If you have it in the private sector and in the free market, that’s going to give everyone an equal playing field on which to compete,” he said.

Roby and Gerritson also favor a repeal of the Affordable Care Act, although like Rogers they have few specifics of what would replace the program for the estimated 195,000 Alabamians who signed up for or renewed a plan through the federal health insurance exchange in the most recent round of enrollment.

“I certainly would not want to throw them under the bus,” said Gerritson, while saying that Congress should explore block grants to the states and free market principles for health care.

Roby said there would be a “grace period” for those in ACA plans should a repeal take place. She praised a proposal from U.S. Rep. Tom Price, R-Ga., that would repeal the Affordable Care Act and replace it with a mix of tax credits and reduced benefits. Critics have said that plan Could add to the federal deficit.

The candidates also want to see efforts toward immigration reform that go toward security. Roby said in the interview that her priority was “securing the border” before addressing any other immigration reform. Gerritson also prefers a border-first approach to the issue. Rogers said he wants a “humane way of removing (undocumented immigrants), documenting them . . . put on the fast train so to speak” to determine status.

Roby has a significant fundraising advantage over both her opponents. From Jan. 1 to Feb. 10, she raised $853,998, with a little more than half that total coming from political action committees. She ended with $678,453 on hand.

Gerritson raised $146,418 from July 1 to Feb. 10during the same period, finishing with $2,351 on hand. About two-thirds of Gerritson's funds came from individual donations.

Rogers, funding his campaign mostly through loans, finished with about $7,110 on hand.

Read or Share this story: http://on.mgmadv.com/211QGIw