Photo by: Rick Danzl/The News-Gazette State House 102nd District candidates Brad Halbrook , left, Jim Acklin, and Randy Peterson, right, during the Active Senior Republican meeting at the Champaign Public Library Monday Feb. 1, 2016.

If there's any place in Illinois where the name Bruce Rauner is golden, it ought to be in the 102nd House District where there's a three-way Republican race for a state representative seat.

In the 2014 gubernatorial election Rauner got just over 71 percent of the vote in the largely rural district that includes all or parts of six counties: Champaign, Douglas, Vermilion, Shelby, Moultrie, Macon and Edgar.

In only five other House districts did Rauner do better than that. (Tops was the 109th District southeast of Effingham where Rauner got 74.9 percent over Gov. Pat Quinn)

And only one of the three candidates in the 102nd race — Brad Halbrook — has Rauner's backing.

He's playing it to the hilt.

At a candidate forum last week in Champaign, Halbrook said he supports every facet of Rauner's Turnaround Agenda, and when asked about a particular issue — property taxes, for example — he simply stated Rauner's position.

"The governor's language has been filed," Halbrook said. "It is a freeze and some other components to give relief to the local units of government. It allows voters to have more control of how their dollars are spent. This is a great piece of legislation. It is what the governor needs to deal with the property tax issue."

Left unstated were some of the more controversial parts of Rauner's property tax relief proposal, allowing local governments to get out of collective bargaining.

Even when asked about the lack of any higher education funding this year and the impact on the nearby Eastern Illinois University, Halbrook adopted the Rauner line.

"I'm concerned about Eastern and all our university systems," he said, adding that "there are some issues that need to be addressed," such as procurement reform.

Rauner's support for Halbrook also comes with money, and not just the $10,800 that the governor and his wife have given Halbrook's campaign. He's also received about $30,000 from the Rauner-backed Liberty Principles PAC for television and radio advertising, and has received campaign contributions from Rauner allies around the state.

Halbrook's two opponents, Randy Peterson of Paris and Jim Acklin of Ogden, have to tread carefully on the topic of the governor.

When asked if they support his Turnaround Agenda, they criticized only minor facets of it, and they adopted a less autocratic tone regarding the ongoing budget impasse.

"We've got to get in there and make some compromises," said Peterson. "In the end we've got to come together and fix the state of Illinois."

Acklin's best dig at Halbrook is only tangentially aimed at Rauner.

"I won't be beholden to any special interest group or political benefactor," Acklin said of Halbrook. "I'll be an independent voice for central Illinois, and I'll make decisions based on what's best for the residents in that district."

That's as close as anyone's going to come to criticizing Rauner in the 102nd District.

Acklin endorsement

The Business Empowered PAC, a subsidiary of the Champaign County Chamber of Commerce, has endorsed Acklin in the 102nd District.

"Jim Acklin has a proven track record of being a steward of taxpayer dollars, balancing budgets and cutting property taxes," said Garret Hill, a spokesman for the committee. "Jim Acklin will build consensus on major issues and will help foster a pro-business, pro-jobs environment that makes Champaign County strong."

Acklin has piled up a number of local endorsements, including the Champaign County Republican Party and former Gov. Jim Edgar, who once lived in the county.

Shimkus scared?

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is backing U.S. Rep. John Shimkus, R-Collinsville, in his 15th Congressional District primary against state Sen. Kyle McCarter of Lebanon.

"Plain and simple, John Shimkus is an effective conservative who is laser-focused on governing. We are honored to add our endorsement in partnership with the Illinois Chamber of Commerce," said Maggie Sheely of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.

It's the latest in a flurry of rare primary endorsements of the veteran lawmaker.

McCarter clearly has Shimkus worried. The 10-term congressman last week started running a negative ad, ironically accusing McCarter of being part of the Washington establishment because his campaign is being funded by the Washington-based Club for Growth.

"It's Washington versus you. Washington insiders picked Kyle McCarter," the TV ad says. "In Springfield he sides with the Chicago machine, voting to urge Congress to create Obamacare, and funding Planned Parenthood. Kyle McCarter doesn't even live in our district. John Shimkus does. He's fought Barack Obama, voting 66 times to limit or repeal Obamacare. It's Kyle McCarter and the Washington insiders, or John Shimkus and you."

But Shimkus is being financed by Washington insiders too, both in his campaign contributions and in independent expenditures. Last week the American College of Radiology Association PAC reported a $24,237 independent expenditure on Shimkus' behalf.

Tom Kacich is a News-Gazette reporter and columnist. His column appears on Sundays and Wednesdays. He can be reached at 351-5221 or at kacich@news-gazette.com.