A Donald Trump supporter defended Trump's offensive tweet smearing Heidi Cruz’ looks as “satire” and as part of Trump's "man's man" awesome masculinity.

Leave it to Fox News to cover Trump’s latest round of misogyny as a Trump vs. Cruz campaign debate – as opposed to a real look into Trump’s record toward women. So we had David Wohl who recently defended Trump by saying, “Donald Trump’s a man’s man and that’s what his followers love about him.”

“Is there any doubt about that?” Wohl now asked, after host Sandra Smith read the original quote. Then he also defended Trump's tweet as satire, also, presumably, of the manly man kind.

WOHL: Donald Trump responded with satire. That was a satirical tweet of his wife next to Heidi Cruz. What if he had made the tweet his beautiful wife and the possible future First Man of the United States, Bill Clinton, with a smirk on his face? Would people have been outraged? No, they would have laughed and moved on and that’s what people need to do with this one.

The other guest, Cruz supporter Katie Pavlich wasn’t buying it.

PAVLICH: Come on. …It’s not funny and I find it, again, amazing how Donald Trump supporters like David continue to condone behavior that’s easily condemnable and when it’s the right thing to do, supporters like David here can’t actually get on the right side of things.

If you ask me, the anti-Trump ad that started it all, which showed a GQ photo of a nude Melania Trump and questioned whether she was fit to be First Lady, was entirely fair game. This was not private behavior but part of her career. The ad was made for conservative Utah voters and raised an issue about Melania Trump's public morality that they might well care about. Trump’s response, however, did nothing to actually defend his wife. He took a mean-spirited, gratuitous swipe at Heidi Cruz with a photo chosen to make her look unattractive. In other words, it was childish retaliation aimed at Cruz' looks.

But Pavlich seemed more interested in emphasizing that Cruz “had nothing to do with the ad” and that when he found out about it, praised Melania Trump.

However, Pavlich did delve somewhat into Trump’s history of attacking women – which Wohl dismissed as all part of Trump’s sense of good fun.

PAVLICH: Donald Trump then responded by again proving that he only cares about what women look like. He again repeated his track record of going after the wives of candidates. Let’s not forget that Heidi Cruz is not one of Donald Trump’s first targets here. Jeb Bush’s wife, of course, was another target of Donald Trump’s inappropriate, immature and frivolous attacks. This proves once again that Donald Trump is un-presidential, unfit for the presidency and he should be making better decisions and people like you should be condemning – it’s not funny. WOHL: If you don’t have a sense of humor, then you shouldn’t be in this game. It was a satirical tweet. We know Heidi Cruz is a beautiful, smart woman and he had a tweet with her smirking next to his wife to sort of zing back at Ted Cruz for what he perceived to be a horrible naked picture of his wife in an ad in Utah caucuses, just before the caucuses took place and knowing full well that the Mormon people are very offended by that kind of thing. I think you guys are blowing it up to be far more than it is.

Yet neither host Sandra Smith nor Fox News contributor Pavlich mentioned Trump’s continued, sexist attacks on their colleague, Megyn Kelly, the regular host of the show.

I’d say his behavior toward her is quite relevant to Wohl’s claim that Trump was merely responding to an ad and being satirical, wouldn’t you?

Watch everybody ignore the elephant in the room below, from the March 24 The Kelly File.