By J. Peder Zane

Linda and Gary Childs go almost everywhere with their “little girl.”

The retirees, from West Boylston, Massachusetts, love to parade 3-year-old Chino down busy streets in her stroller. They take her to restaurants dressed in her fur-lined vest or polo hoodie where “she sits in her own chair, very polite.”

But their favorite place may be the seashore, where Chino wears sunglasses and one of her four beach dresses while lounging in a chair embroidered with her name.

“Chino gives us so many laughs and so much love,” Linda Childs, a 67-yearold retired schoolteacher, said of the 12-pound Chihuahua-pug mix. “She just makes everything better.”

The Childses are unusual in some respects. Retirement remains a time when many Americans move away from things they have to paint, feed or nurture. Only 41 percent of Americans 65 and older live in households with pets, compared with 68 percent of those 45 to 54 and 76 percent of 18- to 24-year-olds, according to a 2014 survey by Mintel, a market research agency.

The golden years may have less bark, bite and meow, but in the last decade new scientific studies, evolving attitudes about pets and changing family structures have reshaped the relationship between retirees and animals, even if much of the new research is not universally accepted.

Erika Ribaudo, a senior adviser at A Place for Mom, which helps about 200,000 families a year find living arrangements for retirees, noted a growing demand for pets by retirees and the willingness of senior living communities to accept them.

“As recently as 2005 there were very few communities that accepted pets,” Ribaudo said. “Now, probably 40 percent of them are pet-friendly, and that number is growing. Science tells us that pets make people feel so much better, and more clients just don’t want to give up their beloved family member. Today, they don’t have to.”

For retirees, smaller is better. Younger pet owners are more likely to own dogs than cats — by a roughly 60-40 split. This gap begins to narrow with age, so that the 65-and-older crowd is slightly more likely to own cats than dogs.

There are no definitive statistics on the breeds of dogs favored by various age groups, but the American Kennel Club suggests that less active retirees — as well as those living in apartments or who travel a lot — consider smaller breeds like Chihuahuas or Dachshunds. It is easier to trip over smaller dogs, but it is harder for them to knock down their owners.

As more Americans live alone and families have fewer children, “their attachment to pets is deepening,” said Hal Herzog, a psychology professor at Western Carolina University and author of “Some We Love, Some We Hate, Some We Eat: Why It’s So Hard to Think Straight About Animals.” “They think of them as people, and they are making greater emotional and financial investments in their pets.” Retiree pet owners seem especially devoted as they buck older Americans’ tendency to give up pets.

“As boomers become empty nesters, they look for other things to nurture,” said Richard Rosso, a certified financial planner in Houston. “I’ve been in this business for 26 years, and during the last seven to 10 years I have noticed that the retirement dream for many clients is still drinking a piña colada on the beach, but now they see a Lab next to them.”

Since the average U.S. pet owner spends more than $1,600 per year on a dog and $1,100 on a cat, Rosso said, he now includes pet budget lines in his financial plans for retirees.

The growing belief that pets are not just good, but good for you, may make ownership more appealing to retirees. Some studies find that pet ownership can help reduce blood pressure, triglycerides and cholesterol while increasing one-year survival rates after a heart attack, according to Alan Beck, a researcher who is the director of the Center for the Human-Animal Bond at Purdue University.