Packers running back Eddie Lacy, who had 85 yards rushing and a TD against the Bears, is also trying to get better at his pass blocking. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Green Bay — Eddie Lacy is so good there is not much for him to do to get any better.

The Green Bay Packers running back is now reliable with his pass protection, tried one diet experimentation over the summer that was short-lived and had some conversations about how to start the season, but otherwise the mission of this man is to pretty much keep doing what he has been doing and not change a thing.

And if you follow football at all, you know how uncommon it is to think that way, because usually the player is always talking about getting better every day.

With Lacy, he's on top now — so much so that when his position coach was asked how he could make him better, he shook off the suggestion.

"My deal is just to point him in the right direction and let him go," said running backs coach Sam Gash. "Get out of the way of greatness."

Nimble feet. Graceful balance. Atlas hands. The power to run over the front line of a defense and the flexibility to spin and kick out past the second.

But just because Lacy has arrived does not mean the work is done. In fact, staying at the top can be harder than the climb up. So Lacy is looking for the balance between trying some new things and staying true to old ways.

Fast start: One of the things Lacy mentioned as a goal was to start out this season faster, and he was content with his performance at Chicago last week in the season opener when he had a lot of good reads, kept his pad level low and when he got tackled, rarely fell backward.

What he did not care about was his 3.0 yards-per-carry average last September, well below his other monthly averages of 5.1 in October, 4.9 in November and 5.2 in December. That part of Lacy has not changed. He still doesn't look at stats; he never studies who leads the NFL in rushing.

"When I speak it is never in terms of actual numbers," said Lacy. "I just felt like I could have done more. Or should have done more."

A new diet: With that on his mind, Lacy did try for the first time a whole foods and plant-based diet plan for a month in the off-season, which was completely out of character because he doesn't do any supplements ordinarily.

"I just don't like putting stuff into my body," said Lacy. "I don't know what it is and I don't know if there's any long-term effects. I'm just not big on taking supplements no matter what they are."

How does he fuel up, then, for such a physically demanding role? Does he eat protein several times a day or...

"I don't know...I just eat...normal!" he bellowed.

In fact, the coaches talked to Lacy in training camp, as they do all the players, about eating a certain way, said offensive coordinator Edgar Bennett.

"This is a marathon," said Bennett. "You want to do everything that you can control to stay healthy, to make sure you practice and stay on the field to help the team.

"He's headed the right way. It's about longevity and being able to last the entire season."

It seems like everyone wants the prototypical running back — the Ahman Green-type with the 4% body fat — but none of Lacy's coaches were critical of him in any way publicly.

"He had a great camp in terms of being available and actually getting good work in," said Gash. "He took every rep I had scripted for him, so I'm happy. Very happy."

Lacy just probably won't go back on the plant diet again.

"It wasn't that good. It was a complete 180 from the way I am used to eating," said Lacy, making a face. "It was tough. I eat steaks, chicken. To cut it off and eat just plant-based stuff, it was tough."

At 5 feet 11 inches and 234 pounds he uses his body to punish the souls who try to stand in his way, and that punch isn't going to come from a kale and beet salad alone.

"I've never tackled him live because we try not to go live on Eddie in practice, but we give him a little 'thud' here and there and man, he's solid," said safety Morgan Burnett. "He's a hard runner. It's going to take more than one guy to bring Eddie down."

Pass pro: The one part of his game that has caught up to his dominant rushing — he has 2,402 yards in 32 games — is his pass protection. For the last two decades, all Green Bay running backs come to learn that they have to protect the quarterback first.

"All young running backs, when they first get in to the league, that's the first thing they really have to get in tune with," said Bennett. "The blocking concepts."

"If you're not blocking, you're not playing," said Lacy.

So he's worked at it.

"You can be a great blocker — but sometimes you may be a little too far inside, or, you didn't meet him far enough from the quarterback," said Lacy. "There's always little things that you can critique. I don't put a limitation on myself because I don't want to ...feel as though I can't get any better than I already am."

True to himself: Everything else about Lacy remains the same from the day he walked in as a spirited rookie. That's his way of dismissing the pressure that comes with such early success. The cartoon watching, the laughter in the locker room, the lightening of the serious mood, he's the same guy.

After buying his parents a new home to ease the pain of all they lost in Hurricane Katrina, Lacy can't part with that 1995 Chevy Caprice even though he now drives a Corvette Stingray, because it's the first car he ever had. So it is home, with his brother.

And he hasn't upgraded his Twitter handle — Lil_Eazy_Ana_42 — to something more formal, and maybe marketable, like his real name. When he joined Twitter as a redshirt freshman at Alabama. He picked the nickname because he liked a Lil Wayne song with lyrics that said, 'I'm the man of my land, call it Lil-Weezy-ana.'

"I changed 'Weezy' to 'Eazy.' I thought it was cool at the time. Different," said Lacy.

Lacy also drowns out the noise of the outside world by having only two motivating factors — making his family proud and not letting his teammates down.

"I don't want to be the reason something bad happens," said Lacy. "I give 100% and I don't want to fumble and put us in a bad situation because that's on me."

Otherwise, this is his career. Other opinions don't matter. On Lacy's Twitter bio, he chooses in the limited space there to say that he is living "MY dream."

"My whole thing is, I'm doing this. I have great parents, a great family behind me, but I'm out here doing this for me," Lacy said. "This is what I want to do. If one day I wake up and I don't want to do it no more, I'm not going to do it no more because such-and-such wants me to do it."

So Lacy doesn't put out well-worn sports clichés about getting better. He hasn't studied the moves of other running backs to improve his own. He has it made, and he knows it, but in a serious moment, he asks that his demeanor not be misinterpreted.

"I think what's misunderstood about me is that people feel like because I don't watch football or follow the sport, that I don't like what I do," said Lacy. "Or, I'm just doing it because I'm good at it.

"But that's definitely not the case. Every day I go out and I play with everything that I have.

"And I give everything I have for my teammates."

That's what drives the man who already has arrived.