Brevard Medical City Opens, Space Coast Healthcare Facility Construction Booming

By Space Coast Daily // August 16, 2015

MH WILLIAMS seeing strong growth

BREVARD COUNTY, FLORIDA – Healthcare construction has always been a favorite with the building and lending industries. As the Chicago commercial real estate strategy firm of Jones Lang LaSalle once commented, medical offices are “the investment darlings.”

Although uncertainty over the ramifications of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) did temporarily curb the appetite for more of these “investment darlings,” after the dust began to settle with the ACA, the reality is that healthcare will need to accommodate many more patients – about 32 million more – and that the aging of the Baby Boomer population will also result in significantly greater need for medical facilities.

Thus, the building boom is back on with this segment of the real estate market.

“Many health care systems as well as individual physicians have deferred capital plans due to uncertainty surrounding the roll-out of the Affordable Care Act, but it is picking up again, now that there is more clarity on the direction of healthcare,” said Michael Williams, Sr., president of MH Williams Construction, the largest commercial builder in Brevard County.

“We are seeing strong growth opportunities in the medical industry and are continually working to ensure low-cost delivery that meets the present and future needs of this fast-changing market. Stay tuned, as we have a few exciting projects coming up in the next several weeks that we will be excited to announce.”

UPSCALE DEVELOPMENT

Running out of room is a fact of life in busy medical and dental practices. When primary care physician and founder of Suntree Internal Medicine Dr. Abe Hardoon ran out of office space for a third time in less than 10 years, he decided to take matters into his own hands and create a setting that would allow him plenty of expansion opportunities and also promote healing through its environment.

The result is Brevard Medical City, where the new building for Suntree Internal Medicine is Phase One of five and the keystone of a 29-acre complex on Wickham Road Hardoon and his staff moved into the new 31,000-square-foot, two-story building this June.

The second part of Phase One, currently under construction, is a 15,000-square-foot diagnostic center that will include MRI.

The upscale development will feature 35-foot royal palms lining the main boulevard, fiber optics throughout the property, a six-plus acre lake, fountains, benches, paver walkways, a lighted one-mile jogging/walking trail open for community use, a sophisticated security system and even charging stations for electric cars.

Also under construction is Phase Two, a 46,000-square-foot complex of medical/profession/retail office condominium space.

Subsequent phases include Chateau Madeleine, a 90-bed adult assisted living facility.

Currently also being considered as part of Brevard Medical City is a retirement community of independent living residences.

With Brevard Medical City, Hardoon has tapped into a vision of medical facility construction that encompasses much more than just bricks and mortars. It transforms health services by integrating them within the community and shaping the experience into one that is appealing, efficient and convenient.

MH WILLIAMS FOCUSED ON BREVARD COUNTY

In business since 1987, MH Williams is headquartered and focused in Brevard County, although the full-service commercial construction firm builds throughout the Southeast.

MH Williams has built the gamut of medical projects, including major hospitals, cosmetic surgery centers, data centers, surgical centers, pharmacies, assisted living facilities, dental facilities, laboratories and pediatrics and orthopedics offices, among others.

Among MH Williams’ vast list of past projects are several for Health First at corporate and service delivery facilities in Viera, Palm Bay and Rockledge, the Wuesthoff Medical Arts Center, the Lawler Medical Building, Osler Medical Pavilion, the Medi-Share Corporate Office, Melbourne Kidney Center, Regency Medical Park II, Sheridan Medical Building, ENT Ambulatory & Surgical Center, Pediatrics of Brevard and Central OB-GYN, Wickham Dental Care, Schumacher Orthodontics, Sedaros Oral Surgery, Vevera Family Dental, Alzheimer’s Care Facility of Viera, Buena Vida Estates, Cedar Creek Life Center, Century Oaks and Crane Creek ACLF Apartments.

MH Williams also worked with Brevard Zoo to build its veterinary clinic, as well as its meerkat exhibit and expansion of the boardwalk and the Africa section of the park.

The company is also working with the Brevard Neighborhood Development Coalition, or BNDC, to develop Palm Bay’s Evans Center, a community center that will provide healthy food options, job training opportunities and a clinic run by the Brevard Health Alliance.

It is not the first time MH Williams has worked with both organizations. With BNDC, the company constructed in the Booker T. Washington Neighborhood, Melbourne’s poorest community, both a learning center for the children of the community (the DOCK) and Greater Heights, an affordable apartment community for the working poor and the elderly.

“We also have a great working relationship with Brevard Health Alliance,” said vice president Randy Trent.

“We’ve worked together on interior renovations for three of their locations and are excited to partner with them for the Evans Center.”

MH Williams’ Medi-Share office expansion for Christian Care Ministry in Melbourne reflects the fast pace at which the medical construction industry moves because of the explosive growth of healthcare.

“We built Medi-Share’s 41,000-square-foot office building in 2014 and now they are ready to expand by 13,000 more square feet and we will be working with them again,” said Williams.

“We break ground on their new expansion in August and are thrilled to be working with them.”

MORE EFFICIENT SPACES

For Dr. Sadesh Kumar’s Wickham Dental Care in Melbourne, MH Williams recently completed a 5,000-square-feet state-of-the-art dental facility that allocated plenty of opportunity for growth.

“One of the trends in the medical industry right now is building more efficient spaces, with plans and room to expand,” said project manager Marcus Ingeldsen.

“That’s what we did with Wickham Dental Care. They have a brand new dental facility with room to build out an additional 1,200-square-feet of office space.”

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free