The 2014 mid-term elections have come and gone. Republicans maintained control of the House and gained seven Senate seats giving them Senate majority. These elections have left Republicans feeling hopeful and invigorated, Democrats feeling deflated and nervous, and voters feeling all of the above. Voters cast ballots based on fear over the nation’s future and their perceptions over who was at fault for everything from the economic downturn to the Ebola threat. Ideologically, both parties are seen as the antithesis of one another so the issues themselves have become irrelevant in the face of party loyalty.

This environment has gridlocked our political system and has made it more difficult than ever to pass legislation or take action that does not have overwhelming bipartisan support. Unfortunately, support for renewable energy has been caught in the crossfire of this political environment, leaving supporters that are almost exclusively Democratic and liberal. In order to see the full-scale deployment of renewable energy, the dialogue surrounding renewables will have to be shifted to incorporate issues and values that receive bi-partisan support. In a polarized climate, the economy remains a top priority of Republicans and Democrats alike, so shifting the focus of the clean energy dialogue to the economic benefits could begin the depolarization of support for renewable energy.

ADVERTISEMENT

The increase in political partisanship is not merely a perception, but a real ideological shift. A Pew Center Research poll reports that political polarization has increased dramatically over the past decade. In 1994, the spectrum of political ideology showed that “23 percent of Republicans were more liberal than the median Democrat; while 17 percent of Democrats were more conservative than the median Republican”. In 2014 these percentages are drastically different with 4 percent of Republicans and 5 percent of Democrats more conservative or liberal than the median of the other party. Republicans are shifting farther to the right and Democrats farther to the left. As a result, there are fewer ideological similarities between the two parties and an undertone of mistrust as the parties view the other’s ideas as a threat to the nation’s prosperity and future.

Thus far, this political division has resulted in a one-dimensional conversation surrounding renewable energy. “Climate change”, “renewables” and “green” are words that are almost exclusively associated with liberals and Democrats. Conversely, “coal”, “gas” and “oil” are associated with conservatives and Republicans. Republicans view Democratic support for renewable energy as a threat to businesses and jobs, while Democrats see the lack of support for renewables as a threat to the nation’s energy security, environment and future. The dialogue is black and white as Democrats are seen as renewable energy allies and Republicans as renewable energy enemies.

The continued association between renewable energy and climate change undermines the other benefits and further alienates more Republican-leaning voters. It is naïve to assume that support for renewable energies must always stem from a belief that climate change is real and poses an immediate threat. There are appeals for renewable energy that extend well beyond the environmental benefits and those need to become the focus of the renewable energy dialogue.

Regardless of political affiliation, Americans want a secure and stable future. Much of this security comes from a stable and growing economy that ensures they can pay their mortgage and bills. A September 2014 Gallup poll revealed that 86% of Democratic voters and 91 percent of Republicans rate the “economy” as one of their top three priorities, in addition to the “availability of good jobs.” However in sharp contrast, “climate change” was prioritized by 61 percent of Democrats and only 19% of Republicans. The appeal for renewable energies will never achieve bi-partisan support if the benefits continue to only be primarily associated with climate change and the environment—issues that have proven to be highly partisan.

Renewable energies such as wind, solar, biomass, and hydropower have the potential to provide Americans with an industry that can bring greater security and stability to the nation’s economy. These energy sources are by nature inexhaustible and completely based in the United States, making them immune to resource shortages and foreign conflict and eliminating price spikes to consumers. Additionally, it means investment and job opportunities in the United States. The Union of Concern Scientists report states that a 25 percent renewable energy standard by 2025 has the potential to create more than 200,000 jobs and would result in “$263.4 billion in new capital investment for renewable energy technologies, $13.5 billion in new landowner income biomass production and/or wind land lease payments, and $11.5 billion in new property tax revenue for local communities”. Though renewable energy sources can play a fundamental role in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and environmental damage, they can also play an essential role in reducing costs to consumers, creating jobs, and increasing investment in innovation, technology and infrastructure.

The newly elected, Republican-controlled Congress forebodes continued stalling on government-initiated clean energy progress over the next few years. In the meantime, shifting the dialogue to focus on issues with bipartisan support, such as the economy and job creation, is one of the few ways that support for renewable energy will be depolarized and the United States will see the full-scale deployment of a clean energy economy. To develop a clean energy economy there still needs to be significant investments made in technology, infrastructure and the regulatory framework, but removing partisan politics is the most important step as finding clean energy solutions helps all Americans, both Democrats and Republicans.

Galatioto is a Stakeholder Engagement associate at the Alliance to Save Energy. She is also a fellow with the Clean Energy Leadership Institute.