WINNIPEG, Manitoba — Two days before Ryan O’Reilly’s reunion in Denver, Carl Soderberg on Monday further proved his value as O’Reilly’s replacement.

Soderberg, if you recall, was acquired by the Avalanche from Boston a day before the Avs traded O’Reilly and Jamie McGinn to Buffalo in June. Soderberg was tagged as Colorado’s No. 2 centerman and would log significant minutes on the power play and penalty kill — while the four young return pieces from the Sabres would become building blocks for the future.

Monday against the Jets at the MTS Centre, Soderberg shined in leading Colorado to another Central Division triumph.

Soderberg scored during a delayed penalty and assisted on Jarome Iginla’s power-play goal in the Avs’ 2-1 win. Both goals from the visitors came in the second period, when the Avs produced 16 shots and overcame a shoddy start in front of goalie Semyon Varlamov (36 saves).

Avs Mailbag: Pose a question for Terry Frei, Mike Chambers

Winnipeg scored its goal with 41.6 seconds remaining on a 6-on-5 attack. About five minutes earlier, Jets leading scorer Blake Wheeler had a shot clang off Varlamov’s right post.

Varlamov was in goal what Soderberg was at the other end: clutch.

“I think we played a strong game,” said the softspoken Soderberg, who logged 17:30 of ice time. “When you get a lead, it’s so much easier. You can stay patient and wait for their mistakes. That’s what we did tonight.”

The visitors improved to 10-3-1 in hockey’s toughest division and 3-0 against the Jets.

Had Winnipeg (21-22-3) won, it would have tied Colorado (23-21-3) with 47 points. Instead, the Avs increased their lead to four points over the Jets and leapfrogged Nashville for the last wild-card playoff position in the Western Conference.

“Four-point games have been good for us so far,” said Avs coach Patrick Roy, referring to divisional games. “We need to continue this.”

Soderberg scored his ninth goal of the season 1:16 into the second penalty on a 6-on-5 attack after the Jets committed a penalty and Varlamov skated off for an extra attacker. Colorado doubled its lead at 19:42 of the period when Iginla took Soderberg’s cross-ice pass and buried a snap shot behind rookie goalie Connor Hellebuyck for the veteran’s 602nd career goal.

“They all feel good,” Iginla said after being asked how 602 felt. “When you get a power-play goal and are able to go into the third 2-0 in a big game, it felt good as a group. In the third, we know what we had to do — a good push and hold them off.”

When Iginla scored, Winnipeg’s Blake Wheeler was serving an interference minor for a blind-side hit on Cody McLeod against the boards. Iginla’s goal — the 184th power-play tally of his career — made him the 18th highest goal-scorer of all time. He was in a tie for Jari Kurri at 601.

The Avalanche was outshot 16-8 in the third period and 37-34 overall, but it recorded 21 of the game’s 29 blocked shots.

Soderberg and wingers Gabe Landeskog and Blake Comeau combined for nine shots.

“Our entire team played really well tonight,” Roy said. “That (Soderderg) line played solid, and I used them a lot in our zone in penalty killing. They had a lot of ice time, and I thought they responded well to that challenge.”

The Avs host Buffalo at the Pepsi Center on Wednesday in the first game between the teams since their big trade last summer.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or @MikeChambers