Fox News contributor and RedState.com editor Erick Erickson has apparently reached his breaking point with the media. Why? Because journalists "have such erections" for President Obama that they won't report on his "latest b.s." Oh.

Here's a brief list of the weird sexual references in Erickson's new post, which is titled "Impeach the President" (he includes the quotes in the title).

"journalists have such erections for everything Barack Obama does"

"You guys soiled your shorts with giddy excitement"

"you’d rather have cocktails … with the President" (the pun on "cock" being "absolutely intended")

"jealously size up the competition in the First Lady"

"wish you too could be a mistress"

"half of MSNBC still wants to have his baby"

"the women over there just want to be his mistress"

Erickson is mad about how the media won't report on a Heritage Foundation blog post that suggests companies will have to swear they didn't cut their workforces to avoid the employer mandate provisions of Obamacare. It's not exactly the First Amendment/illegal move that Erickson suggests — the rule is meant to actually keep companies from cutting their workforces in order to avoid the recently postponed mandate for employer coverage.

But maybe I'm only writing that because of my deep-seated desire to have sex with Barack Obama. This is Erickson's contention, this sputtering argument that reporters want so badly to sleep with Obama — in a literal sense? I mean, does he actually think they want to sleep with him? — that they will excuse his many horrible actions in a way that they would not excuse President Bush's. (Or, as Erickson ironically dubs the former president: "George Chimpy McBushitler Halliburton.")

I'm not worried about my son becoming gay. I'm worried about him living in a society that doesn't recognize it as a sin. — Erick Erickson (@EWErickson) May 23, 2013

This is actually pretty embarrassing. Erick Erickson's rage turns him into a fourth-grader on the schoolyard, saying the worst possible things he can think of, which are all about gay sex. The worst thing he can think of to impugn the bias he perceives in the media is that reporters want to sleep with Barack Obama. Erickson has regularly opined about the sinfulness of homosexuality (as at right). Here, the implication of homosexuality is part and parcel with his attempts at insulting the media for their closeness to the president. The sin of not seeing Obama as he sees Obama is akin to the sin of being gay.

Maybe what Erickson is trying to do is throw the sort of bomb that Erick Erickson likes to throw: an incendiary headline (from which he backtracks at the end), horrible suggestions about sexuality that he knows will rile up his opponents.

Or maybe he was trying his hand at erotica. If so, a little surprised at the same-sex emphasis.