Buy Photo <p>Term-limited after serving as the District 4 councilman since 2007, Troxell is an associate professor of mechanical engineering at Colorado State University. Troxell, 58, is seen as a conservative candidate who has received staunch support from the city’s business community.</p> (Photo: Coloradoan library)Buy Photo

A leader brings people together.

The next mayor of Fort Collins should be our Collaborator in Chief.

He should reflect the views of his community. He should do more listening than talking.

Of the three candidates to be mayor of Fort Collins — Ward Luthi, Mike Pruznick and Wade Troxell — the Editorial Board endorses Troxell for his willingness to listen, collaborate and position us for continued success in the years to come.

His positions on key issues demonstrates a long view that will serve Fort Collins well.

From widening of Interstate 25 (the city should be involved) to attainable housing (he supports a review of you-plus-two and limited fee waivers for nonprofits building homes) to Colorado State University's on-campus stadium, he is receptive to working with local, regional and state partners.

It's important to note that if elected, both Luthi and Pruznick would work to stop a new football stadium from being built on CSU's campus.

"I don't think the stadium should be built ..." Luthi said. "No longer in the heart of Fort Collins will our iconic view be Horsetooth Rock. Current council has abdicated its responsibility to protect residents' rights … I would act to do everything we could to stop it."

Pruznick spoke of "breaking the stalemate," a tall order when CSU doesn't need permission from the city to build on land it owns. And hardly a perspective that's going to bring the university to the table for a conversation toward the end goal Pruznick seeks.

Said Troxell, who earned his bachelor's, master's and Ph.D. degrees from and is a professor at CSU: "We're inextricably linked. We need to take a look at how important that relationships is. Having more discussions as big projects present themselves. A great university needs a great community, and likewise a great community can have a university."

The moment for CSU to build a new stadium on its campus will never be right. But the decision has not come without an agreement to better listen to neighbors' concerns, via the IGA. We expect Troxell to hold CSU to its commitment to the city and its residents.

Visionary leaders can and do push people out of their comfort zones. And in that respect, Luthi's message resonates with the board.

He believes in a European-style Fort Collins, with lower floors of office buildings housing retail and food services. He wants fewer cars on our roads and better byways for bikes and pedestrians. He supports urban agriculture and recognizes water availability as a critical issue for us in the years to come.

"We have a high quality of life, I think it can be way better," Luthi said.

We are simply concerned one single issue — CSU's stadium — would engage the majority of his time and effort. That a my-way-or-the-highway attitude will burn too many bridges.

We would love to see similar charisma from Troxell.

But it is more important that our next mayor brings people together. We don't need a leader who will not constructively engage with the changes to come in Fort Collins.

The next leader for Fort Collins should inspire, but more importantly must translate our community's aspirations into real action. We believe Troxell is the best candidate to lead Fort Collins forward.

Fort Collins mayoral candidates

•Ward Luthi

•Mike Pruznick

•Wade Troxell

•All registered residents of Fort Collins may vote for the mayoral candidates.

Coming Wednesday

The Editorial Board will publish ballot issue endorsements. To see previous council race endorsements, visit coloradoan.com/opinion.

Read or Share this story: http://noconow.co/1CbHU21