Running back Eddie Lacy gains 65 yards on 20 carries. It was the eighth game this season with 20 or more carries for the rookie. Credit: Rick Wood

By of the

PLAYER OF THE GAME

For years, he's been the resident scapegoat for anything wrong with the Packers' secondary. But all along, the second-longest tenured Packer on the roster has stuck around on heart and guts. And as a core special teams player, cornerback Jarrett Bush earns a dose of redemption every so often on defense. The Super Bowl win over Pittsburgh was one such day. And so was Sunday against the Atlanta Falcons. The eight-year pro broke up a fourth-down pass to Tony Gonzalez with 2 minutes left. And then when Green Bay needed one more stop to ice this 22-21 win, Bush picked off Matt Ryan. Coasting across Lambeau Field — ball in hand — Bush enjoyed his day in the, um, sun. "I felt like I had pretty good defense on him," Bush said on the break-up. "I was pretty stoked when he dropped that ball. I actually knocked his hands down a little bit. ... I thought that was a huge fourth down."

MISSING IN ACTION

The Atlanta Falcons offense in the second half. The Packers' embattled defense deserves credit for delivering late in the game. This Aaron Rodgers-less stretch has been scarred by failures in these exact situations. The Packers couldn't get off the field late against Chicago and Philadelphia at home. They were gashed by the Vikings' run game on a field-goal drive in overtime. Yet Sunday, the Falcons could do nothing in the second half against the Packers' defense. Green Bay forced a trio of three-and-outs in the second half. Mike Neal's sack/fumble that was recovered by Johnny Jolly set up the game-winning touchdown. A run defense that allowed back-to-back 200-yard days shut down Steven Jackson and Jacquizz Rodgers in the second half — the Falcons had just 19 yards on 10 attempts. "I'm very proud of our unit and proud of our team," defensive end B.J. Raji said. "It was a tough game out there. They've got a big back like Steven and a shifty guy like Jacquizz, so it was tough to tackle those guys. The guys behind us and the guys up front did a good job."

WHAT IF ...

The script on this one nearly took a dark turn on Atlanta's final drive. Chances are, wide receiver Harry Douglas didn't get much sleep Sunday night. With 17 seconds to go, Matt Ryan threw a deep ball to Douglas up the left sideline that could have given the Falcons a shot at a game-winning field goal. Douglas dropped the ball. One play later, Bush's interception sealed the Packers win. "They are missed opportunities," Falcons coach Mike Smith said. "We had some chances to make some plays in all three phases and we didn't. ... We just didn't get it done." A catch, a field goal and we're talking about a total late-game collapse by the Packers.

IN CASE YOU MISSED IT

■ M.D. Jennings was benched for Sean Richardson midway through Sunday's game.

■ Tackle Marshall Newhouse was inactive due to flu-like symptoms.

■ Fresh off his Hall of Fame induction, Dave Robinson's name was enshrined at Lambeau Field.

■ Before player introductions, former Packers quarterback Don Majkowski and tight end Paul Coffman were recognized.

■ Jamari Lattimore replaced an injured Brad Jones at inside linebacker only to suffer an injury of his own after two plays.

■ Multiple players inside the locker room said they were surprised by the fans booing throughout the first half.

■ Former Packers receiver Jeremy Ross returned a punt (58 yards) and a kick (98 yards) for touchdowns in Detroit's loss to Philadelphia.

BY THE NUMBERS

66 Receiving yards for Andrew Quarless, a career high for the fourth-year tight end.

8 Games of 20 or more carries for Packers rookie running back Eddie Lacy.

63 Tackles cornerback Tramon Williams has this season, one shy of a career high.

81.8 Matt Ryan's career passer rating against the Packers in five games, going 2-3.

7 Third downs converted by the Packers after getting seven first downs total at Detroit last week.

5.9 Yards per pass attempt for the Falcons.

UP NEXT

Packers (6-6-1) at Cowboys (7-5), 3:25 p.m. Sunday (Fox), Cowboys Stadium

Players were not jumping for joy inside the Packers locker room after beating Atlanta. There's still a lot of work ahead if they're going to push for a playoff spot, starting with the Cowboys on the road. Dallas has been up and down all season. Again. But when they're on, the Cowboys can play with any team in the NFL. Tony Romo has 24 touchdowns and only seven interceptions, spreading the ball out to Dez Bryant, Jason Witten and rookie Terrance Williams.