Soap box graphic (Photo: Provided)

I have been a general medical practitioner in Salinas for the last 36 years and was a doctor in Soledad for one year before I opened my office in Salinas. These 37 years have been unbelievable for me and I can say that it has been my incredibly good fortune to have had this experience.

Over the years there have been many changes in the health care system and it is certainly my opinion that these changes have been mostly destructive and counterproductive to the health care delivery system.

The current system is beyond broken and likely will implode sometime in the near future; both the patients and the health care practitioners have been co-victims of these changes; the larger forces of the government, big insurance companies, and drug companies have rapidly transformed the system to create a Frankenstein’s monster.

I will here try to trace the essential changes that have taken a good health care system and have subjected it to bad changes to finally create the current ugly system that we now have.

The Good

When I started out here in Salinas 36 years ago, the predominant type of primary care doctor was the solo independent practitioner. There was no relationship between the doctor and either Medicare or the big insurance companies. The patients came to see the doctor and experienced the healthy doctor-patient relationship that was dominated by professional ethics.

The doctor related to the patient in a way that was satisfying to the patient and to the doctor alike; it was a special bond. At the end of the encounter, the patient paid the doctor for his or her services and was able to afford the care; the patient then went to the pharmacy and gave the prescription to an independent pharmacist who also had a professional relationship with the patient. The pharmacist filled the prescription and the patient paid a reasonable amount for the medication. The patient left the pharmacy and went home and then sent a copy of the doctor’s bill to their insurance company or to Medicare for possible reimbursement.

Finally, if the patient was actually sick enough to be admitted to the hospital, they were able to get good care and to come home and then to get a bill from the hospital that was affordable. In this system, both Medicare and the big insurance companies played a very peripheral role and did not control the system.

The Bad

Several years ago, the private insurance companies began to make a power play to take over the health care system. They saw a tremendous potential for making large returns on their investment.

At the same time, the federal government bureaucracy also decided to make a power play on the health care system. It is the nature of bureaucracies to seek power and this is what the medicare bureaucracy did over the past several years; the large insurance companies took over control of the health care dollar by collecting large premiums from patients and then by setting themselves up as the agency that determines how the collected health care dollar would be distributed.

It is not surprising then that the net result of this process led to the decreased availability of services to patients and lower reimbursements to the people who actually deliver the health care. The health insurance companies were the big winners of this transformation as they became both the controllers of the health care system and the primary economic beneficiary. The losers were both the patients and the health care practitioners.

On the medicare side, the mandate of computers for all practitioners led to a boon for venture capitalists who rapidly produced computer systems for the health care facilities; regardless of their quality these computer systems were forced upon the health care practitioners – both physicians and nurses – who were not adequately trained to used them. As a result, the computer system became an impediment to health care rather that a valuable tool.

The Ugly

The final result of this process is a system in which the doctor-patient relationship has broken down to the detriment of both the physician and the patient; medical-professional ethics which defined excellent practice has been replaced by business ethics that defines maximal profits.

However, the profits are not being generated for the doctors or nurses but rather for the businesses that now run the health care system; the reason for this is that the continued pressure of lowering reimbursements to practitioners that was driven by the large insurance companies and medicare led to the situation in which physician practices became insolvent and needed to be bailed out; they became easy targets for being cannibalized by business groups.

And once the medical practice is taken over by business, it also is under the system of business ethics: the goal is transformed from one that emphasizes the excellent care to one that is focused on the generation of profits for the business.

In addition, the unskillful imposition of computer systems into the doctor-patient relationship and into the nurse-patient relationship has totally disrupted the ability for practitioners to provide good health care to the patient. Too much of the time of the practitioners is taken up by slow and unwieldy computer systems and this leaves less time for the practitioner to attend to the needs of the patient.

The Future – the Second Coming

In the aftermath of the First World War, William Butler Yates wrote a poem designed to convey the confusion the world at that time. Yates was also concerned with the possibility of a very disturbing future, thus he ended his poem with a chilling image of things to come.

My fear is that Yates’ images also apply to the current health care system. Yates poem conveys both the total irrationality of the system and the fear of where this system is going and what beast will be its final incarnation:

“Turning and turning in the widening gyre / The falcon cannot hear the falconer; / Things fall apart, the center cannot hold.

“The darkness drops again but now I know / That twenty centuries of stony sleep / Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle, / And what rough beast, its hour come round at last, / Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?”

Read or Share this story: http://bit.ly/1nyoPv9