In case you missed it, there is an excellent article on the main Policy Watch site today that highlights the unfortunate problems with the new history curriculum financed by the arch-conservative Koch family. The Bill of Rights Institute, funded by the Koch family and whose Board includes Koch employees, received a contract to help develop materials for North Carolina public school teachers to use in a course, required for all students, about America’s founding principles.

As Ian Millhiser, Senior Constitutional Policy Analyst at the Center for American Progress Action Fund and author of the article, notes this could have been a great opportunity for North Carolina students to learn about important areas of American history that are often ignored by high schools. However, rather than present a balanced view, the materials push a clear Koch-sponsored agenda.

They present a selective view of history, exaggerate conflicts that have largely been resolved, emphasize subjects congenial to a conservative worldview and ignore entirely major threads of constitutional law and history. The students who learn from these materials are likely to emerge more skeptical of federal power and more sympathetic to a libertarian view of property rights. They are likely, in other words, to emerge more like Charles and David Koch.

There are many examples of how the Koch brothers’ own political views are represented in the material. The module on property, for instance, focuses on matters of particular concern to well-moneyed groups such as land developers. Another unit, concentrating on whether the Supreme Court’s decisions embrace a broad or narrow vision of federal power, paints a decision upholding Obamacare to be a broad expansion of federal power (even though in reality it reduced Congress’ ability to legislate). But, perhaps the most absurd examples are where the material debates matters that are generally uncontroversial, such as whether the Bill of Rights applies to states.

Parts of the Institute’s materials rely on a tactic that will be familiar to anyone who has debated a climate change denier, teaching students that a controversy exists over a question that has largely been resolved. The Seventeenth Amendment, for example, is put up for debate . . . Today, this amendment is almost entirely uncontroversial. A 2013 poll found that only 16 percent of American adults believe that it should be repealed.”

Click here to read the article in its entirety on Policy Watch’s main page.