Become a fan of the Political Gabfest on Facebook. We post to the Facebook page throughout the week, so keep the conversation going by joining us there. Or follow us @SlateGabfest!

The Slate Political Gabfest is sponsored by Stamps.com. Buy and print official U.S. postage using your own computer and printer, and save up to 80 percent compared with a postage meter. Sign up for a no-risk trial and a $110 bonus offer when you visit Stamps.com and use the promo code GABFEST.

And by Casper, an online retailer of premium mattresses for a fraction of the price. Casper mattresses come with free delivery and returns within a 100-day period. And get $50 toward any mattress purchase by visiting Casper.com/gabfest and using the promo code POLITICAL.

Advertisement



And by Blue Apron, the new service that delivers all the ingredients you need to make incredible meals at home. Discover a better way to cook. Visit BlueApron.com/gabfest to get your first two meals free.

To listen to the discussion, use the player below:

For this week’s Slate Plus bonus segment, the hosts have a conversation about U.S. presidents. Slate Plus members get an ad-free version of this podcast with bonus segments. Visit slate.com/gabfestplus and try it free for two weeks.

Advertisement



On this week’s Slate Political Gabfest, Emily Bazelon, John Dickerson, and David Plotz discuss the Supreme Court decision to save Obamacare (yet again), the debate over Confederate iconography, and Pope Francis’ polemical encyclical on climate change.

Here are some of the links and references mentioned during this week’s show:

Emily chatters about her family vacation to the Grand Canyon (through Canyon Explorations/Expeditions).

Advertisement



John chatters about how bees are, quite literally, worrying themselves to death.

David chatters about NBC’s Friday Night Lights.

Live Gabfest! The Slate Political Gabfest is coming to Washington, D.C., on July 29, 2015. Doors open at 6 p.m. Tickets are now SOLD OUT! Tickets to the cocktail hour, from 5 to 6 p.m., are available at slate.com/cocktailsdc. Presale for Slate Plus members starts at 1:30 a.m. on Friday, June 26, and will end on Friday, June 26, at 8 p.m. Tickets will be available to non-Slate Plus members beginning on Friday, June 26 at 8 p.m. If you are a Slate Plus member, you will receive 30 percent off your ticket purchase. Just use your Upcoming Events tool in the Slate Plus dashboard on the right side of the Slate Plus home page to receive your individualized discount code. To become a Slate Plus member, visit slate.com/gabfestplus and try it free for two weeks.

A Slate Plus Special Feature: The Slate Podcast Endorsement-O-Matic (Almost) every product recommended on every Slate podcast since the dawn of creation.

Topic ideas for next week? You can tweet suggestions, links, and questions to @SlateGabfest (#heygabfest). (Tweets may be quoted by name unless the writer stipulates otherwise.)

Join the discussion of this episode on Facebook. (Comments may be quoted by name unless the writer stipulates otherwise.)

The email address for the Political Gabfest is gabfest@slate.com. (Email may be quoted by name unless the writer stipulates otherwise.)