Boulder's Department of Open Space and Mountain Parks is charged with overseeing 43,000 acres of public land surrounding Boulder and making decisions that affect countless hikers, bird watchers, runners, climbers, dog walkers, residents, and visitors every year. Whether it's green tags, off-trail access, raptor closures, or approval of new trails, OSMP policies touch the lives of many residents. For this reason, a vital part of the OSMP mission is public outreach: communicating with various interest groups, gathering input, explaining policies, and refereeing inevitable uprisings.

For the past 13 years, much of the public face of OSMP has been that of Dean Paschall. Earlier this spring, Dean retired from OSMP, which has prompted us to reflect on the job that he has done — as we have seen it for the past decade from our front-row seats. With an undergraduate degree in natural resources management and advanced course work in natural heritage studies and botany, Dean certainly has the training for a job as a public land manager. But it's also his passion for the outdoors that made Dean a natural resource within OSMP. His background gave him a deep understanding of the balancing act between conservation and recreation that OSMP deals with every day.

Advertisement

When the job of Division Manager for Visitor and Environmental Services opened at OSMP, Dean applied and was hired in 2001. Affable, articulate, and adept, Dean was perfectly designed the challenging job. Constituents across the wide spectrum of open space lovers have appreciated Dean's responsiveness and dependability. His work has kept the public connected to OSMP and informed of its initiatives. Dean has used communication skills, shuttle diplomacy, and tools of his own invention to keep the OSMP ship afloat on often choppy public waters. He has been in the trenches on three public and contentious Trail Study Area processes. The most recent West TSA was a two-year march that consumed Dean daily, as he facilitated often-combustible public meetings and stood for civility and reason, particularly when those commodities were in short supply. Always accessible, well informed, and friendly, Dean served with distinction as a communicator, problem solver, and representative of the city.

Dean's diverse training outside the classroom began in Yosemite National Park, where he worked for ten years as a park ranger. During that time, he earned a law enforcement commission; served on Yosemite Search and Rescue, one of the premier mountain rescue teams in the country; and spent April through November of several years alone as a mounted backcountry ranger, responsible for fire and wildlife management on hundreds of thousands of acres of Sierra wilderness. His first-ever hang-glider descent from Half Dome landed him — not in jail — but in charge of non-traditional activities in the park.

Dean spent the next decade of his life teaching earth and life sciences in an Idaho high school. While teaching, he wrote seventeen textbooks in the series Environmental Education (E2), published by Houghton Mifflin. The series was widely used in this country, but also found an international market, particularly in China, where it spurred a fledgling environmental movement.

The publication of Al Gore's best-selling manifesto Earth in the Balance defined Dean's life for the next ten years. Gore had already proposed the Global Learning Observation to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) project. When Gore came to office, he launched it and Dean joined the team on day one, which brought him to the Boulder NOAA lab. He was instrumental in implementing the key idea of GLOBE: recruiting elementary through high school students to collect environmental data that could be used by scientists around the world. Over ninety countries adopted the project and Dean travelled to the Czech Republic, Uruguay, and Kazakhstan, among other countries, training teachers and students about GLOBE. The program thrives today (see globe.gov): An estimated 20,000 teachers in 27,000 schools have collected over 120 million measurements during GLOBE's lifetime.

An outgrowth of the GLOBE program was Science on a Sphere (SOS), and again Dean was in on the ground floor. The idea behind SOS was to create stunning displays of environmental data on the surface of an Earth-like sphere. Dean remembers working in a dark basement of the Boulder NOAA lab, devising ways to project data images on a beach ball. His work has resulted in spectacular displays that can be found in nearly one hundred museums and libraries around the world (a trip to sos.noaa.gov is worthwhile).

While Dean worked on environmental education projects, he hardly neglected his quest for adventure. In 1979, he was part of the National Geographic-sponsored Upper Amazonian Exploratory Expedition that rafted 120 miles of the uncharted Amazon headwaters. The following year, Dean went to Nepal as part of the American Men and Women on Everest expedition, which scouted a new approach route to Mt. Everest's West Ridge. More recently, he has rafted or kayaked many of America's wildest rivers. Just last year, he navigated the entire Grand Canyon in a dory with one partner.

We close by emphasizing the mission-critical importance of OSMP's public point person. Particularly as it embarks on the North Trail Study Area, effective and frequent communication with the public will be essential in order to complement the work of OSMP's excellent staff. We urge OSMP and the City to find someone who can carry on with the work that Dean did so well.

Bill Briggs and John Putnam are former Open Space Trustees; Ray Bridge, is Co-Chair, PLAN-Boulder County.