With a future Senate president leading the way, Sarasota and Manatee counties have one of the most potent delegations of the past 15 years heading into the Florida Legislature’s 2015 session.

While Sen. Bill Galvano, R-Bradenton, won’t become Senate president for four more years, his status as a rising power carries perks and a tremendous influence that the region has not seen in years.

One gauge of that power: money. Consider that Galvano has run a political action committee called Innovate Florida since 2006, one that raised less than $90,000 per year for its first seven years.

But since the start of 2014, when he secured the pledges necessary for a future Senate presidency, Galvano has raised just over $1 million from an array of powerful industries seeking to influence the legislative process.

Florida Power & Light, U.S. Sugar Corp., Disney Worldwide and even real estate tycoon Donald Trump have donated tens of thousands to Galvano’s fund, all in hopes that it will put them on good terms with the future leader.

The Session Ahead

Why so much money?

A Senate president helps dictate the statewide legislative agenda, determines committee memberships and rewards or punishes special interests as few in Tallahassee can. And because of term limits, which gives lawmakers a limited period in which to make their mark, power flows to the leaders in waiting, as well as those currently in authority.

“I think it’s going to be great for our community,” state Rep. Jim Boyd, R-Bradenton, said of Galvano’s growing clout.

Galvano, a lawyer, recognizes the potential. He said that sure, he’ll keep an eye out for the region when the state budget is being built this year. But Galvano, 48, also has ideas of using his influence in another way, one that speaks to how he has tried to model himself after political idol Abraham Lincoln.

Speaking to a room full of the area’s biggest business leaders last week in Sarasota, Galvano made the obligatory GOP references to cutting taxes and doling out economic incentive money in the name of job creation.

But most of the rest of his speech focused on two issues rarely seen atop the legislative agenda: mental health funding and the developmentally disabled.

Galvano told the 120 business leaders that whether they want to believe it, failing to properly address mental health in Florida affects them because of its spillover into other parts of life.

“The reason I’m a Republican is a because of Abraham Lincoln,” Galvano said. “He had a simple formula. He said the role of government is to do for those who cannot do for themselves or cannot do well for themselves.

“Everything else is fluff.”

Legislature 2015: The Issues

Galvano said he has a clear measuring stick for judging legislative success.

“If we’re able to help the mentally ill, the elderly, the children who have no means of protection in certain circumstances, if that is what we able do, then we’ve fulfilled the role of government,” he said.

Other key players

While Galvano is unquestionably the most influential Florida legislator from this region, the delegation has other key players who will influence some of the session’s hottest issues. On medical marijuana, alcohol regulations, tourism funding, tax incentive policies and the environment, Sarasota and Manatee will have plenty of impact.

Here is a ranking of the region’s delegation from the least influential to the most, and the issues on which they are likely to have the most sway:

7. Rep. Darryl Rouson, D-St. Petersburg

Personal: 59, attorney

Key position: Top Democrat on Justice Appropriations Subcommittee.

Why he’s important: There may be no one in the legislative process more dedicated to making sure people in prison have a chance at rehabilitation. In his role on the Justice Appropriations, Rouson has sought more funding to help inmates in various ways, including getting substance abuse services.

Bill to watch:

HB 149 — Grandparent rights. The bill would allow grandparents a chance to petition a court for visitation of minors in cases in which one parent of the child has died, is missing or is in a vegetative state.

Medicaid expansion — There is no bill number, but if the House revives a plan to expand Medicaid to more than 800,000 Floridians without health care coverage, Rouson, a strong orator, will be in the middle of the debate.

6. Rep. Julio Gonzalez, R-Venice

Personal: 50, orthopedic surgeon

Key position: Health Quality Subcommittee

Why he’s important: As one of just two doctors in the House, Gonzalez already is showing he’s going to use his voice to influence public policy in the medical profession.

Bills to watch:

HB 697 — Public health. Gonzalez’s proposal would ensure that people exposed to communicable diseases can be quarantined upon arriving in Florida. It’s a response to the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, part of efforts to keep returning people from spreading the disease.

HB 147 — Abortion. Gonzalez is a key co-sponsor of this legislation, which would ban doctors from performing abortions unless their clinics are within 30 miles of a hospital in which they have admitting privileges. A similar bill in Texas has been identified as having closed half of that state’s abortion clinics.

5. Rep. Ray Pilon, R-Sarasota

Personal: 70, retired sheriff’s deputy

Key position: Vice chairman of Agriculture and Natural Resources Appropriations Subcommittee.

Why he’s important: Pilon is a former lobbyist with the Peace River-Manasota Regional Water Supply Authority, which gives him insight on water policy issues.

Bill to watch:

HB 1 — Texting while driving. Pilon’s bill would double fines for anyone caught texting while driving in a school zone or at a school crossing.

4. Rep. Greg Steube, R-Sarasota

Personal: 36, attorney

Key position: Chairman of the Highway and Waterway Safety Subcommittee

Why he’s important: Steube has spearheaded legislation to help craft beer brewers and pro-gun measures, including a bill allowing some college students to carry weapons on campus. He’s also in the center of an effort to legalize medical marijuana for people suffering from cancer and other illnesses.

Bills to watch:

HB 19 — School safety. Steube’s bill would allow a superintendent to designate school personnel to carry guns on campuses if they are veterans or former law enforcement, to provide added protection in the event of a shooter on the premises.

HB 4005 — Concealed weapons. Would allow college students who are licensed to have a concealed weapon to bring those firearms on campus.

3. Rep. Jim Boyd

Personal: 58, insurance

Key Positions: Vice chairman of Appropriations; Deputy majority leader and majority whip

Why he’s important: The region’s most important House member. Boyd has been the go-to lawmaker in drafting controversial bills dealing with insurance, elections and public pensions over the last few years. It shows Boyd is one of the most trusted members of the Legislature and will have influence on a host of issues.

Bill to watch:

Amendment 1 implementation — In November, voters approved a constitutional amendment to require that a third of fees collected from documentary-stamp taxes on real estate transactions be spent on environmental conservation. Boyd has been enlisted to oversee implementation of the amendment in the House.

2. Sen. Nancy Detert

Personal: 70, former mortgage broker

Key position: Chairwoman of the Senate Commerce and Tourism Committee.

Why she’s important: Besides being the gatekeeper for various tax and tourism policies on her main committee, Detert has become a respected voice on reforming the child welfare system and the Department of Children and Families.

Bills to watch:

SB 1046 — Film incentives. Detert has filed legislation to reform policy on film incentive money in a bid to attract more studios to make projects in Florida. Detert says the film incentives have historically produced a better return on investment than funding for sports.

SB 318 — Elder guardianship. This bill would require a hearing prior to placing people in the elder guardianship system when they are deemed too frail or mentally compromised to make decisions for themselves. Detert is a co-sponsor, and she fears seniors are being locked away in institutions and having assets seized without due process.

1. Sen. Bill Galvano

Personal: 48, attorney

Key position: Senate majority leader, future Senate president

Why he’s important: As a Senate leader, Galvano will have influence in helping craft the chamber’s overall agenda. He has stated a priority will be improving mental health services in Florida and expanding programs for the developmentally disabled.

Bills to watch:

Gambling compact. This year the Legislature is scheduled to determine whether to let the Seminole Tribe continue operating high-stakes card games, and whether to allow more gambling in the state. Galvano could was the lead negotiator in devising the gaming compact when he was in the Florida House in 2010.

Medicaid expansion. Galvano strongly supports a renewed bid to expand Medicaid under the federal Affordable Care Act to cover more than 800,000 low-income Floridians. He said expanding the program would cover the state as the federal government decreases federal funding for low-income assistance to help hospitals pay for care for the uninsured.