WASHINGTON — In his second start, Jon Gray wants a better beginning.

The Rockies’ prized right-hander takes the mound for the second time in his major-league career Monday night against the New York Mets at Citi Field.

The pomp, circumstance and butterflies of his debut will be gone, so he expects a better performance.”I started out a little rough, but I got myself out of situations,” he said Sunday. “I want to hit the ground running this next time. I want to be sharper, not make as many mistakes.”

Last Tuesday, Gray got a no-decision in Colorado’s 10-4 loss to Seattle at Coors Field. The rookie allowed three runs — two earned — in four innings. Gray surrendered five hits and two walks while striking out four batters. He threw 77 pitches, 43 of which went for strikes.

The first inning was not pretty. Gray threw 33 pitches to six batters. To lead off, he threw three 96 mph fastballs and two 95 mph fastballs to Austin Jackson before the Mariners center fielder lined out to DJ LeMahieu at second base. Gray then walked Kyle Seager, struck out Nelson Cruz ,and gave up an RBI double to Robinson Cano and a run-scoring single to Jesus Montero.

Gray said he’ll be a different pitcher Monday and hopes to display the things he learned at Triple-A Albuquerque.

“I feel like I’m more aggressive now,” he said. “I’m pitching more to contact now, and I’m not letting my pitch count go up.”

Gray gained notoriety at the University of Oklahoma for a fastball that topped 100 mph. He doesn’t cut loose like that now, but he said the firepower is still there when he needs it.

“It definitely is,” he said. “There is a time and a place for that. If a guy is fouling off pitches, that might be the best time to cut loose, but you have to make sure it’s the right guy you’re facing.”

Streak stopper. Before taking two of three games from the Nationals, the Rockies had lost eight consecutive road series. According to Stats, Inc., that stretch tied for third-longest stretch in franchise history.

Footnotes. Two-time Gold Glove third baseman Nolan Arenado committed two errors Sunday, with another play originally ruled an error, then changed to a fielder’s choice. … LeMahieu, who hit the go-ahead, game-winning single in the eighth inning Sunday, is batting .382 since July 4, hitting safely in 24-of-29 games.

Looking ahead

Rockies’ Jon Gray (0-0, 4.50 ERA) at Mets’ Jonathon Niese (6-9, 3.51), 5:10 p.m. Monday, ROOT; 850 AM

Niese, at one time rumored to be a trade target by the Rockies, has turned his season around. Since the beginning of June, the left-hander owns a 2.78 ERA with 49 strikeouts against just 20 walks in 71 innings. He has had a tough time against the Rockies, going 1-3 with a 4.98 ERA. Gray, Colorado’s top pitching prospect, is making his second big-league start. He was so-so in his debut against Seattle, getting a no-decision in Colorado’s 10-4 loss at Coors Field. He allowed three runs (two earned) on five hits in four innings.

Tuesday: Rockies’ Chris Rusin (3-4, 4.66 ERA) at Mets’ Matt Harvey (10-7, 2.76), 5:10 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (7-4, 4.85) at Mets’ Jacob deGrom (10-6, 2.13), 5:10 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Rockies’ Eddie Butler (3-9, 5.50) at Mets’ Noah Syndergaard (6-6, 3.01), 10:10 a.m., no TV

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post