Hillary Clinton Hookers: Hundreds Of Sex Workers Make Final Push For Clinton In Nevada, Offer Discounts For Votes

The group Hookers 4 Hillary supports the former secretary of state for her pledge to protect Obamacare and crack down on domestic violence.

Feb 17, 2016 12:37 PM EST

The group was started by Dennis Hof, owner of the Moonlite Bunny Ranch near Carson City, Nev., and many of the girls who work there. (Photo : Twitter Photo Section)

As the Nevada Democratic caucuses quickly approach, a group of sex workers who call themselves Hookers 4 Hillary are doing everything they can to help Hillary Clinton win, with some even offering discounts to customers who promise to vote for her.

The group was started by Dennis Hof, owner of the Moonlite Bunny Ranch near Carson City, and many of the girls who work there shortly after Clinton announced her candidacy in April. It now includes some 490 sex workers from various Nevada brothels, such as the Kit Kat Guest Ranch near Carson City, the Love Ranch in Las Vegas and the Alien Cathouse near Area 51, according to The Huffington Post.

The girls have ramped up their efforts ahead of the Feb. 20 Democratic caucuses in Nevada, championing Clinton for her pledge to protect Obamacare, her foreign policy experience, her opposition to conservative supply side economics and her support of agencies that protect the public's health.

"Obamacare allows us to get health care without classifying us as illegal workers," Mae, 25, told HuffPo. "Not having it canceled is a big deal."

Others are supporting her for her tough stance on domestic violence. "I'm for Hillary because she's cracking down on domestic violence," 26-year-old Entice Love told The Guardian. "I've been in a relationship for a long time where I'd been thrown down stairs, black eyes, fractured ribs... when I'm looking at who I want to pick for the presidency, I look at what are they doing that I can relate to that will be of benefit for me. That's why I was for Obama, now I'm for Hillary."

To help trump up support for Clinton among brothel customers, many of the group members are offering a 25 percent discount to those who agree to caucus for her on Saturday.

"If you tell me you're caucusing or voting for Hillary, I will give you a free lunch or 30 extra minutes to use however you like," Kisses told HuffPo.

Clinton needs all the help she can get in Nevada. A new CNN/ORC poll released Wednesday shows her in a statistical tie with rival candidate Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, 48 percent to 47 percent, with a margin of error of plus or minus three percentage points.