State Rep. Dickey Lee Hullinghorst, a Gunbarrel resident who on Wednesday will formally become the first Democratic woman to assume the post of Speaker of the Colorado House of Representatives, works Friday on the speech she'll be delivering during the opening day of the Legislature's 2015 session. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

When the Colorado Legislature's 2015 session gets under way on Wednesday, Boulder County and Broomfield could once again benefit from being represented by several of the lawmakers holding key leadership positions and committee assignments.

That's long been the case, several of those current and former leaders said in recent interviews, with current Boulder County and Broomfield legislators playing major parts in determining what bills become state laws, and which ones won't, by the time the session concludes in May.

State Rep. Dickey Lee Hullinghorst, a Gunbarrel Democrat, will be Speaker of the Colorado House of Representatives, the first Boulder County lawmaker to hold that chamber's No. 1 post in 121 years.

"Those of us who are elected from Boulder County clearly represent the values of Boulder County residents," Hullinghorst said.

That could mean that the county's local governments, school districts, and other organizations — as well as its individuals and families — "might have a little more access to the decision-making process," Hullinghorst said

"I intend to make that happen," Hullinghorst said. But she emphasized she'll also attend to her responsibilities as House speaker to consider the viewpoints of people from throughout Colorado.

While Democrats retained their majority control in the House in last fall's elections, Republicans are taking over the top leadership posts in the Senate after gaining a majority of the seats in that chamber.

There now will be no senators representing parts of Boulder County or Broomfield who'll hold top leadership positions in the GOP-controlled Senate.

Boulder's Rollie Heath, who last year was Senate majority leader, will the Senate Democrats' assistant minority leader this year.

Heath said, though, that trying to negotiate compromises while crafting legislative proposals "has always been my style," regardless of whether his party was in the majority in one or both houses of the Legislature. He said he'll continue that approach.

Assistant state Senate Minority Leader. Rollie Heath, D-Boulder,

Hullinghorst and Heath both noted that more than 95 percent of the bills enacted into state law last year, when the Democrats controlled both the House and Senate, were passed with at least some level of bipartisan support.

Asked if that might change in this year's GOP-controlled Senate and Democratic-dominated House, Heath said: "I would sure hope not. We're going to find out."

Heath said one of the underlying questions facing lawmakers from both parties as they introduce legislation this year is: "Do we really want to get things done, or do we just want to make a point?"

Said Heath: "In my mind, we've got to figure out where the public is, in terms of priorities."

He predicted, though, that the Legislature will wind up "getting more things done than some people expect."

Heath said that in 2014, the Senate's majority-Democrat leaders held weekly meetings with the then-minority Senate GOP leaders. He said Sen. Bill Cadman, the Colorado Springs Republican who's taking over the Senate's presidency post, "has told me he will continue those meetings."

In the meantime, Heath said, "Boulder County's had a history of leadership" in the Legislature, and he predicted that will be evident again in 2015.

Boulder delegation respected for 'doing homework'

Former state Senate president Brandon Shaffer, a Longmont Democrat, said he thought Democratic state representatives' choice of Hullinghorst to be the new House speaker "is very significant."

As speaker, Hullinghorst will be expected "to represent the entire state, and not just Boulder County," Shaffer said, just as that was expected of him when he held the Senate's top leadership spot.

Even so, Hullinghorst's roots are in Boulder County, Shaffer said, and that "will influence her perception of issues."

Said Shaffer: "Our entire delegation from Boulder County is well respected down there. They do their homework. They know their constituents."

Hullinghorst has spent the past two years as House majority leader, the No. 2 leadership position in that chamber.

Former state Rep. Alice Madden, a Boulder Democrat when she was in the Legislature who was House majority leader from 2005 through 2008, said "it is incredibly important" for Boulder County to have members of its delegation in such leadership spots and serving as chairs or vice chairs of the committees that hear and cast at-least-initial votes on the hundreds of the session's proposals for new state laws or the repeals or revisions of existing laws.

Madden, who's now the principal deputy assistant U.S. Energy Department secretary for Intergovernmental and External Affairs, said the outcomes of the two political parties' split control of the Legislature "will depend on the Republican leadership" in the Senate.

"You can work together, or you can throw bombs," Madden said.

Former state Rep. Claire Levy, another Boulder Democrat, said split control will force compromises in order for any potentially controversial bills to pass both houses and proceed to Democratic Gov. John Hickenlooper's desk for his decisions whether to sign them into law, allow them to become law without his signature, or veto them.

Legislators from both parties will "have to seek opportunities to appeal to a broader community" to gain support for their proposals, Levy said.

Levy said Hullinghorst will have a critical role "in preventing bad legislation from making it to the House floor for debate" — whether those are proposals introduced by House members themselves or are pointedly partisan measures approved in the GOP-controlled Senate and then advanced to the Democratic-majority House.

Having people like Hullinghorst and Heath in leadership positions, meanwhile, "assures that issues that are important to residents of Boulder County are front and center" during the Legislative session, said Levy, who's now executive director of the Colorado Center on Law and Policy.

Levy and former state Rep. Paul Weissmann both said Boulder County legislative leaders' constituents won't necessarily get everything they want out of the Legislature. But those people and the leaders "will have bargaining chips," Levy said.

Weissmann, a Louisville Democrat who was House majority leader in 2009 and 2010, said he'd found that when lobbyists approached him, they'd make it a point to at least mention something that showed "they know what we're focused on, and what we need" in Boulder County.

"It puts Boulder County stuff on other people's radar," said Weissmann, who was elected last fall to be Boulder County treasurer, succeeding Bob Hullinghorst, Dickey Lee Hullinghorst's husband, in that county government position.

Unlike many recent years, Boulder County won't have any lawmakers on the Joint Budget Committee, a powerful joint House and Senate panel that crafts annual state government spending recommendations for the full Legislature's consideration. Levy served on that committee, as did former Reps. Todd Saliman, D-Boulder, Jack Pommer, D-Boulder, and Tom Plant, D-Nederland.

But Hullinghorst has appointed Rep. KC Becker, D-Boulder, to the Capital Development Committee, which reviews construction project proposals from state departments and agencies such as the University of Colorado and recommends which of those proposals should be built into the overall state budget packages.

Becker's membership on the Capital Development Committee could prove to be "great for the University of Colorado," Levy said.

Said former Boulder City Council member Becker: "I have a strong interest in making sure CU stays a highly competitive university."

Becker, a former Boulder City Council member whose district extends into neighboring counties, said she's aware of local needs throughout that district.

"I'm certainly looking out for Boulder and wants to represents their interests well," Becker said. "You do that not only with committee assignments but your votes, as well."

Hullinghorst speech will highlight jobs and economy

Hullinghorst has also appointed Becker vice chairwoman of the House Agriculture, Livestock and Natural Resources Committee. And the speaker has chosen Rep. Mike Foote, D-Lafayette, to be vice chairman of the House Finance Committee, and has reappointed Rep. Dianne Primavera, a Broomfield Democrat whose district extends into Boulder County, to chair the House Public Health and Human Services Committee. Rep. Jonathan Singer, D-Longmont, will be vice chairman of that Health and Human Services panel.

While no Boulder County or Broomfield-residing Democratic lawmakers will chair GOP-majority Senate committees this year, the new Senate Republican leadership has named Vicki Marble to be chairwoman of the Senate Local Government Committee and vice chairwoman of the Senate Education Committee. Marble, a Fort Collins-area Republican, represents a district that extends from southeast Larimer County through southwest Weld County into Broomfield.

Cadman has chosen Sen.-elect Tim Neville, a Littleton Republican whose multi-county district extends into Boulder County and includes Eldora, Eldorado Springs and Superior, to be chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.

As House speaker, Hullinghorst gets to deliver one of the session's traditional opening-day speeches on Wednesday.

As of Friday afternoon, Hullinghorst said she was still writing those remarks, which she said "are being changed on a daily basis."

One theme Hullinghorst said she expects to emphasize, though, will be "jobs and the economy," including the need to help people gain the specific skills needed to be hired for the Colorado jobs that are available now or that expect to be available in the near future.

Hullinghorst said she and other Democratic candidates campaigning in last year's elections found that "even though Colorado is recovering pretty well from the Great Recession," there are "a lot of folks" who say they and their families "aren't feeling that" financial rebound.

She said she and fellow Democrats will be looking at proposals intended to help address economic security and economic fairness issues.

As for the influence that Boulder County's local governments and voters may have on the 2015 session's lawmaking, "we do a pretty good job of representing Boulder County and always have," Hullinghorst said.

"I don't know how much that will differ" this year, she said, but "I'm always a strong advocate" for those constituents "and will continue to be."

Madden said of Hullinghorst, who succeeded Madden in representing Boulder County's House District 10: "She is an amazing woman. She's just perfect for this job at this time."

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc