Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

From this morning’s LBO Wire:

Like many an intrepid mountain climber, Francisco Partners has secured a place at the top of K2. The private equity firm has invested more than $100 million in SourceCode Technology Holdings Inc., also known as K2, a provider of platforms and services for running business applications, Lillian Rizzo reports. Francisco will receive two seats on the company’s five-person board of directors, said Adriaan van Wyk, co-founder and chief executive of K2.

More stories available to LBO Wire subscribers: KRG Capital Partners sells Diversified Foodservice Supply Inc. to New Mountain Capital…Riverside Co. invests in Pro-Vigil Inc., a remote video-surveillance and monitoring services company…and NewSpring Holdings signs a definitive agreement to purchase X5 Solutions Inc., a provider of telecommunications services.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere on the Web:

Centerbridge Partners and Goldman Sachs Group Inc.’s GS Capital Partners are exploring a sale or initial public offering of trucking and logistics company Kenan Advantage Group Inc., Gillian Tan and Dana Mattioli report for The Wall Street Journal.

Terra Firma Capital Partners’ chief financial officer has left the firm, which has been grappling with its latest fundraising efforts and a string of expected senior departures, Ayesha Javed reports for LBO Wire’s U.K. sister publication Private Equity News (subscription required).

Ahead of the U.K. election, a campaign group called 38 Degrees is lobbying aggressively for the government to close the so-called Mayfair tax loophole, which allows carried interest to be taxed at the lower capital gains rate rather than the higher income tax rate. According to 38 Degrees’ estimates, executives at private equity firms are avoiding up to 700 million U.K. pounds in tax a year using the “loophole,” the Independent reports.

TransUnion LLC, an Advent International Corp.- and GS Capital-backed provider of credit information to businesses and consumers, is planning to raise as much as $800 million in an initial public offering this year, according to Bloomberg News.

Write to Thomas Dunford at thomas.dunford@wsj.com