SAN FRANCISCO — Brett Anderson walked into the clubhouse with a taped left index finger Sunday and left the trainer’s room with it packed in ice and heavily wrapped in an Ace bandage.

Even before manager Walt Weiss revealed a word, Anderson’s chances of landing on the disabled list increased dramatically. An X-ray confirmed a broken index finger. He will see a hand specialist in Denver on Monday and is expected to be sidelined four to six weeks depending on how quickly the bone heals allowing him to grip the ball.

“I knew something was wrong,” Anderson said. “It’s unfortunate. It’s hard to believe. I have that shadow of the injury bug around me. But there was nothing I could do.”

He suffered the injury in the third inning Saturday. Facing Matt Cain, Anderson, who has little experience as a hitter since he was drafted in 2006, flicked a 93 mph sinker off the end of the bat. He shook his hand as he jogged down the line and was unable to remain in the game after throwing a warm-up pitch.

“He said it was like he had a foam finger on. He couldn’t feel anything,” reliever LaTroy Hawkins said.

Acquired for Drew Pomeranz in December, Anderson owns a 3.60 ERA in three games, all Rockies losses. He was in the middle of his best performance with his new team when his finger snapped. This injury comes on the heels of missing nearly two years after elbow surgery and most of last season with a broken bone in his foot suffered while shagging flyballs.

“My bat didn’t break. I guess the wood head was too strong. I needed it to take the brunt of the blow,” Anderson said.

Franklin Morales, who lost his spot to Jordan Lyles, is expected to replace Anderson in the rotation. The Rockies could add a reliever Monday or just bring back infielder Charlie Culberson, who was optioned before Sunday’s game to make room for Tyler Chatwood.

Morales threw a scoreless inning Sunday.

Morales’ desire to start is well-known. He was disappointed that he lost his job this past weekend.

Sorry, Charlie. Drew Stubbs doesn’t have much claim to a roster spot if he doesn’t face left-handers. Yet, manager Walt Weiss took a gamble pinch-hitting Stubbs in the eighth for the scalding Charlie Blackmon. Blackmon is 4-for-10 against lefties. Weiss correctly played a matchup. Stubbs singled to left to tie the score off Javy Lopez, leaving him 3-for-7 off the sidearmer.

Footnotes. Jhoulys Chacin (shoulder) will begin his rehab assignment Tuesday for Single-A Modesto. He’s on track to return April 28 or May 3. … The Rockies’ bullpen compiled 15 strikeouts in 12 innings in the series. “We pitched well. I really thought we were going to get them,” reliever Adam Ottavino said. Troy E. Renck, The Denver Post

Looking ahead

Rockies’ Jordan Lyles (2-0, 3.86 ERA) at Padres’ Eric Stults (0-2, 5.59)

8:10 p.m., Monday, ROOT; 850 AM

Jordan Lyles is like character Dante in “Clerks.” He’s not even supposed to be here today. Tyler Chatwood’s injury forced Lyles into the rotation, and Lyles’ effectiveness kept him there. He didn’t win his third game last season with the Astros until June 2. He has taken seriously the mandate to throw lower strikes. Eric Stults had a layover with the Rockies after a brief career in Japan. With Charlie Blackmon 1-for-7 off the left-handed Stults, Drew Stubbs could start in center field. If not, it’s time to wonder about his value on the roster if he can’t play over Brandon Barnes or Blackmon.

Tuesday: Rockies’ Juan Nicasio (1-0, 3.75) at Padres’ Robbie Erlin (1-0, 1.35), 8:10 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (0-2, 9.69) at Padres’ Andrew Cashner (1-1, 1.29), 8:10 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Rockies’ Franklin Morales (0-1, 6.94) at Padres’ Ian Kennedy (1-2, 4.24), 4:40 p.m., ROOT

Troy E. Renck, The Denver Post