Peterson Party Center, Woburn, Mass., has entered into a recapitalization transaction with private equity firm Dubin Clark & Co. The recapitalization will enable Robert (Bob) Traina, Peterson president and owner, to divest himself of a portion of the business while providing the company with a partner to continue its growth trajectory.

Peterson Party Center has been in operation for more than 60 years, and primarily services Massachusetts and surrounding areas. Traina joined the company more than 40 years ago as general manager and purchased the business, becoming president and CEO about 20 years ago. Since assuming ownership of the business, Traina’s focus has been on driving growth through the development and delivery of premier products and services.

Traina bought a significantly larger building located on 24 acres in Woburn, Mass., a northern suburb of Boston, three years ago to accommodate company growth. Extensive renovations were made to the 140,000-sq.-ft. facility including a state-of-the-art laundry utilizing RFID technology, an environmentally-friendly dish room, and a 5,000-sq.-ft. tent wash area complete with a conveyor drying system.

The company’s linen rental division made a strategic investment in Table Toppers, a Newton, Mass.-based fashion, boutique and custom linen rental business, in 2013. In addition to acquiring Table Toppers’ product line, Eileen Saliba, Table Toppers owner and president, joined Peterson to lead the combined linen division. Table Toppers has recently opened a Boston showroom to better serve its current client base.

Traina will remain CEO of Peterson Party Center, with the ongoing goal of continuing to build the infrastructure, including staff, inventory and processes, necessary to provide continued service to a broader array of customers. Traina credits the company’s growth and success to all of the talented and dedicated company staff.

Brent Paris, a partner with Dubin Clark, led the recent transaction. Both Paris and Dubin Clark have gained industry background through an investment in the party and event rental industry. Paris said Dubin Clark’s investment in Peterson Party Center is intended to employ equity dollars in a very well run, highly profitable market leader, from which it intends to expand organically, as well as through strategic add-on acquisitions.

Peterson Party Center was represented in the transaction by Ed Latek of Latek Capital Corp., Lake Forest, Ill.