Mayor Eric Garcetti speaks during a press conference at Los Angeles city hall regarding NBA Commissioner Adam Silver’s banning of Donald Sterling for life from any association with the Clippers or the NBA April 29, 2014. File/Andy Holzman/Staff Photographer

Next year, the country will mark 50 years since Martin Luther King Jr. led marchers from Selma to Montgomery in Alabama, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act and President Lyndon B. Johnson signed it into law.

But on the cusp of the new year and the marking of that anniversary, events in 2014 showed race to still be a combustible issue in America. One of the biggest stories of 2014 was the fatal shooting of an 18-year-old black man named Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., by white police Officer Darren Wilson in August. It sparked outrage and a grand jury was impaneled to see if there was enough evidence to move forward with a criminal trial against Wilson.

In November, the grand jury decided there wasn’t enough evidence to move forward with the criminal trial. That decision touched off riots in Ferguson and protests in several cities throughout the country — including actions in downtown Los Angeles where the 101 Freeway was shut down by marchers and more than 300 getting arrested before Thanksgiving.

What transpired in Ferguson brought knowing nods from those in the African-American community who have complained about racial prejudice by police against citizens. To show support for Brown’s family, people protested with the “Hands up, don’t shoot” gesture” — which was picked up by several St. Louis Rams football players who entered their stadium during a November game against the Raiders. It brought back images of the 1968 Mexico City Olympics when Tommie Smith and John Carlos raised their fists in the air as an act of protest against racial inequality in America.

But it also succeeded in bringing divergent foes together on some issues as well. Tea Party favorite Sen. Rand Paul, R-Kentucky, wrote a letter in The New York Times decrying the shooting of the unarmed teen and several other Tea Party members in Congress questioned the militarization of police equipment used to hold back protesters.

The shooting of Brown by the white police officer wasn’t the only racially-charged story of the year.

L.A. Clippers

In Los Angeles, the NBA ripped control of the Clippers from Donald Sterling, the aging owner who was taped by a girlfriend making racist remarks about blacks. It became such a flashpoint that the team’s players had considered walking off the court for the playoff game and sponsors of the team yanked their ads from Staples Center until NBA Commissioner Adam Silver made the announcement on April 29 that Sterling had been stripped of his ownership and was banned from attending the games.

The announcement coincided with the anniversary of the Los Angeles riots in 1992, where four white police officers were acquitted in Simi Valley for the beating of Rodney King.

Steve Ballmer, the former Microsoft executive, purchased the team for $2 billion and Sterling — who had a history of lawsuits filed against him by tenants at properties he owned for racist behavior — gave up trying to hang onto the franchise and faded out of the spotlight.

Civil rights in 2014 also played large in other big stories this past year: the influx of children fleeing gang violence in a handful of Central American countries and entering the United States illegally and seeking refuge from persecution.

Advertisement

Busloads of kids were greeted by angry protesters in San Diego County and it gave way to a contentious debate about immigration reform for the estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants currently residing in the United States. President Barack Obama ultimately launched an executive action in December that rankled some House Republicans and hard-line anti-immigrant groups through its method of allowing undocumented immigrants to get work permits and square themselves with the law.

The battle for equality also was seen in 2014 as state after state dropped bans on same sex marriage as judges ruled laws barring such unions were unconstitutional. But late this year, a district court judge in Louisiana upheld that state’s ban on same sex marriage and legal experts predict the U.S. Supreme Court will likely have to weigh in next year.

Judge Martin Feldman issued his ruling in defense of Louisiana’s ban in September — the first victory for anti-same sex marriage advocates after more than 20 states saw their bans fall.

Health scare

The year was also one for public health scares — namely the emergence of the Ebola virus that killed more than 7,500 and sickened thousands more in West African nations. It panicked the United States when a man died in a Dallas hospital in October after contracting the disease. A nurse in Dallas was quarantined as was one in New Jersey, and the scare led to controversial decisions by politicians — including possible GOP presidential hopeful Gov. Chris Christie — to impose mandatory 21 day quarantines for those in New Jersey who were exposed to the virus.

State and county health officials in California began to order 21-day mandatory quarantines for those who were in West Africa, though officials also allowed for those restrictions to be handled on a case-by-case basis. Californians also got used to being asked by hospitals and health practitioners if they’d traveled to or been in contact with anyone who had traveled to Western Africa.

The Ebola scare was a health alarm that came just about a month after children in the Midwest started coming down with respiratory virus called Enterovirus D68. That malady hospitalized thousands of children across nearly a dozen states.

The undercurrent of health care overall had been a major storyline through 2014 as well, when Obamacare completed its enrollment of Americans early in the year. California led the way by having more than 1.2 million people sign up through the state’s insurance exchange by the end of the enrollment period.

Political change

But while the president was able to declare Obamacare a victory, Americans decided in November to give Republicans control of the U.S. Senate in addition to bolstering the GOP’s advantage in the U.S. House of Representatives. That put Sen. Mitch McConnell in the driver’s seat as the upper chamber’s majority leader.

While the nation swung Congress to the GOP and made gains in governorships — going from 29 to 31 — California bucked the trend and re-elected Democrat Jerry Brown to a fourth term as governor. Brown divided his tenure in Sacramento — the first two terms from 1975-1983 while the state was in the midst of a record-breaking drought. His third term came after a few unsuccessful campaigns for president and stint as Oakland’s mayor before succeeding Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger in Sacramento in 2011. His 2014 win brought him full circle as he dealt with the state’s debilitating drought and managed to get a measure passed on the ballot that would help the state shore up its water reserves.

Terrorism also stayed in the forefront with the beheading of journalist James Foley by the group ISIS — a collective of terrorists formed through instability in Iraq and a fissure in al-Qaida’s leadership. And a Malaysian Airways plane was downed over Ukraine, killing 298 as groups accused Russian separatists of shooting it down. It was a particularly bad year for Malaysian Airways as another one of its planes vanished in the South Pacific and still hasn’t been located.

Cyberterror also reached high-profile status when, in December, a group of North Korean hackers threatened theaters that planned to show “The Interview,” a Seth Rogen comedy that shows the assassination of leader Kim Jong Un. Sony Pictures, which planned to release the film on Christmas Day, canceled those plans amid protests by celebrities such as George Clooney and Rob Lowe, who ripped the studio for caving to the demands.

Sony, however, announced on Christmas Eve it would stream the film online and a few theaters announced they would screen the movie.

Some of the biggest stories of 2014 went well into far-flung areas of space.

Members of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, other NASA scientists and the European Space Agency saw their Rosetta spacecraft travel for a decade over 300 million miles from Earth to a speck of rock called Comet 67P and land a small probe on it in November. It was the first-ever landing of a spacecraft on a comet — a relatively tiny target just about 2.5 miles wide.