Pharmacist David Miller, owner of Keystone Pharmacy in Grand Rapids, says pharmacists are “by far the most accessible health care professional.” In an era of drastic change in the health care industry, pharmacists are taking on a broader role in delivering basic services to consumers who are unable to access their physicians. The key for pharmacies, however, will be securing reimbursement from insurers for the new programs, Miller said.

Already much more than just a place to fill prescriptions, the pharmacy could become an accessible, one-stop center in the delivery of basic health care services.

Health care consumers increasingly have the option to walk in and see a pharmacist to get a flu shot, seek advice in managing chronic conditions such as diabetes, and potentially get diagnosed and treated for common ailments.

As the U.S. health care industry undergoes dramatic shifts in traditional models and places a greater emphasis on wellness and prevention, pharmacies are evolving right along with it — when they can make a business case to offer a broader range of services.

“We are by far the most accessible health care professional,” said David Miller, a pharmacist and owner of Keystone Pharmacy in Grand Rapids that recently launched a nutrition consulting division. “You can’t just walk in and see your physician. You can see us.”

At no cost – for now – Keystone customers can have access to a certified nutritionist who offers advice on diet, nutrition and overall wellness.

The service illustrates how pharmacies are stepping beyond their traditional role of dispensing medications and selling medical supplies. Many retail pharmacies large and small now provide flu shots and immunizations, consult with customers on wellness, and offer diagnostic tests such as blood pressure, blood glucose and cholesterol checks.

From offering advice on wellness, nutrition and managing chronic illnesses, to providing simple and quick tests, pharmacies are becoming “a center for health care, potentially,” said Larry Wagenknecht, CEO of the Michigan Pharmacists Association.

“The pharmacy is going to become a place where people can receive more than just prescriptions,” Wagenknecht said. “I see the pharmacy becoming more of the center for a variety of different types of health care that goes with the traditional role of dispensing pills in the bottle.”

And it’s not just in the store that they’re doing it.

Grand Rapids-based Meijer Inc. recently added online diabetes consulting to its list of services. The website, Meijer.com/diabetes, offers information on nutrition, exercise and medication management, plus a risk assessment.

In announcing the service last month, Meijer cited data from a survey it conducted that found a need for the kind of services it and other retail pharmacies now routinely provide for diabetics.

Half of the survey’s respondents felt overwhelmed in managing their diabetes and lacked a personal care plan. Forty percent said that on top of their physician visits, they are more willing to talk to a pharmacist for advice and found walk-in services for diabetics at Meijer stores useful.

Nine out of 10 survey respondents were unable to identify potential complications from diabetes, such as strokes, heart and kidney disease, and hypertension.

In offering advice, information and even some medical services, pharmacies can complement primary care doctors, educate patients, and — in some cases — fill in when a customer is unable to access or get to a physician.

Jim Mathews, chief operating officer at New Era-based HomeTown Pharmacy that operates 37 retail pharmacies across Michigan, said pharmacists are essentially taking “the next logical step as the mid-level provider.”

“I think there’s a growing appreciation for what a pharmacy can do,” Mathews said. “It’s a natural extension to the way pharmacists are trained.”

HomeTown Pharmacy is evaluating whether to provide in-store diagnostic tests such as swabs for strep throat or the flu. Through collaborative agreements with physician practices, the pharmacy can send positive results to a customer’s doctor, get back a prescription order and then dispense the medications.

Simple blood tests for cholesterol and blood sugar levels are also a consideration for 2014, Mathews said. Expanding in-store basic care is becoming a necessity to compete, he said.

“We want to do more of that and we are moving in that direction,” Miller said. “It helps you keep up with the Joneses more than anything.”

Some of the large national pharmacy chains for years have been going much further and opening in-store medical clinics for primary care, staffed by nurses, nurse practitioners and physician assistants.

Walgreens now operates about 400 clinics at stores in 18 states, although not in Michigan. CVS Pharmacy operates more than 650 of its MinuteClinic retail health care centers at store locations in 27 states — including several in southeast Michigan — that record 18 million patient visits annually.

[RELATED: "In era of health reform, retail clinics become part of health care delivery system," from Crain's Detroit Business.]

As the pharmacy’s role in the health care system continues expanding, Mathews sees more of them opening in-store medical clinics. The company recently was contacted by a physician in the Kalamazoo area who had inquired about HomeTown Pharmacy providing space for an exam room at a local store.

“A pharmacy, to a degree, will become a walk-in medical clinic,” he said. “It just makes too much sense not to have that happen.”

A walk-in medical clinic at a HomeTown Pharmacy location is “a possibility” in the future, although the company presently has “no concrete plans” for one, Mathews said.

As care and business models change in an era of health reform, pharmacies and doctors today can better connect and collaborate through electronic medical records and health information exchanges that enable them to readily exchange patient information, Wagenknecht said. Pharmacies now can easily transmit the results of a customer’s blood pressure or cholesterol tests, or results from a simple diagnostic test, straight to his or her physician.

How well the emerging role may help to improve the health of customers is unknown, although an initiative several years ago in Asheville, N.C. shows potential.

Known as the Asheville Project, the initiative included having pharmacists develop in-store care services.

In just one example of success, a 2008 article in the Journal of the American Pharmacists Association detailed how the effort used pharmacists to consult with and monitor patients with hypertension. The initiative “achieved significant clinical improvements that were sustained for as long as six years, a significant increase in the use of (cardiovascular) medications, and a decrease in (cardiovascular) events and related medical costs.”

Key to the evolving role for pharmacies, however, is receiving payment for services. Customers typically pay out of their pockets for consulting and some health insurers will reimburse for flu shots and simple diagnostic tests.

The Asheville Project involved insurers reimbursing pharmacists for their services.

At Keystone Pharmacy, Miller would like to expand into other areas for consulting services — hypertension, diabetes and weight management, for instance — although he’s hesitant to go too far for now.

“It has to make business sense,” Miller said, and that means securing reimbursement payments from health insurers for the service or care provided.

“Until there’s a successful reimbursement model, I’m not interested in rolling out those programs,” Miller said. “It creates a huge drain on resources.”

While the expanding role of pharmacists stems in part from the business opportunity in today’s health care era, Miller initially started offering consulting services a decade ago out of economic necessity, starting with women’s health and then adding pain management. As reimbursement payments for prescriptions started tightening, he needed to diversify his revenue stream and decided to do it by offering fee-based consulting services.

“It’s becoming harder and harder for a pharmacy to stay open filling prescriptions. In a few years, it may be impossible,” Miller said. “We need alternative revenue streams. Without different revenue streams, traditional pharmacies are going to die.”

--

Editor’s note: An earlier version of this story incorrectlty stated that Keystone Pharmacy charges for its nutritional consulting division.