Democracy is imperfect. But it is the best system we’ve got. Similarly, since their invention in the NME in 1952, the UK pop charts have been far from bulletproof. Indeed, the history of the metrics of music consumption would – and does – fill books. In the past decade, the UK charts have been rejigged to accommodate downloads and streaming plays, in an attempt to best reflect what music is most popular. Earlier this month, charts just for vinyl were introduced, reflecting the unexpected resurgence of the connoisseur’s format.

More pop change is afoot. From July, singles and albums will no longer come out on Monday in the UK, but on Friday – a move that will bring worldwide release dates into harmony. After more than 40 years on Sunday nights, BBC Radio 1’s chart show, to be hosted by Greg James, will move to Friday evening, from 4pm to 6pm. Not only that – as of 10 May, kids’ TV channel CBBC will play host to The Official Chart Show, a magazine programme studded with videos and gossip, and hosted by Cel Spellman, a successor, of sorts, to the much-missed Top of the Pops.

With charts as accurate as they have ever been, both the top 40 and what you might call chart-watching as a national pastime are now under scrutiny. The move to CBBC speaks volumes about the need to hook a younger audience into consuming pop in ways an older audience would recognise. (Quite how young that audience might be was slightly misunderstood by NME recently, who weighed in with jokes about Rastamouse, a show on CBeebies, the channel aimed at pre-schoolers.)

Thanks to the internet’s endlessly personalisable technologies – YouTube channels, streaming, you-name-it-on-demand – pop has been at the forefront of a seismic change in listening. The past couple of years has seen Radio 1 lose millions of listeners as it attempts to retune to a younger audience. Much has been written about this decline in broadcasting, where many once witnessed the same thing at the same time, and the rise of what we do now: stacking up podcasts, Sky+-ing content and streaming the latest obscure remixes on Soundcloud, as and when. “Narrowcasting” describes the endlessly niche way in which we watch and listen. With everyone off doing their own thing – especially the young – what is the role of the mainstream charts and, indeed, of mainstream chart shows, in this age of fragmented, bespoke consumption? Our young interviewees, stopped and quizzed in Camden last week – not a scientific sample but reflecting a range of ages and tastes – seem to point to the charts’ redundancy, certainly as a tastemaking exercise. But is it telling that more than one commented on the rise of a rock band, Royal Blood, to No 1 as being significant?

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Top of the Pops was a national obsession from 1964 until 2006.

It’s instructive to know that for many years in the US, the charts were confined to the music industry’s trade paper, Billboard: who was at No 9 was of little concern to the general public. In the UK, by contrast, the charts have been a more emotional affair, broadcast to the nation, the rises and falls of your favourite song a matter of intense concern. Bob Stanley, who has written extensively about the charts, reckons this obsession with pop quantification is a curiously British trait, akin to cricket statistics and trainspotting. Perhaps Britons, with their hierarchical society, have had some innate need to know who is top pop dog from week to week. Maybe the system itself appealed, appearing populist and meritocratic at a time – the 50s, 60s and 70s – when those old hierarchies were crumbling. Buy enough of your heroes, send them up the charts: your tastes would be validated, and your sense of agency sated.

And now? If the charts matter to anyone, it is probably the record companies. Then there are the egos of high-volume artists to consider: the hit parade, after all, parades their hits. You can just picture Ed Sheeran, giddy from his umpteenth No 1, tousling Harry Styles’s hair, promising him a couple of tunes for his putative solo album when One Direction run out of steam. What joy would there be, if there were no No 1 to get to?

And chart shows? Getting eyes on screens, or ears to speakers, to consume specific content remains a holy grail for all broadcasters; recapturing the youth audience is a priority for the BBC. Relocating the chart to after school on Friday (and reinforcing it on TV at teatime on Sunday) makes sense. Huge numbers of young people remain pop-obsessed; but, if there is a conclusion to be drawn from our sample and the move to CBBC, perhaps it is that the age of the pop consumer has decreased significantly. Another metric – the show’s own viewing figures – will reveal whether our particular national obsession with new entries, steady-at-No-4s, and big climbers can continue in an age where listening is an increasingly fractured pastime.

Young music fans have their say on the charts







Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Antony Ryder, 16

Likes: Nirvana, the Smiths

I discover music through Spotify and YouTube, and there are a few bands in our school that have gigged around London, they know what’s going on. They found out about Drenge and Royal Blood and all these up-and-coming bands. Lots of my friends pass around CDs, or people share their headphones at lunchtime. Things like Spotify are really convenient – if someone hasn’t heard of a song, you can play it to them straight away, it’s so easy nowadays. I don’t care about the charts – the music is overplayed on the radio, there’s nothing to it any more. It’s all commercialised. I listen to some playlists, they’re really good for moods – instead of being the top 20, it’s about what you actually want to listen to.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Alyssa Crabb, 17

Likes: the Libertines, Fall Out Boy, Panic at the Disco

We have a record player in the house but it’s downstairs and I wanted my own, so I got one for my birthday. A lot of my friends have them too – it’s a thing in our generation for people who really like music. Obviously they’re a bit more expensive so it’s more of a commitment. My record player does MP3 so it goes straight to my laptop. Once you have the music that you listen to, those musicians say what bands they like, so you’re always hearing about new stuff. If I wanted something new, then maybe the charts would be a place to go, but I’m in a place where I have too much to listen to anyway.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Murdo Hepburn, 17

Likes: J Cole, Kendrick Lamar, Kings of Leon, Drake

I wasn’t a huge music fan a year ago but I’ve got majorly into it now – I had very much a follower phase, but I stopped listening to music because my friends did and found my own groove. I really couldn’t care less about the charts, but back then I definitely did! I’d listen, ask my friends about the songs, and they’d be like, “Yeah, that one’s good.” I wouldn’t look anywhere else for new music – as opposed to now going on Spotify radio for hours on end. I respect all kinds of music but commit to one genre at a time. I’ve started listening to loads of old Drake, which I never used to listen to when it was new. J Cole was the tipping point.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Dylan, 9, and Theo, 7

Like: OneRepublic (Dylan), Iggy Azalea (Theo)

Dylan: I like music I can dance to. I like Counting Stars by OneRepublic. I don’t know what the charts are. I am sort of interested in music.

Theo: I like pop music. I like Fancy by Iggy Azalea, one of my friends showed it to me. It’s a good song, it’s really fun. I like the rapping bit best. I like to dance to it. I never see music on the television but sometimes hear it on the radio, whatever is on and most of the songs that are on the radio, I haven’t heard of.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Csepi Asztalos, 21

Likes: Crystal Fighters, the Kooks

I do listen to the charts! I’ve just been in France for six months and I did listen to the charts as a refresher a bit towards the end. It probably made me feel closer to home, a bit of English music. But when I was away I would Shazam stuff if I heard something good on the radio – I discovered So Freakin’ Tight by Tough Love. I mostly stream music on YouTube, I don’t really buy it. Then out and about, I listen on Soundcloud, I’ve got a playlist on that. I listened to the charts a bit more when I was a kid, though it never mattered to me where my favourite acts got to. It was just pop music.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Viola Asztalos, 24

Likes: Bonobo, the Walkmen, the Strokes, AlunaGeorge

We play the radio at work so I listen to the top 40 then, but I’m not that eager to know. I’ve found some artists that I really like and I follow them, rather than what’s top 10. But I loved Top of the Pops when I was a kid, I always wanted my favourites to be No 1 – when Black Eyed Peas made it with Where Is the Love?, I was loving that. Now I discover things through Spotify on my phone – I listen to my favourite bands on there, but there’s also the related artists link, and I find new music through there, and friends.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Kit Bienias, 20

Likes: The Wytches, Eagulls, Drenge

I don’t really follow the charts, but when Royal Blood got their album to No 1, that was quite interesting – it’s been a long time since a rock band have got to No 1. Nowadays it’s usually about all this shit pop music. Recently I’ve got into Spotify, but I buy more vinyls. I’m interested in the new vinyl chart – we should be all for reintroducing and pushing vinyl. I only started buying records about four, five years ago, but I’m a bit of a collector. I picked up my dad’s records and I use his record player – he’s got a pretty rubbish modern one but it does the job.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Emily Warne, 17

Likes: Drenge, Arctic Monkeys, Foals

I don’t really care about the charts, I don’t think there was a time when I ever did. I’ve never been a pop fan. I listen through my headphones on the computer and through my iPod Classic. I buy music from iTunes – it’s easier to buy it instead of streaming it, and it supports the bands. I don’t think the charts matter – it’s down to each individual person, isn’t it? I don’t think the charts affect people’s tastes. Would I be bothered if Foals or Drenge headlined Glastonbury? I suppose it would be good but I’m not that bothered.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Holly Bootland, 17

Likes: Nirvana, Drenge, Guns N’Roses, Queens of the Stone Age

My dad used to listen to bands like GNR, so I started listening to them, and now I go on YouTube to find songs. Spotify recommends “artists like this artist” – that’s how I discovered Drenge. I always buy CDs, I’m addicted! I like to have it in physical form to listen to at home, rather than on my phone. I never pay attention to the albums or singles chart, I’ve never been interested, never been a pop fan. None of my friends do either! When you get to a certain age you realise that kind of music isn’t aimed at you – it’s for quite young people. One Direction isn’t really for people my age.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Samir Chadah, 16

Likes: the Cribs, Wolf Alice, Courtney Barnett, Modern Baseball, the Wombats

I don’t usually listen to the charts – sometimes the bands I like are in there, but I don’t get my music from the charts. The vinyl chart sounds interesting – the music I like tends to be more on vinyl. There would be a lot less pop stuff on it. I have a Spotify subscription. I get some music on CDs but that’s generally because it comes in a package with a gig ticket. Me and my friends tend to recommend bands to each other. A lot of it is a group thing – there are some people I know who like the same stuff, who I talk to about music.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Marco Rodrigiuez, 16

Likes: Royal Blood, Drenge, Red Hot Chili Peppers, AC/DC, James Brown

The charts don’t make a difference to me – if it sounds good, that’s what I’m interested in. Though [looks hesitant] I did jump out of my seat when Royal Blood’s album got to Number 1, because maybe now I’ll get the opportunity to hear more bands, and it could mean I have some hope in playing music in the future and make a living out of it. I prefer actually physically having a copy of the music, so a record or a CD is ideal, it’s better to have it in your hand. I listen to music on my phone out and about – I reckon I have about 1,000 songs on here.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Solomon Pace, 16

Likes: Royal Blood, Drenge, Led Zeppelin, MF Doom, Dangermouse, Radiohead

I discover some older music through my guitar teacher, but mostly it’s through YouTube. I’ve got into genres, I click through the genre portals on Wikipedia and see what kind of stuff there is in there. Then I go on to YouTube and see what comes up. I don’t really pay attention to the charts – they don’t really represent what most people like. Well, what I like. I don’t mind when my favourite bands become successful as long as nothing changes – or it only changes for the good. I sometimes buy music on iTunes… or I steal it.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Jake Fox, 17

Likes: Jacob Isaac, Ella Eyre, Pulp, the Verve, MNEK, Jacob Banks, Raye, Grace Parker

I occasionally listen to the charts when I’m with friends in the car. I am interested, but some music is disappointing at the moment – a lot of it is highly edited when it could be a lot more raw. Ella Eyre is an incredible artist with an incredible voice. I’d prefer artists like that to go to No 1, though it doesn’t really bother me. I’m quite a casual music fan. But bring back TOTP ! They need to. That was a good way of hearing stuff. I used to watch it with the family.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer

Georgina Parker, 16

Likes: Drenge, Arctic Monkeys

I don’t really care about the charts. I used to care when I was about 13, a bit younger, but I just don’t like that kind of music any more. Bands I like don’t really get in the charts. I buy music on iTunes because it supports the musicians better. I don’t have Spotify or anything – it’s expensive, to be honest.

Interviews by Laura Snapes