The past few years on Capitol Hill, deadline-driven fiscal battles have been fueled by sharp ideological differences. Clashes over Obamacare, Planned Parenthood funding and immigration policy have all led to partisan showdowns and one government shutdown.

This time, however, the end-of-year spending fight is turning out to be mostly a test of patience, as well an early challenge for how Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) intends to run the House.

Story Continued Below

Ryan promised that Appropriations Chairman Hal Rogers (R-Ky.) would captain the negotiations over the $1.1 trillion omnibus spending bill. But as the endgame plays out, it’s Ryan who has to finalize the deal, bargaining with his veteran Democratic counterpart, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.)

House Democrats, who made a new offer to Republicans on Wednesday to break the stalemate over the omnibus, know Ryan will be able to deliver only a sliver of the Republican Conference for any spending bill, so he’ll need a sizable number of Democratic votes to pass anything. So Democrats believe they should hold firm in their demands. The negotiations are intertwined with talks over a separate, sprawling year-end tax extenders measure.

It’s the same dynamic that played out under former Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio). The game plan for Democrats is wait for Republicans to cave and use the threat of a veto by President Barack Obama to back up their position. The party wants Ryan “to own the deal,” said one Democratic aide.

During a closed-door meeting of top Democrats on Wednesday, Pelosi criticized Ryan and GOP senators who have alternately bashed her for holding up the talks or being “out of the loop.”

“It can’t be both!” Pelosi said, according to a source in the room.

Republicans, meanwhile, appear to be unusually calm during the glacially slow negotiations, swapping proposals with Democrats and patiently waiting for them to respond, usually a day or two later. Ryan and other GOP leaders recognize that only 78 Republicans voted for the budget deal that led to this current round of negotiations, and in order to hold on to most of his members, Ryan has to move deliberately.

Ryan, on the other hand, knows that Obama and Democrats want the additional domestic funding promised as part of the Boehner-negotiated budget deal, just as his defense hawks want more money for the Pentagon. But to get that money, Democrats are going to have to cede some ground on policy demands to Republicans.

Politically, Ryan can afford to continue passing short-term funding bills to keep the government open while he tries to reach an agreement. Anything is better for him than the open rebellion from GOP hard-liners that Boehner often faced.

With both sides confident that time is on their side, there is no pressure for a quick agreement; for Ryan and Pelosi, a good deal is more important than a quick deal. The House on Friday will vote on a short-term funding measure to keep the government open until Dec. 16, and additional continuing resolutions are possible.

“If it were left to [Hal] Rogers and [Thad] Cochran and [Barbara] Mikulski and [Nita] Lowey, the issue would be over; we would have had a bill,” said House Minority Leader Steny Hoyer of Maryland, referring to the top Republicans and Democrats on the House and Senate appropriations committees. “When Ryan became the speaker, he said, ‘You know, we’re not going to do top-down, we’re going to do bottom-up.’ … [But] the problem over there [with Republicans] has been it has been bottom-up. The leadership has been unable to lead because the bottom would not cooperate.”

Of course, Ryan staffers say it was always assumed that the speaker would have to close out the deal, as has been the traditional approach by party leaders. What was true under Boehner is still true under Ryan.

Yet Ryan’s willingness to move slowly is appreciated by hard-line conservatives in the House Freedom Caucus, who often bristled at what they thought was a “take-it-or-leave it” approach employed by Boehner.

“I’m encouraged by a couple of things. I’ve said there is no way I would vote for a package that didn’t include the [Rep. Mike] McCaul language [on Syrian refugees], and I’m actually a little optimistic,” said Rep. Matt Salmon (R-Ariz.) “A person’s future actions can be best judged by their prior actions, and what [Ryan] has been doing over the last couple of weeks has been nothing like Boehner.”

Much of the deal is in flux, because the funding and tax bills are being negotiated in tandem. But a few things have become obvious.

Democrats are expected to relent on lifting a ban on U.S. oil exports that’s been in place since the 1970s. Republicans will not score the environmental policy riders they had once sought, and many aides in both parties believe GOP leaders will not be able to insert language dealing with Syrian and Iraqi refugees into the omnibus package, despite their previous full-throated support for such a measure.

The GOP believes the White House is open to some language on refugees, but senior Democrats have pushed back on that idea. Reforms to the visa waiver program, however, will be included in the omnibus package, easing some of the concerns for both Republicans and Democrats following last week’s deadly shooting in San Bernardino, California.

The budget talks are being complicated by the simultaneous push for the massive tax break package. Pelosi has pushed for a popular child tax credit, arguing that such a move is necessary because most of the measure is devoted to corporate tax provisions. Republicans have objected, arguing such a move is too costly.

Democrats are also divided on the size of the tax break package, which has swelled to as much as $800 billion by some estimates. Ways and Means Committee Chairman Kevin Brady (R-Texas), who took over the panel after Ryan became speaker, said he is still optimistic that a long-term tax extenders package can be approved, though he said a two-year package is a possibility if needed.

“We’re trying to continue to get on the tracks in both chambers,” Brady said. The Texas Republican refused to bash Pelosi or the Democrats.

“I am not going to characterize anyone in the negotiations,” Brady added. “I just assume that everyone is there in good faith.”