WASHINGTON — Treatment for the dying in the American health care system is broken, says an Institute of Medicine report released last week.

It’s broken in ways that are hard to believe.

Some nursing homes send frail and ill patients to the hospital not to be cured, but because the hospital will discharge them for “rehabilitative” treatment at a skilled nursing care facility — often the same place they were at to begin with, but now under higher reimbursement rules.

Patients “move back and forth between care settings [and payment options] not for medical reasons, but to maximize provider benefits,” the authors declare in “Dying in America: Improving Quality and Honoring Individual Preferences Near the End of Life.”

Some hospitals and physicians hang on to dying patients because the fee-for-service payment system is an incentive to do more tests, treatments, consultations and the like. Hospice care may be more humane and more in keeping with a patient’s preferences, but providers make less money under those circumstances.

Forty-two percent of the 286,000 Medicare patients who died in 2009 died in a hospice facility. But more than a quarter of those patients in hospice care had been there for three days or less. And 40 percent of those came from a hospital’s intensive care.

The report says this tendency to hang on to such patients in expensive settings has likely gotten worse in the last five years.

This report, in short, is a slam on American medicine. But Dr. Robert Fine, the director of clinical ethics and palliative care at the Baylor Scott & White Health System, said he’s thrilled.

“I was blown away with it,” Fine said. “I feel like the IOM [Institute of Medicine] kind of read our game plan.”

Palliative care

Baylor’s palliative care teams work with patients suffering the physical, emotional and spiritual pain of chronic illnesses like cancer. They work alongside colleagues trying to cure or push a patient’s illness into remission. But they are on salary. They have no financial incentive to bring patients to the hospital to die, and no problem with spending 90 minutes helping a patient and family walk through an advanced medical directive.

Baylor University Medical Center and Parkland Memorial Hospital provide palliative care, but most other hospitals in Dallas do not. Most Dallas hospitals, in fact, are subject to the kinds of criticism found in the Institute of Medicine report.

Dr. Leonard D. Schaeffer, whom the University of Southern California’s Leonard D. Schaeffer Center for Health Policy & Economics was named for, was one of 21 committee members who worked on the “Dying in America” report.

“The whole history of health insurance has been about reimbursing for medical care on a fee-for-service basis. And this report says that’s all got to be changed,” Schaeffer said. “And it says if you can’t do it within the law, guess what? You ought to change the law. That is a fairly radical change for the good old Institute of Medicine.”

Medical directives

When it came out last week, much of the attention on “Dying in America” concerned its recommendation that physicians be paid for consulting with their patients about end-of-life care. This was tried during the the Affordable Care Act debate, but got blasted as a promotion of “death panels” to decide who gets advanced care and who dies.

“Dying in America’s” authors say this is instead about paying physicians for the time they spend discussing a patient’s preferences — the sort of things covered in advanced medical directives and living wills. And they say it’s never too early to begin those conversations.

Waiting until a patient nears death is waiting too long. Because of cognitive, physical or mental inability, most of us nearing the end of life aren’t able to make those sorts of decisions.

Fine said Texas’ medical wills make it easy for patients to state whether they want all possible medical interventions to stay alive or if they’d rather just slip quietly away with a minimum of pain and care. Getting down to specifics, however, is not easy when insurers don’t want to pay for it.

The report is available online at www.iom.edu/Reports/2014/Dying-In-America-Improving-Quality-and-Honoring-Individual-Preferences-Near-the-End-of-Life.aspx.

Follow Jim Landers on Twitter at @landersjim.