Charleston Battery midfielder Sebastien Thuriere (left) returns to the club after a month-long stint with the Haitian national team in the 2015 Gold Cup. Provided

When Sebastien Thuriere returned to the Battery’s practice field this week after a month-long stint with the Haitian national soccer team, head coach Mike Anhaeuser could sense a difference in the young midfielder.

Coming up WHO: FC Montreal vs. Charleston Battery When: Saturday, 7:30 p.m. Where: MUSC Health Stadium Records: Montreal 4-12-1 (14 points); Battery 9-4-7 (34 points) Tickets: 971-4625

There was a certain confidence to Thuriere’s demeanor that wasn’t there before he left to be a part of the 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup tournament with the Haitian national team. It wasn’t arrogance per se — just a little extra swagger in Thuriere’s step when he returned to the training grounds with his Battery teammates.

“I think anytime a player gets to play on a national team and gets some international experience, it’s going to help him,” Anhaeuser said. “Not everyone is able to get that experience. Sebastien came back from the Gold Cup with a glow about him. There was a little bit different look in his eye. He’s been playing at a very high level for the past month against some great competition, so he’s very confident right now.”

The Charleston Battery, who are in the midst of a 14-month USL home unbeaten streak, will face FC Montreal on Saturday at the newly renamed MUSC Health Stadium at 7:30 p.m.

Thuriere, 25, appeared in all four matches for the Haitian national team. Despite being born in St. Petersburg, Fla., Thuriere is allowed to play for Haiti because his mother is a Haitian native.

Thuriere spent the last month crisscrossing the United States as the squad prepared for and played in the Gold Cup. The travel was exhausting, but the experience was one that Thuriere said he won’t soon forget.

“We went to eight different cities in a month and I don’t think we spent more than three days in the same hotel,” Thuriere said. “Even with all the travel, it was an experience of a lifetime, one I’m not going to forget. It was a huge honor to get called up by your country. The Gold Cup is a huge event for our country. It’s an experience that I think everyone who plays soccer would love to have, You want to represent your country and play on the biggest stage possible.”

The Haitians were in the same group as the United States, Panama and Honduras. It was considered the toughest group in the entire tournament. The Haitians tied Panama, 1-1; defeated Honduras, 1-0 and lost the U.S. 1-0.

“It was definitely the group of death,” Thuriere said. “You had to bring your A-game every match. There was almost no margin for error fo us.”

Thuriere, who is an American citizen, said the highlight of the tournament was playing against the United States at Gillette Stadium in Foxborough, Mass., in front of more than 40,000 fans. Thuriere came off the bench and played 20 minutes and nearly scored against the U.S.

“It was a great atmosphere and I think that’s biggest crowd I’ve ever played in front of,” Thuriere said. “There’s a huge Haitian community in Boston, so we actually had plenty of support. It was almost like playing at home in Haiti. They brought their carnival spirit to the game enough though we lost.

“My parents were able to make the match and I know it took them something like 90 minutes to get out of the parking lot because all the Haitian fans were having such a good time. I got a pretty good scoring chance in that match, but I was just a bit unlucky.”

In the lead-up to the tournament, Thuriere had been a starter for the Haitians during their four exhibition matches. Johnny Placide, Jean-Jacques Pierre, Jeff Louis and Donald Guerrier were all imported from their clubs in Europe for the tournament to bolster their lineup.

“We have a few big-name players,” Thuriere said. “Those guys have a ton of international experience and have played in a few Gold Cups before this one. I learned a lot from those guys. I’m still young, so it wasn’t a big deal (coming off the bench). Hopefully, this is just the first of many appearances for (me with) Haiti.”

The Haitians made it out of the group stage, but lost to Jamaica, 1-0, in the quarterfinals. Jamaica upset the United States in the semifinals before losing to Mexico in the finals.

“I thought we played well enough to beat Jamaica, but we were a bit unlucky,” Thuriere said.

Thuriere returned to Charleston’s lineup this past weekend, started and played a full 90 minutes for the Battery during their 1-0 loss to Toronto FC II.

“After the month with the (Haitian) national team, I’m playing with a lot of confidence,” Thuriere said. “I was playing with some very good players and we played every day. We didn’t have a day off the entire month, so I feel like my game is pretty sharp right now.”

The problem for Thuriere has been finding his nitch in the Battery’s lineup. He’s been used as an outside midfielder on occasion, but has played mostly as a central defensive midfielder.

“The great thing about Sebastien is that he’s versatile so I can use him in a lot of different ways,” Anhaeuser said. “He can come in and be a defensive stopper or I can put him up top and he’s very good at getting forward and creating scoring chances. He’s a guy we want to get on the field because we know what we’re going to get from him every time he steps on the field.”