I discussed Donald Trump's newly-released tax reform plan on Megyn Kelly's show last night, offering the assessment that his policy package offers much for conservatives to enthusiastically embrace. Despite being a consistent detractor of Trump's policy incoherence and boorish temperament, I'm not in the business of reflexively criticizing him for sport (via Right Sightings):





(1) "Everyone's got to be covered." This call for universal coverage sounds like an endorsement of Obamacare's tent pole -- the hated individual mandate tax. If he doesn't support that coercive, blanket measure, what is Trump's alternative to achieving his goal?



(2) Uninsured [poor] people are "going to be taken care of," he says. Who pays for it? "The government." Conservatives have strenuously opposed Obamacare's expansion of Medicaid, an entitlement program that was already restricting access to care due to paltry reimbursement rates, and was empirically failing the neediest Americans. Trump's comments suggest that he'd seek to extend Medicaid even further to cover millions of additional uninsured people, or perhaps propose some new program on top of the existing unsustainable federal healthcare bureaucracy. Much like Obama, Trump claims that unspecified "savings" from elsewhere would pay for this enormous spending project -- but even if you grant him this point for the sake of argument, on what planet should the standard-bearer of the Republican Party and conservative movement make government-funded universal health coverage a centerpiece of his agenda? Expanding the entitlement state and welcoming additional government intrusions into healthcare is the antithesis of limiting the size, scope and power of government.



(3)"It's going to be a private plan and people are going to be able to go out and negotiate great plans with lots of different competition with lots of competitors." This is almost precisely the way President Obama described the Obamacare exchanges, dressing up mandate-laden government micromanagement as "choice and competition" within the (extremely heavily regulated) private market.