Carson draws raucous applause

Ben Carson on Saturday delivered a forceful defense of conservatism, arguing for dramatically scaling back the federal government and saying that he wouldn’t support Obamacare even if it worked.

Carson, the retired neurosurgeon who has become a darling among grassroots conservatives, drew raucous applause from the crowd at the Iowa Freedom Summit in Des Moines.

Story Continued Below

His speech demonstrated the large appeal — and significant liabilities — of his potential outsider candidacy for the 2016 presidential nomination, as Carson hinted at positions that put him outside the mainstream of either political party.

Carson said that the U.S. should cut its government by “attrition” — not replacing any federal employees that retire in the next 4-5 years. The resulting smaller government would mean that “they don’t have time to stick their noses in people’s business,” he said, to applause.

On the Affordable Care Act — which Carson has on several occasions compared to slavery — the famous former surgeon said he opposed any government intrusion in health care. “Even if it worked, I would oppose it,” Carson said of Obamacare. “It doesn’t.”

“I don’t believe in taking the most important thing a person has, which is their health and their health care, and putting it in the hands of the government,” he later added, a potential reference also to Medicare and Medicaid. The ACA, Carson said, “fundamentally changes” the U.S. and puts it on the road to putting government in charge of Americans’ personal lives.

Carson also criticized President Barack Obama’s executive order on immigration, saying that Congress, not the White House, had the authority to take action. Later in his speech, though, he said that he didn’t think undocumented immigrants “should have to hide in the shadows,” and proposed that the U.S. pursue a guest-worker program similar to that in Canada.

Carson peppered his wide-ranging speech with self-deprecating humor about being a poor student as a child and personal anecdotes about pushing back against those who blame their struggles on institutional unfairness.

Carson, who would likely be the only African-American candidate on the GOP side if he chooses to run in 2016, has pleased conservatives by taking on Democrats on matters of race.

“We cannot allow progressives to shut us up through political correctness,” he said.

Carson, appearing loose as he ambled around the stage, also said he wanted to retire after his surgery career but that the “monster” of the national debt wouldn’t allow him to sit on the sidelines.

Though considered a long shot to win the GOP nomination, Carson has significant appeal among Iowa Republicans — he came in second to Mitt Romney in an October Bloomberg Politics/Des Moines Register poll of the state’s likely GOP caucusgoers.