Bill Gross, the co-founder of Pimco, was the face of the company before he left. Getty Images

Pimco’s parting of ways with Bill Gross was the business equivalent of ripping off a Band-Aid: abrupt and immediately painful.

Gross, a co-founder of Pacific Investment Management Co., quit last week under threat of getting fired. Now, as billions of dollars follow him out the door, the firm’s executives are working to persuade clients to stick with them despite the loss of the legendary investor. Chief Executive Douglas Hodge has said he is optimistic, calling the split an opportunity to evolve the company “from a founder-led approach to a team environment.”

For company leaders, a bold move that results in immediate losses can be tough to stomach, especially one that sparks a backlash from investors and stakeholders. But whether cutting ties with a difficult yet brilliant talent or ditching a revenue stream, management experts say that big short-term sacrifices are sometimes the secret to long-term success—provided bosses get their timing right.

The fact that executives were planning to oust Mr. Gross suggests they were willing to make a tough call for the sake of preserving Pimco’s culture and retaining talented employees, even if that meant losing the face of the company.

“You don’t give that up unless there’s a really good reason,” says Paul Argenti, a professor of corporate communications at Dartmouth College’s Tuck School of Business.

To be sure, recent flagging returns mitigated the risks of parting with Mr. Gross, who helped start the firm in 1971. Pimco Total Return, the fund Mr. Gross had managed and the largest such fund in the world, gained 3.3% in the 12 months ended Sept. 25, compared with 4.4% for the average intermediate-term bond-fund peer over the same period, according to research firm Morningstar

“It was easier to make that decision now than it might have been five or ten years ago,” Mr. Argenti says.

A Pimco representative did not return a request for comment.

CVS Health, the nation’s second-largest pharmacy chain, shocked many earlier this year by deciding to end sales of tobacco, giving up $2 billion in annual sales. CVS is betting that its tobacco-free stance will bolster its business as a provider of basic health services and as an administrator of prescription-drug benefits, generating revenues over the long term. The firm even changed its name from CVS Caremark Corp. to reflect its broader mission.

A CVS cashier retrieves cigarettes for a customer in a New York store. Andrew Hinderaker for The Wall Street Journal

The timing was right, too: tobacco sales have been slumping amid higher taxes, smoking bans and public-health campaigns. At the same time, the Affordable Care Act has presented a business opportunity to deliver health care to newly insured Americans.

CVS’s shares have risen more than 20% since the February announcement. So far, no other national pharmacy chains have followed CVS to drop cigarettes.

“While there’s never a right time to walk away from $2 billion in revenue, this was the right time,” CVS President and Chief Executive Larry Merlo told The Wall Street Journal last month. “Eliminating this obstacle will allow our company to grow over the long term.”

CVS did not return requests for comment.

Patience is a tough sell in a business climate dominated by the strident voices of activist investors, leadership consultants say.

“Managers have to deliver short-term results, and that becomes a habit,” says Jo Whitehead, a director of Ashridge Strategic Management Centre in London and co-author of the book “Think Again: Why Good Leaders Make Bad Decisions and How to Keep it From Happening to You.”

“It’s very difficult to change that mindset,” Mr. Whitehead says.

When the timing isn’t right, bold strategic shifts can backfire. Netflix in September 2011 announced a plan to split its movie-streaming business and DVD-by-mail service into two separate websites. When the move was announced, Netflix CEO Reed Hastings indicated that he was willing to take a short-term hit from customers in order to solidify the firm as a digital business. But the plan to split the sites, which came on top of a price hike, was scotched three weeks later, amid an exodus of some 800,000 angry U.S. subscribers that quarter.

“There is a difference between moving quickly—which Netflix has done very well for years—and moving too fast, which is what we did in this case,” Mr. Hastings said in a statement when he repealed the move in October 2011. Since then, Netflix’s business has thrived and its share price has more than tripled.

In 2011, Netflix quickly rolled back a planned split of its movie-streaming business and DVD-by-mail service. Associated Press

The good news for bold bosses: there’s no evidence that, over the long run, markets penalize executives who take a short-term hit for the sake of a strategy shift, says Michael Mankins, a partner at Bain & Co. and head of organization practices for the consultancy’s Americas region.

Markets may overreact as they digest new information, Mr. Mankins says, but investors eventually come around if the decision was well-timed and drives up the company’s value over time.

“If alternative A is better than alternative B, but it has a negative near-term consequence, you should still pick it,” he says.

At Pimco, the near-term remains fraught. Morningstar this week downgraded its rating of Pimco Total Return to bronze from gold, citing uncertainty over the management shuffle. Still, analyst Eric Jacobson said the overall outlook for the fund remains positive.