Topics: Debt, Editor's Picks, Entitlement cuts, Entitlement reform, Fix the Debt, millennials, MSNBC, Pete Peterson, Social Security, young people, Business News, Politics News

All right, fellow millennials, say it with me: “Social Security will still exist when I reach old age. Social Security will still exist when I reach old age. Social Security will still exist when I reach old age.” (Just to be clear, let’s assume that anthropogenic climate change hasn’t torpedoed the global economy or plunged the United States into a “Mad Max”-style post-apocalyptic wasteland when it’s time for us to collect.)

Arguably the most successful social program in the history of this great nation, Social Security keeps 22 million older Americans out of poverty, and can easily remain solvent for the foreseeable future. So why are millennials so pessimistic about their chances of getting their fair share when it’s time to collect? In a recent Pew Research poll, only 6 percent of millennials said that they expect to receive a Social Security package comparable to what retirees collect today.

While there are a number of explanations for this deep-rooted cynicism, we should look first to the ugly, hysterical state of our political dialogue. It’s perfectly understandable that millennials might crave responsible, measured politicians who are willing to reach above the ugly, partisan fray of our discourse — indeed, as a candidate, President Obama campaigned on this exact platform, and was summarily rewarded with the largest margin of victory among young voters in a generation.

Unfortunately, the otherwise-reasonable desire for moderation has led to a generation inclined to self-identify as “fiscally conservative, socially liberal.” And, to put it plainly, screw all that noise. Millennials can (and should) celebrate their hard-fought victories in the social sphere: gay marriage, “don’t ask, don’t tell,” and the gradual easing of our disastrous, racist war on drugs are all examples of noteworthy progress. They are also, when taken together, evidence that millennials are gaining political and demographic power, as their political preferences manifest on the national stage with increasing frequency.

But let’s be very clear: There is no political position more childish than that of the “fiscally conservative, socially liberal” voter. The scourge of the “fiscal conservative, socially liberal” has created a generation that is far too willing to accept a disastrous economic ideology while basking in smug self-satisfaction for having advanced a few token social causes. Unfortunately, true equality for the groups that social liberals want to help will require more than just the legalization of gay marriage, over-the-counter Plan B, or more lax pot laws. Lasting equality for women, minorities and the LGBTQ community requires a progressive tax structure that can afford to pay for strong social programs subsidizing education and keeping things like illness, unplanned pregnancy, or temporary unemployment from permanently holding back the most poor and disenfranchised.

Yet according to the gospel of the “fiscal conservative, socially liberal” crowd, welfare programs like Social Security and Medicare are ticking time bombs, and threaten the wider economy. In this narrative, as our society ages, demographic destiny will bring monstrous debt levels, putting us on the same path toward economic stagnation and debt default that has plagued so many of Western Europe’s social democracies.

No single individual has done more to mislead left-leaning Americans about the impending-crisis of “unfunded liabilities” in healthcare and Social Security as billionaire debt-alarmist Pete Peterson. Financier of the liberal astroturfing outfits “Third Way,” “Fix the Debt,” and the deeply misguided “The Can Kicks Back,” Peterson has engineered a brilliant campaign to create the illusion of an imminent crisis from expanding federal debt. Every poll that show millennials don’t expect Social Security benefits when they eventually retire is evidence of Peterson’s overwhelming success.

Polished and well-financed, Peterson’s groups received scant criticism from the left until fairly recently, successfully sowing the impression of consensus around the impossible “fiscal conservative, socially liberal” position they quietly promote — yet tellingly, Peterson’s groups hardly ever offer solutions to this impending “debt crisis” that don’t involve deeply slashing social programs. Peterson’s two-pronged approach is quite simple: summon absurd figures representing our future debt, and combine those ominous numbers with an eager willingness to lump Republicans and Democrats together when parceling out the “blame.”

It’s a brilliant piece of political theater — it appeals to our incipient desire for “above-the-fray” moderation, while allowing Peterson to effectively disguise the redistributive effects of his proposals as just more bad-tasting medicine that adults surely know they must swallow if they want to get well. In his 2004 bestseller “Running on Empty” (which earned a glowing Salon review from Farhad Manjoo, who unironically calls the book”a tour de force”) Peterson blames both the Democrats and Republicans equally for our current “crisis.” In Peterson’s mind, the Democrats are to blame for cynically — irresponsibly? — buying the votes of the Poors with the promise of cushy handouts like healthcare and elderly support (the nerve!), while the Republicans are to blame for giving sweet tax cuts to their rich benefactors before dealing with the monstrous fiscal burden those conniving liberals created. Frequently referring to federal debt on an “infinite time horizon,” Peterson borrows an estimate of $45 trillion in unfunded liabilities from the totally–not–biased American Enterprise Institute.