Li'l Abner, gone, no more can I Zing!



Li'l Abner, the presumptive gone...



Oh, the hypocrisy of Republicans. Rick Snyder, after poisoning the children of Flint, doesn't want us to focus on the history of the tragedy. His Benghazi chasing brethren in the House will never let that sad chapter go into the history books, no matter how many times Hillary has been exonerated.



Thank you Hillary for being the adult in the room



Trump keeps telling us he's smart and knows big words, so why does he sound illiterate every time he opens his mouth?



If Trump picks Rick Scott to be his running mate then Florida will get up to six months of Vacation from Slick Rick's Reign of Terror (e.g., Rick's YouTube Attack Ad on the Starbucks Lady).



Now that Trump is the Presumptive Republican Nominee he could use a VP Nominee that likes to visit Starbucks and have friendly discussions with female voters about health care issues.



From Demmy to Demo to Just Plain Dumb.



Beep, beep, beep. How can you beep watch a beep show with all beep these beeps? Beep.



Bernie Sanders has so much money in his pockets now he may wind up as a capitalist.



Today I cornered a roach in the garage and I said you be ISIS and I'll be Trump. And yes, the next stop was reach heaven.



A bookstore? Good luck, but for crying out loud, who needs a bookstore? Got cell phone? Got books!



The director of the FSU criminal justice think tank says Florida's prison population is extremely high, even though the state's crime rate is at a historic low. Did it occur to her that the crime rate is low BECAUSE so many criminals are off the streets?



It's official: Cruz dropped out, Trump will be the Republican nominee and we will have our first woman president!



Ziffer keeps focused on a community school that we don't need while thousands go without power Ziffer now I am like you in the dark.



Guess Ted Cruz never learned a quitter never wins, and a winner never quits - but that's something that comes naturally to native born Americans.



Mr. Maddox and Mr. Ziffer never mind opening a charter school could you focus on providing high-quality utility service. You both would rather berate teachers than doing your own jobs.



Thanks Scott Maddox and crew. My power has been out for two hours A failure of leadership.



How about that 9-day vice presidential run by Carly Fiorina? Who would have imagined her disastrous HP career would have "trumped" it, no pun intended.



RIP, GOP



Hillary can't win without Bernie's supporters - and she ought not to underestimate the depth of discomfort Berners have with her character, honesty, and progressive issue bona fides.



If people want to shirk their civic duty and not vote, that's their right, but, they shouldn't be allowed to run for public office.



Florida needs another Governor Graham indeed! Too bad for us that Gwen is a GINO - Graham in name only.



FSU student government passes a resolution banning the wearing of headdresses at sporting events. So under our first amendment, we can burn a US flag at Doak Campbell Stadium, but cannot wear a Native American headdress?



Please don't tell me you are surprised that Trump considers the Enquirer a factual news source.



Ted Cruz d.o.a. 5/3/2016 RIP



For all you heretics: Of course Jesus was a blue-eyed, blonde-hair white guy! I've got an 8x10 autographed picture to prove it!



Hey, remember, all us conservatives/GOP'ers have NO problem with the high rate among the undesirables (ie, the poor, elderly, children).



Certain politicians spend most of their time trying to sling mud at others because they are trying to get it off of themselves! Dirty politics at its finest! Right Mr. Pons?



Absolute proof that Ted Cruz is a Cuban Commie: His dad was a major player in JFK's assassination orchestrated by Castro, the FBI, and the CIA.



Alan Williams sure is lucky AFP grades on the curve.



So Winston Churchill's bust was "unceremoniously" shipped back to the U.K. Who remembers that he was Time's Person of the Half Century, something that Obama couldn't even be considered for.



Wouldn't it be nice if all the states held their primaries on the same day? Then the newscasters would be able to cover other topics instead of the same old things we're all tired of hearing.



As disgusting as Trump may be to many, the GOP insiders treatment of him runs counter to the sense of fair play Americans expect for anyone who plays by the rules and is fouled.



We need a constitutional amendment codifying our right of refusal: "NONE OF THE ABOVE"



If Donald Trump's hands were tied behind his back would he be able to speak?



Now Ted Cruz can go back to his native Canada, or maybe position himself for the power vacuum in Cuba, but I bet neither country would admit him.



Reading Zing! on my computer makes it hard to tell where on starts and the other leaves off. Maybe some are better that way.



My neighbor's dog left a Ted in my yard.



I would love one week that all presidential candidates would suffer from laryngitis.



Does anyone know who those two kids are on those Scott and Wallace billboards?



Thank you to the brave lady running out into Hermitage Boulevard this morning to save the turtle in the middle of the road. I'm sure the turtle thanks you also!!!



Melania Trump just turned 46. Isn't it about time for the Donald to start auditioning her successor?



Saw a story with the headline, "NASCAR fan brings pet possums with him into Talladega ", and I thought to myself, don't they all?



Oh my word, now we may have bad hair and no hair on the same ticket. Won't that make a lovely photo go on the buttons?



it is one thing to be understanding of these 'special' people, But why do we condone and encourage this sort of lifestyle choice.



And people wonder why the Christians and Conservatives are up in arms with our country and the actions of our citizens



It is no wonder our society is where it is now, when the school system condones such behavior.



The news media is deluded by the belief they control the truth. Four words: WTFU! Only 6% are fooled.



Now I get it, the newsworthiness of the Leon prom election was because they elected two queens. Right?



This same group of scientists crying wolf about "global warming" was in the 70's, on the cover of TIME magazine, calling for a coming ICE AGE. They haven't been right yet!



Scott Walker was the first to withdraw. Then Bush and Rubio dropped out. After Cruz, the Bushes will be down to one final candidate: Hillary Clinton.



With doctors not being able to prescribe pain medication, medical marijuana will certainly pass on the next ballot.



I always cringe when I hear a statement begin: " The overwhelming majority of research indicates......."



When I finished high school, a gap year was called the draft.



Was one of the gay students at Leon named Carrie?



Target stock valuation dropped $2.5 billion following their transgender bathroom unveiling. Oops!



Ziffer needs a shave. He looks too much like Bill Ayers.



Obamacare is a one hit wonder with forgettable lyrics.



What is far worse than a Stephen King horror story? Trump and Scott in the White House.



Be careful what you wish for...with Donald Trump"s wall. Ask the farmers from Alabama to California who picks the crops.



If a corporation is willing to desert a community in California to do business in Florida, what do you think they'll do once their tax breaks (corporate welfare) runs out here?



To the very uncaring person who hit and killed the dog on Thomasville Road & Forsythe Road, you are more than uncaring to leave that poor animal there without even stopping to help it. Shame on you!!!



To the very uncaring person who hit and killed the dog on Thomasville Road & Forsythe Road, you are more than uncaring to leave that poor animal there without even stopping to help it. Shame on you!!!



Maybe I should just pinch my nose and vote for the Donald.



They say the science of climate change is clear but the politics is not.



Every day, you have to endure unreasonable parents, students, and/or school administration. Thank you Leon County teachers for all that you do. You earn every dollar you make!



If Scott has to resign as Governor to run with Trump for VP I'm all for his candidacy.



And here I thought GSA at Leon High referred to a Girl Scouts of America troop.



Add up all of the other "minority" religions and denominations, the Baptists are no longer the majority.



Scott won't be VP. He'll be the guy in charge of dismantling Obamacare.



Well, I suppose that's one way for Trump to assure that he would lose in Florida.



Trump and Scott on the same ticket. Two guys totally capable of embezzling hundreds of millions of dollars and getting away with it. Perfect.



Nearly a half page on Leon prom but not enough space to list the names of the eight Florida officers killed while protecting us last year?



World must be ending. Charles Koch has admitted man made climate change.



Cell phone users: please remember, driving is job #1!



Sorry Ron, climate change science is not clear and IS debateable.



Try changing the address on your Florida drivers license which requires four different forms of id and then complain about the voter id laws in various states.



A Jonah Goldberg column and a Hulk Hogan story on the same page. The last time I saw so much fluff was in cheap pastry.



If Larry Wilmore claims Obama as his, he is more than welcome to him.



I thought I knew what delusional meant until I saw a presidential candidate with no prayer pick a failed businesswoman as a running mate.

"We are limping bad." Grrrr! What ever happened to adverbs? Try "We are limping badly", Mike.



Sanders wins the Indiana primary and the USA Today headline is "Clinton Keeps Her Focus on November"? Huh? Not biased are we?



Good move, FSU, on outlawing the inappropriate Indian headdresses. Another racist symbol, mockingly worn by white people, bites the dust.



Solution to aggressive Russian & Chinese fly-by's with training benefits for our side: Heat-seeking paintballs!



What's going on? I can't recall reading anything negative about FAMU for at least a week now.



Before jumping on the Graham for governor train, you might want to check her voting record. Progressive she is not. I'm not sure really what she is other than an opportunist taking advantage of her famous father's name.



"The Demo's" refers to possession by the Demo. Please cease and desist from all impermissible use of my client, the apostrophe.



Rafael Cruz asked for divine intervention and we got it, Donald Trump.



Apologizing after you've been caught really means that you're sorry you GOT caught.



Donald Trump, from the people who brought you Sarah Palin, who does not believe in climate change, but does believe in witches.



Empty promises from Scott Maddox. No update on the free star metro for high school students Mr. Maddox? There's an oxymoron free and Scott Maddox.



Due to the nature of the business, I don't think pilots get the opportunity to wreck very many planes, usually just one. Rep Williams voted the way his constituents elected him to. Folks like Rep Beshears voted the way big money said vote. Any questions? FAMU and a forward think tank seem like an oxymoron.



The next time Donald Trump talks about how unfair our trade deal is with China, someone should point out to him that we don't have a trade deal with China.



President Obama intends to declare a national monument to gays but we already have one here with the Capitol building.



Forget all the political reasons about headdresses at FSU games. The guy BEHIND YOU can't see a thing!



Here it is folks: I don't like Hillary, but Trump scares me.



Want to know why marijuana is still illegal? "$3.60 billion in assets seized"



Another way to describe Rep. Williams F grade from AFP is that he votes for projects for which he, personally, is not willing to pay. He thinks the unicorns will fund them.



Now we can look forward to Phil Robertson from Duck Dynasty as VP and Judge Judy on the Supreme Court.



Still no editor at the Democrat? Describing the agencies miffed about the paper's local awards, the writer says, "There's two." But there ARE two...or else there's one!



Apparently if you're the only local newspaper in town you don't have to give a rip about customer service, posted call hours, or repeated delivery failures.



How can Ted quit before I get a chance to recycle all my Carly Fiorina Zings!.



I'd get onboard with Trump's wall if he were going to be on the other side of it.



Trump, a man who only values money. Our "Christians" have a new idol.



Rick Scott for Trump's VP! as long as he has to resign to run.



If Trump selects Rick Scott as his running mate then I'm voting for Hillary.



Gadsden County Schools it is teacher appreciation week. Do we all get vacations and dinners from Acaletics?

Click to submit your Zing! at Tallahassee.com/zing. (Note: Zing!s on this blog are unedited for spelling, grammar and style.)

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/26T8StN