I’m your Essential Politics host Christina Bellantoni, and I don’t know about you, but I’m excited for the first-in-the-nation caucuses tonight in Iowa.

Californians often ask why Iowa, and some wonder what, exactly, is a caucus, anyway? Those are totally fair questions, especially for voters who don’t get the same privilege of retail politics. There is plenty to say about Iowa’s demographic makeup not being representative of the nation. There’s no argument that is true.

Consider that America is 17.4% Hispanic, 13.2% black and 5.4% Asian. Iowa is 5.6% Hispanic, 3.4% black and 2.2% Asian. (California, by contrast, is 38.6% Hispanic, 6.5% black and 14.4% Asian.)

There’s also no argument that Iowans take the responsibility they’ve only held for a few decades seriously, and they put the candidates through the paces. Each and every one of them.

That brings us to the difference between a primary and a caucus, which is basically a meeting. Democrats have a slightly different process, so your friends and neighbors are actually working to convince you to join their candidate.

Flashback to an Iowa caucus 2008 Video by Christina Bellantoni Video by Christina Bellantoni See more videos

Get a sense of what it’s like with this video I shot at a caucus in 2008. This one, held in a church, gets good about 38 seconds in. The best quote was from the organizer counting off the groups caucusing for their candidates: "Anyone for Christopher Dodd?"

That night, without being plugged in, I was sure Hillary Clinton had won Iowa because she had performed so strongly in the caucus I observed. How is that possible? Well, a caucus is sort of complicated.

Talking this over in the newsroom, we decided to try and simplify things. So we made a video with gummy bears.

How a caucus works, as explained with gummy bears The Iowa caucus kicks off on Monday. How does it work? Allow these gummy bears to explain. The Iowa caucus kicks off on Monday. How does it work? Allow these gummy bears to explain. See more videos

Mark Z. Barabak outlines how tonight’s caucuses will work, and the long game of why it matters in the context of the party nomination which three tickets are punched out of Iowa.

It’s perhaps easiest to tell the story of Iowa through the voters themselves.

Let’s start with Gabe Searles, a lifelong Californian who moved to the Hawkeye State eight months after the last caucuses in 2012. He and his wife, Jaime, are getting a kick out of feeling like they matter. And being there to experience the caucus season has rekindled Gabe’s interest in politics.

They took their three children on the road Saturday, starting with patriotic waffles, heading to a rally for Sen. Ted Cruz, snapping pics soon after with Sen. Marco Rubio and ending the day with Carly Fiorina. Sunday it was New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie.

They already had seen Donald Trump, Ben Carson, Sen. Bernie Sanders and Martin O’Malley.

Sen. Marco Rubio with the Searles family Courtesy the Searles family Sen. Marco Rubio with the Searles family Sen. Marco Rubio with the Searles family (Courtesy the Searles family) (Courtesy the Searles family)

The Searles family got photos with most of the candidates, too.

"We figure we've got a unique opportunity being here in Iowa, and we wanted to take advantage of it," said Searles, a guitar teacher and graphic designer who grew up in San Jose.

Or consider Charlie Comfort, an Iowa millennial who will be caucusing for Fiorina tonight. I’ve been following him for years, and tracked his political journey for a story that went live this morning.

It was an action-packed weekend in the Hawkeye State, and our team was all over it on Saturday and Sunday.

Evan Halper and Chris Megerian write that Sanders is trying to be Barack Obama, not Howard Dean.

Megerian and Barabak also find the extremes of both parties are emblematic of deeply divided America.

Seema Mehta examines Fiorina’s roller-coaster candidacy, and finds she enters the Iowa caucuses much as she entered the race — an asterisk in the polls and a non-factor in a crowded field.

Kate Linthicum has our Iowa weather report, and four other things to watch for tonight.

We have five reporters and an editor on the ground in Iowa today. Meet our team and follow along tonight.

We’ll also be tracking how people are viewing what’s happening back in California. It starts in Sacramento, as freshman Assemblyman Matthew Harper (R-Huntington Beach) returns to work after spending his weekend in Iowa to help Cruz.

Are you in Iowa? We want to hear from you.

We’ll have live results on our politics page all evening. The caucuses begin at 5 p.m. Pacific time.

DEMOCRATIC INFIGHTING

When it comes to ousting Republicans in swing districts, you might think Democrats would all be on the same page. But that’s not the case in a handful of races, as Javier Panzar reported Sunday.

Local activists feel national Democrats and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee are meddling in their affairs and pushing candidates who might demonstrate fundraising prowess but have less support at home.