International co-working network WeWork has grabbed another chunk of Denver office space, this time in a recently completed building in the Central Platte Valley.

WeWork has signed a lease for roughly 50,000 square feet in The Lab, a 78,640-square-foot, four-story office building behind Denver Beer Co. at 2420 17th St., property owner Soma Capital Partners announced Friday.

It’s the second major WeWork lease announcement this month. The developers of the Triangle Building near Union Station confirmed the co-working giant would occupy 72,000 square feet in that soon-to-be-completed office building at 1550 Wewatta St.

Still, the New York-based company’s overall plans for the Denver market remain unclear.

WeWork’s Platte Street outpost could open by late this year or early next year, said Soma partner Jordan Caspari. Leasing is underway for the building’s remaining 25,000 square feet of office space and 3,000 square feet of ground-floor retail.

“This street in an untapped gem,” Caspari said. “This is where people want to work. They want to work in a cool location, with all the amenities, and have it be accessible to the Lower Highland.”

Soma, which is based in San Francisco, has worked with WeWork before, including on two properties in Berkeley, Calif., and Toronto.

The Denver deal came out of the relationship Soma developed with WeWork through the Berkeley project, Caspari said. There, Soma purchased a property and leased all 50,000 square feet to the co-working network.

“We asked them about where they wanted to be next, outside of these key gateway markets on the coasts. Denver was at the top of our list and the top of theirs,” Caspari said.

With partner Philadelphia-based CenterSquare Investment Management, Soma purchased The Lab property this month for an undisclosed price. Confluent Development and Brue Capital were the developers.

“If you look at their other markets, if you look at where they’re at, they’re really a retail model,” Caspari said. “When they come into a market, they can have three or four locations, and each location draws members from different areas of the city.”

WeWork declined to comment on its plans.

A search of the company’s website shows it is hiring for front desk associates, community managers and associate community managers in Denver.

With 50 locations in 16 cities worldwide, WeWork has put down stakes in Austin, Texas; Berkeley; Boston; Chicago; Los Angeles; Miami; New York City; Philadelphia; Portland, Ore.; San Francisco; Seattle, and Washington, according to the website. International offices are in London, Amsterdam, and Herzliya and Tel Aviv, Israel.

Investors recently valued the company at $10 billion.

Communal workspace starts at $45 per month. Dedicated desks and private offices begin at $450, according to the website.

Emilie Rusch: 303-954-2457, erusch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/emilierusch