Parents in Hawaii, beware! Planned Parenthood is squarely behind the federally funded sex education in Hawaii schools. The Hawaii Youth Services Network and the University of Hawaii received almost two million dollars from the federal government’s PREP funding—which is part of Obamacare—to develop, replicate, and implement “comprehensive sex education” in Hawaii schools. Planned Parenthood of Hawaii is a partner with both entities in the grants.

Hawaii Youth Services Network has worked closely with Planned Parenthood in pushing Planned Parenthood’s perverse, morally bereft sex education. Planned Parenthood thanked HYSN for partnering with it in 2012 to produce a sex ed teacher training workshop for middle school and high school known as the Positive Images workshop.

The workshop was billed as essential for “middle and high school teachers, community health educators, youth-serving professionals, and staff involved with teen pregnancy, STI, and HIV prevention programs.” The “trainers” were none other than Planned Parenthood of Hawaii’s Sonia Blackiston and Kathleen Stofocik. “Both trainers have led numerous sexual health workshops across Hawaii, including Sex Ed 101 for Educators, Contraception and STI 101, I’m Askable, Avoiding the Wide Eyes and Giggles , and HOPE (Helping Our Parents Educate),” according to the workshop promo.

The University of Hawaii is also a friend of Planned Parenthood and abortion. A February 2012 Life News story says that the university was then deciding “whether to provide funding for the Planned Parenthood abortion business to start doing abortions at Kauai inside the Mahelona Memorial Hospital in Kapa’a.”

Clearly, Planned Parenthood is squarely behind the sex education grant money and likely had a great deal of input into writing the law requiring comprehensive sex education in schools that receive funding specifically earmarked for sex education. That law passed the legislature in 2009, supplanted the 1995 abstinence supporting law, and opened the doors for the current PREP grants.

You can find policies on sex education for Hawaii and other states here: http://answer.rutgers.edu/page/state_policy.

Note that the law does not require Planned Parenthood style sex education in Hawaii public schools. Period. It requires that any school that receives state funding specifically for sex education provide medically accurate, factual, and comprehensive information that is age appropriate and includes education on abstinence and contraception.

This law supplants the 1995 abstinence law that was previously in effect. The new law follows Planned Parenthood’s agenda so closely that it looks as though it was penned by Planned Parenthood.

Have no doubt: Planned Parenthood will claim that it is the law that children in Hawaii must be subjected to its comprehensive sexuality education, and will use that claim to try to blackmail schools and parents into accepting its perverse sex education. This applies in other states as well. Planned Parenthood is misrepresenting the law when it makes such claims.

It is time for parents in Hawaii and all across the United States to do their homework. Find out what is being taught to your children in the realm of sexuality education and who is teaching it. Contact us by e-mail and we will be glad to assist you in your fight.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

Additionally, Dr. Miriam Grossman and Dr. Judith Reisman have done a fabulous job laying out the case against comprehensive sex education on their websites. Please thoroughly explore their websites to help arm yourselves for this battle:

Dr. Miriam Grossman: http://www.miriamgrossmanmd.com/blog/

Dr. Judith Reisman: http://drjudithreisman.org/

If you are in Hawaii and want to join in the fight against Planned Parenthood sex education, please contact Rita Diller by replying to this newsletter and we will help you get in touch with those who are organizing resistance.

Be sure to study Parent Power!!, Jim Sedlak’s definitive step-by-step book on taking back control of the schools.

LifeNews.com Note: Rita Diller is the national director of American Life League’s Stop Planned Parenthood Project.