As I've noted in prior posts, the real problem with Obamacare is not that it's too stingy but that it's too generous - at least for those smart enough to figure out how to game the system.

Here's an interesting piece from Open Markets on that topic. The first item about how rates will soar for some people is mildly interesting, but if those people do the slightest bit of research they can easily find a way to beat Obamacare.

So ignore that and focus on the second item, the one about how rich retirees can hide their income to get great health-insurance policies paid for by Uncle Sugar:





Hey you RICH early retirees who are not on Medicare yet and are buying your own medical insurance!! The Affordable Care Act of 2010 (Obamacare) will give you TOTALLY FREE insurance coverage. You must be rich enough to take advantage, so the poor and middle class are probably left out of this wonderful opportunity. The only criteria for eligibility for thousands of dollars of Obamacare health insurance subsidies is TAXABLE income in 2014 and later. So just accept minimal TAXABLE income from your pension, (suspend your SSA for a while if necessary) and use Roth IRA money or cash savings, or loans to live on until you are eligible for Medicare. In my case, I am taking out an equity loan on my paid-off house to use for living expenses for the next 4 years, so I will have minimal taxable annual income (around $27K from a pension) and little other taxable income. Doing this in 2014 will allow me to be eligible for around $5,363 of Obamacare health insurance subsidy and the plan I am electing from my state insurance exchange is going to cost me $5,372. My total medical insurance expense under Obamacare for the year will be $9 !!!

Exactly. Anyone who has the ability to move money around can hide income and show just enough of it to qualify at the very bottom of Obamacare eligibility.

The maneuver he mentions is just the tip of the iceberg. Remember, the subsidies in Obamacare are presented as tax credits. That means that you've got till April 15 of the following year to make sure to hit the proper income targets to minimize taxes. Every tax accountant in America will be studying Obamacare to figure out the loopholes.

The rich will make out the best because of their ability to move money around. As for those people caught in the middle, though, Obamacare has all sorts of perverse incentives and penalties, as noted in this piece also on Open Markets.

On the Obamacare health insurance exchanges, being married can cost you a lot. Get divorced (or avoid getting married, if you live together), and you save $7,230 per year if you are a fairly typical 40-year-old couple with kids (example: the husband working full-time, and the wife working part time, with the husband making $70,000, and the wife making $23,000). If you are a 60-year-old couple with equal incomes and no kids, and you make $62,041 a year, you save $11,028 a year by getting divorced or remaining unmarried. These are the amounts of money you will lose if you get married, since you will lose this amount of taxpayer subsidies due to Obamacare’s discriminatory treatment of married versus unmarried couples.

The law is so poorly written that there are huge tax cliffs in it:

For example, it effectively creates a 35,618 percent marginal tax rate for one hypothetical 62-year-old whose income rises by $22, by triggering the sudden loss of $7,836 in government tax credits.

Of course that hypothetical guy's tax accountant will tell him that he needs to climb back from that cliff by giving $23 to charity - assuming of course he has a tax accountant.

Like every American on Obamacare, he'd better get one.

When they do, people will be gaming the system like crazy - and Uncle Sugar will be paying out a lot more subsidies than Obama ever imagined.

Meanwhile this objection to Obamacare is just stupid. The accusation that Congress is getting some sort of special treatment under Obamacare is pure nonsense. Like other Americans, Congressmen get a health-care plan as part of their compensation. Whatever that subsidy is, say $15,000 a year, it doesn't change under Obamacare. It is simply paid to a different recipient.

What Richard Viguerie is proposing here is not equal treatment but unequal treatment. He's arguing that congressmen, unlike people in private employment, should take a big cut in compensation because of Obamacare. That's either dumb or dishonest. Take your pick.