FORT WAYNE, Ind. (21Alive) -- The new Religious Freedom Restoration Act -- or RFRA -- is a lengthy document and obviously stirring strong emotions.

But what does the law really say?

State Senate President Pro Tem David Long tells 21Alive News RFRA is too complicated to address in a short news story, but says the new law was in no way designed to discriminate against anyone, and he's appalled at the growing backlash.

Long says Senate Bill 101 was designed as a First Amendment issue to protect citizens from undue burden by government actions, which is why it falls under state laws about legal claims against the government.

He cites a case where the state wanted Amish buggies to have electric lights on them.

The Amish sued, claiming electric lights were an undue burden against their religious beliefs, while the state said it was a public safety issue.

The court's compromise -- reflective triangles to help buggies be seen in the dark.

Senator Long says Indiana's RFRA includes language for businesses because last year, the the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in a 5-to-4 decision that for-profit corporations which are family owned, like Hobby Lobby, cannot be forced to provide free contraception to women in the company health plan, even under the Affordable Care Act.

"It's been the law in 19 states for almost 20 years, it's been the law of the federal government for almost 20 years so I'm not sure what all the hoopla is about. But seems to be the story of the day, so I'm sure I see what all the controversy is about, to tell you the truth," Larry Festa says.

But the perception persists across social media is that Indiana's new law allows businesses to discriminate against homosexuals.

And companies are starting to take action.

"This is going to make us look really backwards as a state, for lack of a better term. Really antiquated and really going to cost the bottom line. How so the bottom line? As we've already seen there's been some groups, church organizations, other groups that have pulled out plans for conventions and other events. That's money that's lost," Lauren Caggiano says.

Analysts say the State Senate declined to clarify the law when it voted along party lines to soundly defeat an amendment that would have specifically prohibited discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.

The new law does include a clause that says, “The bill also permits assertion of free exercise rights as a claim or defense in judicial or administrative proceedings even if the government is not a party to the proceedings.”

Legal experts say what that means is that if a baker, for example, were to refuse to make a wedding cake for a gay couple and that couple sues, the baker can assert RFRA as a possible defense.

Therefore, RFRA does not allow discrimination, but does allow a defendant to ask the judge to consider the law as part of the defense.

RFRA goes into effect July first.

To read State Senate Bill 101, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, in its entirety, click here.