× NC snakebite victim charged $89,000 for 18-hour hospital stay

MOORESVILLE, N.C. — A Mooresville man believes he was overcharged for treatment of a snake bite last year when he was billed $89,227 for an 18-hour hospital stay, according to the Charlotte Observer.

Eric Ferguson was taking out the trash one August evening when he felt a stinging pain in his foot. When he looked down he discovered fang marks on his foot.

Ferguson drove himself to Lake Norman Regional Medical Center where he received anti-venom medication for the bite.

Later, upon receiving the bill, more than $81,000 of which was for the four-vial dose of anti-venom, he decided to do some research on the price of the medicine.

Ferguson and his wife looked on the Internet and found retail prices for the medicine ranging from $750 to $12,000 per vial, or $3,000 to $48,000 per four vials.

Ferguson’s treatment was covered by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina. With the contractual discount through his insurance, the total bill was reduced to $20,227. Of that, he paid around $5,400 to cover the deductible and co-pays.

The medical care was “beyond phenomenal,” Ferguson told the Charlotte Observer. “It was just the sticker shock.”

What particularly bothered Ferguson was that the hospital charged so much initially. Even with the insurance discount, the hospital wound up collecting about twice what Medicare would have paid.

Lake Norman Regional, a private for-profit hospital, is under scrutiny by others for questionable practices.

The Charlotte Observer reported that in a 2010 lawsuit, recently unsealed in Mecklenburg County, two emergency room doctors alleged that Lake Norman and Davis Regional Medical Center in Statesville committed fraud by offering kickbacks to doctors who would order unnecessary tests and admit more patients to increase corporate revenues. The federal Department of Justice is also investigating.

Health Management Associates, which owns the two hospitals, has denied these allegations.

Source: Charlotte Observer