Weigh in on taxes, education, healthcare

U.S. Senate candidate Darryl Glenn answers a question during the GOP U.S. Senate Candidate Debate held Thursday, at Sterling Middle School. Behind him are: (from left) candidate Jerry Eller, moderator Caleb Bonham and candidates Charlie Ehler, Peggy Littleton and Jon Keyser. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

A handful of GOP U.S. Senate candidates visited Sterling Thursday to share their thoughts on government, healthcare, education, taxes and more. Peggy Littleton, Charlie Ehler, Darryl Glenn, Jerry Eller and Jon Keyser took part in a debate at Sterling Middle School organized by the Logan and Yuma County Republicans.

Caleb Bonham, a Fox News contributor who spoke at the Republicans' monthly luncheon earlier in the day, served as moderator for the event.

Candidates were asked about the urban/rural divide in Colorado and how they would address rural interests feeling disenfranchised by state government.

Glenn agreed there is a divide and people feel like their government is not listening to them. "It's our job, especially as a United States Senator, to get off your butt and come home, have regular meetings around the state and make sure that your office actually reflects the composition of the state of Colorado, to make sure that you're representing all of the interests in Colorado."

Ehler said the problem is urban politicians don't understand what goes on in rural Colorado. "As a senator I will seek to promote fairer representation for the rural counties," he told the crowd.

Littleton noted rural areas feel like they don't get as many services as other urban areas. "It's incumbent upon us to make sure that we get the services out to you as much as we possibly can," she said.

Advertisement

Eller said "it's sad" that urban politicians don't understand rural areas. "The best thing we can do as a rural people is have events like this and hold our elected representatives accountable."

Keyser did not answer the question because he was late to the debate, due to weather.

When asked about fracking, all candidates agreed that it's a good thing. "It's created an economic boom and prosperity for the United States," Ehler said. Littleton believes the nation should be doing everything it can to be energy independent.

There was some disagreement though over at what level of government should be addressing fracking and the issues of property rights. Ehler said it should be addressed at the local level, if they choose to. Littleton said the regulation belongs at a state level, because some communities allowing fracking and some not creates disincentives for oil and gas to come to Colorado.

Another question was about the proper role of government in land, air and water. Littleton said it's to allow for personal property rights. Eller said there need to be fair and equitable laws and they need to be enforced.

Glenn said government's role should be very limited. "We need to defend water rights when it comes to prior appropriation doctrine," he told the crowd, adding that "the land grab that's out there" is what concerns him. "We want to make sure that we have minimal policies that are infringing upon your rights when it comes to agriculture industry."

Ehler said the proper role of government in air is "to make sure we're regulating against harm;" in water is to ensure water law is observed; and in land is "to ensure we observe your property rights."

Keyser said federal government needs to be smaller than it is now. He pointed out that when he was at the capital as a state representative, "we worked hard to make sure that we were good stewards of your tax money."

When asked how they would address federal tax policy, Eller said he's for a flat and fair tax, though he's not sure how that will happen. Glenn believes the current wealth redistribution system is not working; he said tax policy should be to fund the basic essence of what government is — the core services defined by the Constitution.

Ehler said the tax code needs to be simplified; "Get it down to something we all can understand." Littleton agreed the tax structure needs to be restructured in a dramatic way and said there needs to be a fair tax "where everyone has some skin in the game." She also said taxes on businesses need to be reduced.

Keyser called for a cut on the corporate tax rate, to encourage businesses to come back to the U.S. He also said in regards to individual income taxes he wants a system that is "fairer, flatter and simpler."

Candidates also spoke about where they stand on the Trans-Pacific Partnership and how they would help increase agriculture exports. Glenn said he has concerns "that we're giving away our sovereignty, in that we're creating barriers, we're essentially saying we're no longer going to follow the constitution, we're going to follow this world court order." He said TPP puts agriculture at a competitive disadvantage.

Ehler called for fair trade, not free trade. "TPP's got to go, along with most of the free trade agreements we've got."

Littleton said before Congress votes on TPP, they need to ensure that it doesn't have excessive environmental regulations that would lead to reduction in trade.

Keyser said trade agreements are fantastic for Colorado and agriculture and as a Senator if a trade agreement is proposed he will look to see how it will impact Colorado.

Eller also said he is for free and fair trade.

When asked for their thoughts on Common Core, all the candidates agreed it should be repealed and said that education decisions should be made at the local level.

Littleton was on the State Board of Education when Common Core was passed. She said as someone who has been an educator she knows how damaging it is to students. "We need to help them learn how to think and not tell them what to think."

Eller called for an end to unnecessary testing. Glenn noted students learn differently, they thrive in all types of environments "and we have a responsibility to make sure that we defend that."

Candidates were asked what they would replace Obamacare with and how they would address continued Medicaid expansion.

Littleton said it needs to be replaced with something that actually is affordable and accessible, adding that the federal government should not be forcing citizens to buy health insurance.

Keyser called Obamacare the largest tax increase in modern history and said Colorado made a mistake in taking money from the federal government to expand Medicaid. He said the solution is not more regulation; it's the free market.

Eller said all government employees and their dependents and uninsurable should be under the government system and there should also be private healthcare industry competing against each other to lower costs.

Glenn noted the focus needs to be on health insurance and the health insurance system should be about competition across state lines and allowing employers to be able to offer health insurance. He said by focusing on the health insurance aspect "then the federal government and the state government, by way of block grants or whatever, can take care of the indigent population."

Ehler said Obamacare is horrible because of excessive regulations and those need to go.

When asked if the federal government should control as much land as it does, all candidates agreed it shouldn't, because the state can manage it better. Ehler noted the federal government "manages our public lands in its interests and ignores ours."

Eller and Glenn said there are some areas where federal government does have a right place to be in, but the vast majority of land should be managed by the state.

When asked what the role of the government is in creating a climate for jobs, growth and opportunity, candidates agreed government shouldn't create jobs, but it should create a climate to allow for businesses to thrive and that happens by reducing excessive regulations.

Candidates were also asked about the proper role of federal government related to minimum wage. They agreed the government should stay out of it. Ehler noted "the minimum wage may sound good to someone that's trying to live on it, but if we give them no incentive to improve their skill sets, how are they going to improve themselves?'

"It does not make sense to raise the minimum wage, mandate, and have employers be able to hire fewer employees to actually run their businesses," Littleton said.

Keyser said the focus should be on providing the maximum opportunity for everyone.

Callie Jones: 970-526-9286, cjones@journal-advocate.com