Washington Township residents may soon be able to pick up some property tax relief with their large pizzas, as the township considers instituting a shop local program with unconventional rewards.

In a presentation to the township council on Wednesday night, Carmine de Falco, president and CEO of Fincredit, Inc., said his company’s Property Tax Reward Program works with local townships to bolster local economies and give a bit of tax relief with the swipe of a card.

“It’s quite simple. Think of it as a reward or loyalty card, but we don’t give points, we don’t give coffees, we give property tax credit,” de Falco said.

The program is pretty straightforward.

Go into a participating local restaurant or store, hand over your rewards card when you check out and a percentage of your bill — pre-determined by each business owner — will go toward your third-quarter tax bill.

So if you spend $100 on dinner at a local restaurant that’s chosen to give back 10 percent, Fincredit will take $2.50 for process fees and put $7.50 toward your reward account. If you’re a renter or just frequent the township and live elsewhere, the rewards come back in the form of an annual check.

That $7.50 here and there can add up, he said.

In the pilot town of Marlboro, where Fincredit is based, the reward program saw more than $360,000 in bulk sales in its first fiscal year, with more than $20,000 going toward offsetting property tax bills. He expects that number to bump up to $60,000 to $70,000 in the near future, and said they’ve already grown to include six other municipalities in the state, including Highland Park, Bayonne, West Orange and, most recently, Voorhees. More than a dozen others are in talks to be next.

The boon for businesses — since they’re the ones doling out funds — is that residents aiming to make the most of the program will specifically seek them out and drive up sales.

“Everyone who walks around with this card is a potential customer,” said de Falco.

While businesses aren’t required to purchase equipment to participate — the reward cards can be manually entered online for free — Fincredit offers a card reader that can attach to a terminal for $50 or a separate, dial-up terminal for $160 with no per-swipe fees for higher volume businesses.

The municipality would oversee the parameters of how the program is applied in the township, including how it’s promoted and whether or not big-box, chain stores would be welcomed to participate.

A good start to the program would be about 15 to 20 businesses, said de Falco, with about half of those considered “high-volume.”

Marlboro currently has about 50 businesses signed up, and Voorhees has enlisted more than 30.

“It’ll grow, absolutely,” de Falco said.

There’s even a possibility local colleges or universities could take advantage of the program, de Falco said, by signing up and contributing a significant chunk of change toward a family’s property tax bill when they pay their tuition bill.

There’s no cost to the township for the program, and township CFO and Tax Collector Robin Sarlo told council the tax credits would be applied by their financial software in the same way they process similar adjustments, and wouldn’t be an additional burden on their workload

Users would be able to use the www.propertytaxcard.com website to login and check how much tax relief they can expect, and Fincredit will handle the customer-service aspect of the program.

If Washington Township decides to sign on, it could be part of the first wave of a growing program, as Assemblyman Ron Dancer (R-Ocean) recently proposed legislation to “facilitate implementing this in as many townships as possible,” de Falco said.

Republican Councilman Chris Del Borrello, who spearheaded the move to bring the Property Tax Rewards Program to the township after reading about Voorhees’ involvement, said he’s tried to find flaws, downsides or ways the system could fail, and he’s come up empty.

“It’s kind of a win-win for residents and local businesses,” he said.

---

Contact staff writer Michelle Caffrey at 856-686-3686 or mcaffrey@southjerseymedia.com