MOREHEAD CITY — A Senate proposal to add sales taxes to services such as veterinary care and pet grooming has prompted a veterinarian here to start a letter-writing campaign in protest.

The Senate plan would tax a variety of services currently exempt from charging sales tax: veterinarian visits; pet grooming; repair, maintenance and installation on personal property such as cars; and advertising.

Dr. Richard Hawkes, owner of Arendell Animal Hospital, said while he’s concerned about the tax on all services under the Senate version of HB 117, he’s especially concerned about the impact a tax would have on veterinary care and public health.

“This will lead to pet owners on limited and fixed incomes compromising veterinary care for their pets, which can also become a public health risk when pets aren’t vaccinated,” he said. “They slipped this into the bill, and I don’t think a lot of people know about it and how serious this could be.”

He further pointed out this would probably lead to an increase in the cost of food because veterinary care plays an important role in the care of livestock for food production.

Dr. Hawkes has posted signs on his doors and at the reception desk in protest of the proposal. He’s also handing out copies of his protest statement and addresses of legislators to his clients when they check out.

The N.C. Veterinary Medical Association and other professional organizations are also encouraging citizens to protest the proposed sales tax. For most areas of North Carolina the tax is 6.75 percent, with 4.75 percent of that going to the state and the remainder to local governments.

The new service taxes would help pay for cuts in the corporate and personal income tax rates. There is no similar provision in the House budget bill.

The bill is currently part of the debate as the House and Senate try to reconcile their budget differences. If it passed, it would take effect Thursday, Oct. 1, and generate an estimated $202.9 million for the state in fiscal 2016-17.

But a statement from the N.C. Veterinary Medical Association points out that any reduction in corporate and personal income taxes for veterinarians would likely be offset by lost income from changes in client visits and spending patterns.

Melissa Crowe, office manager at Arendell Animal Hospital, said several clients have contacted legislators.

“Clients are worried. We try to make our prices affordable and work out payment plans with people on fixed incomes, but if this goes through there will be a price increase. That’s the last thing we want to do.”

Client Jeff Jones of Newport, who had brought his dog in for an annual check up and vaccinations, said he was against the increase.

“It will have a negative effect on things like rabies protection and animal health,” he said.

Dr. Hawkes added that he’s also upset because the sales tax is so random, and he’s concerned it would lead to future taxes on other health care services.

“Where would they stop? If it goes through, what would stop them from eventually taxing chiropractors or dentists?”

Automotive mechanic Jeff McCabe with McCabe’s Garage in Morehead City is also concerned about the proposal. He wasn’t aware of the plan until the News-Times informed him Thursday.

“I hadn’t heard anything about it. I wouldn’t like it. Rates would have to be raised, and that would all go back (on)to the consumer,” Mr. McCabe said.

The Republican-led Senate proposal is part of a massive economic development and tax plan to shift more of the tax burden from income to sales taxes.

The plan to tax services would be coupled with a sweeping change in how the state allocates sales tax revenues among counties. The current formula directs most of the money to the county where a sale occurred – an approach that favors urban counties where rural residents typically do their shopping.

Senate Majority Leader Harry Brown, R-Onslow, unveiled a plan months ago that would instead divide the revenue based on each county’s population. The proposal would offer a boost to small, rural counties, while urban counties could lose millions.

By taxing services such as auto repair and pet grooming, the state would increase sales tax collections and soften the blow of the new distribution plan in urban counties.

Sen. Brown’s plan would still create winners and losers. Projections from the legislature’s nonpartisan staff show that 17 counties would have less sales tax revenue by 2020 than they would under the current system that year. The change would be phased in gradually from July 2016 to June 2020.

Carteret County would lose sales tax revenue under the plan.

The Senate bill offers counties a third option for making up any revenue losses: Raise their county-level sales tax through a ballot referendum.

If the legislation passes, counties could seek up to two quarter-cent sales tax hikes for education or transit or to boost their overall budget. Each quarter-cent increase would have to occur in separate elections. And no county could have a local sales tax higher than 2.5 percent – although Orange and Durham counties could keep their current 2.75 percent rate.

Scott Mooneyham, a spokesman for the N.C. League of Municipalities, said towns and cities are concerned that county governments could keep all revenue from hiking local sales taxes – without sharing the proceeds with municipal governments, as they do under current law.

For those interested in contacting legislators, contact information is available at www.ncleg.net.

The Associated Press contributed to this story.

Contact Cheryl Burke at 252-726-7081, ext. 255; email Cheryl@thenewstimes.com; or follow on Twitter @cherylccnt.