Topics: ACLU, Cell-phones, Decision, dragnet, Editor's Picks, John Roberts, Privacy, searches, Sonia Sotomayor, Supreme Court, Surveillance, Politics News

In the middle of a key discussion in Wednesday’s landmark Supreme Court decision in Riley v. California, Chief Justice John Roberts quotes from a concurring opinion Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote two years ago in U.S. v. Jones.

“GPS monitoring generates a precise, comprehensive record of a person’s public movements that reflects a wealth of detail about her familial, political, professional, religious, and sexual associations,” she wrote in that case holding that GPS monitoring was a search.

Roberts used Sotomayor’s earlier argument to support his own assertion that data stored on cellphones was qualitatively different than physical records. His citation of her opinion served to do more than support the new decision – which generally requires cops to get a warrant before they search a cellphone after arresting someone. It also codified Sotomayor’s contention that technology requires a reconsideration of key Fourth Amendment precedents.

The decision is momentous in its own right. It dealt with two difference cases involving men who had their cellphones searched after being detained, which led to evidence used to prosecute them on more serious charges. Roberts held that cellphones hold far more private information than even someone’s home, and as such shouldn’t be searched in the same way as someone’s pockets could be.

He sounded like the ACLU when he explained what to do about it. “Our answer to the question of what police must do before searching a cellphone seized incident to an arrest is accordingly simple— get a warrant.”

In real life, it’s likely that cops will integrate cellphone search warrants into their arrest warrant process. And Roberts’ opinion allows police to invoke exigent circumstances to search a phone. But at a minimum, this ruling will prohibit suspicion-less searches of cellphones.

Which brings me back to Roberts’ citation of Sotomayor.

A different part of Sotomayor’s concurrence, arguing that the existing precedent holding that you don’t have a privacy interest in data you’ve given to a third party “is ill suited to the digital age,” has been invoked repeatedly in privacy debates since she wrote it. That’s especially true since the beginning of Edward Snowden’s leaks. Lawsuits against the phone dragnet often cite that passage, arguing that the phone dragnet is precisely the kind of intrusion that far exceeds the intent of old precedent. And the courts have – with the exception of one decision finding the phone dragnet unconstitutional – ruled that until a majority on the Supreme Court endorses this notion, the old precedents hold.