You’re going to have a hard time finding a more popular new neighborhood this summer than Sierra Ridge by Lennar Homes – 38 homes sold there just since June 1. And that’s before today, when Lennar opens two new family-sized models that’ll rank as some of the most affordable new designs in the south metro area – from just $369,900.

Lennar will have the Cupcake Truck out, noon until 2 p.m., as it unveils two homes that have never before been toured by homebuyers (Lennar kept visitors from seeing the plans until the decorating was done for this weekend’s opening). One of the two is a big-value Pike design – four bedrooms plus a main-floor study, 3-½ baths, with 2,336 square feet of finished space, from $411,000.

Meanwhile, this location works so well that Lennar had a waiting list when it opened its luxurious Grand and Monarch series models here last spring. In a year when there are plenty of buyers looking around from out-of-state, Lennar has taken almost all sales from families who already live in established areas like Highlands Ranch and Centennial, waiting to move up and wanting to improve their commuting situation into DTC, Meridian, Lone Tree and other business campus areas.

“And there’s virtually no inventory of homes out there now,” says Patrick Hennessy, who’ll greet you today along with Gina Korfiatis and Michael McCleery. “That’s been a huge draw for us.”

So are the amenities headed for Sierra Ridge that buyers see on the drawing board: Nice pool, clubhouse, oval-shaped park, and lots of trails on the way (some being completed now). Younger kids will go to Prairie Crossing Elementary (it’s 8-for-10 stars at GreatSchools.org); and major grocery shopping is already within five minutes – adding to Park Meadows in Lone Tree to the west and a mix of restaurants and stores along Parker’s own historic Mainstreet. Lot sizes, Hennessy adds, are a little larger than what you may be seeing in other areas – opportunities up to 11,000 square feet for Lennar’s larger series; up to 7,000 feet for these new Pioneer Series homes opening today.

At a time when very few new homes are ready to deliver, you can see a couple today from Lennar’s larger collections at Sierra Ridge. Those include a Fairfield 4-bedroom, 3-½ bath model, with full basement and 3-car garage that Lennar has at $499,900. It shows off ‘Everything’s Included’ features that Lennar provides standard in the price on this collection: hardwood floors throughout the main level, granite kitchen tops, stainless appliances, front-yard landscaping, air conditioning, 8-foot doors, LED lighting, wrought-iron stair rails, and clean, renewable solar energy at no additional cost — a state-of-the-art system provided and maintained by SunStreet Energy Group.

To reach the grand opening at Sierra Ridge, take Lincoln Avenue east from I-25, three miles to Urbana Street and turn south to Isle. Or if coming from Parker, take Lincoln west to Chambers Road and turn south to Cosmopolitan, and follow Lennar’s signs carefully.

Grand opening, affordable Pioneer Series at Sierra Ridge by Lennar, 1,720-2,336 sq. ft., first look at 2 family-sized models, choice for early move-in, walkouts available, solar system, pool & clubhouse planned, Cupcake Truck. 9989 Isle Cir., Parker; take Lincoln east from I-25 3 mi. to Urbana, turn south to Isle; or from Parker take Lincoln west to Chambers, south to Cosmopolitan, follow Lennar signs

From $369,900

Today 11 a.m. until 6 p.m., Cupcake Truck noon-2

720-619-0198

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him atmark@samuelsonassoc.com. You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns online at DenverPostHomes.com.Follow Mark Samuelson on Twitter:@marksamuelson