Joel Quenneville was between jobs in September 2008. He had ended a three-year stint as the Avalanche’s head coach but still was living in the Denver area. He had just been arrested for suspicion of driving while intoxicated in Lone Tree when I ran into him at a Centennial ice rink.

Canadian-raised brothers Bud and Greg Ahbe run a private drop-in skate and are mutual friends, and Quenneville and I were playing hockey together. It’s the Wednesday night skate, and we call it “The Dub.”

We chatted during warm-ups, on the bench and briefly after the 90-minute skate. But Quenne- ville didn’t stick around for a beer. He was ashamed of being arrested and he was out of work — although he said he had some things to do as a Chicago Blackhawks scout.

We all felt sympathy for “Coach Q,” and realized how one mistake during a tenuous time could significantly tarnish a great career.

The next month, just four games into the NHL season, Quenneville was the Blackhawks’ head coach, replacing Hall of Famer Dennis Savard. Colorado’s loss was Chicago’s gain. And there was no more feeling sorry for “Coach Q” — particularly as time went on.

Quenneville, a former NHL player with the Colorado Rockies, among others, has built on a possible Hall of Fame coaching career by leading the Blackhawks to seven consecutive playoff appearances. They won the Stanley Cup in 2010 and 2013, played in the Western Conference finals in 2009 and 2014, and entered Saturday with a 1-0 lead in the Stanley Cup Final against the Tampa Bay Lightning.

In 17 seasons as an NHL coach, including seven with the St. Louis Blues, Quenneville failed to advance to the playoffs only once — in 2006-07, when the Avalanche went 44-31-7. His 754 career regular-season victories are third-most all time, and only Scotty Bowman has more wins (1,244) with a better winning percentage (.657). Quenneville’s winning percentage (.615) is third-best among the top 20 coaches in wins behind Bowman and Mike Babcock (527, .627).

Quenneville owns three Stanley Cup rings, the first in 1996 as an assistant with the Avalanche, and will retire as one of hockey’s best all-time coaches. He has yet to coach Canada in the Olympics — somewhat of a head-scratcher — but is otherwise considered a legend by his fellow countrymen.

There’s no feeling sorry for “Coach Q.” Only pride for seeing a great coach have a great career.

Captain Cal O’Reilly is related to Ryan O’Reilly

Cal O’Reilly, older brother of Avalanche forward Ryan O’Reilly, is the captain and leading playoff scorer for the Utica Comets, who began Game 1 of the Calder Cup Finals on Saturday at the Manchester (N.H.) Monarchs. The Comets are the American Hockey League affiliate of the Vancouver Canucks, and the Monarchs — who are moving to Ontario, Calif., next season — are the Los Angeles Kings’ top prospects.

O’Reilly, a three-time AHL all-star, is an assist king for Utica. He leads the Comets with 15 postseason points (zero goals) in 18 games. In the regular season, O’Reilly led Utica with 61 points, including 51 assists. His assists were tied for second behind league scoring champion Brian O’Neill (58) of Manchester.

O’Reilly, 28, was a 2005 fifth-round draft pick of the Nashville Predators. He has played in 113 NHL games, with the Preds, Coyotes and Penguins.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/ mikechambers