Earlier this month, Siren Vid, a startup Boulder-based video production company, marked its official launch.

The firm was founded by Kenya Brading, Jessie Davis and Megan Golliday, who all worked at Metal Flowers Media, a casting agency with operations in Colorado.

Davis spoke with the Daily Camera last week about Siren Vid and the trio's approach to the creative process.

The following has been edited for clarity and length:

1.) What spurred you and your partners to start a video production company?

We were all very interested in the storytelling aspect of these promotional videos; we felt that was something businesses would be interested in. It's a combination of something that we were interested in pursuing in the first place and something that could really benefit businesses.

2.) What types of businesses make up Siren Vid's target clientele?

We like to be everything under the video umbrella, but starting out, we're definitely going to be targeting outdoor industry businesses, adventure filmmakers and outdoor gear companies. We're very interested in pursuing music videos.

3.) What makes up Siren Vid's portfolio now?

We're doing a promotional video for Twisted Pine (Brewing Co.). We've worked a lot with Cannabrand, which is an advertising agency based in Denver. They primarily focus on cannabis-related companies. We made a music video for Maynard & the Walnut. We've done a couple small projects. We're just dipping our toes in.

Advertisement

4.) What makes Siren Vid's approach unique?

First and foremost, the creative element. We don't want it to be a cheesy commercial look. We really want it to be very artful and creative and have that cinematic look. I definitely think that's going to make us stand apart from our competitors.

5.) In Advertising Age's 2014 BtoB Outlook: Marketing Priorities and Plans survey, businesses indicated they planned to increase their online marketing spending in video by nearly 8 percent in 2014. Is that trend playing out locally?

Our culture is dominated by visual media, I think that's why we wanted to (start Siren Vid) in the first place. We definitely saw that trend happening. ... People would much rather watch a video about it than read a whole page of content. They want to click "play" and watch the story unravel.

— Alicia Wallace