Photo

To the Editor:

Re “No Relief for Air Travelers” (editorial, Dec. 16):

Air travel difficulties are utterly avoidable, but require a readjustment of expectations concerning markets. Indeed, whether free to compete or free to merge, airlines have largely underserved their customers (and employees).

Continuing public (and congressional) contention over air-travel quality may justify a re-examination of what air service really is: a competitive product, or simply a public utility. The traveling public would be overwhelmingly satisfied with simple, consistent, affordable average ticket pricing; a comfortable seating arrangement on a modern, efficient aircraft; and reliable scheduling within a comprehensive network of destinations.

None of that requires a competitive free-for-all or complex mergers, but rather an air travel industry more organized like modern European or Asian rail, or even United States commuter train services: a single, regulated operator held to standards of service and safety, with very simple consistent pricing.

Continuing frustrations with airline travel stem from a misapplication of commercial and competitive principles.

MATT ANDERSSON

Hinsdale, Ill., Dec. 16, 2014

The writer is the founder and former chief executive of Indigo Airlines.

To the Editor:

While fuel prices have abated from historic highs, focusing on fuel alone ignores the many fixed costs that determine the price of a plane ticket, like aircraft, rent, landing fees and labor, to name just a few. The average round-trip domestic fare has actually fallen 10 percent over the last decade, thanks in large part to price competition among the airlines.

Airlines have returned to profitability while delivering better service for their customers, all while keeping airfares low. That’s great news for air travelers.

NICHOLAS E. CALIO

Washington, Dec. 16, 2014

The writer is president and chief executive of Airlines for America, the industry trade organization for the leading United States airlines.

To the Editor:

Any airline has to be a big business to compete. Many flights are a legitimate business expense and a tax deduction. Others are rewards for various types of frequent fliers. The lines and crowding are part of air traffic now. (Have we forgotten the daily mobs at Penn Station or the Port Authority Bus Terminal?)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Airlines are also competing with newer, relatively inexpensive modes of communication, like smartphones and Skype. We have many communication alternatives to our overpriced airlines. Perhaps we need to consider more use of phones or just slowing down. Few visits are so critical that they must be made at the speed of flight. Airline prices will not go down until we slow down!

THEODORE S. VOELKER

Copake, N.Y., Dec. 16, 2014

To the Editor:

The falling price of fuel may be the most glaring disconnect to the cost of the average plane ticket, and you are correct to characterize this as an example of the extraordinarily consolidated airline industry exerting its control. Thankfully, there is a solution to this problem that lies with the millions of people in the United States who fly each year.

On nearly any commercial airline ticket, a traveler pays a passenger facility charge user fee, or P.F.C. The locally set and controlled P.F.C. helps make necessary improvements and upgrades to runways and terminals to ensure that flying remains safe, secure and efficient.

Most important, the P.F.C. spurs competition when it comes to providing air service. If there’s anything the major airlines hate, it’s competing against one another and deflating their artificially high airfares.

Not surprisingly, the airlines oppose efforts to modernize the P.F.C. to keep pace with inflation. The airlines would rather further exploit the traveling public.

Our airport system and air passengers are the big losers under an “airlines only” model. But Congress could be the hero if it moves to modernize the P.F.C., returning control back to airports, providing fare relief for passengers and fostering an even healthier airline industry.

KEVIN M. BURKE

Washington, Dec. 16, 2014

The writer is president and chief executive of Airports Council International, North America, which represents local, regional and state governing bodies that own and operate commercial airports in the United States and Canada.