Week in Review

Senate

The Senate voted 90-8 to pass its first appropriations bill of the year, a $37.5 billion measure that would fund energy and water programs. Democrats allowed the bill to advance after senators rejected a partisan amendment that would prohibit the Obama administration from buying heavy water from Iran’s nuclear program.

Senate Commerce Committee Chairman John Thune (R-S.D.) wants answers from Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg after it was reported that the site routinely suppressed conservative news from appearing on its “trending” list section. Zuckerberg later responded to the overall criticism by saying he would invite “leading conservatives and people from across the political spectrum” to discuss the issue.

Supreme Court nominee Merrick Garland filled out a questionnaire for the Senate, a traditional prerequisite to a Senate Judiciary Committee confirmation hearing. Sen. Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.) said Senate Republicans should consider confirming Garland in the lame-duck session if his party loses the presidential election in November.

Presumptive GOP presidential nominee Donald Trump was well-received by Senate Republican leaders during a visit to Capitol Hill, where he met with several lawmakers. Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) called the meeting “constructive” and said he urged the real estate mogul to focus on economic issues and tamp down on his proclivity for personal insults.

House

House Speaker Paul Ryan said he had a “very encouraging” meeting Trump, while adding that it would take more time for him to offer his full support to the presumptive nominee. If Ryan ends up backing Trump, it would likely signal the death of the Wisconsin Republican’s goal to make his party more aspirational on key policy areas. The two leaders have little in common besides their dislike of Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton.

The House passed several bills aimed at addressing opioid abuse. With the Senate passing similar legislation in March, the two chambers now plan hold a conference meeting to hash out a compromise bill they can send to President Obama before the summer congressional recess.

A federal judge ruled against the Obama administration in a case filed by the Republican-controlled House that challenges the portion of the Affordable Care Act dealing with “cost sharing.” The judge ruled that the government cannot reimburse insurance companies unless Congress appropriates the money.

Executive action

The Obama administration issued guidance to all U.S. public school districts saying they must allow transgender students to use the bathroom that matches their gender identity.