Kenneth Lee Jones gets a closer look at "Duet," a stainless steel sculpture by artist Jeff K. Laing, on Friday at the Benson Park Sculpture Garden in Loveland. Jones taught drama and fine art for more than 40 years and said, "I love to see beauty." ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Three Art Shows Three Loveland art events have dominated the first week in August for decades. Art in the Park came first around 1967 and started exhibiting wares by local artisans, first at Dwayne Webster Veterans Park and later at North Lake Park. Sculpture in the Park debuted next in 1984 as a juried show that exhibits sculptures from around the country at Benson Park Sculpture Garden. And the Loveland Sculpture Invitational arrived on the scene at the field southwest of Loveland High School in 1992 to finish off the triangle of premier art shows. Sculpture in the Park and Art in the Park remain, but the Loveland Sculpture Invitational has canceled future shows. A new event, possibly named the Loveland Invitational Fine Art and Wine Festival, will take its place this year. Dates: The three art shows will run the weekend of Aug. 7-9.

The hole left by the cancellation of the Loveland Sculpture Invitational won't be vacant for long.

After the Invitational confirmed in November it was not coming back in August 2015, at least two other promotion groups from outside Colorado contacted Loveland representatives about putting on an event during that art weekend.

New show

Candy Vermillion with Vermillion Promotions in Arizona confirmed with the city of Loveland last week that her group is moving forward to bring an art event to Loveland in August at the same time as Sculpture in the Park and Art in the Park. The name of her event tentatively is the Loveland Invitational Fine Art and Wine Festival.

Advertisement

In late 2014, the Loveland Sculpture Group decided to close the doors on the Loveland Sculpture Invitational because of rising costs, which caused discussion among local artists and groups in the area and around the country as to what might fill that void.

Lots of interest

"When the Invitational canceled, we were in the midst of a big art festival (in Arizona). I was bombarded by voicemail and email messages from artists that have participated in the Loveland Sculpture Invitational," Vermillion said in a phone interview.

"They were surprised and sad that it was being canceled and asked if we would be interested in making contact to do something similar for those dates in Loveland," she said.

In January, another group, Thunderbird Artists, inquired with the school district about renting the space near Loveland High School for an art event.

One-third of the event property is owned by the school district and two-thirds is owned by the city.

Thunderbird Artists contacted the Loveland Police Department this month about an event permit. This was months after Vermillion production had started the process with the city Parks and Recreation Department, so Vermillion was allowed to move forward because the city policy is first-come, first-served.

"(The Invitational) is an event that has been in the city for decades," said Betsey Hale, city economic development director, while explaining the confusion. "We haven't ever had a formalized process for utilizing the facilities (for the art events). There hasn't been this issue before because these events have always been there, long before any of us even started working for the city."

Good for Loveland

Fine art and wine

Vermillion Promotions looked at the reasons the Invitational was canceled. One way the company plans to cut costs is to require artists to furnish their own tents. Vermillion said the tents cost the Invitational thousands of dollars every year.

Vermillion said artists seemed interested in a show that would include not just sculpture but high-end two-dimensional art and other media.

Her team plans to create a cultural fair of paintings, mixed media, woodwork, metalwork and glass art.

"It won't be on the craft end. It will be on the fine-art end of the spectrum," she said.

The event will include wine tastings and entertainment such as Native American musicians, dancers and storytellers. It might also have artist demonstrations such as glass blowing and woodworking.

She has also been advised by artists that new and interesting food vendors would be a nice addition.

New festival logistics

The company plans to promote the show nationally, just like the Loveland Sculpture Invitational did, and staff members hope to pick up sculptors who didn't make it into Sculpture in the Park this year.

Vermillion hopes to secure 150 to 200 artists.

They are still deciding on pricing, but Vermillion believes they will charge somewhere in the range of $375 to $500 for booth space and allow artists to retain all sale income. The cost for visitors to enter the event probably will be $3 to $5.

Vermillion said that by starting an art event in Loveland, she hopes to cross-promote by promoting the Loveland art events at festivals in Arizona, while also promoting Arizona festivals to the national audience in Loveland.

Vermillion said the company's festivals in Arizona all partner with local nonprofit organizations. She understands that the Loveland Sculpture Invitational donated money to Thompson School District art programs, so she hopes to do something similar.

Response from existing shows

Polly Juneau with the Loveland High Plains Arts Council, which runs Sculpture in the Park, said the Vermillion show will be a nice complement to the sculpture show and the craft show.

She thinks it's exciting and is glad to know that Loveland will have something "up on the hill" to give people coming to town more choices.

Carolyn Pearce with Thompson Valley Art League, which coordinates Art in the Park, also said she is excited to welcome the new show to Loveland.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/jessicabenes.