Two activists — a professor and a pediatrician — were arrested last week in Burrillville while protesting the expansion of a natural gas pipeline and a proposed natural gas-fired plant.

The two may be on the extremes of the opposition against fracked gas and power plants that burn natural gas because of the impact on climate change. But they are part of a growing debate here and across the country about the conflict between economic growth and environmental protection and their effects on the quality of life.

The debate, and new questions, have been sparked by Invenergy’s proposal to build a $700-million, 900-megawatt natural gas-fired power plant in Burrillville.

Last Monday, I wrote that Governor Raimondo endorsed the plant while trying to strike a balance between economic development and environmental concerns. She said the plant would create new jobs in a troubled economy and a more predictable source of energy at lower costs. She also said the efficiency of the plant in Burrillville would displace plants that create more pollution.

Although the plant would be in the far northwest corner of the state, I suggested it would affect all Rhode Islanders and everyone should weigh in.

Many readers did, through letters, tweets and emails.

Here’s a sample of what they said:

Light the burners

Why are some environmentalists so adamant about the proposal of a natural-gas-fired power plant? Do they not realize that this would be the needed system until science and wind/solar technology makes advances?

Get a grip people! I didn't vote for Gov. Raimondo, but she is spot on advocating for this plant. Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse claims that with wind/solar power our rates will go down. Yeah, just like Obamacare!

I’m in favor of this new power plant.

Ed Hawk, Johnston

Is there enough gas?

I am an energy consultant with more than 30 years of international experience.

I am a strong supporter of natural gas-fired power generation, but I am having a hard time reconciling the construction of a new power plant with the ongoing claims that we do not have enough transmission capacity to move gas into this region during the high demand winters. Remember, this is supposedly why our existing electricity costs are so high.

While I am certainly aware that we have gas available, where is the transmission capacity coming from? Even with the highest of efficiency power plant designs I would imagine this plant would consume some 6,000-7,000 British thermal units (a unit of heat content) per kilowatt (a unit of energy). There's roughly 1,020 Btu per standard cubic foot of gas. You can do the math.