Federal workers want everyone on Obamacare except… federal workers

posted at 5:31 pm on September 14, 2013 by Jazz Shaw

It’s really turning out to be an Obamacare kind of weekend, even in the midst of all the Syria news. First, Erika reported that labor unions were out of luck when it comes to getting an exemption from Obamacare, and Ed reminded us that the system is fraught with security problems. Well, the administration will need to keep an eye on how many horses are getting out of the pen, because virtually all Federal Employees would prefer not to be enrolled, thank you very much.

From Merrill Matthews at Forbes:

Who knew that when President Obama promised, “If you like your health care plan, you will be able to keep your health care plan. Period,” he was only referring to federal employees … and himself? A new survey of 2,500 federal employees and retirees found that 92.3 percent believe federal workers should keep their current health insurance and not be forced into ObamaCare. Only 2.9 percent say they should become part of the new health insurance exchanges.

You always need to be cautious with surveys, particularly when you’re trying to hit such a specific demographic slice, but if you manage to ring up a number greater than 90 on one side of the equation you can be pretty sure that you’ve tapped into a significant majority. And Matthews has discovered a particularly biting bit of irony in these numbers which is probably already obvious to the majority of us. The lion’s share of federal workers are all organized in federal employee unions. Weren’t they some of the President’s most vocal and active supporters when this train wreck was being shoved through Congress in the first place?

What I’d like to know is how many of those federal employees so eager to avoid ObamaCare themselves supported forcing everyone else in it… To put it simply: Federal employees and retires almost unanimously prefer to stay in their generous taxpayer-funded health insurance program, known as the Federal Employees Health Benefit Plan (FEHBP), rather than being dumped into liberalism’s two greatest monuments to government-run health insurance, ObamaCare and Medicare. Speaks volumes, doesn’t it?

I can’t believe that there isn’t going to be some sort of eleventh hour, ride to the rescue maneuver to absolutely ensure that federal employees won’t face this awful fate. Staying on that fat, taxpayer funded Cadillac plan is the far better option, and Democrats don’t want that many union workers ticked off at them. But whatever the “solution” turns out to be, it won’t come as much comfort to all of the people on private plans who wind up getting forced onto the rolls. That would include workers, retirees and family members from UPS, IBM, Trader Joe’s and others.

But nobody really wants the GOP to keep trying to stop this bill, right? I mean, that would just be some silly people on the fringe.

Related Posts: