Purely as a political matter, Chief Justice John Roberts did the Republican party great good yesterday when he laughed the absurd King v. Burwell out of the Supreme Court. Now, the various Republican candidates can rouse the fury of The Base without ever having to present an alternative. And, also, by ruling the way he did, Roberts blunted the edge of any Democratic attacks about the future of the Court itself. However, deep in the base, there are people who know What's Really Going On, and they are not fooled.

Just blackmail one or two key conservative leaders to stop the GOP from blocking Obama's agenda. Just find out the weak link of a key opposition leader or government official and hold it over their heads. It's that simple. Suddenly sworn lifelong conservatives are giving Obama whatever he wants – Obamacare, Trans Pacific Partnership, massive tax increases, amnesty for illegals. The list is long. Am I being too cynical? Really? Did anyone suspect former House Speaker Dennis Hastert was a child molester who commited crimes with underage boys? Because he sure had everyone fooled. He looked like a choir boy. But he clearly did something terrible that forced him to agree to pay millions of dollars in blackmail.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

That's just logic right there.

The comments are an absolute delight.

This is dead simple. Justice Roberts has two adopted children. There were some shenanigans getting the adoption paper work done. The threat against him is not actually against him but against his adopted daughters that could be deported which would also devastate his wife and him. So, yes, Obama is blackmailing him with deporting his daughters. Pure Alinsky – can't attack the man so attack his family and a strong family commitment then becomes his achille's heel. Keep in mind how the Obama administration handles deportations. They enforce the law selectively. Illegal immigrant rapists and murders are let loose on the streets but cross them and your adopted children will be deported.This is all documented. I saw an article somewhere some time after the first Obamacare decision that was butchered by Roberts about his adopted children. Do the research. It's there. But it was a back page little blurb that could have been blown up into a national scandal and possibly have removed Roberts from the bench. But nothing came of it. Why? Because they knew they would need it again later. Now apply this to Boehner, McConnell, military leaders, anyone at all that gets in the way. Make them an offer they can't refuse.

I think "This is all documented. I saw an article somewhere sometime..." is my favorite attribution ever. And the same Supreme Court just ruled that there is a constitutional right to same-sex marriage.

Wake up, sheeple!!!