Brookings, SD

Craft beer is rapidly growing in popularity across the country -- and some could argue that it's solely a man's drink.

But a group of beer-loving women in Brookings is changing that stereotype while gathering to explore the feminine side of the fashionable beverage.

At lunchtime in downtown Brookings, a few dozen women gather around at Wooden Legs Brewing Company.

The women are members of the "Girls Pint Out," a newly-created women's group centered around good beer and good company.

"I love it," Rebecca Tilberg said. "I think it's great."

Rebecca Tilberg met this table of new friends at one of the monthly events.

"Women can get together and meet each other and create those relationships, talk about beer, taste beer," Tilberg said.

"It was really fun to find a place to go to drink good beer and meet other people who appreciate it," Bri Thicke said.

Girls Pint Out is a national organization with more than 50 chapters in 30 states.

It was brought to Brookings in January by Cassie TenCate and Charmaine Houck - two women passionate about craft beer.

"Marketing has lost the sight of the women," Charmain Houk said, co-founder of Brooking's Girls Pint Out. "There is something out there called 'chick beer' and I would never drink it because it's actually offensive to me."

They also noticed there wasn't a group where they could explore the en-vogue beverage with female friends.

"It's a really open table conversation about beer," Cassie Tenkate said, co-founder of Brooking's Girls Pint Out.

Beer is typically considered a man's drink, but with events centered around knitting and cupcake-pairing, it counteracts that perception with lady-like flair.

"We've gone out and made a movement for women to try different beer. To talk about beer and understand the flavor profile because I love a good Scotch Ale because it has that deep roasty caramel note to it. That's what I enjoy. Other people really like that green hoppy flavor of an IPA," Houk said.

It's proven effective, with a couple dozen women coming to the newly-formed events. They range in age from 21 to ladies in their 50s.

"It's been a really great ride," Houk said. "It's only three months but we keep getting more and more women showing up to our events so it's exciting."

The rules are as free-flowing as the craft beer. Membership is free and men, we'll they're not turned away, either. The co-founders say it's just a chance for craft beer lovers to explore varieties they've never otherwise been exposed too.

"When there are all those different options and you can try a lot of different things. I think that it can bring out more of people's creativity and open up their minds a little bit," Tilberg said.

And for Tilberg and her beer-loving friends, they're happy for the opportunity to get together.

Featured Stories

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.