Victoria Harrell of Clayton supports Donald Trump and her reason is simple. Trump has said he wants to repeal Obamacare.

“We cannot afford the Affordable Care Act,” Harrell said.

The Dothan Eagle randomly asked 50 people attending Older Americans Day in Dothan on Wednesday who they support for president - Hillary Clinton, Donald Trump, or other/none of the above?

Twenty-eight respondents said they support Trump. Eleven said they support Hillary Clinton and eleven others said they would vote for neither or someone else.

Harrell said the Affordable Care Act has affected her adversely since its inception.

“It hasn’t been good for my family. We need to get rid of it,” Harrell said. “We need a change. It’s about time. Trump is fighting.”

Below are a few responses from Wiregrass seniors when asked their presidential preference.

» “Trump. No question. He talks the truth. Hillary lies too much, and I’m a Democrat.” Mary Cleem, Cowarts.

» “I’m voting for anyone who runs against Hillary Clinton.” Charlotte Sherrill, Enterprise.

» “Neither. You could take a farmer and put him in there and he would do better than either one.” Joe Ann Chason, Dothan.

» “Hillary. She is not as arrogant as Trump is.” Edgar DuBose, Dothan.

» “Trump. He tells it like it is. He’ll make America great again.” Judy Sevec, Dothan.

» “Trump. The way it is now, Republicans and Democrats, they all want the same thing. We need a change.” Tony Sevec, Dothan.

» “Hillary. I hope she’ll do the right thing.” Valerie Wheeler, Dothan.

» “Trump. Hillary was underneath the tutelage of a socialist. I don’t support her or her husband, either one. I don’t think she speaks for women. She doesn’t speak for me.” Teri McPhail, Graceville, Florida.

» “I suppose it is the lesser of two evils with Trump, but I do not like at all how he relates to foreign leaders. I think it’s dangerous,” Debbie DuBose, Enterprise.

» “Voting against Hillary. I like the way Trump talks, even though I don’t think he can get half of the stuff done that he talks about.” Bobby Hadden, Wicksburg.

» “Trump. I live by myself. I can vote for who I want to.” Ann Croley, Enterprise.

» “Hillary. I don’t like Trump’s attitude. He talks too much. He just talks all the time.” Velma Henderson, Ashford.

» “I wouldn’t vote for Hillary Clinton for dog catcher. I think Trump is brash, but I think he will get good people around him.” Donna Sabel, Cottonwood.

Well more than 1,000 seniors from throughout the Wiregrass attended the annual older Americans event, which featured live music from The Classics, skit contests, door prizes and other events. This year’s event theme was “Once Upon a Rhyme.”

Older Americans Day also featured food and several sponsors’ booths. The annual event is organized by the Southern Alabama Regional Council on Aging.