Seeking to increase traction ahead of the June primary, Republican governor candidate Doug Burgum has been taking political aim at his party's endorsed candidate, Wayne Stenehjem, using the Affordable Care Act for leverage.

The two governor hopefuls have dueled in campaign advertisements in recent days over Stenehjem's record on Obamacare. Burgum launched his offensive wielding a 2015 lawsuit with Stenehjem's name on it that supported Obamacare premium subsidies. Stenehjem is fighting back with a 2010 lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of Obamacare, which he signed onto for the state.

Burgum is challenging Stenehjem in the primary for the Republican slot for governor on the November general election ballot.

Burgum's campaign points out Stenehjem was the only Republican attorney general to join 21 Democrat counterparts in opposing petitioners in King vs. Burwell. Petitioners sought to overturn Obamacare by arguing the health care act allowed subsidies for state-run health exchanges but failed to provide the same subsidies for the federal health exchange. North Dakota did not set up an exchange, preferring that residents sign up for health insurance through the federal exchange. The Supreme Court ruled the subsidies do apply to the federal exchange as well as state exchanges.

"The impact of this lawsuit on our state's policy holders would have been devastating," Stenehjem said in a statement released Monday. "Over 15,000 North Dakota Obamacare policyholders would have been denied the federal credit they counted on to help pay the premiums they were required by law to buy.

"That's a pretty major income tax increase for thousands of middle and low-income families. Maybe Doug Burgum thinks only he should get federal tax credits and not hard-working North Dakota families," he added.

Stenehjem has been running his own ad. The ad doesn't address King vs. Burwell but refers to the 2010 lawsuit to overturn Obamacare that he signed. There have been a series of lawsuits challenging Obamacare. The Supreme Court upheld the healthcare act in 2012.

Stenehjem countered he has long opposed Obamacare "as yet another example of the administration's inclination for federal overreach, an unwarranted intrusion into our personal lives and a violation of constitutional rights."

"Few in North Dakota have been fighting harder against Obamacare than I have," he said.

Burgum's campaign called Stenehjem's response misleading. His most recent action on Obamacare is what voters should be looking at, according to the campaign.

"The truth is Wayne sided with Democrats at the Supreme Court in a case that was Republicans' last, best chance to stop Obamacare in the courts," said Robert Harms, campaign spokesman. "If Wayne was really fighting for North Dakotans, he forgot to consider the thousands of North Dakota small business owners who are facing higher mandated costs and had to reduce jobs because of Obamacare, as well as the thousands of policy holders who are being forced to pay higher premiums and may lose their health care plans."