It's a rare day when not only the New York Times but also MSNBC slobber all over the most embattled GOP member of the United States Senate, Illinois' own Mark Kirk. And it's a rare week when real, honest, pro-business structural reform in Illinois becomes law.

Yet, during a week when we've been overwhelmed by Mayor Rahm Emanuel's meltdown over the Laquan McDonald shooting and related police abuse accusations, both acts actually occurred. Wonders never cease.

The Kirk plaudits came after the senator, who can carom from being a real moderate to being as hard-line as they come, was the only Republican in the chamber to vote for a proposal by Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., to prevent people on the government's terror watch list from purchasing guns and explosives.

The action prompted MSNBC's Lawrence O'Donnell—a card-carrying liberal, as my tea party friends might say—to praise Kirk's "profile in courage." Said a Times editorial, as "another bloody massacre" occurred in California, Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz and other presidential wannabes voted no, but Kirk voted yes.

And Kirk and Maine's Susan Collins also were the only GOP senators to vote against a measure repealing Obamacare that's headed toward a presidential veto.

Of course, while such votes will help Kirk in a November general election, they may stir some restiveness on the Republican right. A new Ogden & Frye poll published in Illinois Observer gives Kirk just a 37.6 percent job approval rating among likely GOP primary voters, compared with 70.8 percent for Gov. Bruce Rauner. With Kirk facing two primary foes—both admittedly little known and poorly funded—this situation is worth watching.

Team Kirk replies that his approval rating is higher in some other polls, including a Washington Post survey.

Meanwhile, Rauner today is speaking at an Illinois Manufacturers Association lunch, and he'll have some news for his listeners: He's signing a bill to reform and cut costs in Illinois' unemployment insurance program.

The deal, negotiated last month amid the state's budget war, received final legislative approval earlier this week. And House Speaker Michael Madigan didn't put a brick on the bill, as has happened with some other measures, but sent it right down to the second floor of the Capitol.

Now, maybe we can get back to bashing Rahm some more.