If your mom is constantly asking you whether you’re dating anyone or when you’ll be getting married already, the startup behind a couple of new websites wants to help.

Soon-to-be-launched sites invisiblegirlfriend.com and invisibleboyfriend.com plan to provide social media proof, including text messages and photos, that you are currently in a relationship, which should hopefully be enough to temporarily alleviate incessant queries from friends and family.

While having dinner with your parents and inquisitive friends, you can text your new girlfriend or boyfriend and, guess what--they’ll text you right back.

Related: Proposing the Kimye Way: Why Romance Is Getting Really Expensive

“Put simply, this platform helps you create credible, reasonable stories that you can bring home to a curious mom, your buddies, and coworkers,” the site says. “These stories are backed by virtual and real-world social proof.”

The service may also appeal to people in a same-sex relationship they’re hiding from disapproving relatives or to those trying to avoid unwelcome advances from a coworker, as creator Matt Homann told BuzzFeed.

The service got some pre-launch buzz last year, but it still hasn’t officially started yet. The curious can apply to join a private beta, which will be launching this fall.

You can pick your new girlfriend or boyfriend’s name and age, and even flesh out their personality, all for “a small one-time fee.” If you lack creative inspiration, the sites will help you craft a story about where and how you two met and who took the first brave step.

Related: 10 Best Cities for Jobs That Let You Have a Life

In the longer term, the company is planning to add other ways to communicate with your non-existent significant other, such as phone calls and voicemails, as well as gifts, personalized notes and flower deliveries.

The company isn’t completely making up those virtual partners it provides. Users can volunteer to become an invisible girlfriend or boyfriend by simply submitting a selfie. They won’t be paid for the first photo, but if someone selects the picture as their fake special someone, they’ll be paid for each additional selfie they submit.

The company says it will never share the real identities of those submitting selfies with anyone else and also promises it will even use their zip codes to make sure the photos aren’t available to users in the same area.

What happens when mom wants to meet your significant other? You broke up, of course, because you found someone new. He’s invisible…of course.

Top Reads from The Fiscal Times: