It is just one phrase in the Jan. 28 letter confirming that Randy Mastro, the high-powered and politically connected trial lawyer from New York, had been hired to represent the office of Gov. Chris Christie in the George Washington Bridge and Hoboken Sandy aid scandals.

“Assisting in its internal review” is the phrase placed into the letter. And it means that Mastro and his New York-based collection of lawyers are helping Christie’s office pick apart its inner workings to “figure out what really happened here” before the scandals erupted, according to a Christie spokesman.

It is also a phrase ­— and a mandate — that has some lawyers and state legislators questioning Mastro’s “true goals” as private counsel to the governor’s office.

Is the aggressive litigator using the internal review process as a cloak, they ask, as he takes investigative steps aimed more directly at protecting Christie personally in the scandals?

The lawyers and Democratic legislators cite Mastro’s recent tactic of sending out letters asking for handwritten notes and other information from key figures such as a former Christie staff member, along with outsiders who have fired accusations at Christie’s office, including Hoboken Mayor Dawn Zimmer. It appears, they argue, that Mastro could be trying to learn whether there is any evidence that might implicate Christie in the scandals.

And if that’s the case, say the lawyers, then New Jersey’s taxpayers, who are footing the bill for Mastro’s services, are in effect paying for Christie’s personal attorney.

“So what were they (Mastro’s team of lawyers) going to do with the unredacted journal notes from Zimmer they asked for?” says Stanley Brand, a nationally known political corruption lawyer. “Why do they need them, to make a defense case for the governor?”

Brand, who was a lawyer to White House press secretary George Stephanopoulos in the Whitewater scandal of the 1990s, also says, “Bill Clinton had to pay for his own lawyer in Whitewater,” ultimately spending millions of dollars.

Some legal experts and legislators also question whether Mastro is trying to intimidate central witnesses by requesting detailed personal documents and sit-down interviews.

“It’s an intimidating position to be put in for Zimmer because she could be made to look as uncooperative if she doesn’t hand over the information Mastro is looking for,” says John Wisniewski, a Democratic state legislator and outspoken Christie critic, who serves as a co-chair of a bipartisan state legislative committee investigating the scandals.

And still others say they have doubts about whether the billing rate of $650 an hour for Mastro and his legal team amounts to an overall “discount,” as Mastro has said.

State Sen. Raymond Lesniak (D-Union), who is not on the investigative committee, says simply that he views the internal review by the governor’s office as “a waste of time, effort and money” because it will have “an inherent credibility problem because those involved include very close associates of the governor himself.”

The governor’s office stands firmly behind its hiring of Mastro’s legal team, which is based out of the Park Avenue office of his prominent law firm, Gibson Dunn & Crutcher. The team has been retained to do important work on behalf of New Jerseyans, the office says, such as conduct the internal review and respond to sweeping subpoenas issued by state legislators and by U.S. Attorney Paul Fishman, who is leading a separate inquiry into the scandals.

“Just as the outside counsel hired by the Assembly Democrats (to help the investigative committee) is being compensated by the public, so too is the team hired by the administration,” said Colin Reed, a Christie spokesman.

“Gibson Dunn’s role is to conduct an internal review so we can figure out what really happened here. It’s in the public’s interests to gather all the facts and prevent something like this from ever happening again … and once the review is complete and the facts are known, the governor intends to make the findings public.”

Christie’s office has also said Gibson Dunn would “bring an outside, third-party perspective to the situation” and “take an independent look” at what happened.

Still, asks Brand, “Who is Gibson Dunn’s client? Because some of the types of things they (Gibson Dunn lawyers) are doing seem to me to spill over into personal representation” of the governor. And some New Jersey lawyers contend that even the “optics” of Christie’s office using Mastro do not look good: They point out that Mastro was deputy mayor and chief of staff to former New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, a close and powerful confidant of Christie’s who has repeatedly appeared on national talk shows in recent months to defend Christie.

Mastro did not return telephone calls seeking his comment for this story.

THE SCANDALS

The George Washington Bridge scandal burst onto the national stage on Jan. 8, after emails emerged showing that Bridget Anne Kelly, a Christie deputy chief of staff, and David Wildstein, a Christie ally who held a high-ranking position at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, had orchestrated the closure of access lanes to the bridge, triggering traffic jams in Fort Lee. It is believed that the closures may have been political payback directed at Fort Lee Mayor Mark Sokolich, a Democrat, after he declined to endorse the Republican governor for re-election.

Ten days after that scandal broke, Zimmer accused Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno and other Christie officials of threatening last spring to withhold Hurricane Sandy relief funds from her city unless she backed a real-estate development project tied to Christie ally, Port Authority chairman David Samson.

Mastro was hired by Christie’s office in January, and by early February, he began sending letters to Sokolich, Zimmer, Kelly, Wildstein and others, seeking interviews with them and important documents. (To date, Sokolich’s office has turned over some information to Mastro but several others, such as Zimmer, have declined.)

For instance, in a Feb. 4 letter sent to Zimmer’s lawyer, Mastro asked for “complete, unredacted copies of all documents that Mayor Zimmer has provided to others such as the U.S. Attorney’s Office and the press, including any handwritten notes or correspondence, relating to her allegations, and other documents relating to Hoboken’s requests for Sandy-related aid.”

Those letters from Mastro have raised questions about the motivations and tactics being used by Gibson Dunn as it assists the governor’s office in its “internal review.”

“If you were to do an internal investigation, and be true to your words, you talk to the people on your staff, under your control,” Wisniewski says, adding, “At its best, the retention of Mastro and his team is a defensive move by the governor. At its worst, it’s a move that will delay and confound the other investigations into the scandals that are taking place.”

He also says, “If a true internal investigation was desired, then why on the day that Bridget Kelly was told that she was terminated for ordering the lane closures at the bridge, did no one in the governor’s office sit down with her and do an exit interview, and ask a real simple question: ‘Bridget, why did you do it?’ ”

COST TO TAXPAYERS

Gibson Dunn’s plush New York lobby rests on the 47th floor of the MetLife Building, towering above Park Avenue. Regal artwork hangs from the walls, and awards for excellent legal services sit on polished tables. Nearby, immense windows offer an awe-inspiring view: The vastness of Manhattan sweeping uptown, into the Bronx.

Recently, as some legal experts have questioned Mastro’s goals and tactics, others have questioned how much the taxpayers of New Jersey should be paying for Gibson Dunn’s hourly work. Some argue the “grunt work” of producing subpoenaed documents to investigators could be handled by state government lawyers for two or three times less than the rate being charged by Mastro.

In addition, even though Mastro has said Gibson Dunn’s professionals assigned to the scandals are each using the one-size-fits-all, “discounted” rate of $650 an hour, other experts say they question whether the rate is a discount.

Called a “blended rate” in law-firm speak, the rate presumably means that younger associates at the firm have ratcheted up their normal rates, which experts say are likely hundreds of dollars less than $650.

Just which — and how many — Gibson Dunn lawyers and professionals are “billing out” each day is unclear. Requests made to both Mastro’s office and the governor’s office asking for a list of the Gibson Dunn professionals working the scandals — along with their titles and typical billing rates — have gone unanswered. A similar open public records request made with Christie’s office has been denied.

IN WHOSE INTERESTS?

Brand and other lawyers acknowledge that Christie is not a named target in the investigations, an important point, they say, while noting that if Christie were a named target he would have to retain a personal attorney. They also note that the governor has repeatedly denied any involvement in — or awareness of — wrongdoing.

In addition, some attorneys say they see “nothing improper” about the actions Mastro has taken on behalf of the governor’s office.

“Mastro has the perfect right to interview any potential witnesses on behalf of his client,” says Joseph Hayden, a defense lawyer and former state prosecutor. “The individuals involved here are represented by skilled lawyers who can make appropriate decisions. They can talk to him or not.”

Still, Brand claims Mastro’s private-lawyer role in representing the office of the governor at least raises potential issues of conflict.

For instance, he says, “What if Mastro interviews a witness who incriminates the governor. What does he do then? Or incriminates a higher-up. What does he do?”

At that point, say some experts, Gibson Dunn would likely be obligated to reiterate to Christie’s office that its duty, in representing the office of the governor, is to the public — and thus it might be obligated to disclose what it has learned to the public or investigators.

Yet some lawyers also point out that disclosing such information could involve Christie’s office having to waive its attorney-client privilege or government-process privilege with Gibson Dunn, which could place it in a powerful but conflicted position.

What is more, says Michael P. Ambrosio, an ethics professor at Seton Hall law school, Christie might also be able exert “executive privilege” on behalf of the office, to keep information learned by Gibson Dunn from coming out.

“It may be in the governor’s interest to disclose the full scope of what the review found,” Ambrosio says. “Or there may be some legitimate reasons for asserting the executive privilege, because of the injury that could rebound to the office itself, not only now but in the future.

“Politically, he might be better off … letting it all come out,” Ambrosio added. “All privileges are a hindrance to the truth.

“But it might boil down to a prudential judgment by Christie: What is reasonable under the circumstances?"