By Isadora Rangel of TCPalm

Treasure Coast congressional candidate Mark Freeman's response Monday to accusations he made racist comments at a forum last week has been to criticize President Barack Obama for "expanding the welfare state" and worsening race relations in the country.

The Republican received criticism from both parties after he accused Obama of giving black people "free stuff" during a forum for GOP candidates in the District 18 race. He was responding to a question about what candidates would do to address racial tensions in the country.

"(Obama) paints a picture of envy to our black citizens," Freeman said during the April 21 forum in Stuart. "And the envy drives hatred and then he says to them, 'You've got it coming for free. These rich people owe you,' and on top of that he gives them free stuff, too, and that just is anti-American and it complicates our relations between the races and really we need to have compassion for these people and we need to allow them the education they need so that they can have self worth ... and become productive citizens."

Freeman declined to comment Monday.

Democratic candidate Randy Perkins' campaign posted a video online with audio of Freeman's response and asked him to apologize. Freeman's comments also drew criticism from Calvin Turnquest, a black Republican from Tequesta who unsuccessfully ran for the seat in 2014 and now supports Freeman's opponent, Rick Kozell in the Aug. 30 GOP primary. Turnquest called Freeman's comment offensive to black Americans and attributed them "to his comfort of existing in a bubble of ignorance."

Freeman, a Boca Raton doctor, responded Monday with a news release in which he called Perkins a "socialist" and listed programs as examples of how Obama expanded welfare.

The release mentions a U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2014 report that found more than 23 percent of Americans received government assistance in 2011, more than in the previous 18 years. However, welfare reliance began trending up in 2008 with the beginning of the economic recession and before Obama took office in 2009, the report shows.

Freeman cited his opposition to these programs:

"Cash for cars for select Americans": Obama signed the Cash for Clunkers into law in 2009 to stimulate the economy and reduce carbon emissions by allowing car owners to trade their older less fuel-efficient cars for up to $4,500 in credits that go toward buying newer more fuel-efficient cars. Participants in the program were more likely to be white and had higher incomes than people who didn't participate, a 2013 Brookings Institution study found. The study also found the program failed to reach most of its goals.

Obama signed the Cash for Clunkers into law in 2009 to stimulate the economy and reduce carbon emissions by allowing car owners to trade their older less fuel-efficient cars for up to $4,500 in credits that go toward buying newer more fuel-efficient cars. Participants in the program were more likely to be white and had higher incomes than people who didn't participate, a 2013 Brookings Institution study found. The study also found the program failed to reach most of its goals. "Reduced mortgage for select homeowners": Obama has proposed to change rules to make it easier for some homeowners to refinance their mortgages and to cut fees for mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration.

Obama has proposed to change rules to make it easier for some homeowners to refinance their mortgages and to cut fees for mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration. "Free Obama phones": The Lifeline program provides a $9.25 per month subsidy for welfare recipients to buy phone service. The program was created during the Ronald Reagan administration and expanded under President George W. Bush to include cellphones. It became known as "Obama phone" largely after a video went viral showing a black Obama supporter saying "Everybody in Cleveland, low minority got Obama phone."

The Lifeline program provides a $9.25 per month subsidy for welfare recipients to buy phone service. The program was created during the Ronald Reagan administration and expanded under President George W. Bush to include cellphones. It became known as "Obama phone" largely after a video went viral showing a black Obama supporter saying "Everybody in Cleveland, low minority got Obama phone." "Free Internet service:" Obama announced last year the ConnectHome plan to bring low-cost or free broadband service and training to low-income households.

Obama announced last year the ConnectHome plan to bring low-cost or free broadband service and training to low-income households. "Obamacare:" Congress passed the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and it provides subsidies for people earning up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level to buy health insurance.

Freeman is the best-funded of the eight Republicans in the race, largely by using $1.2 million of his own money. Perkins of Delray Beach is the best-funded candidate in both parties, also largely because of about $2 million he put into the race. Perkins and Freeman live outside District 18, which covers Martin, St. Lucie and northern Palm Beach counties and includes predominately black areas, such as northwest Fort Pierce.

They are running to replace Democrat Patrick Murphy, who's leaving his seat to run for U.S. Senate.