A small group of people demonstrate against police violcence in Grand Central Station on Dec. 22 in New York City. The demonstration was held in response to the deaths of police officers Wenjian Liu and Rafael Ramos, of the 84th Precinct, who were killed execution style on December 20 as they sat in their marked police car on a Brooklyn street corner. (Photo: Getty Images)

The only person with blood on his hands is the killer. So let’s bag the hyperbole.

The tragic murder of two police officers is horrible enough without the rapid-fire finger-pointing.

It didn’t help to paint all cops as racist monsters after the killing of several young unarmed Black men by police officers. It doesn’t help now to paint protesters and their political supporters as complicit in the murder of two New York City cops.

Ismaaiyl Brinsley, the gunman who killed himself after shooting the officers Dec. 20, was motivated by his own evil demons. His deranged “justification” for the killings was the deaths of Eric Garner and Michael Brown, two unarmed Black men killed by police.

But a killer’s ranting on Instagram does not mean demonstrators or elected officials who criticized police have “blood on the hands,” as Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association President Patrick Lynch suggested.

It does not mean protests created a toxic environment that bred a cop killer. Former New York Gov. George Pataki called the killings a “predictable outcome” of “anti-cop rhetoric.”

That’s as off-base as Pima County Sheriff Clarence Dupnik blaming the 2011 shooting of former Rep. Gabby Giffords on the “vitriol and rhetoric” of right-wing talk shows. Jared Loughner, who killed six people and wounded 13, was insane.

Brinsley had a long criminal record and a history of mental instability.

It is truly frightening that his posts promising to “put wings on pigs” garnered “likes” on Instagram, where the hashtag “shootthepolice” is no longer searchable. But on Twitter, that despicable hashtag and several similar ones draw comments from those who urge violence against the police.

Shall we blame the killings on social media?

Politicians, protesters and others with big microphones should work to pull the plug on the blame game.

That means acknowledging the reality expressed by Dante Fernal at a makeshift memorial to the murdered officers in Brooklyn’s Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood. He told USA TODAY that the police had cleaned up the projects where he lived. He gets along “just fine” with the guys at the local precinct. A lot of people do.

Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams called for a pause in protests over the deaths of Garner and Brown: “It’s time for New Yorkers to come together.”

The same is true for the rest of the nation. Americans need to work together, not scratch each other’s eyes out.

An undertone of peace permeated a vigil for two slain NYPD police officers, as family and community leaders urged healing and togetherness in the wake of the crime.

Police face dangers every day. It’s a part of the job that needs to be acknowledged by those who accuse cops of being trigger happy and those who want to blame the murder of two police officers on anti-cop rhetoric.

Fatal ambushes are among the leading causes of firearm-related police deaths, according to USA TODAY, citing an analysis by the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund. It’s been that way for years, long before anyone heard of Brown or Garner.

It’s also long been an ugly fact of American life that young black men feel singled out by police officers.

These issues are both about public safety. They are not mutually exclusive, and they should not be reduced to sound-bite sized rants.

So hold the grandstanding. It isn’t doing anybody any good.

Americans need to meet on common ground, not trample each other in a self-righteous race to claim the higher ground.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1BiuCxr