Topics: Allen Kurzweil, Books, Editor's Picks, Interview With My Bully, Life News

It’s safe to say that Allen Kurzweil doesn’t let sleeping dogs lie. The author undertook a global, decades-long search to find his childhood bully before he was even aware that it all might add up to something beyond personal redemption (or revenge). The resulting book, “Whipping Boy: The Forty-Year Search for My Twelve-Year-Old Bully” is by turns probing, dead-serious and buoyant — it’s a gripping work of sleuthing and personal memoir. There’s a Monty Python quality to the entire endeavor, and there’s no doubt that the story would make great musical theater.

But “Whipping Boy” is a harrowing book, too. It will leave anyone who was ever treated cruelly as a child asking themselves if they would ever have the nerve to face up to that bully. In many ways, it’s about ripping off the layers of adulthood to the very core — to find that child still there, just waiting for discovery. Not just the child inside the victim, but the child inside the bully, too.

We spoke to Kurzweil from his home in Rhode Island about the pain of digging into the past, the slippery quality of personal memory, and the sweet taste of revenge.

Bullying is a somber topic. When I first heard about the book, I thought it would be this really intense psychological journey and very, very dark. The book, though, is full of these funny and gleeful moments. Was it fun for you to write?

The easiest parts of the book were a joy to write and fun. But the darker aspects were tremendously difficult. I was rescued from the time I spent exploring those moments of humiliation and anguish by the outrageous probability of Cesar’s adult activities. So yes, by the time I sat down to write the book, there were parts of it that were really, really fun to piece together. The journalist in me loved those aspects of the story that lingered on the preposterousness of Cesar’s professional life. But the final portions of the writing, which were those moments when I really was digging deeper into the anguish that precipitated the inquiry in the first place, were very challenging and did not come easily. I think I came to it backwards, in that I tiptoed around the subject of the bully and of Cesar and whether or not I would write the book as a book. It was only when I found myself in a law firm with 14 boxes of criminal discovery materials that I realized there was very clearly a book in this search. I think the notion of bullying and particularly the genre of memoir writing is predicated on this soul-searching, anguish-filled presentation of self, which is not something that comes naturally to me. I tend to be somewhat whimsical in nature. So there is a bit of dissonance between my temperament and the subject I chose to write about.

Many of us have had bullies. Clearly one of the things that really helped you in writing this book is that other people who had had bullies were cheering you on and they were willing to go out of their way to help you find this guy.

That was one of the amazing and unexpected dividends of this research. I’ve never before pursued a subject where people were not only so willing, but eager to assist me in my research, not because of any journalistic confidence, but because they had an allegiance to me by virtue of the motivating force behind the search. Almost without exception every one of my informants had had a Cesar of one kind or another in his or her past.

Those experiences, a lot of people kind of bury them. How much of this was really a part of your adult life? How much did you really think about it? Was it kind of hidden back there and you had to open the box on it?

Both. I had rendered Cesar into harmless anecdote. He was just a story to tell at a barbecue or a dinner party, almost for comic relief. But I think that that was a defense mechanism for the deeper trauma and I think what has surprised me, subsequent to the publication of “Whipping Boy,” is how there’s this entire contingent of people who have suffered childhood abuse who sublimate or who sweep it under the rug, and then suddenly find themselves resurrecting those childhood memories while reading “Whipping Boy” and then getting in touch with me. I’m in my mid-50s and folks in their 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, I mean I’ve gotten letters from grandmothers in their 70s, who grew up assuming it was not OK to carry that childhood suffering into adulthood. So they did try and forget it, overlook it. But I have to say the minute the subject comes up, out come the names of childhood persecutors, out come the stories of this and that. I did a reading last week here in Providence, and yet again someone had to raise his hand, and basically it became a session where everyone named his or her bully. This guy stood up and said, “When I was growing up, Ted Danson tied me to a radiator with a rope and told me I better figure out how to get out of it before the heat started to come on.”

On a more serious note, there’s a Russian woman who was abused as a 6-year-old who’s asking my counsel whether she should hire a detective — a 72-year-old grandmother. The most incredible thing is I’ve gotten three emails from guys my age who responded favorably to “Whipping Boy” because they used it as an opportunity for the first time to acknowledge that they had been mercilessly bullied by Cesar. So one of them told me, “I’ve finally told my wife about what happened.” For all of the anti-bullying intervention programs, I don’t think there’s much effort made to acknowledge the connection between an older generation of parents who were bullied and the cyberbullying and all of these anti-bullying initiatives that are currently being promulgated and put through. There’s a virtue to actually trying to create a program in which, instead of distinguishing how cyberbullying is so different from what happened to us as parents, as kids, it might behoove us to try and dig deeper to the universal aspects of humiliation that the parents and children all suffer, even if the technology has changed.

In some ways Cesar, I hate to say this, but he did you a favor by being this bizarre character — in literary terms.

He was a gift, in literary terms, but also I would argue even beyond that, emotionally. If it had not been for Cesar, I don’t think I would have burrowed as deeply into earlier traumas of my early childhood. By participating in an act of vandalism that really was a precipitating force for the search, which was the loss of my father’s watch. He enabled me to spend far too much time, sitting at my desk reflecting on what it all meant, and resurrecting memories of my dad. If I had to rewrite the opening of the book where I refer to him as a menace and a muse, I think I would also say that it was a mitzvah, it was a blessing, that he has given me an opportunity to write about something of importance I might not otherwise have explored.

The setting of the boarding school at the beginning of the book is kind of an unusual setting, with all these kids who are from all over the world. How do you think that that particular setting impacted what happened and the torture that you endured at that time?

There’s two responses that come to mind. First of all, I don’t think that the kind of torment to which I was subjected was unique to Aiglon. If you had gone to any of the other local boarding schools, or even in the United States in the 1970s with hazing and abuse, etc., the sort of nature of that I don’t think is unique to Aiglon. However, Aiglon as an educational institution unquestionably is anomalous. It was, for good and for bad, a totally insane education institution. It’s not nearly as rogue in its organization as it was back then. But back then, it was this extraordinarily eccentric combination of military-style, Etonian, rank-obsessed public school, in the English sense of the word, coupled with this free-spirited, free-loving, early 1970s, Buddhist, spiritual pedagogy of its founding headmaster, who was a vegetarian, asthmatic, who somehow managed to combine this insane 36-page rulebook with a kind of laissez-faire attitude that you would never, ever be able to pull off today. I liked a lot of it. I obviously loathed the time I had to spend with Cesar. But I found it incredibly fun to be kicked out of the school for three days and told to hike around the mountains with a couple of other kids with no surveillance whatsoever by adults as an 11-year-old. Obviously that would never happen today.

I think that from a cinematic point of view, Aiglon is unique, it’s got those incredible vistas and weird foods. But as far as kids being bullied I think that was pretty commonplace; I say this with knowledge now gleaned from very heated and lengthy series of exchanges on the Facebook alumni page in the wake of the publication of the book. There were stories that come out in the Facebook page that are much more concerning than the one I tell. And then there’s a whole range of people who are very defensive about the reputation of the school, and challenge that perspective. So it’s a somewhat polarizing subject. But I think that the particular situation of a particular dormitory I was in, unfortunately encouraged or turned a blind eye to the abuses that Cesar and some other kids were inflicting on the smaller students. [brief interruption] The story that I tell is specific not only to the location or to the school, but to the specific year in which it took place. Because a year later there was a new housemaster and much less of the kind of torment that I received.