When it comes to reading, Larry Yoder says age limitations are passé. A bookseller and buyer at The Bookies, Yoder, 70, is the kind of guy who hands ” Divergent” to parents and persuades them to take a chance on a title some might mistake as kid lit.

Proudly, he boasts that a lot of parents take the bait. With some customers coming in his doors looking for reads with low time commitments and gripping stories, Yoder says many of his adult patrons are turning more frequently to Young Adult books.

“You know what the difference between a good adult book and a good young adult book is? A hundred pages,” Yoder quips. “When they want entertainment, if they can get something compacted that has entertaining aspects to it, [adults] will go to the YA book.”

Circulation data from the Denver Public Libraryshows that between January and May, 68 percent of YA check-outs came from readers above the age of 18 (in 2013 it was near 70 percent, too). And according to a 2012 market research study, 55 percent of YA book consumers were older than 18, with the biggest segment slotted in the 30-44 age range.

“We’ve never had so many YA books,” says Judy Bulow, the children’s book buyer for the Tattered Cover book stores. “Over the years it’s grown because I think that aspect of childhood has grown.” When Bulow was 17, “you were off working; you’d given up the things of a child by 18. But now, I think you’re considered young for a long, long time.”

Alongside the adult crossover craze into YA fiction — thanks to the fan bases behind such best sellers-turned-blockbusters as “Harry Potter,” “Twilight,” “The Hunger Games” and “Divergent” — is a rising stigma attached to adults reading down their age ladder.

It’s a sentiment that has been the subject of online screeds plastered on news sites such as Slate, where writer Ruth Graham, in a piece titled “Against YA,” last week wrote:

“Fellow grown-ups, at the risk of sounding snobbish and joyless and old, we are better than this. … [I]f people are reading ‘Eleanor & Park’ instead of watching ‘Nashville’ or reading detective novels, so be it, I suppose. But if they are substituting maudlin teen dramas for the complexity of great adult literature, then they are missing something.”

Fort Collins-based author Lauren Myracle doesn’t think the material is infantilized; she believes the stories strive to be more immediate and less jaded without sacrificing writing quality. They can also give adults a sense of nostalgia or pleasure.

“I’m always pushing [YA] on people, saying, ‘No, you don’t understand, forget the cover, forget the age,” read the story, she says.

Lafayette-based middle-grade author Ingrid Law wants readers of all ages to shed any embarrassment or prejudices. Not only are there good stories in every age demographic, she says, but younger stories can also serve as gateways to niche adult genres, which might be engendering certain aversions.

“YA can give them a place to start multiple genres in one safe place,” Law says, citing Orson Scott Card’s “Ender’s Game” as an example of an introduction to science fiction.

Graham concedes some of these points in her article, but she says the very ways YA books aim to be pleasurable are at odds with adult fiction’s goals.

“YA books present the teenage perspective in a fundamentally uncritical way,” she writes. “It’s not simply that YA readers are asked to immerse themselves in a character’s emotional life — that’s the trick of so much great fiction — but that they are asked to abandon the mature insights into that perspective that they (supposedly) have acquired as adults.”

With this viewpoint in mind, Yoder says he narrows his customers down into two categories: staunch narrative advocates, for whom a good story trumps all, and literary stylists, for whom taste depends on what is deemed artistically praise-worthy. The latter group can be a tougher sell in terms of YA, he says.

Myracle adds that YA authors sometimes struggle for artistic legitimacy because the way their stories are marketed can create the false assumption that their work is somehow trivial. But Law and Yoder insist there are crossover stories that can not only nab money in multiple demographics, but can also make readers of any age “feel something.”

The original publicity and marketing behind J.K. Rowling’s “Harry Potter” series, Bulow and Yoder say, had a lot to do with kick-starting the crossover phenomenon of bringing adults to the YA sections of bookstores and libraries.

But even before then, with what started as a categorization of books rooted in early reading and innocence — with such titles as “The Hardy Boys” and “Nancy Drew” — Bulow recalls a blossoming of ideas taking hold in the ’50s and ’60s — with “Catcher in the Rye,” “Lord of the Flies” and “The Outsiders,” among others — that muddied the waters and brought mature themes to young audiences. Thus, the lines became blurred between what was intended for a young adult and what should be read by adults.

A constant ebb and flow of classics over the last few decades has continued to wash hits ashore in the forms of coming-of-age tales, fantasies, dystopias and mysteries. But now, Bulow says YA dystopias, which have been popular for the last handful of years, might be on their way out, as publishers are looking for more teenage realism stories a la John Green’s “The Fault in Our Stars.”

As much as YA is expanding into new territory, the market is also fragmenting into the beginnings of a risque offshoot dubbed New Adult, or Young Adult Mature, in some bookstores.

Yoder says dovetailing off the craving for coming-of-age realism are stories with 18- to 24-year-old protagonists wielding themes of sexual discovery, careerism and survival, hoping to net crossover readers who connect with multiple age demographics.

“As one person here once said, ‘These are a bunch of young readers and young writers who never read Harlequin and now want to,’ ” Yoder says. “They want bodice rippers!”

Many of the biggest New Adult hits have come in the form of self-published best sellers, such as Cora Carmack‘s “Losing It” e-book series, which deals with love and sexuality after high school.

Regardless of trends, Joyce Meskis, longtime owner of the Tattered Cover book stores, rolls her eyes at people who say certain genres have age caps.

“It’s important that people read across many genres,” she says. “It’s an enlightening experience.”‘

Perhaps the biggest advocate of that stance is Yoder, who often can be found at The Bookies’ sci-fi-fantasy crossover shelf — his favorite. He might hand you the latest biography on Robert E. Lee or he might convince you that Paolo Bacigalupi’s ” Ship Breaker” will give you enough deep, dark themes to chew on.

If you argue with him, he’ll probably shake his head and hands, and then tell you something you might have already heard: A good story is a good story, no matter where it comes from.

Sean Fitz-Gerald: 303-954-1211, sfitz-gerald@denverpost.com or twitter.com/srkfitzgerald