TEMPE, Ariz. —Sefo Liufau took off his redshirt here Saturday night. Now all he has to do is put on a red cape.

It became painfully clear that it will take Superman to save this Colorado Buffaloes season. Arizona State became the third straight Pac-12 opponent to ground them into buffalo burger, chewing them up just as the meager crowd did the buffalo burgers served in the Sun Devil Stadium concession stands.

The Sun Devils humiliated Colorado, 54-13, bringing back nightmarish flashbacks of 2012. The only difference is Saturday night revealed a glimpse at possibly a bright future.

Liufau, the true freshman who led Bellarmine Prep in Tacoma to last year’s Washington state title game, showed signs of belonging with a lot of peach fuzz thrown in. In his first series, he entered in the first quarter and led the Buffs (2-3, 0-3 Pac-12) on an 11-play, 80-yard scoring drive.

He hit 5-of-6 passes for 64 yards, culminating in a 10-yard slant to Nelson Spruce for a touchdown.

Unfortunately, it only made it ASU, 25-6.

“The way I’d like to look at the rest of the year is we took a redshirt off a young man that we think is very talented, we think is very bright, we think is an excellent leader,” first-year coach Mike MacIntyre said. “We’d like to be able to hopefully play him the rest of the year — if he plays good.”

The way the season had gone, Liufau couldn’t stay too comfortable on the bench. Junior Connor Wood entered the game having hit only 37 percent of his passes in two Pac-12 blowouts. Saturday he hit rock bottom. He went 0-for-4 and when he threw an interception right to cornerback Lloyd Carrington while running out of bounds, it was time to change the offense’s direction.

“Connor’s has done some good things for us and I really, really like Connor but he hasn’t had a winning grade in four games now,” said MacIntyre who said Liufau is the new starter. “I felt it was time to make a little bit of a change there just like I would at any position.”

From the start of spring, Colorado’s staff loved the 6-foot-4, 210-pound Liufau. They loved his accuracy, poise and speed but they didn’t want to use him too soon. Now they’re using him before it’s too late.

He wound up 18-of-26 for 169 yards but he also threw two interceptions, was called for intentional grounding from the end zone for a safety and lost a fumbled snap.

“I felt like I left a lot of plays out there,” Liufau said. “I didn’t really take care of the ball. I threw two picks, had a safety and a fumble. That hurts the team a lot.

“Even though coming in as a backup, that’s unacceptable. I let the team down.”

MacIntyre did have a choice. Senior Jordan Webb, last year’s starter, was cleared to play from a torn ACL in the spring. But MacIntyre said Webb would only play if Wood had to sit out a play or two due to injury or getting his helmet knocked off.

Also, for the second time in three weeks, the offense forgot it had the nation’s second-leading receiver in yards per game. Paul Richardson didn’t catch a pass until the third quarter. It went for one yard. He finished with four for 39 yards but this offense had all the spark of a soggy firecracker.

“We tried to throw the ball to Paul Richardson early and often,” MacIntyre said. “They were doubling him early and often.”

Defensively, that rebuilding job will take longer than expected. The progress from two opening wins over Colorado State and Central Arkansas has been erased by horses when stepping up in class.

Standing 115th nationally in total defense entering the game, the Buffaloes will be knocking on the door of the national basement. ASU (4-2, 2-1) had 392 yards at halftime before emptying the bench. It finished with 532 yards. It scored four touchdowns and a field goal in its first five possessions.

In three league games, Colorado has been outscored 155-46.

“I think we match up physically pretty well,” said linebacker Addison Gillam who had four tackles, almost nine below his average. “It’s just not being in the right place.”

With the season starting to reel out of control, Colorado may get a break Saturday when it hosts Charleston Southern, an FCS school that’s replacing the flooded-out Fresno State game from Sept. 14.

While MacIntyre will use every trick to keep his players’ heads up, what’s he doing for his own? Even in his inaugural 1-12 season at San Jose State in 2010 he didn’t get beat this bad.

“I’m not going to blame players or I’m not going to blame coaches,” MacIntyre said. “I’m going to say it’s a process. It’s truly a process. I wouldn’t be here if we didn’t have a long way to go.”

That process won’t necessarily get any easier, regardless of the opponent.

After all, Charleston Southern is 7-0.

John Henderson: jhenderson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnhendersondp