You can get soph­ist­ic­ated sur­gery, with the most ad­vanced devices in the world and the most fam­ous doc­tors, for a small co-pay if you have the right in­sur­ance plan. Sounds great, right? But did you need all that? Would still want all of that if you had to stake your own money?

Con­ser­vat­ive re­formers say that if con­sumers have to spend their own money, they will forgo use­less or un­ne­ces­sary care and fo­cus on the things that mat­ter to them, such as qual­ity, cost, or bed­side man­ner. These re­formers ad­voc­ate for health in­sur­ance plans with high­er de­duct­ibles or great­er cost-shar­ing to sub­ject health de­cisions to fin­an­cial dis­cip­line. And while these ideas are gen­er­ally touted as an al­tern­at­ive to the Af­ford­able Care Act, high-de­duct­ible, low-premi­um plans are gain­ing in pop­ular­ity as the law is im­ple­men­ted. It’s just not clear that they are bet­ter at mak­ing pa­tients more con­scien­tious con­sumers of care than their lower-de­duct­ible coun­ter­parts.

High-de­duct­ible plans, typ­ic­ally defined as those with a de­duct­ible (the amount a pa­tient has to pay out of pock­et be­fore the in­surer steps in) in ex­cess of $1,000, have sprouted in re­cent years. A pa­per by Katy Kozhi­man­nil, a pro­fess­or of pub­lic health at the Uni­versity of Min­nesota, and oth­ers pub­lished in the Au­gust is­sue of Med­ic­al Care es­tim­ates that 34 per­cent of in­sured work­ing Amer­ic­ans have high-de­duct­ible plans, and that the num­ber has tripled since 2008. With their lower premi­ums, the plans are at­tract­ive to em­ploy­ers and pa­tients, who save money each month — as long as they don’t have to seek ex­pens­ive med­ic­al care. The new Obama­care in­sur­ance mar­ket­places, which give con­sumers the abil­ity to shop for health cov­er­age on­line, are pro­jec­ted to fur­ther the pro­lif­er­a­tion of high-de­duct­ible plans for the same reas­on.

As you’d ex­pect, in­creas­ing the cost of care does de­crease con­sump­tion. An April re­port from Mas­sachu­setts’ at­tor­ney gen­er­al de­scribes a Blue Cross Blue Shield ana­lys­is of the pa­tients in its high-de­duct­ible plans. Their use of health care ser­vices de­creased between 1 and 5 per­cent, de­pend­ing on their de­duct­ible, from 2008 to 2010, and they used more pre­vent­ive ser­vices and cheap­er gen­er­ic pre­scrip­tions. That’s ex­actly how cost-shar­ing plans are sup­posed to drive be­ha­vi­or.

But pre­lim­in­ary data from 2010 and 2011 for two oth­er health plans in Mas­sachu­setts re­vealed that, when ad­jus­ted for health status, the costs of high-de­duct­ible plans over­all were ac­tu­ally high­er than stand­ard plans. The re­port doesn’t make clear why this might be the case and urges fur­ther study. But some health policy ex­perts say such high­er costs could be the res­ult of pa­tients put­ting off ne­ces­sary care and al­low­ing health prob­lems to fester, ne­ces­sit­at­ing more pricey treat­ment in the end.

Kozhi­man­nil ex­amined how men and wo­men in high-de­duct­ible plans in New Eng­land used health care between 2001 and 2008. Wo­men re­duced the num­ber of emer­gency-room vis­its for low-sever­ity prob­lems (say, a flu) by ap­prox­im­ately one-quarter, but main­tained rates for in­ter­me­di­ate- and high-sever­ity is­sues. Men, on the oth­er hand, re­duced all emer­gency-room vis­its, while de­creas­ing high-sever­ity emer­gency care the most, by nearly one-third.

The study says this is “con­sist­ent with the hy­po­thes­is that men who trans­ition to [high-de­duct­ible plans] may fore­go needed care … res­ult­ing in delays or in­creased sever­ity of ill­ness when care is later sought.”

An­oth­er study by Har­vard Med­ic­al School pro­fess­or J. Frank Wharam and oth­ers, pub­lished in the Au­gust is­sue of Health Af­fairs, found that poorer pa­tients in Mas­sachu­setts also re­duced high-sever­ity vis­its by as much as one-third in a giv­en year. The high de­duct­ibles were dis­cour­aging the most ne­ces­sary care.

Des­pite these early con­cerns about high-de­duct­ible plans, some as­pects of their philo­sophy, if the plans pro­lif­er­ate as ex­pec­ted un­der Obama­care, might nudge pa­tients in­to be­ing sav­vi­er health care con­sumers. Hard data — for price and for qual­ity — are cur­rently lack­ing, mak­ing shop­ping around dif­fi­cult. What stand­ard­ized qual­ity meas­ures there are can be mis­lead­ing: A hos­pit­al that does poorly on one in­dic­at­or (say, death after sur­gery) may have very un­healthy pa­tients rather than a prob­lem with its care. The met­rics and in-depth re­views that are avail­able in many areas of the eco­nomy are gen­er­ally un­avail­able with­in the health care sys­tem.

As Obama­care con­trib­utes to the rise of high-de­duct­ible plans, it might push reg­u­lat­ors to make this data avail­able. In­deed, a few states have taken ac­tion on price trans­par­ency in re­sponse to re­cent health re­forms. North Car­o­lina and Mas­sachu­setts each passed bills man­dat­ing that hos­pit­als pub­lish the prices they ne­go­ti­ate with in­surers, which might help pa­tients se­lect af­ford­able care.

Mak­ing more and bet­ter data avail­able to con­sumers has the po­ten­tial to change the health care sys­tem for the bet­ter. High-de­duct­ible plans, with their fo­cus on con­sumer choice and ex­pec­ted growth un­der the health re­form law, could en­cour­age that to hap­pen.