As head dental assistant at Chicago's Dentologie, Jessica Cornier knows that helping fix a patient's smile can have a big impact on his or her life.

In fact, one of her favorite memories involves a patient who came into the South Loop clinic for treatment a few years back. While she arrived with very poor dental hygiene, the staff was able to send her home with a more attractive, healthier mouth.

"We restored her smile to satisfactory, and she was so pleased she started crying and gave us hugs," Cornier recalled.

Cornier and other dental assistants at the clinic work with three dentists, who see about 30 patients on a typical day.

"We have a great relationship as a team. We're always laughing and treat each other like family," she said.

Cornier, 27, and her co-workers help the dentists during both surgical and nonsurgical procedures. This means interacting with patients and making sure their time in the office is as comfortable as possible. Routine tasks often include preparing the work area, sterilizing instruments between patients, assisting with procedures and providing patients with post-operative instructions.

Dental assistants must be detail-oriented, organized and responsible, Cornier said. It also helps to have an outgoing personality and a passion for working with people and helping patients.

Those who want to become dental assistants have a few options when it comes to education and training.

Community colleges and trade schools commonly offer training programs that can be completed in less than a year. Elzbieta Gasinska, a 23-year-old dental assistant at Dentologie, said she completed the DA program at Everest College in nine months, followed by a one-month externship.

"(Dental assistants) have to have hands-on experience," she said. "It's not a career that can be explained through a textbook; you must experience it."

Cornier said that when she joined the profession eight years ago, the demand for dental-assistant schooling was not as high as it is today. Rather that completing a college program, Cornier was hired as a dental assistant and received on-the-job training at another Chicago clinic. Since then, she's taken courses in Invisalign and become certified in Invisalign treatment (an innovative tooth-straightening technique).

Gasinska said many dental assistants also need additional certification for coronal polishing and pit and fissure sealant placement, which she completed at the University of Illinois at Chicago.

Other local colleges offering DA training include: Harry S. Truman College, Everest College and Wilbur Wright College.

Cornier finds her job rewarding because it allows her to grow as a person and as an employee, and it requires her to be part of a team serving patients.

"The more you put your patients first, the more rewarding it will be," she said.

Still, the work is not without its challenges. It can be difficult to adapt to the various personalities of patients and team members. Doing an effective job also means staying "two steps ahead of the dentist," anticipating what needs to be done next, Cornier said. It can be stressful handling situations in which treatment outcomes don't go as predicted, she noted.

But like most jobs in the health care field, Cornier said the number of jobs for dental assistants is expected to grow in the future.

"As the demand for dentists increases, as long as there is a need for care with increased patient flow, there will be a demand for dental assistants," she said.

Demand expected to surge in next decade

As of 2012, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics said 303,200 people were working nationwide as dental assistants.

Job duties can be wide-ranging. In addition to making patients feel comfortable in the dentist's chair and preparing them for treatments, DAs also sterilize instruments, set out instruments and materials, hand instruments to the dentist during treatments, and help keep a patient's mouth dry with suction hoses and other special equipment.

The job can also include educating patients about dental hygiene, processing x-rays and completing lab tasks under a dentist's supervision, scheduling appointments and working with patients on billing. Some DAs perform lab work that may include making casts of a patient's teeth or creating temporary crowns.

There's more than one way to become a dental assistant. Some states require DAs to complete an accredited program and pass a state exam, while others, including Illinois, have no formal educational requirements. Those who opt for an accredited program often can complete their training at a community college in about a year. Two-year programs also are offered at community colleges (for an associate's degree) but they are less common.

The Commission on Dental Accreditation, part of the American Dental Association, approved over 250 dental-assisting training programs in 2013, according to the BLS. Such programs include classroom and lab work, in which students learn about teeth, gums, jaws and other anatomical details related to dental work.

In states where dental assistants must be certified, in addition to a high school diploma, they must pass the Certified Dental Assistant (CDA) exam from the Dental Assisting National Board after graduating from an accredited program and completing the required amount of on-the-job training. Dental assistants with no formal training may learn on the job from other dental assistants.

In 2012, the median annual wage for dental assistants was $34,500, according to the BLS. The lowest 10 percent of DAs earned less than $23,550, while the top 10 percent of earners made $47,580.

By 2022, the BLS projects a 25 percent increase in demand for dental assistants because the demand for preventive dental services is expected to rise, requiring dentists to hire more assistants to handle routine tasks. Also, as Baby Boomers age, more are opting to keep their natural teeth rather than get dentures, increasing the need for dental care in their later years.

The federal Affordable Care Act is also expected to increase the number of patients with access to health insurance, including dental coverage.

(C) 2014 Tribune Content Agency, LLC