Sioux Falls, SD

Great Bear Recreation Park welcomed pros and amateurs alike to its third annual Adaptive Ski event February 28.

The event aims to make the enjoyment of downhill skiing accessible to everyone by catering to people with various impairments or disabilities.

More than 30 people from South Dakota, Iowa, and Minnesota applied to participate in this year's day-long outing. Each received an hour of private instruction, adaptive rental equipment, a lift ticket, and lunch, all free of cost.

Adaptive Program Director Rob Flannery says the event has been so successful, Great Bear intends to expand it season-long.

"Our hope is to transition into more of a sustainable program that runs every sunday next ski season so people that are in the area can come out and maybe progress through their skiing and really take hold of the sport," Flannery said.

The event was made possible by sponsor groups and the hard work of more than 50 volunteers, assistants, and instructors. Donors included the Alpine Society, IMED Mobility, Orthotic & Prosthetic Specialties, Inc., the VA, and Sanford.

News

Outdoors

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.