Topics: Coal, elk river, Freedom Industries, gary southern, Water, west virginia chemical spill, Sustainability News, News, Politics News

The Federal Bureau of Investigation has arrested Gary Southern, former president of the company responsible for contaminating the drinking water of 300,000 West Virginians earlier this year, on criminal fraud charges. According to a complaint unsealed on Monday, Southern was charged with bankruptcy fraud, wire fraud and lying under oath in hearings following the spill.

This January, up to 300,000 people were left without tap water after 10,000 gallons of a coal-cleaning chemical began leaking into the Elk River in Charleston, West Virginia, just upstream of the largest water treatment plant in the state. The leak sprung at a storage tank run by Southern’s former company, Freedom Industries, which manufactures chemicals for coal and steel production. The chemical, called 4-Methylcyclohexane Methanol (MCHM), causes “severe burning in the throat, vomiting and skin blistering” if one comes into contact with it.

An investigation revealed a disturbing level of negligence: not only were the company’s tanks full of holes (through which a steady stream of toxic liquid was flowing into the river), the leak had been noticed and sort-of fixed, with a cinder block and some absorbent powder.

In a sworn affidavit, FBI Special Agent James F. Lafferty said that Southern attempted to preserve his wealth and innocence by blaming others. “Shortly after the leak and discharge of MCHM into the Elk River was discovered on January 9, 2014,” the affidavit reads, “Southern engaged in a pattern of deceitful behavior, which included numerous false and/or fraudulent statements about his role at Freedom, his role in the sale of Freedom to Chemstream, and his knowledge about conditions at the Etowah Facility.”

Just before the spill, Freedom Industries had been sold to Chemstream Holdings. Meanwhile, the Environmental Protection Agency and the FBI had started an investigation into the former company for any violations of the Clean Water Act. Under oath, Southern testified that during this period of time, he was not an employee of Freedom. He later admitted that he worked part-time as a consultant.