Before Don Hunt left his post as chief of the Colorado Department of Transportation (CDOT) early this year, he told The Denver Post that one of the most difficult challenges facing the state from a funding perspective was the expansion of Interstate 25 to six lanes along a 25-mile stretch north of Denver near Fort Collins.

“We have [a plan],” Hunt said, “but it costs $1 billion. It’s an unfunded plan. We have $35 million for a billion-dollar project.”

This is a project that even people generally skeptical of highway expansion should favor — since there is no real alternative to I-25 along the Front Range. And it is growing population, not more individual driving, that has produced time-devouring congestion.

That segment of I-25 is hardly the only stretch of highway that needs improvement simply to keep up with population growth. For example, although CDOT has pulled several rabbits from its hat to improve the I-70 mountain corridor, much more needs to be done there.

Unfortunately, the recent legislative session failed to produce a plan to do something about highway funding.

U.S. Rep. Jared Polis, whose district now includes Fort Collins, has said the federal portion of I-25 funding could be available in the next three to five years — but of course it won’t do much good without major state investment, too.

On that score, according to The Coloradoan, Gov. John Hickenlooper last month told an audience in Fort Collins that “we’d be able to have six lanes all the way from here to Colorado Springs” if the General Assembly would agree to turn the state’s hospital provider fee into an enterprise fund. That would free up $215 million a year, he said, which could be leveraged to cover the construction cost.

A bill to create the enterprise fund was killed by Republicans in the state Senate.

Meanwhile, a Republican bill to generate $3.5 billion in highway improvements by renewing the 16-year-old TRANS bonds died in the Democratic House. Critics of the measure, including CDOT, worried it would have taken too much from maintenance.

The critics had a point. But then so did House Minority Leader Brian DelGrosso of Loveland, Senate Bill 272’s sponsor, who said a transportation tax hike is a hard sell and state leaders can’t just sit on their hands. Without the TRANS bonds, Gov. Bill Owens’ administration would never have been able to fund the T-REX I-25 expansion and a number of other state projects.

We continue to think the hospital provider fee qualifies as an enterprise fund, and should have been created as one in 2009. For that matter, given the success of TRANS bonds, it’s hard to believe that some sort of bonding package acceptable to both parties can’t be crafted for the 2016 legislative session.

“You can’t have such large chunks of your population, your working public, that are spending 45 minutes a day in traffic,” Hickenlooper said. “It’s not good for business, it’s not good for people’s family lives.”

Forty-five minutes? Such an optimist.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.