The world renowned intellectual and author criticized Washington’s double standards regarding the deadly use of drones in the Middle East.

Noam Chomsky, a historian, linguist and a prominent commentator on political affairs in the United States and the world, lashed out at President Barack Obama calling him “an opportunist” and said Hillary Clinton is no different.

In an interview with WorldNetDaily (WND) in Cambridge, Massachusetts, Chomsky, who was voted the “world’s top intellectual” in a 2005 poll, expressed no disappointment in Obama, because he “didn’t expect anything” from him.

RELATED: US Democracy in Serious Decline, Says Noam Chomsky

​He criticized the Obama administration’s health care act.

“What the administration regards as their major achievement, the Affordable Care Act, is a small step toward dealing with what is, in fact, an international scandal,” he stated.

He said the U.S. health care system is a failure because, “It has about twice the cost of comparable societies, at least per capita, and some of the worst outcomes.”

Chomsky also expressed his dissent with Obama’s use of drones in the Middle East.

“With the drone assassination campaign, Obama has essentially rescinded this principle (Magna Carta) by officially designating a person as guilty if the White House decides that they might someday want to harm us,” he said.

RELATED: Noam Chomsky on the New York Times' Media Bias



The intellectual highlighted Washington’s double standards by saying that if any other country used drones against another nation, the U.S. government would “consider it justification for a nuclear war.”

The writer also criticized Obama’s expansion of National Security Administration policies to conduct surveillance on U.S. citizens, saying that they are aimed at controlling the population, which “is unconscionable.”

Regarding the possibility of Hillary Clinton becoming president, he said that in comparison to Obama, she “may be a little more militant.”

Chomsky also lashed out at Obama for the secretive Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement the president is attempting to fast-track through congress.

“It’s called a free-trade agreement, but it’s not,” Chomsky told WND. “We don’t have the details, because it is essentially kept secret. But from all indications, it’s like all the other agreements that are not free-trade agreements. They are investor-rights agreements. The idea is that the Obama administration wants to ram the deal through without public discussion. The idea is called ‘fast-track authority.’”