A government report published Thursday shows Obamacare is still far from achieving one of its goals.

President Barack Obama's health care reform law, the Affordable Care Act, has brought the number of people lacking health insurance to a historic low. Yet it also aimed to reduce visits to emergency departments, where the uninsured would often go to receive care but which are often strained with high volumes of patients and deliver more costly services. In giving millions more people access to health insurance coverage, the creators of Obamacare theorized that patients would seek medical help earlier with their doctors as symptoms develop, rather than rush to the emergency room during a time of crisis.



[READ: Amid International Emergency, U.S. Hospitals Prepare for Zika]

But findings from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggest that not having health care coverage isn't the only factor keeping people from defaulting to the ER for care, and that "ER use overall has not changed significantly after the first full year of ACA implementation."

The report from the CDC's National Center for Health Statistics used data from the 2013 and 2014 National Health Interview Survey to assess why and how often people went to the emergency room. Data from 2014 – the year that coverage provisions in Obamacare went into effect – showed the percentage of adults visiting the ER didn't differ much from the year before, despite the fact that 7.9 million gained coverage between the two years.



The percentage of adults visiting the ER didn't change significantly after Obamacare's health insurance provisions went into effect. Courtesy CDC/NCHS

The biggest changes between 2013 and 2014 were decreases seen among patients with Medicaid who visited the ER and uninsured adults who went more than once. Authors of the report said people who are covered by Medicaid may visit the ER more often because they tend to have more serious medical needs than others. The Medicaid category also included those covered under the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) and other state-sponsored health plans.

[ALSO: CDC: New Lyme-Causing Bacteria Found in U.S.]

Obamacare required all Americans to get health insurance or pay a fine, and made it illegal for insurance companies to refuse coverage based on pre-existing conditions. It also aimed to make coverage more affordable by helping to pay premiums for private insurance and expanding Medicaid to more low-income people.

The report sheds light on whether these factors influenced ER use. It found most people who go to the ER – 77 percent – go because of the seriousness of their condition, which could reflect that a doctor told them to go or they were taken there by an ambulance, among other things. These rates remained mostly unchanged from 2013 to 2014.





Adults who visited the emergency room primarily because of the seriousness of their medical condition. Courtesy CDC/NCHS

But the report also revealed that nearly 12 percent of ER patients went because their doctor's office wasn't open. Small decreases were observed in the percentages of people with private insurance and people on Medicaid, though results showed a slight increase among the uninsured.

Percent of patients who went to the ER because their doctor's office wasn't open. Courtesy CDC/NCHS

Even having access to care remains a challenge for some. Among those who went to the ER at least once in 2014, 7 percent reported they went because they didn't have another place to go, because the ER was the closest provider or because they generally get most of their medical care there.

Patients who say they went to the ER primarily because they couldn't get care elsewhere. Courtesy CDC/NCHS

Uninsured adults were more than twice as likely to lack access to other providers as were people covered by private insurance and adults with Medicaid. This was also true prior to the passage of the ACA, and was used to bolster the theory that increasing the amount of people covered by health insurance would lead to a decrease in ER visits.