A sample bottle containing E. coli bacteria is seen at the Health Protection Agency in north London, March 9, 2011. For decades scientists have managed to develop new medicines to stay at least one step ahead of the ever-mutating enemy, bacteria. Now, though, we may be running out of road. (photo by REUTERS/Suzanne Plunkett)

Acclaimed bacteria expert comes back to Israel

Author: Calcalist (Israel)

Professor Roy Kishony is about to map the world of bacteria, pinpointing each and every one of them — every mutation, every transformation, every case of bacterial infection. Ten years from now, he says, enormous computer databases will be capable of informing any patient not just, let’s say, about which bug is causing his cough, but also about unique mutations of the said bacterium, which antibiotics it is not resistant to, and even where it has come from.

Summary ⎙ Print Israeli academia welcomes back acclaimed Professor Roy Kishony, who knows how bacteria think, can predict their mutations and how they are going to beat antibiotics. Author Translator Hanni Manor Original Article לגרסה המקורית בעברית

“Today, when an infectious disease is spotted, a bacterial culture is sent for lab analysis, the infection-causing bacterium is identified and, based on the data received, we can tell which antibiotic should be given,” says Kishony in an exclusive interview to Israeli daily Calcalist. “In the not-too-far future, possibly in ten years, medical diagnosis is going to change radically. It will be based on reading the genome of the pathogen – that is, the bacterium. Just imagine that each time a bacterial culture is received in the laboratory, the bacterium’s DNA sequence will be entered into a computer, and we will consequently be able to identify the specific pathogenic bacterium and know how to handle it. That way, we will soon have a very large database of microbial genomes, which will also allow us to inform the patient where the bacterium has come from. That is, we will be able to tell where the patient was infected – whether at home, while on an airplane, in a hospital, or anywhere else. We will thus understand how the disease has spread, and we will be in a position to stop its propagation, as well as the spread of other contagious diseases. And as noted, once the DNA is analyzed and mapped into the bacterial database, we will be able to know precisely which antibiotic the [pathogenic] bacterium is resistant to, and even take it a step further and specify the antibiotics to which it may become resistant in the future. We may thus protect ourselves against the bacterium, and devise smarter combinations of antibiotic medications specifically tailored to the patient, on the basis of the genome of the bacteria collected from him.”

All this could open the way to a fundamental change of the diagnostic procedure, medical treatment, and the development of drugs, and dramatically improve the condition of human beings as individuals and the health care of the public in general. In other words, the database under discussion, expected to come into being thanks to the unprecedented and extraordinary work of Kishony, may yet change the face of medicine, no less so than antibiotics.

And this change, along with other groundbreaking and diverse research work, is currently being led by Kishony from his laboratory at the Technion – Israel Institute of Technology. He joined the Technion laboratory only three months ago, in March, following 15 years in the United States at a prestigious Harvard laboratory, among other places, where he is still carrying on his research as a visiting professor.

It took the Technion senior figures – the most prominent of its faculty members – no less than five years to persuade Kishony to come back home to Israel. The process provides a glimpse of the immense effort required of the Israeli academia to return leading Israeli researchers to the country and, at the same time, points to the major dilemmas facing Israeli academics who are doing part of the scholastic route abroad. Hence, underlying the war that Kishony is waging against bacteria in the name of the world’s medicine, another war is fought – aimed at winning over people like Kishony on behalf of the survival of Israeli academia.

What's the next step the bacterium is expected to take, or: How does it manage to overcome the obstacle course?

The war waged against bacteria is one of the major struggles in today’s science. The growing resistance to antibiotics has for years troubled doctors, and it has already become a hot issue on the global agenda. Last month [April 30], the World Health Organization released a first-of-its-kind report, stating that the medical world is facing a far-reaching change, and that the dangers lurking around are liable to be “devastating'' to public health – right now; not only in the future. ''The world is headed for a post-antibiotic era, in which common infections and minor injuries which have been treatable for decades can once again kill,” the report warns. In view of the bleak forecast, an international emergency meeting was organized by the Royal Society of London, one of the world's leading scientific bodies. And even though some researchers believe that the report has taken it a bit too far, all the participants in the convention, including Kishony himself, confirm that it is indeed a critical problem.

“Over the past decades, antibiotics saved the lives of hundreds of millions of people; however, the more they are used – carelessly administered to humans, as well as to animals– the more the bacteria are becoming resistant to antibiotics,” says Kishony. “That is to say, antibiotics are administered in order to fight disease. Alas, it [their over-use] eventually renders the drugs ineffective. What’s more, the forecasts in this context are, in fact, gloomy. In the future, antibiotics will no longer be effective. The Western world is trying to deal with the problem in several ways. It urges doctors to employ more discretion when handing out prescriptions for antibiotics, and on the research front it seeks to better understand bacterial resistance, so as to be able to cope with it.”

And that's what Kishony has been doing. At the age of 43, Kishony is one of the most prominent names in the struggle against bacterial resistance. The Technion President, Prof. Peretz Lavie, has even said earlier this year that Kishony “is made of the stuff of Nobel laureates.” It was quite accidentally that Kishony stumbled upon the research field of bacterial resistance. As a matter of fact, he is a physicist by training. He is a graduate of the [elite Israel Defense Forces’] Talpiot program. He holds a master's degree in physics and mathematics from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, and a doctorate in physics from Tel Aviv University, his area of specialization being hydrodynamics. He then went on to Princeton University for post-doctoral studies, where, he recounts, “I visited the biology lab and I was fascinated with the topics of research, and delighted by the possibility to manually toy with and discover new things in the lab – not just by solving equations, but actually exploring concrete things in the world surrounding us. These days, biological research tends to involve mathematical calculations, and I found that I truly enjoyed this combination.”

His next stop as researcher was at Rockefeller University in New York and, later on, he proceeded to Harvard. For four years, he took the track that led to his breakthroughs. It happened when he already had his own lab where he researched bacterial resistance, following his cooperation with the Boston Children's Hospital. A few years earlier, the hospital had to cope with an epidemic infecting many of the patients with Burkholderia dolosa, a bacterium resistant to all types of antibiotics, which even caused the deaths of children with cystic fibrosis. When Kishony and his team studied bacterial samples taken from the patients and mapped the bacterial genome, they essentially outlined – for the first time ever – the path along which the epidemic had spread. “We identified mutations and we managed to reconstruct the bacterial lineage. We were able to locate the person who had started the epidemic, detect those who developed the next generation of the bacterium, and see who infected whom. We traced the genetic changes the bacteria had undergone – some of those rather insignificant, while other changes were of importance to the bacteria's survival in the human body. We realized that bacterial changes recurring in different patients are the really significant ones. And we followed the variations in the bacterial response to the immune system, the body conditions, and the antibiotic treatment. Basically, we tracked the bacterium and studied its experience inside the human body.”

Kishony is still busy mapping bacterial evolutionary processes. He uses samples taken from premature newborns or from tuberculosis patients, seeking to identify the conditions under which bacteria become resistant to antibiotics, to characterize the changes that may be expected and to find ways to improve preventive and proactive treatment. At the same time, he performs fascinating manipulations on bacteria. For instance, he is growing in the laboratory a variety of plants, since, as he notes, “antibiotics were developed by nature hundreds of millions of years ago, in the form of fungi and bacteria fighting other bacteria. Mankind discovered them [the antibiotic plants] in the wild, and used them out of context, in isolation from ecology. Clinical experiments cannot reconstruct the complex of materials that was effective in nature. It is therefore necessary to go back to nature and find out what other materials are created in conjunction with the antibiotics and how they can help in dealing with [bacterial] resistance.”

Another part of the study is based on the Morbidostat – a bacterial fixed mortality rate regulator. It consists of an array of test tubes filled with E. Coli bacteria, into which sensors are pumping various doses of antibiotics. A computer connected to the entire system continually records the growth rate of the bacteria, which indicates their resistance to antibiotics, and then tells the system to increase the dose accordingly.

Another innovative and impressive experiment, temporarily dubbed OMG (Observatory for Mutations and Growth), is taking place on a sort of a sand table, where war is waged between the researchers and the bacteria. It is actually an agar plate the size of a table. Along both its sides bacteria are dispersed – E. Coli bacteria in this case, too. The researchers then place barriers across the table. Each such barrier offers food and antibiotics, and the quantities of food and antibiotics are increased from one barrier to another: The closer they get to the middle of the table, the bacteria are offered ever more food, but also more antibiotics. They have a clear interest in making their way to the center of the plate, yet they face ever greater danger as they approach that area.

And it is a very real danger: Antibiotics at each of the stations should kill all the bacteria. However, it turns out time and again that, in each experiment, a small group of bacteria manages to get through the barrier and move on. The masses get killed, while a small spearhead of bacteria undergoes mutations, sending on the myriad next-generation bacteria. The latter are protected at least for the moment, until they reach the next barrier. And then, again, the majority cannot make it, but the minority adapts to the changing conditions, develops resistance, and the progress of bacteria continues.

The experiments are still underway, but the fundamental trend is already clear. “The evolution of antibiotic resistance in bacteria occurs at a very fast pace,” says Kishony. “Given simple laboratory conditions, in two to three weeks their antibiotic resistance increases a thousand times. The set of mutations responsible for it is created within a very short time, and the changes instantly render the bacteria smarter and more resistant, which makes it difficult to medically cope with.”

It is surprising to hear Kishony talk about “smart” bacteria. “They are not sophisticated, but there are many of them,” he explains. “Let’s say I have a lot stupid of bacteria and each tries something stupid – yet, one of them may accidentally act wisely. They defeat us by virtue of their numbers: If even one out of a billion bacteria tested undergoes a minor, but significant, change and then reproduces and generates a new population of resistant bacteria, we are going to have a problem.

“At the end of each experiment, we sampled the bacteria wherever they managed to break through the antibiotics barrier. We then reconstruct the genome of the lucky bacteria, and compare it with that of the bacteria that failed to pass the barrier and were killed by the antibiotics. This allows us to study the genetic sequence of events that made it possible for the bacteria to develop resistance. Over and over again, we can see how similar the process is — that is, to what extent it is to be expected. We can also observe the various alternatives the bacteria have – the different pathways leading to bacterial resistance. It may be likened to a game of chess. It would certainly be of great help if you could guess the next step of your rival in the game. We study the moves of the bacteria, to anticipate their next step. It is by no means a totally predictable process. There are a number of options, but not too many, and by monitoring the process we can prepare with the appropriate antibiotics designed to attack [and offset] the changes about to happen.”

Evolution is moving backwards, or: How can researchers be induced to return back home?

Kishony, a physicist and a mathematician by training, approaches the matter by the numbers. “Biology is becoming a quantitative science – a discipline that makes use of advanced calculation methods and Big Data,” he says, explaining that the fact affects every aspect of the discipline, which suffers from ever shrinking budgets the world over. “As budgets decline, it becomes ever more important to train the next generation of scientists, so that they will also know how to analyze hundreds of megabytes of data. Nevertheless, there is still much room for the good old classical biology – for non-computational biology, as well.”

But beyond the numbers, over the years, Kishony has become attached to the bacteria he is experimenting with. He is trying to beat them, but they fill his world. Indeed, he finds it hard to talk about the “killing of bacteria.” According to Kishony, “In the laboratory, in vitro, we can kill them. However, in the wide clinical context, it would be more accurate to say that we seek to control them. After all, we have been trying to handle bacteria for long years. Yet, no treatment applied so far has succeeded in eliminating them. My work would thus be better characterized as an attempt to study the behavior of bacteria and the changes they undergo, and thus figure out how to overcome them.”

Kishony takes extra care with his wording, always on guard to stay scientific, speak to the point and look at the broader context. Still, now and then one can perceive between the lines the great drama his research generates — for example, when he describes the experiment that won him the prestigious award jointly granted by the Pasteur Institute, the renowned Paris research center, and the pharmaceutical company Sanofi. “We applied different combinations of various antibiotic drugs to resistant bacteria and found that certain combinations had a stronger impact on the resistant bacteria, which lost in the competition to the bacteria considered less resistant. In other words, the antibiotic-resistant bacteria were found to be susceptible to certain combinations of antibiotics. It means that we can take resistant bacteria and render them susceptible to antibiotics. It creates a situation where evolution is moving backwards.”

Evolution is moving backwards. But how many researchers can say they have made it move that way?

Well, Kishony for one, certainly can. With an extraordinarily accelerated career path to his credit, having won his doctoral degree at the age of 28 and a professorship when he was just 34 years old, no wonder the Technion courted him for so long. As far back as 2009, he was approached by Nobel Laureate Prof. Aaron Ciechanover, founder of the Lorry I. Lokey Interdisciplinary Center for Life Science & Engineering at the Haifa-based Israel Institute of Technology. “It isn’t mere words that I would use to persuade a person of such distinction. Words are only the means to an end,” says Ciechanover. “I would tell him: Come and visit us; give it a try; have a look at the lab; meet the students. Take a sabbatical and spend the year with us. You can always go back. I would never tell him that the Technion is better than Harvard, as the truth is that it is not. Going by international indices, we rank below Harvard. However, I would tell him that one can attain great success at the Technion, and to drive the message home, I cite my own personal case. True, I did my post-doctoral studies abroad, like everyone else. It’s a must. However, I have never been a faculty member at a foreign university, and yet, I have made it. Success can be attained even at the Technion, working from Israel. The right conditions are available here. It may be more difficult to make it here, but it is quite possible.”

The then-newly elected Technion President Prof. Peretz Lavie joined the [persuasion] efforts in due course. ''And later on'', Kishony relates, ''I was approached by the Senior Executive Vice President of the Technion, Prof. Moshe Sidi, by the Dean of the Faculty of Biology, Yehuda Assaraf, and by Deputy Vice President for Academic Affairs Professor Gadi Schuster.'' The latter says: “Roy had his doubts. I believe that his wife was the anchor drawing him back home [to Israel]. Our job is to accompany the families in dilemma, and help as much as we can. One of Roy’s concerns had to do with the students expected to serve as his lab assistants. As part of the process, I suggested that a number of students be sent to Harvard for summer vacation, where they would be able to gain hands-on experience in his lab, giving him an opportunity to get to know them personally and subsequently make his choice. And that’s the way it was done.”

At Harvard, too, pressure was exerted on him, and he was offered all kinds of benefits – among other things, a grant that would allow the family (Kishony and his wife have four children, ages 5 to 18) to move to a better apartment. The Technion offered him lower wages, but promised to put at his disposal a modern laboratory and aid in the absorption of the family. Above all, the Technion emissaries smartly drew on the emotional side.

Thus, for instance, Ciechanover says that he never talked with Kishony “in terms of Zionism, but rather discussed the social fabric [in Israel] which, although on the decline, there were still many good things here.” Lavie adds: “I visited Kishony at his Harvard lab, and I was deeply impressed with him. I met a young and highly promising man, who nonetheless, was far from assuming self-importance. And I said to myself that we had to have him with us. I told him about our plans, the scientific vision [of the Technion], and the efforts that we were willing to make to bring him back home. And, needless to say, I played on the Israeli ticket. I told him that he was approaching the point of no return, where he would have to decide whether or not his children would grow up as Israelis, and whether or not his son would enlist in the army. And it was just the beginning. We had many more conversations. And he had to be given time enough for the lengthy maturation process involved, which would also allow him to fulfill his commitment to Harvard.”

Lavie takes a great pride in the mobilization of Kishony. When I interviewed Lavie in October, at the beginning of the academic year, he proudly told me about the promising researcher without mentioning his name. “I have just recruited a world-renowned researcher in the field of synthetic biology who is willing to come to Israel for half the salary he had [abroad], but who wouldn’t give up lab equipment he had at Harvard. I have thus built him a laboratory worth $ 2 million, as I believe that he is made of the stuff of Nobel laureates. You cannot do scientific research today the way Ciechanover and Avram Hershko (both Technion scientists and Nobel Laureates in Chemistry) did in the early 1980s, in some [dark] alcove, with a set of test tubes.”

The Technion's recruitment efforts did not stop there. Next week, Kishony and two other promising researchers who were persuaded to return from their stay abroad are to address the Board of Governors of the Technion. Kishony is expected to explain on that occasion how and why he has opted for the Technion.

Lavie, in turn, describes how it works. “The Technion faculties locate the most promising researchers in the world. We are really looking for young and promising postdoctoral students or for acclaimed scholars with a research record to their credit, who have an affinity for Israel – whether Israelis living abroad or Jews who may be interested in ‘making aliyah’ [immigrating] to Israel. Once a faculty identifies a highly commended candidate and sends out feelers, testing the ground with him, the Technion senior faculty members enter the picture and personally get involved in the process.” Among other things, each family receives a uniquely tailored absorption package that takes care of both the personal and professional aspects. Thus, for instance, Kishony’s wife received help in finding a job at the Rambam Health Care Campus [in Haifa], “a job that suits her skills and fits her,” notes Lavie.

"In the last five years we recruited 140 new staff members, and we are investing an average of $780,000 in absorption of each member of our staff. We have two designated funds, each of $10 million, and sometimes we raise specific amounts to build a lab or bring a particular researcher. We don't recruit a lot of people at the level of Roy Kishony, but we need at least one at his level every year to maintain excellence in research of the institution. Unlike other institutions, where they also recruit scholars in the humanities, almost all of us [at the Technion] need laboratories and equipment, and abroad they are enjoying excellent conditions in these aspects also.

"We manage to recruit so many people not because of the state budget or the intercession of the [Planning and Budgeting Committee of the Council for Higher Education]. Though the issue could be of great importance to Prof. Manuel Trajtenberg, Chairman of the Planning and Budgets Committee, and even after the set-up of the centers of excellence designed for this purpose, the budgets we get to absorb staff members are simply ridiculous; we need more than $20 million per year and receive $4 million. How can I return these brains with 20% of what we need? It's just pathetic."

Because of the children, or: Harvard leads, no question

"Technion really did a lot to get me, even at the level of resources allocated to research and laboratory level and in flexibility of thinking associated with each process, with the understanding that the connection created by this institution between the power that there is in the exact sciences, engineering and computer science and the life sciences, is important for my research," shares Kishony about his side of the process. "The transition was not trivial at all. It's not as if you put Harvard against Israel on the scale and see where it tends to swing. If I would have done that, Harvard is the leading place; there is no question at all. Wage surely could not be the primary consideration in the decision, and we had there a good life there and a lot of friends, and yet we returned [to Israel]. This decision comes more from the heart; it is hard for me to break into reasons. We were deliberating with this for a long time, but in the end I am completely satisfied with it.

"We came to the United States in 1999 with two small boys, and then we had two girls. We felt as if we belonged there, but my wife and I have close family in Israel and it was difficult to raise children away from Grandma and Grandpa and cousins. Our relatives did not pressure us to come back. I am not sure that they would not have told us not to stay, had we asked them. But for us, something was missing. Two years ago we came to Israel for a sabbatical and we were amazed to see how quickly the boys entered here, socially and academically. They felt at ease here. At the end of the year we returned to the United States, and the big boys chose to stay with the grandparents. After a year in the United States, we decided to return."

When asked to discuss the brain drain, Kishony says: "The academic system is built so that the central point of decision, the one in which you are accepted at the university and continue onto the path of tenure, is at the end of the post — your doctorate — and many do a post-doctoral abroad. It's a central part of the phenomenon: it is always easier to stay where you already are. I am a member of the forum on the Israeli overall strategy in science education, and we think a lot about it: if and how we can move the equilibrium point to Israel without harming the importance of the post-doctoral abroad. But beyond that, yes, there are more alternatives abroad in research and in industry, and life there is usually more affordable."

As it was said before, he is still running his lab at Harvard, chatting on Skype with his staff, writing articles with them on Google Docs, coordinating students' exchange from there to here and from here to there, and he frequently travels, as he will for the whole coming summer. But the distance from the United States allows more professional development because "at the same time, I am much more exposed today to the forefront of research in Europe than ever before."

And as someone who is very familiar with the state of research worldwide, when will humanity really solve bacterial resistance?

"It will not happen tomorrow or the day after, or even next year. But with regard to diagnosis, things advance fast. I believe that in not so many years we will be able to diagnose infectious diseases based on the genome of the bacteria, with databases at least at the state level, if not internationally. Some of these things can already be applied today, but we still have a long way to go in order to analyze the resistance of the bacteria according to the genome."

Read More: http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/business/2014/06/israel-roy-kishony-bacteria-research-technion-harvard-brain.html