Stapleton has always been a place to see cutting-edge home designs – and today you can be there when the latest example arrives in Stapleton’s new Willow Park East neighborhood. Lennar Homes’ Generations collection homes are family-sized designs that accommodate novel living arrangements that real families are exploring in today’s market – say, grandparents who come for extended stays with their grandkids; or an older parent who moves in; or a ‘boomerang kid’ who returns home.

Lennar has already had great success with its ‘NextGen’ designs in neighborhoods all around the Denver area, and that success is likely to be redoubled at Stapleton, Denver’s most popular master-planned community, where families get unprecedented parks, trails, neighborhood shopping, good schools, and recreation centers. The grand opening of the Legacy model is today – but Lennar already has buyers signing on for these: one of them a family with kids who love the support they get from Grandma and Grandpa, who will get their own apartment-like suite as part of the design – a living room, bedroom with private bath, stackable laundry, and kitchenette with sink, fridge and convection oven.

You’ll tour that additional suite on the main level – but from the outside, Generations homes look like single-family designs, ones that make no compromises in terms of size and features for their core families. In the 3,171-square-foot Legacy, you’ll see three upstairs bedrooms plus a loft, including an expansive master suite with five-piece bath, and a full upstairs laundry, plus attractive main-level formal and wide-open family areas. That’s in addition to its additional Generations suite, full basement, and 3-car garage.

Lennar Homes has a choice selection of sites for these in Willow Park East, and can deliver some homes this fall, if you get involved now. Prices start in the mid-$500s – all to include clean, renewable solar energy at no additional cost, in state-of-the-art photovoltaic systems provided and maintained by SunStreet Energy Group, plus Lennar’s ‘Everything’s Included’ package of highly popular standard features.

You’ll also see the attractions coming to surrounding Willow Park East – including Sandhills Prairie Park with a promontory that’ll have mountain views; and a wedge-shaped ‘Pizza Park’ with a wood-fired oven for pizza parties. There’ll be a community garden and a dog park, and new Northfield High School opens this fall. And willow Park East puts residents close to The Shops at Northfield Stapleton, a regional attraction for its Macy’s, Bass Pro and other shopping, along with a dozen dining spots including Texas de Brazil, Bar Louie, La Sandia, Starbucks, and TGI Fridays.

Lennar will have the Cupcake Truck on site for the grand opening from noon until 2 p.m. From central Stapleton, take Central Park Boulevard north, past I-70, to Northfield Boulevard and turn left a half mile to Verbena, then proceed north eight blocks to a left on Prairie Meadow Drive, take your first right on Valentia Court, then turn right toward the model on E. 54th Place and Verbena Street.

Grand Opening of Lennar’s Generations in Stapleton’s Willow Park East neighborhood; 2,678 to 3,171 Sq. ft., furnished model, close to parks, The Shops at Northfield Stapleton. 5449 Verbena St., Denver; from central Stapleton take MLK Blvd east to Central Park Blvd, turn north 1.9 mi. (across I-70) to Northfield Blvd, left on Northfield 0.3 mi to Verbena, north 8 blks to a left on Prairie Meadow, then right

From mid-$500s

Today 11 a.m. until 6 p.m.; Cupcake Truck noon-2

303-223-9758

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him atmark@samuelsonassoc.com. You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns online at DenverPostHomes.com.Follow Mark Samuelson on Twitter:@marksamuelson