Donald Trump is the "Winston Churchill of our time," conservative radio host Michael Savage said of the surging GOP presidential candidate during an interview Wednesday."The Savage Nation" host opened his show with his admission that he was all-in for the real estate billionaire's candidacy before grilling him on the Iran nuclear deal, voter ID laws and his campaign goals."We have to strengthen our military," Trump said of his political agenda. "[W]e have to take care of our vets… we have to get rid of Obamacare."There's so much to do… This may be the most important election we've ever had," he asserted.Savage pledged his support, and declared:"You're the lion… you're the Winston Churchill of our time. Keep hitting them real hard."On the Iran nuclear deal, Trump said it's "inconceivable" that New York Democratic Sen. Chuck Schumer, who he always "thought loved Israel," would support the agreement in the Upper Chamber.Yet, Trump conceded, "nobody knows what he is going to do," before suggesting Israel might pressure him to oppose it."Actually I’m surprised that Israel isn’t putting tremendous pressure on Schumer because they do have a lot of power over Schumer," Trump charged."It is one of the dumbest deals I've ever seen," Trump said of the deal. "They can do whatever they want to do, who's going to catch them… It's so embarrassing, the whole thing."Savage also pressed Trump on whether he would establish strict voter ID laws through an executive order as president, then sympathized with his being on the hot seat."I know I don’t want to nail you, I don’t want to get you to say 'yes' and then they’ll nail you for that," Savage said. " 'Trump goes on right wing Savage Show and says’ … right away, they start screaming racism. I get it. I know what they do. I know the game."Trump didn't answer the question directly, saying only that he supports identification laws; he also didn't commit to establishing them by executive action.'You’re a rich man, but you know this is going to cost a billion and a half dollars," Savage said of how Trump would finance his own campaign. "You surely don’t want to throw all of that out on your own. Are you considering having people donate money or not?""It's called Trump. com… People are sending a lot of money…" Trump replied, adding he doesn't want to be beholden to any special interests from big-money donors."Michael, one man offered $5 million, they want to put millions in," Trump said. "I said, ‘don’t do it because I don’t want to have a position where some day you’re going to need [something]'."Pressed again if he is willing to spend $1.5 billion of his own wealth to win the White House, Trump said: "I’ll see what happens."