Topics: Feminism, Media Criticism, Netflix, orange is the new black, Prison, Prison Reform, TV, Media News, Entertainment News, Politics News

Since its debut in 2013, the Netflix series “Orange is the New Black” has been hailed as a humanizing portrait of female inmates. As a former inmate myself, I call bullshit on that. It’s not humanizing, it’s not realistic, and it’s not a step forward.

See, I know a thing or two about what real prison is like. In 2010, I was arrested on drug charges, and I went on to serve 21 months behind bars, first in county jail and then in state prison. I’d grown up in an upper-middle class family and, as of the day I got arrested, I knew nothing about the prison system. I didn’t even understand the semantic distinction between jail (typically a county-run facility used for shorter sentences) and prison (typically a state or federal facility used for longer sentences). One thing I did understand was that I should be scared. I knew from the start that I’d eventually be going to state prison, and that sounded terrifying.

The thing is, prison is scary in some ways – for example, the omnipresent threat of solitary confinement is terrifying – but it wasn’t scary in any of the ways I expected. I wasn’t in constant fear of being raped or beaten up. In fact, I met some wonderful people. That was not what I’d been led to believe I should expect in prison. Without any better frame of reference, I’d bought into popular beliefs about what prisoners are like. Incidentally, they are not “as seen on TV.”

In “Orange is the New Black,” the problem begins with Piper. She’s not exactly the main character in the series, but it’s fair to say that she’s the anchor character, the one to which the rest of the story is tied. Over the course of the first three seasons, we come to learn that she’s a pretty horrible person. At the start of the series, she’s timid and polite and seems like a nice lady. Soon enough, she starts cheating on her fiancé. And season one ends with her beating the crap out of another inmate (admittedly a very annoying one.) In season two she rats out girlfriend Alex in order to get her sent back to prison, and by the end of season three she sets up her new love interest Stella, getting her sent to solitary just days before her scheduled release date – all in the interest of protecting a panty-smuggling ring.

What causes Piper’s transformation? In season one, during her off-the-cuff “Scared Straight” speech, she tells aspiring badass Dina that the scary part of prison is “coming face-to-face with who you are.” It seems that Piper’s character transformation throughout the series is not because prison changed her, but because it helped her find who she always was – which is not a good person. The hidden message here is that if you think you know an inmate who’s a decent person, then you just don’t know them well enough. They’ve probably always been bad all along. That’s basically the opposite of humanizing.

Of course, most of the “OITNB” characters just aren’t decent people in the first place. There are some exceptions – SoSo, Yoga Jones, Taystee – but for the most part, the show is populated with some pretty hate-able characters and caricatures, from Vee to Boo to Mendoza to Red. That’s not realistic and it makes a mockery of the idea that the show humanizes its inmates. Yes, there are some really horrible, nasty people in prison, but there are also some absolutely wonderful women there. I met plenty who I’ve stayed in touch with since my release and am proud to call my friends. (I just wish we could’ve met somewhere other than prison.)

To be sure, some of my prison friends have gone back to drug use and ended up back behind bars. But some are out changing the world with prison reform efforts, going to college, working and paying taxes, or raising families. Even those who did end up back behind bars aren’t necessarily bad people. This is a crucially important point, but one that many Americans categorically reject, and that rejection has real-world consequences. And “OITNB” isn’t helping.

The problems go deeper than that. Overwhelmingly, the show – and especially season three – depicts the women of Litchfield as horrible mothers. Admittedly, just as it’s true that there are some terrible people in prison, there are some terrible mothers in prison. There are women who have committed unspeakable crimes in which their own children were the victims. That happens, and I’m not saying it doesn’t. However, it’s not realistic to paint all prison moms with the same brush, because they’re not all horrible mothers. Some women are doing time for killing their abusers, in some cases to protect their children. Some women just made mistakes, and some women are actually innocent. Some women were bad mothers while they were using drugs, but once they sober up they no longer resembled the incompetent, mean, and uncaring parents shown in “OITNB.”

To choose one particularly galling example, a Mother’s Day event in season 3 is basically a carnival of bad parenting. We see everything from a mother losing track of a kid to a mother abandoning her baby to get high on drugs smuggled in through the baby’s diaper. They aren’t able to handle basic parenting skills like dealing with a dirty diaper. They tell their children how unwanted they are. These things might, indeed, all happen, but there is a dearth of counterexamples than makes the show’s depiction of prison mothers one-sided, and perniciously so. Although there are probably some competent mothers at Litchfield, what the show chooses to focus on is primarily the terrible ones.