Topics: Abortion, Christmas, complaints, conervative, Family, holiday, John McCain, things to complain about, Video, Politics News

In the movie of my life, there will be a montage of all of the times I have outraged someone in my family (or been outraged by someone in my family) while talking about politics during the holidays. Like the time I had to chase after my mother’s friend as she fled to the elevator when our conversation about whether or not John McCain was “pro-choice” got, uh, heated. I convinced her to come back inside the apartment only after promising I’d drop the issue. (But for the record, John McCain does not support reproductive freedom. At all. Though maybe I shouldn’t have told my mom’s friend that she was “totally nuts” when she refused to accept my point about his record.)

Or that other time I found myself in an argument with a friend’s father, explaining that “partial-birth abortion” is not a medical procedure and that if he wanted to fight about reproductive health with me then he had to at least agree to use real words while doing so.

Now of course I’ve also had really respectful conversations with the people I love and disagree with about the things we think are important, but that’s not always possible. And if you want to avoid arguments altogether this year, which some of you might, I am happy to recommend a way to do just that.

Complain about mundane things! Indulge that feeling of injustice about something that actually does not matter at all! Everyone loves to complain! And others will support you in your complaints and then share their own complaints! It is the best, most unifying thing ever. In fact, if you do try to talk to your conservative relatives about politics and end up in an argument, try making amends by complaining together. It might help.

Here are four completely inane and self-indulgent things that I will complain about with my relatives this year. Feel free to borrow them if you need something ridiculous and inconsequential to complain about. (But let’s be real; you have plenty of such things to complain about. Everyone does.)

Happy holidays!

My bed might be too soft and I think it’s hurting my back.

I love a soft bed. I basically want my bed to be a sinkhole of comfort. In pursuit of this goal, I recently added another mattress topper to my already mattress-topped bed. This has really upped my comfort game while, say, watching Netflix on my laptop, but I think it’s also hurting my back. Every morning, I wake up with a tight, slightly crooked back.

What do you do in such a situation? Sacrifice the womb-like comfort of a warm, overly cushioned bed or, you know, take care of your actual body? Hard to say, hard to say.

Someone in my neighborhood has this dog that barks a lot, and another neighbor regularly yells out his window at the barking dog.

I don’t know who this person is or where they live, but they live close enough that I can hear their barking dog when they let it out in their backyard. It’s gotten better recently because the cold is ostensibly keeping the dog inside, but the pattern for months was basically this: I would wake up around 6 a.m. to the sound of a barking dog. The dog would be left outside for hours. Barking. Seemingly not unhappily or in distress. Just barking like a dog that barks a lot because that is dog language or whatever.