If you go What: NAO Challenge When: 11 to 4 p.m. June 27 Where: Longmont Museum's Stewart Auditorium, 400 Quail Road Cost: Free

St. Vrain Valley students are learning to program humanoid robots for the country's first NAO high school robotics challenge.

The goal of the challenge, which will be June 27 at the Longmont Museum and co-hosted by the district, is simple: Get students excited about math, science, programming and technology.

Logan Stype, an incoming sophomore at Skyline High, said he jumped at the chance to participate in the competition.

"You get to play with a robot and make it do some cool things," he said. "It gives you insight into what's possible."

The competition was created by French company Aldebaran Robotics, which makes the NAO robots and opened a U.S. branch several years ago.

"The enthusiasm of the students is through the roof," said Axel Reitzig, a STEM and engineering teacher at the Innovation Center. "Some of the most significant opportunities in the future will be in robotics."

Reitzig said Aldebaran partnered with St. Vrain about a year ago, giving the district five NAO robots to use with students with autism and with English language learners.

The district also partnered with the University of Denver, where graduate student Howard Feng is researching using the robots to help autistic students with social skills. Feng, who's helping with the NAO challenge, said students are gaining hands-on robotics experience.

Advertisement

In the fall, the district created student and teacher robot teams, with Innovation Center students providing technical support and teachers in charge of content. The robots, which retail for about $8,000, were used with students at four elementary schools during the school year.

For the challenge, teams of students from Skyline High, Mead High, Niwot High and Silver Creek High are planning to compete. Schools without robots can use software with a virtual robot to test their programming.

Students must program their robots to dance, play a game and hold a conversation about movies before starting the chosen movie. The robots are about 2 feet tall with the ability to see, hear, communicate and interact with their surroundings with the help of touch sensors, cameras and microphones.

A local team of judges, which includes professors and school district partners, will decide the winners.

To prepare, teens can attend workshops at the district's Innovation Center. Helping lead the workshops are recent Skyline graduate Tanner Brohm and Skyline incoming junior Jake Roberts. Both worked with the robots during the school year.

"We're spreading the word about robots and what they can do," Brohm said.

The two said programming the robots isn't especially difficult but does require some basic programming knowledge and problem solving.

"You just have to be willing to learn," Jake said. "There's a lot you can figure out just from using it."

At a recent workshop, two teams of St. Vrain students worked on the challenges. The students, self-described nerds, said they had some experience with programming but were new to programming a NAO robot.

"I'm learning how to program better," said Skyline incoming senior Koby Estabrook. "We get to test fun things."

The students said the dance part was tricky because it required both creativity and technical skill. They had to figure out how the robot moved and its limits — one group tried having it dance super fast but had to make a quick grab it so it wouldn't fly off the table.

"It's a challenge," said Avynne Trembley, an incoming senior at Skyline. "You have to be really creative."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa