FORMER Queensland premier and failed Forde candidate Peter Beattie says he's got nothing on Mr Palmer in the media tart stakes.

"Queensland has got a new media tart and it is not me,'' Mr Beattie told reporters on Sunday.

"You've got the biggest media tart in Australia. I was only in Queensland.

"No one will be able to ignore Clive. If he wins that seat and he's got a senator ... even if it's just the two of them, you're going to see an interesting state.''

He said the final numbers in the Senate could make for a very colourful chapter in politics.

"If Clive has got the balance of power, all I've got to say to all of you is you're gonna have to say a big prayer. But you're going to have a lot of fun.''

Ten things you should know about Clive Palmer

There's much more than meets the eye to eccentric businessman, miner and now politician, Clive Palmer.

Here’s just a sample...

1. Humble beginnings

The Sunshine State's richest man has been quoted as saying: "I started out as a cleaner, mate, sleeping on the floor."

He made his first fortune young as a silver-tongued property salesman and developer before moving into mining where he says he has made $6 billion.

2. Generous boss

In 2010, the mining magnate gave 50 Mercedes-Benz B-Class 180s sedans to his most-valued employees as a Christmas bonus.

He also gave all 750 of his long-time workers a holiday trip to Fiji.

The bonuses cost him about $10 million. Mr Palmer said at the time he wanted to thank his staff for the $200 million in profit his company earned from a nickel refinery he had recently purchased for about $10 million.

3. Monopoly moves

Clive Palmer owns Mineralogy, Waratah Coal, Queensland Nickel at Townsville, Palmer Coolum Resort on the Sunshine Coast, Palmer Sea Reef Golf Course at Port Douglas, Palmer Colonial Golf Course at Robina, and the Palmer Gold Coast Golf Course, also at Robina.

He owned Gold Coast United FC from 2008 to 2012.

Oh no, not Clive, says Barnaby Barnaby Joyce asks what Clive Palmer is all about as news breaks of Palmer apparently taking the seat of Fairfax. Courtesy: ABC TV

As of January 2012, his net worth was estimated by Forbes magazine to be US$795 million.

4. Titanic effort

In April 2012, he announced he had signed a deal with CSC Jinling Shipyard to build a replica of the Titanic.

Called Titanic II, the ship will be constructed in China and set sail in late 2016.

Palmer hopes to re-create ship as closely as possible with its familiar outside looks and also on the inside.

Titanic II will be 883 feet long, weigh 55,800 gross tons and carry 2,435 passengers and 900 crew.

He wants to honour the memories of those who died and survived on the ill-fated original vessel.

5. Wild statements

Speaking on 20 March 2012, Clive Palmer accused Greenpeace of being funded by the CIA to bring down Australia's coal mining sector.

Both Greenpeace and the CIA rejected the claim. In a speech to around 120 business people on the Sunshine Coast, Mr Palmer revealed he believed Premier Campbell Mr Newman was unfit for office.

"I think Campbell Newman basically has a bipolar condition," Mr Palmer reportedly said.

He told The Today Show last week that News Corp chief Rupert Murdoch's former -wife Wendi Deng was a Chinese spy who's been spying on Rupert for years and giving money back to Chinese intelligence.

6. Incorrigible show-off

Mr Palmer loves being noticed.

At his resort, most things are named after him and a whole wall is devoted to framed photos of him with famous people.

He also has an array of vintage cars in the resort lobby.

Mr Palmer can often be spotted taking his favourites out for a spin.

7. Dinosaur dream

Clive digs dinosaurs and is creating his own Jurassic Park at his five-star resort at Coolum.

It will include about 160 robotic creatures, with an initial shipment of a T-Rex, nicknamed “Jeff’’, positioned in front of the golf club.

It roars every few minutes, which keeps golfers on their toes.

The park could open to the public by the end of the year. One Saturday night, Clive spent the evening pegging out where he wanted the dinos placed to ensure they were in the correct settings.

8. Political roots

Mr Palmer joined the Queensland division of the National Party of Australia in 1974, influenced by the policies of Premier Joh Bjelke-Petersen.

From the early 1980s, he was involved in state politics, serving as the National Party's campaign director during the 1983 state election and as media spokesman during its 1986 election campaign, both of which were successful.

He was a supporter of the unsuccessful Joh for Canberra campaign.

9. Health scare

While watching a soccer game in October 2009, Mr Palmer was thought to have suffered a heart attack and rushed to hospital.

Doctors advised it was a heart palpitation.

He has also suffered from sleep apnoea.

10. Classic love story

Palmer's first wife, Susan, died of cancer in 2006.

In the same week, his long-time friend Andrew Topalov also died of the same disease.

A year later, Palmer married his friend's widow, Anna, and the couple has a young daughter, Mary, and another child on the way.

Palmer to Abbott - You can pinch our policies

Clive Palmer says he doesn't mind if the new Coalition government pinches his party's policies.

Some of those policies raised eyebrows during the campaign, including his plan to let asylum seekers arrive in Australia without visas and with a return ticket, to be processed within a day of landing.

"It doesn't matter if we implement them, or the Labor party does, or the Liberal party does," he said.

"We've got to start looking at ideas, what's best for the country."

Mr Palmer said he would have some sway over any Palmer party candidates elected to the Senate.

"Well I am the parliamentary leader of the party, just like Tony Abbott is the leader of his party, and my relationship will be similar to his relationship with his senators,'' Mr Palmer told AAP.

"I'll have the same sway Tony Abbott has over his senators or what Bill Shorten will have over the Labor party senators - it's no different.''

Mr Palmer said Tony Abbott wouldn't have secured the nation's top job if not for his party's preferences.

"We had six per cent and we preferenced the Liberal Party. The swing against Labor was 4.5 per cent,'' the Palmer United Party leader told AAP on Sunday.

"Without Palmer United's preferences, Tony Abbott would not be prime minister.''

Election analysts say Mr Palmer is on track to win the Sunshine Coast seat of Fairfax and his star candidate Glenn Lazarus will win a Senate spot in Queensland.

But Mr Palmer insists his party will also win the neighbouring Sunshine Coast seat of Fisher, which former Howard government minister Mal Brough is confident he's bagged for the Coalition.

He also claims Senate candidate Jacqui Lambie will win a spot in Tasmania, as will Dio Wang in Western Australia.

And he says his party's in with a chance in the lower house Queensland seat of Hinkler.

The Palmer party, formed just four months ago, had outpolled the century-old National party, he said.

More Australians would become Palmer party converts when they understood more about his policies, he said.

"Those policies weren't reported nationally but they got me 30 per cent of the vote in Fairfax, where the local media reported on them,'' he said.

Last night, Mr Palmer, who whipped up his own party in four months, was jubilant and already looking to the future.

"By winning the seat of Fairfax we can win the entire country over the next three years," he said.

He is hosting a function for 250 supporters at his Coolum resort on Queensland's Sunshine Coast.

A official result is not expected tonight although experts believe Mr Palmer has a good chance of defeating the LNP's Ted O'Brien once preferences are taken into account.

The ABC earlier reported that the founder of the Palmer United Party had attracted more than 29 per cent of the primary vote with about 50 per cent of the vote counted

The Liberal National Party incumbent for the Sunshine Coast seat, Ted O'Brien, has seen an 11 per cent drop in his primary vote.

Mr Palmer has accused the Australian Electoral Commission of influencing the result of the election and has already flagged a possible High Court challenge, the ABC reported.

Spirits are high at Camp Clive on the Sunshine Coast where up to 250 Palmer United Party supporters are feeling positive about their whirlwind campaign.

Mr Palmer is hosting a function at the Captain's Table restaurant at his luxury resort at Coolum.

"The mood here is very upbeat," a Palmer spokesman said. "There is a festive atmosphere and everyone feels satisfied and positive.

"It's amazing how far we have come in four months."

But election analyst Antony Green expects it to be a “close contest” between the LNP and Palmer United Party in the seat of Fairfax.



With 41.4 per cent of the vote counted, PUP’s Clive Palmer is on 29.2 per cent of the vote and the LNP’s Ted O’Brien is on 38.5 per cent.



“What we are getting from the electoral commission is a Labor versus LNP preference count, and that turns into a comfortable victory for the LNP,” election analyst Antony Green said.



“But I’ll now go into the computer and turn off the received preference count because in my view it is only a contest between the LNP and the PUP and this stage it is a very close contest.”



“We will not know the result of that election tonight.”