Peterborough’s Cheryl Jones was impressed the moment she walked into the store.

She was one of the many who ventured into Talize Saturday morning when it opened its doors for the first time to the public in its new location at Portage Place.

It became the sixth in its thrift store chain in Ontario and seventh in Canada in the last decade. The others are in Kitchener, London, Mississauga, Hamilton, Brampton and Delta, B.C.

Mayor Daryl Bennett and Coun. Andrew Beamer were on hand for a special ribbon cutting ceremony, which also included David Tarski, co-owner of Talize with his brother Vitali, David’s son Idan, also part of the business, store manager Brandon Parrott – among others. It also included activities for children such as balloons, clowns and magicians.

The store offers vintage, new and nearly-new fashionable merchandise—with part of the proceeds going to support the Children’s Wish Foundation. The selection ranges from housewares, books, toys and electronics to men's and women's clothing.

Natasha Fieldman, manager of resource development Ontario chapter and Michelle Taylor, coordinator of community development national branch of the children’s foundation in Pickering were also in attendance.

“I like the way it is set up and how clean and bright it is,’’ said Jones, among the early customers. “Everything is easy to see and the quality and variety of the merchandise is very good. The staff is very friendly. It’s easier for me to get to. I like its location and hopefully it will revitalize Portage Place. It’s good they are helping the children, too. That’s a great thing.’’

About 100 people took in the special ceremony which included Bennett welcoming the new store and its 67-member staff unit to the community.

The chain has been in existence for about a decade and David Tarski said they had been looking at the Peterborough market for quite a while. It was just a question of real estate, he said.

“It’s good to be in Peterborough,’’ he said. “We really like the community and where we are.’’

The Tarskis are of Russian descent and the store name is a play on the family name, including he and his co-owner brother.

David said there were three things of importance when it came to running the store.

“It’s about having the best selection for the best price, customer service and supporting a charity like the Children’s Wish Foundation and the environment,’’ he said. “We like being in the community and helping the community. We are happy to help children.’’

Fieldman and Taylor were pleased to be there and said $1 million had been raised for the foundation.

“We have received a lot of support,’’ said Fieldman.

It was difficult to determine how many customers came through the store this day but organizers said the 250 carts were gone within minutes of its opening and it remained busy throughout.

The store will be open Monday to Saturday from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. and Sundays 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.

dale.clifford@sunmedia.ca