David Paul Morris/Bloomberg News A plaque is displayed on the side of a wall at the City Hall building in Stockton Calif., on Feb. 7, 2012.

Bankruptcy lawyers who are trying to cut expenses for Stockton, Calif., enough to get it out of Chapter 9 have turned their focus to the Stockton Ports minor league baseball team, whose lease to use the city’s newish Banner Island Ballpark actually costs the city money instead of making a profit.

City lawyers complained to Judge Christopher Klein earlier this week that the baseball team’s owners haven’t been cooperating as city officials try to cut back on the amount of taxpayer money that supports the team, which feeds players to the Oakland Athletics franchise.

Documents filed to the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Sacramento state that, under the team’s lease, the 310,000-resident city pays not only for most of the stadium’s costs but for many game-day expenses while only giving the city a “small component” of suite revenue and facility fees in return. City officials expected to spend $426,000 on ballpark subsidies during the last fiscal year, according to court papers.

The Stockton Ports were shut out 11-0 on Monday by the Modesto Nuts in their final game of the season, ending the year with a 69-71 record.

According to negotiation documents written before Stockton filed for bankruptcy last year, city officials wanted to tweak the team’s 25-year lease, along with the city’s other sports-related agreements, to cut their roughly $1.2 million annual cost in half.

But before pressing for cuts, Stockton’s bankruptcy attorneys said they need more information—such as average paid attendance and ticket prices—from the Stockton Ports’ owner, 7th Inning Stretch LLC. After team officials didn’t respond to information requests, city bankruptcy attorneys requested to use the examination power of the bankruptcy court to force that information.

“In order to determine the best course of action, the city requires basic financial information regarding the performance of the Ports and their use of the stadium under the agreement,” the city’s attorneys said in court papers.

Since the city’s bankruptcy, Stockton leaders have tried to cut back expenses, including those owed to retired firefighters, police officers and city workers. (Hard times in Detroit have prompted discussions over whether now is the appropriate time to spend $650 million on a new home for the Detroit Red Wings hockey team.)

The team’s ballpark, which can seat more than 5,200 fans, has been blamed for some of the city’s financial problems. City leaders built the stadium and a 10,000-seat arena in 2005 as they tried to revitalize its downtown waterfront with the 24-acre project.

The complex is losing money and “requires a significant general fund subsidy just to remain in operation,” city officials said in court papers.

But according to Stockton’s pre-bankruptcy papers, municipal bondholders who extended more than $45 million for the project are expected to be fully repaid by the city, unlike other bondholders who could be forced to take less than what they’re owed as a result of the city’s bankruptcy.

City officials are preparing to file a bankruptcy-exit plan within weeks that could show exactly how the city will cut its debts and stabilize its operations. If the city makes those cuts without bondholders’ consent, Stockton would be the first city to use the power of Chapter 9 to make involuntary cuts on bondholders.

The city, located about 80 miles inland from San Francisco, was declared to be “ground zero” for the subprime-mortgage crisis by Judge Klein. He also blamed the city’s financial woes on former leaders who had offered overly generous pay to city workers.

Since the case began on June 28, 2012, Stockton leaders have been pressured to sell off city hall even after officials imposed harsh cuts on its departments and its roughly 1,300 workers in recent years.

City attorneys have said Stockton, which ranks as one of the state’s most dangerous cities, employs about 1.2 police officers for every 1,000 residents—a ratio almost half of what is recommended by a national study.

Write to Katy Stech at katy.stech@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @KatyStech.