Sioux Falls, SD

It's an experience these kids won't soon forget, playing with former Guns and Roses guitarist and solo artist, Slash.

The Brennan Rock and Roll academy teaches these kids to play instruments for free. Slash is hoping to see a similar venue open up in his hometown, Los Angeles.

"The public school system, they keep downsizing because of the budget and the first things they take out are the arts. Art classes, music classes, stuff like that. It's unfortunate because that's a huge outlet for young people to latch onto," Slash said.



The kids here have only been practicing for two months, but you can already tell, they have some real talent.

"It was great. Once we got everything in tune we were off and running. The drummer was really good. One of the band that played before us, the bass player was amazing so, ya, they all have potential," Slash said.

But as good as the kids are they say it was a real treat to get to hear Slash play one of his patented guitar solos.

16-year-old Connor Engberg never envisioned anything like this when he signed up for the Rock and Roll Academy.

"It was surreal. It was just one of those moments where you can't believe it's happening. I didn't really realize until he came up on stage that I'm playing with Slash," Engberg said.

Slash came to Sioux Falls to encourage and inspire kids to play music. He's also hoping to inspire some musical volunteers.

"It's something you should do, if you can teach kids how to play and make them feel comfortable learning, put them in a comfortable environment and make it not seem intimidating, that's really the key thing," Slash said.

Some people would find it intimidating, playing alongside a legendary guitarist, but these kids took it all in stride.

Slash says, "It's all about the kids. I've got two of my own and I think supporting kids and setting them out in the right direction is one of the most important things, I hate to sound like an adult but, that we can do."

And Engberg says music is definitely the direction he wants to head in the future.

"I'd love to play on a stage for a living. It's my dream," Engberg said.