<p>Republican presidential candidate Dr. Ben Carson takes questions from members of the media after speaking at a luncheon at the National Press Club in Washington, Friday, Oct. 9, 2015. Carson is promoting a book he has co-authored with his wife Candy Carson entitled 'A More Perfect Union: What We the People Can Do to Reclaim Our Constitutional Liberties.' (AP Photo/Andrew Harnik)</p>

More details on visits to Knoxville this weekend by former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and Dr. Ben Carson, both seeking the Republican nomination for president, became known Friday.

The time of a tailgate party today sponsored by College Republicans for Bush at the Humanities Plaza on the University of Tennessee campus will be 12:30-1:15 p.m. Bush will accompany Gov. Bill Haslam to the game afterward between the UT Vols and the Georgia Bulldogs.

Haslam was to be among the guests at a private fundraiser for Bush on Friday night at the home of state Economic and Community Development Commissioner Randy Boyd.

Carson, who’s coming in Sunday for a book-signing at Books-A-Million, also will be featured at a fundraising breakfast Monday at the Square Room, 4 Market Square. An invitation says a VIP reception and photo opportunity will be 7:30-8 a.m. with the breakfast from 8-9 a.m. The support level ranges from $250 for breakfast to $2,000 for recognition and photo.

The book-signing will begin at 7 p.m. at the bookstore, 8513 Kingston Pike.

Mary Mancini, chair of the Tennessee Democratic Party, released statements Friday ahead of the visits. She said Bush was a failure as Florida governor by not lowering classroom sizes despite a state constitutional amendment and by funding for-profit schools with tax dollars that had no public oversight, among other issues.

Carson, a neurosurgeon, should understand the need for affordable and quality health care yet continues to attack the Affordable Care Act, she said. She also said his “divisive rhetoric offends the very fabric of American culture,” a reference to his remarks that a Muslim should not be U.S. president.

UPDATE ON CITY ELECTIONS: David Williams, third in the Sept. 29 primary for the Knoxville City Council at-large C seat represented by Finbarr Saunders, said he supports Paul Bonovich, who came in second, in the Nov. 3 election. A fourth candidate, Kelly Absher, earlier said he supports Saunders in the runoff.

Financial disclosures filed this week for the city and state show Saunders has $20,643 leftover from the primary; Bonovich has $1,208 and a loan of $5,540; Williams, $1,400; and Asher, $861.

Councilman Marshall Stair, who represents the at-large B seat, has $36,168. His opponent, Pete Drew, who’s previously been on the County Commission and in the state Legislature, did not file but previously reported he had not raised or spent money.

Fifth District Councilman Mark Campen has $6,621 for the citywide general election; his opponent, Jennifer Mirtes, $627.

Georgiana Vines is retired News Sentinel associate editor. She may be reached at 865-577-6612 or gvpolitics@hotmail.com.