More people are getting health insurance coverage, but will the state be able to control the costs of medical care?

COLUMBUS, Ohio – Ohio's rate of uninsured residents has been cut in half since 2012, as health care reform and aggressive enrollment efforts have closed coverage gaps throughout the population, state officials said Wednesday.

The overall rate of uninsured residents dropped to 8.7 percent, down from 17.3 percent in 2012, according to a statewide survey by the Ohio Department of Medicaid. The survey, known as the Ohio Medicaid Assessment, also found commensurate improvements in coverage for children, as the rate of uninsured residents under age 18 fell to 2 percent from 4.7 percent three years ago.

The findings mean that state and federal efforts to insure more people are working, and that more Ohioans are getting access to medical care under state Medicaid expansion and the federal Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare.

"This is something we expected to see, but not at this rate," said John McCarthy, director of the Ohio Department of Medicaid. "This is a huge decrease in the uninsured rate."

The survey also found that, contrary to predictions by some opponents of health care reform, private employers have not dropped coverage for their workers. Since passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010, the rate of Ohioans covered through an employer has remained constant at 55 percent.

The state conducts the survey every few years to track how insurance coverage is changing and to identify gaps in medical care. This year's data was collected through a telephone survey of tens of thousands of Ohioans between April and June. The results were presented Wednesday during an event in Columbus.

Though it found an expansion in insurance coverage, the survey did include some troubling results relative to the health status of Ohioans. For example, it revealed that the rate of obesity increased to 35 percent today from 30 percent in 2008.

That could have implications for the cost of covering a greater percentage of the population, as it means more people are at risk of getting chronic illnesses such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease and other problems.

A high rate of chronic disease in recent years has driven rapid increases in health care costs for employers, government and individuals. McCarthy said the state is hoping to counteract cost increases through the switch to a value-based payment system, where providers are paid a fixed amount of money for their services and only profit if they improve the health of their patients.

The survey revealed that 50.5 percent of Medicaid recipients in the state are working, while 30 percent are disabled and about 20 percent are not working. McCarthy said the percentage of people working is good news, though the state hopes to increase that number through job training and other initiatives, and work to get more people off the Medicaid rolls.