CU is winless in last four Pac-12 games

For the second straight game, the Colorado women's soccer team had a goal waved off. This time, it didn't make a difference in the outcome.

Two days after tying No. 19 Washington, the Buffaloes had the unenviable task of taking on 21st-ranked Washington State. The Cougars got two goals 1 minute, 58 seconds apart in the first half and went on to beat Colorado, 3-0.

The Buffs (7-5-2, 1-3-1 Pac 12) are winless in their last four games after starting conference play with a 2-1 double-overtime win over California.

"It's definitely frustrating because you don't want to start out conference this way," Madison Krauser said. "It puts us in a tough spot and we have to get crucial wins on the road against good teams."

CU's Mikaela Krause battles for the ball with Washington State's Sofia Anker-Kofoed on Sunday at Prentup Field. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

The Cougars (10-2, 3-1) took a 1-0 lead on Kaitlyn Johnson's sixth goal of the season. She beat CU goalie Scout Watson to a loose ball and put a shot by the Buffs' keeper into the left side of the net in the 15th minute.

Colorado had a chance in the same minute when Krauser had the ball in front, but her shot went over the crossbar.

"If that was to have gone in, the game would have completely changed," Krauser said.

After Krauser's near miss, Kourtney Guetlein blasted a shot from the right inside the left post in the 17th minute for his sixth of the season.

"We had a really good early opportunity that we didn't finish and then we got caught high," coach Danny Sanchez said. "We talked about (Johnson) and we can't be caught flat and we did. The second goal was bad defending. They have four shots on goal and three goals."

Advertisement

The Buffs finished with 11 shots on goal, eight in the second half.

Colorado had other chances, including one on an indirect kick in the final two seconds of the first half. Alex Vidger's kick was deflected in but the officials waved it off because time expired, leaving the Buffs frustrated at halftime.

"It just sucks that it didn't count," Vidger said. "It's hard to get a goal in the Pac-12, so when they call it back you're more upset at yourself more than anyone else."

The frustration increased in the second half. Despite a continuous wave into the Cougars' end, the Buffs couldn't score. Washington State had fewer chances but capitalized on one when Tia Gavin scored in the 71st minute to make it 3-0.

"Once they got those (first) two goals they played smart and made it difficult for us," Sanchez said.

Things don't get easier for CU, which plays at No. 6 Stanford on Friday.

Washington State 3, Colorado 0

At Prentup Field

2 1 — 30 0 — 0

Goals (assists) — Washington State: Kaitlyn Johnson (Beau Bremer) 15th minute; Kourtney Guetlein (Sofia Anker-Kofoed) 16th minute; Tia Gavin (Chelsea Harkins) 71st minute.

Goalies (Min-Goals allowed-Saves) — Washington State:Ella Dederick (90-0-11); ColoradoScout Watson (90-3-1).