“We need to keep a better eye on our icons,” Tom Peeler wrote in the July 1997 issue of D before counting down the famous, the familiar and the kinda, sorta forgotten.

It certainly won’t be difficult to espy the item at the very top of his list. After years in hibernation, it returns today: the 1934 neon Pegasus, which, at this very moment, is being reassembled atop its new perch in front of the downtown Dallas Omni Hotel. But another “icon” on Peeler’s list is almost hidden in plain sight: the 54-year-old, 38-foot-tall neon Big Tex along Stemmons Freeway at Walnut Hill Lane, which advertises a bankrupt business beneath a tangle of concrete and construction.

The sign advertises a Centennial Liquor Beer & Wine, which drank its last drop in December 2012 after filing for bankruptcy. The empty building at the intersection is still branded a Centennial, its red canopy now a sad shade of faded and abandoned. Many of the other Centennials wear other brand names now; several have become Spec’s. But this location still belongs to the bank, BBVA Compass.

After making a few calls this week, we discovered that the property’s about to go up for grabs. Realtor Bill Senkel got the listing only days ago. He and the man at the bank say the next owner might not want the sign. They say they’re willing to sell it separately. Make an offer. Better do it soon.

It certainly wouldn’t be the first time Neon Big Tex has been sold and moved. He was built for David Krauss‘ “sprawling” 140,000-square-foot Big D Value Mart, which opened on N. Central Expressway just north of Forest Lane on December 1, 1961 (not 1958, the oft-cited opening date). According to our archives, Mayor Earle Cabell was in attendance for the ribbon-cutting; so too the Light Crust Doughboys, Miss Texas, Miss Arizona and Miss Iceland (for real), who rode a float down Central for the extravaganza. The department store was so much more: Churches held services there; the B’nai B’rith Girls held dances there.

The place didn’t even last a year: A radio operator took over the lease, and after a two-day going-out-of-business sale, the Big D Value Mart shuttered on November 18, 1962.

Centennial, founded in 1936, bought the sign at the end of 1962 and moved it five miles south, to its Lovers Lane location, from which he waved to motorists for decades — save for a brief time in 1984, when he was damaged by a windstorm that involved major repairs and something of a facelift. In 1993 Centennial sold the location to make way for the Central expansion project, and moved Biggish Tex to Stemmons and Walnut Hill, at the time a prominent location.

But save for a fleeting glimpse of the lighted (and refurbished!) big man in the pilot episode of AMCs’ Halt and Catch Fire, he’s been all but forgotten (like the Sigel’s sign that moved from Lemmon to Addison in 2009; it’s profoundly missed). The bank and realtors say they’ve been spending weeks trying to figure out who actually owns him. But he can now be yours, they say. It’s cool with Tex. He’s used to a change in scenery every decade or so.

Below: a brief history of Neon Big Tex.