'Still excited,' every day of going to work.

Louisville Fire Protection District's new Fire Chief John Willson poses with a fire truck at Station 2 in Louisville on Friday. ( David R. Jennings / Daily Camera )

Recently hired police, fire chiefs in Boulder and Broomfield counties January 2015: John Willson, chief of the Louisville Fire Protection District; Michael Calderazzo, Boulder Fire Rescue December 2014: Gary Creager, Broomfield Police Department June 2014: Greg Testa, Boulder Police Department April 2014: David Hayes, Louisville Police Department February 2014: David Ramos, North Metro Fire Rescue District December 2013: Melissa Zak, University of Colorado Police Department April 2013: Marco Vasquez, Erie Police Department October 2010: Rick Bashor, Lafayette Police Department

From a college student taking part in a live-in program offered by the fire department in Moscow, Idaho to his last three years as battalion chief for the Louisville Fire Protection District, John Willson has held nearly every post someone in his field can, over the past 33 years.

As of last week, he can add chief to that list as well.

Willson has been serving as the chief of the Louisville district since Jan. 2, but he was officially sworn in by the department's board of directors on Thursday night.

He took over for longtime chief Tim Parker, who recently retired after a decade at the helm.

"Some people would say it's a calling," Willson said of his chosen profession. "I'm still excited every day I come to work. It's a pleasure and I'm excited to do my best for the citizens whom I serve."

Willson, originally form the Seattle area, studied forestry early in his career at the University of Idaho before earning a degree in political science. After his stint with the local Moscow Fire Department, he decided to pursue firefighting as a career.

In 1989, he moved to Avon to take a full time position with the Eagle River Fire Department. He also worked for Winter Park's East Grand Fire Protection District and West Metro Fire in Jefferson County before coming to Louisville in December 2011.

He was among nearly 50 applicants and eight qualified finalists considered by the board, before they made him their unanimous choice, board president David Yost said.

"We were lucky enough to have him for a few years before this assignment. He leads well, people respond to him well and he knows all the fundamentals," Yost said. "His background was excellent."

Even if he had not been chosen to lead the department as chief, Yost said Willson was part of the district's "succession plan." Yost said he has been integral in working with neighboring fire departments, including the Rocky Mountain Fire Department, with which Louisville has jointly purchased equipment in order to save both departments money.

Willson's collaborative efforts were the first thing Boulder Fire

Chief Michael Calderazzo mentioned when asked about his Louisville counterpart. Calderazzo, like Willson, is a newly-minted department head, officially taking as chief on Jan.5 after serving on an interim basis for two months.

"I am glad it's him," Calderazzo said. "He's been working with us on a number of regional projects so that can only mean we'll have more of that."

Willson said he plans to talk frequently with his predecessor, Parker, over the coming months. Parker, who lives in Louisville, presided over the department's transition from full volunteer unit to a combination department that now employs 21 career firefighters in addition to 60 volunteers. Parker also helped create the department's long-term comprehensive plan, which is due for an update in 2016.

Willson said he foresees the department moving closer to an even split between career and volunteer firefighters as it continues to grow.

"We want to continue the great heritage of our volunteers but also bridge the department into the future, looking ahead to the future and trying to be more proactive instead of reactive," he said.

The Louisville Fire Protection District provides fire and ambulance transport service to all of Louisville and portions of unincorporated Boulder County. The area has roughly 25,000 residents. Its most recent property tax assessment valued the property within the district at $488,324,397, according to Louisville Fire spokeswoman Shawn Stark.

"It's a chance to give back to the community," Willson said of his commitment to firefighting.

"And, to help a person when they are having their worst day."

Joe Rubinor: 303-473-1328, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/rubinojc