<p>Saad stands in front of the Naples building he purchased for his firm, which focuses on the protection of business and real estate interests of clients.</p>

SHARE Dania Maxwell/Staff (2) The 8,700-square-foot-building on 2670 Airport-Pulling Road South is pictured on Friday in Naples. It was purchased by Naples City Councilman Sam Saad III, who plans to move his firm to the location Dec. 15. Naples City Councilman Sam Saad III poses for a portrait in front of the building he purchased for his firm which focuses on the protection of business and real estate interests of clients on October 31, 2014, in Naples, Fla. He plans to be operating from the 8,700-square-foot-building on 2670 Airport-Pulling Road South on December 15. (Dania Maxwell/Staff)

By John Osborne

It has been a labor of love since the beginning for Sam Saad III and his family.

Literally, at times.

When Saad, 37 — a real estate and business attorney, Naples city councilman and father of two — moves his base of operations to a recently purchased, 8,700-square-foot building at 2670 Airport-Pulling Road S. on Dec. 15, he could be forgiven for flashing back to the fateful day in 2007, when he was scheduled to open his current office at the corner of Fifth Avenue South and U.S. 41 in downtown Naples.

A fateful day that didn’t unfold as planned because the stork had other scheduling ideas in mind.

After moving to Southwest Florida from Washington, D.C., in 2003, where he worked on the re-election campaign of President George W. Bush, Saad and his wife set up shop in a spare bedroom of their condo before Amy Saad’s pregnancy in 2007 convinced the couple that more traditional office space might be called for.

And so began the opening day that never was — a frantic 24-hour period that was pushed aside to make room for a newborn baby.

“We were supposed to open Dec. 8, 2007, but we were getting the computers up and running when my wife’s water broke at around noon,” recalled Sam Saad, a Nebraska native and Creighton University law school graduate who was working two other jobs at the time his daughter, Lola, was born. “It was a lot of excitement and a lot of fun.”

Not to mention a testament to Amy Saad’s remarkable recovery ability.

“I spent the next 12 to 15 hours in the hospital, needed a few days, then went back to work a week later,” said Amy Saad, who would go on to also give birth to Sam Saad IV a few years later. “It was a very crazy week. Very exciting, very crazy and very scary.”

Since those early days, Sam Saad III said, everything has been smooth sailing as he has watched his burgeoning business grow to 12 employees and into the much larger space on Airport-Pulling Road South.

“We’ll rent the top floor for a little while as we grow into the space,” he said. “Paradise Coast Title and Escrow will be on the first floor, and we’ll have the law office on the second floor. Our clients will have a much nicer experience, with more comfortable surroundings and better technology. It will be easier and more efficient, not to mention the proximity to the courthouse.

We’ll be across the street now, so it will be two minutes to the courthouse instead of 15. The overall operation will be much more efficient.”

As a family man himself, Saad said he understands the complexities of juggling work and family.

“We’re a very family-friendly business,” he said. “Of our 12 employees, including me, seven have minor children, so if somebody’s kid is sick, somebody has to take care of them. I’m very flexible as long as the work gets done. We’re a small firm, but we offer health care benefits so the employees don’t have to worry about the implications of Obamacare (The Affordable Care Act).”

Claudia Alusma, 23, an Immokalee native and recent Florida Atlantic University graduate, has worked as Saad’s marketing assistant for the past three weeks. Alusma said she appreciated the help she has received at her new job.

“So far, I’m loving the environment,” she said. “I love the way the office is set up, and I like that the employees here are very knowledgeable and skilled at what they’re doing. They’re helping me to learn and get into the marketing world. Plus, Sam is a great leader, and I’m excited to be a part of his growing firm.”

A city councilman since 2010, Saad he wears his different hats to the best of his abilities each day.

“It’s a balancing act every day to get the legal work done, be a good representative for my constituents and make time for my kids and wife,” he said. “I have a great staff, and that helps a lot. I know everyone says it, but they’re the best. They work hard every day, and they’re dedicated professionals who make a huge difference.”