Presidential candidate and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush made Ocala a campaign stop Monday as part of a trek through the state. About 500 people came to see the brother and son of two former presidents at Cypress Hall in the On Top of the World retirement community.

During an hour-long town hall meeting, Bush never mentioned GOP front runner Donald Trump by name; instead, he focused on how he would improve the federal government. He distanced himself from Trump, referencing the real estate developer’s penchant for name calling.

“My campaign is about pushing people up instead of pushing them down,” Bush said to a cheering crowd.

He said he understood people were angry, but that divisiveness was not the answer.

He said his policy toward ISIS was one of destroying them rather than containment, citing President Obama’s failure fighting ISIS. Bush said he would arm the Kurds and embed US troops with the Iraqi military “to give them a spine.”

“Destroying ISIS is a serious issue which requires a serious leader,” Bush said.

He said he would create a no-fly zone in Syria.

As for Russian President Vladimir Putin, Bush called him a “bully,” saying, “he should be more afraid of us then we are of him.”

Putin would better respond to a president who’s “consistent,” not a “blowhard,” Bush said, referencing Trump.

Bush said another focus would be the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, citing the scandal in which many veterans died while waiting for medical care.

He said that if elected, he would make it easier to fire federal career civil servants who were not doing their jobs.

One question from the audience centered on the Affordable Care Act, to which he said that he would work to repeal Obamacare and replace it with a non-mandatory state exchange. He said people should be offered healthcare plans that focused on covering catastrophic illnesses. The plans would have low premiums but high deductibles.

Another question from the audience was about Social Security and ensuring it would remain funded in the future.

Bush said that at the current rate, Social Security reimbursements would likely have to be reduced 25 percent to 30 percent.

To keep that from happening, Bush said, he would work to extend retirement age beginning in 2023 by one month each year.

By pushing retirement back, he would be able to raise reimbursements to a minimum of 125 percent of poverty levels. In addition, he would lower reimbursements to the wealthiest Americans. And if someone is of retirement age and still working, they should not have to contribute financially to Social Security any longer, he said.

Many of those attending the town hall meeting said before the event they were hesitant to support the former Florida governor, saying they came to the meeting to gather information and they were still undecided as to whom they would support.

“I’m just interested. I’ve never been to a rally,” retired U.S. Army Maj. Lynn Grosvenor said before the event. “I think he has trouble connecting with the public. We need someone who projects tough leadership.”

“People are fed up with the status quo. They’re mad. They don’t trust government. The middle class is not doing well. And Jeb Bush represents another Bush and more status quo,” she said.

But after the rally, Grosvenor said she was sold on Bush.

“If he’s on the (Republican ticket) I would vote for him,” she said, “When you see him in person he’s very passionate. He’s very steady. He has answers. He has solutions.”

“He’s talking about issues instead of himself," she said, referencing Trump.

Dottie Taylor, 77, said before the rally that she wasn’t convinced by Bush, but adamant she would not vote for Trump.

Taylor, who owned a real estate business before retiring, said before the rally that “I don’t know if I’m going to vote for him. I have to see what he says."

After the rally, Taylor said, “Nobody has my vote yet. But he’s a good speaker and gave good answers.”

Bush has struggled since first announcing his candidacy in June as the Republican presumptive frontrunner and wielding the largest financial war chest of any candidate. He and his super Political Action Committee have blown through half of the $133 million that they raised through the first three quarters of this year, according to a Washington Times article. About $37 million of that has gone to campaign ads.

When he announced his candidacy he began at 15 percent in the polls and dropped to about 4 percent in the most recent surveys.

Walter Childress, 73, an On Top of the World resident, said that despite spending Bush’s campaign spending, “people want someone from the outside. I know he was a good governor but he isn’t resonating with people. People are looking for something new.”

His wife, Nancy, 74, said that like most politicians she doesn’t trust, she doesn’t trust Bush.

“Too many Republicans get into office and didn’t do what they said they were going to do,” she said.

Asked by a Star-Banner reporter why his poll numbers appear stuck in the single digits, an agitated Bush said “they’re going to go up.”

He told the reporter that as the election nears, voters will turn away from “fear mongering” and find his message to be the right one.

Asked whether Trump supporters would come his way rather than to conservative Republican candidate Ted Cruz, if Trump’s campaign falters, Bush replied that he had faith in the voters.