Buy Photo Lt. Gov. Dardenne announces Tuesday that the Alexandria Museum of Art will be the new home for Louisiana’s State Art Collection. (Photo: Miranda Quartemont/The Town Talk)Buy Photo

The Louisiana State Art Collection has relocated to the central part of the state where it will be on display to the public for the first time in years.

Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne announced Tuesday that the Alexandria Museum of Art will be the new home to the 99-piece collection managed by the Louisiana Division of Arts.

The sculptures, stained glass paintings, drawings, photography, and etchings were all crafted by Louisiana artists. The state started receiving them as donations and acquisitions in the 1940s and housed them in the Old State Capitol Building. Eventually, many went into storage though or were moved into other state buildings like the office for the Department of Culture, Recreation and Tourism.

Buy Photo A stained glass painting from the Louisiana State Art Collection hangs in a window at the Alexandria Museum of Art. (Photo: Miranda Quartemont/The Town Talk)

Dardenne and others at the tourism office decided to have the pieces there inventoried and appraised. They learned the collection was worth a more than half a million dollars. During a Tuesday morning appearance at AMoA, Dardenne noted the value of the State Art Collection also is in its legacy, and he wants to share that with the public.

"Artwork by Louisiana artists needs to be available for Louisianians to see and enjoy," Dardenne said.

Even though that meant, leaving some bare walls around around the building where he works.

"We had to take the pictures off of the wall literally in some people's offices and say sorry," Dardenne said.

But, he said the collection needs to be at a place where it can be properly cared for. AMoA turned out to be a "natural fit."

"This museum is a very mature museum," Dardenne said. "It's established and centrally located in the state, and we thought it would be the perfect place."

Meanwhile, Catherine Pears, executive director of AMoA, and others at the museum have been in the process of building a permanent collection there.

Buy Photo A serigraph by Charles H. Jeffress from the Louisiana State Art Collection hangs at the Alexandria Museum of Art. (Photo: Miranda Quartemont/The Town Talk)

"When you go to most museums, you get to see their collections," Pears said. "That's been the goal for a long time here at the museum."

Now, they're one step closer.

"We have some gaps in our collection," Pears said, "and this donation from the Department of Culture, Recreation and Tourism really helps us to move toward our collecting goals."

AMoA hopes to open the galleries, which will carry a theme of Louisiana art and artists, in 2017 to coincide with the museum's 40th anniversary. The 99 pieces already have moved there though, and a select few will be on display until then. Pears said the museum's collection committee planned to start unpacking them right away Tuesday evening.

"That'll be fun for them to unpack and get to see some of the treasures," Pears said.

The State Art's repertoire includes work by Natchitoches folk artist Clementine Hunter, landscape artist Elemore Morgan Jr., Shreveport sculptor Clyde Connell and renowned artist Ida Kohlmeyer from New Orleans. Since some have been in storage, the museum will have to restore any damage. Once that task is complete though, it will open up new opportunities.

Buy Photo Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne talks with Catherine Pears (left) and Fran Davis (right) after announcing the Alexandria Museum of Art as the new home for Louisiana’s State Art Collection. (Photo: Miranda Quartemont/The Town Talk)

"We won't be changing exhibits in the whole museum every quarter. We'll only have to change out the main gallery," Pears said. "And so, we'll be able to focus on interpretation and education with our own collection."

Read or Share this story: http://www.thetowntalk.com/story/news/local/2015/06/16/dardenne-reveals-new-home-state-art-collection/28832419/