Growing up in the Swiss Alps, Christof Luedi's fitness routine centered around mountain activities such as cross-country skiing. But when a job with the Fairmont Hotels & Resorts took him to Hawaii in 2000, he adapted his workout to his new home. Here, Mr. Luedi takes a break after doing crunches on a fitness ball at the resort's lagoon. Marco Garcia for The Wall Street Journal …

After an employee introduced Mr. Leudi to the sport of outrigger canoe paddling, he became instantly hooked. 'I loved the idea of exploring the islands in these canoes just like people did years and years ago,' he says. Here, Mr. Leudi does a strength routine focused on the muscles used for paddling. Marco Garcia for The Wall Street Journal …

Mr. Leudi—a longtime runner has completed more than 100 triathlons and more than 50 marathons. He runs outdoors three days a week. Two runs are often shorter distance, but at a high intensity. Once a week he goes on a slower-paced endurance run for about two hours. Marco Garcia for The Wall Street Journal …

Mr. Luedi says he often works 18-hour days, so to fit in his strength and cardio workouts two mornings a week, he wakes at 3 a.m. Three days a week, he gets out on the water with the Kai Opua Canoe Club at 4 p.m. 'You organize your life around what you love to do,' he says. 'In my case that is canoe paddling.' Marco Garcia for The Wall Street Journal …

The Fairmont corporate headquarters are in Toronto, so the time difference means Mr. Luedi can answer emails and make calls for an hour before he hits the resort's gym. For 90 minutes, he warms up on the bike and then does a strength routine focused on the muscles used for paddling. 'The paddle technique actually has to do more with rotating your upper body so you are using your lats, your lower- and upper-back muscles, and your core,' says Mr. Luedi. Marco Garcia for The Wall Street Journal …

He likes to train with as little equipment as possible, which he says is part of what attracted him to outrigger canoeing. 'All you need is a paddle, a canoe, and a pair of board shorts,' he says. Marco Garcia for The Wall Street Journal …

Outrigging wasn't 'just about the workout,' recalls the 53-year-old regional vice president and general manager of the resort on the Big Island of Hawaii. 'I learned how culturally significant the whole sport of outrigger canoe paddling is to Hawaii.' Here, Mr. Leudi prepares to do a one-man canoe workout from the resort's lagoon. Marco Garcia for The Wall Street Journal …