Topics: Fox News, Starbucks, Walmart, War on Christmas, Business News

Donald Trump is constantly bemoaning the “War on Christmas” and ripping Starbucks for its plain red cups.

“I tell my wife don’t go to those stores, I want to see Christmas,” he told attendees at the 2015 Values Voter Summit.

But the Donald is a rhetorical Christian soldier. Real believers take the Fox News “War on Christmas” talking point seriously. Some, such as evangelical brand specialist Chris Stone, are acting on it.

Stone—the founder of Faith Driven Global—launched a Christian retail index earlier this year, which seeks to harness the $30 billion in Christmas buying power of the nation’s “Biblically Orthodox Christians.”

As Stone sees it: “Today’s marketplace is tribalized.”

Stone’s base of evangelical BOCs are already almost as tribal as the Williamsburg Lubavitchers. The BOCs have their own Boy Scouts (Trail Life U.S.A.), Girl Scouts (American Heritage Girls), and their own Liberty University. They even read their own newspapers, like the dreary, tendentious Washington Examiner, where Stone announced his 2015 “ChristmasBuycott”—complete with a hashtag, of course.

A “buycott” is the flip side of a “boycott.” It guides faithful consumers toward Christian-friendly retail outlets, while ranking the places they can avoid by spending their money with merchants who share their biblical worldview. I’m not sure there’s a difference, but Stone argues that a buycott is not as negative as a boycott. Informing these buycott consumers is Stone’s Faith Equality Index—a ranking of “how well brands acknowledge Faith Driven Consumers (FDCs) by welcoming, embracing, and celebrating them.”

Stone’s Index draws heavily on the Human Rights Campaign’s “hugely successful” Corporate Equality Index, which ranks brands, workplaces, and retail outlets by policies and practices regarding the LGBTQ community—and has even been “largely successful in compelling brands to include transgender transition in health coverage.” The Faith Equality Index site even compares HRC rankings with each product or outlet it ranks—a subtle “buy here or buy queer” message.

The Index includes a leaderboard where a consumer can track the FDC-plus points earned by reaching out to brands and recruiting family and friends. The real-time competition invites FDCs to engage in a mercantile evangelical movement that rewards the faithful and punishes the not-so-faith-friendly retailers.

Starbucks was an early buycott target. Like Trump, Stone came down hard on Starbucks after it replaced its traditional “Christian-themed” cups with a “solid red blank canvas design.”

Stone’s Index directed believers looking for a more Christ-centered cup of coffee to Dunkin’ Donuts, which honors the faith by serving coffee in red cups emblazoned with the word “Joy.” Krispy Kreme donuts is offered up as another option.

Here’s the FEI as pitched in one of its promotional e-mails. (Attend a Faith & Freedom convention, or a Values Voter Summit, and you, too, will be on the mailing list.)