Gambling losses and winnings Want to bet this is easy? You lose. Winnings are reported on the front of Form 1040 on Line 21, other income, but losses go on Schedule A as a miscellaneous itemized deduction, said Julian Block, a tax lawyer in Larchmont, N.Y. One does not directly offset the other as trades in stocks, bonds or other assets do on Schedule D.

Whether fantasy sports amount to gambling is being argued in court, but winners will receive a Form 1099-MISC, to be reported on the 1040, said Greg Rosica, a tax partner at Ernst & Young in Tampa, Fla.

Same-sex marriage In June, the Supreme Court held that the 14th Amendment “requires a state to license a marriage between two people of the same sex and to recognize a marriage between two people of the same sex when their marriage was lawfully licensed and performed out-of-state.”

Photo

Susan Sommer, director of constitutional litigation for Lambda Legal, said the ruling meant that same-sex couples, like any other married couple, were legally required to file their tax returns as married filing jointly or married filing separately.

Generally joint returns result in a lower overall tax for couples, but depending on individual circumstances, two separate returns may be beneficial. If this is the first time a couple files as married, it could be beneficial to calculate what the results would be both ways, then decide how to file.

Ms. Sommer said the decision applied retroactively and to all states. Some people might benefit from filing amended returns for previous years when they had to file as single, she said.

December tax act Certain tax credits for education have been extended, as have deductions for teachers who use their own money to buy supplies and books for students. The child tax credit has been enhanced, and a provision allowing people who itemize deductions to deduct the higher of state income taxes or sales taxes has been made permanent.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Another provision allows those over age 70½ to make charitable contributions directly from an individual retirement account. It will count as a required minimum distribution or part of one, and because the money goes directly to the charity, the distribution will not raise adjusted gross income, avoiding a possible increase in tax liability, said Sidney Kess, a C.P.A. and lawyer in New York.

This change isn’t retroactive, so people who made charitable contributions last year can’t go back and characterize them as having come from their I.R.A.s.

Photo

Audit risks The overall audit rate for 2015 was less than 1 percent of individual returns, but for those with incomes of more than $1 million the rate was 7 percent, said Mark Nash, a tax partner at PricewaterhouseCoopers in Dallas. “The I.R.S. focuses on high-net-worth individuals,” he said.

Personal use of corporate aircraft and big charitable contributions were often cited in audits, he said. To win in an audit, he said, “make sure you have documentation” to substantiate your tax return. That includes financial records, receipts and even personal journals for business expenses.

Uber and Airbnb Uncle Sam’s take on this is straightforward: The Treasury gets its share. So if you rented out your house or a room or two through Airbnb or earned some money as an Uber driver, you may be liable for taxes, Mr. Rosica said.

Companies like Uber issue 1099s for non-employee compensation, and recipients may need to file Schedule C as self-employed contractors, which allows them to deduct expenses incurred. Some states, including New York, are questioning whether people who drive for Uber are contractors or employees, but for this tax season participants must file based on the forms they receive. Airbnb sends out 1099s for rental income, which is reported on Schedule E, where deductions for expenses can also be taken. Less than 15 days of rental income can be excluded, Mr. Rosica said.

Identity theft The I.R.S. is intensifying efforts to combat identity theft, which has been increasing. It said that in 2015, through November, it had rejected or suspended the processing of 4.8 million suspicious returns and had stopped 1.4 million returns totaling $8 billion in which identity theft had taken place.

Mr. Block advises taxpayers who are worried about this to file early in the hope of getting their returns in before a thief can file a false one. Another strategy is to file a new Form W-4 with employers to reduce withholding. That way, you will have a small balance due next year so that if a thief has claimed a refund, you will not have to wait for yours while the I.R.S. sorts it out.