Eden Braman, 7, is an escape artist.

The soon-to-be second-grader once wedged herself through an 8-inch gap in the backyard fence of her St. Helens home and was found in an adjacent field.

Her mother, Emily Braman, has outfitted their home with motion detectors and alarms. Still, her daughter, who has Down syndrome, needs constant supervision.

Eden was eligible for about $3,400 a year in state funding to cover services, such as 20 hours a month with an in-home caregiver. But it wasn't enough. Braman, a professional guardian and single mother to Eden and 8-year-old, Leah, pleaded with officials for more help but was turned away.

That all changed this year, when Eden became eligible for about $70,000 a year in services, or at least 100 hours of care each month.

"It has been a wonderful blessing," Braman said. "It's eased some of my stresses, made the quality of our family life better and reduced some of my stresses so I can be a better mom."

But while some families are rejoicing, others worry that a change in how services are calculated and funded could cost the state millions of dollars.

Under a provision of the Affordable Care Act, many of the 9,000 Oregonians with developmental disabilities who live at home are now eligible for three times or more in the amount of money to cover services – or tens of thousands of dollars each.

In addition, the rollout has been rocky, requiring wholesale changes to the system without disrupting services. Some families say there aren't enough qualified service providers to go around once the new service plans were implemented between November 2013 and June 2014.

"You have a program on paper that's millions of dollars overbudget, but there is no labor force to execute the plans," said Michael Bailey, whose 26-year-old daughter, Eleanor, has Down syndrome. Bailey, of Portland, is on the boards of Disability Rights Oregon and the National Disability Rights Network.

"The result is that many, many people who used to have good, reliable services now have a plan with tons of money in it, but there's nobody to execute it."

Effect on budget

The new provision changed the way the state evaluates the needs of developmentally disabled Oregonians who live at home. Until last year, the system had capped tiers, many maxing out at $14,000 a year in services.

The new system has no caps, and clients get an annual "needs assessment" from state officials based on their disability and the services they would need to live independently, even though few do. Federal money pays for 70 percent of the costs, and the state pays the rest.

The new system is part of the "K Plan," a Medicaid option that aims to reward states for funneling clients into home and community services rather than more-expensive institutions. In Oregon, which had no institutions for developmentally disabled people, the effect has been a dramatic boost in most families' benefits. Oregon is the second state to roll out the plan, after California.

Officials with the Oregon Department of Human Services say they're monitoring the numbers and say many clients won't deplete their benefits.

So far, officials have seen a slight increase in the monthly per-case cost. In March, the latest department statistics available, show that 9,083 Oregonians received on average of $2,951 in services each. That compares with 9,292 receiving an average of $2,339 each in January 2013.

"We've let legislators know that the potential is there to need additional funds, but right now we don't have a dollar figure that we'd be asking for and moving forward on," said Trisha Baxter, interim director of the department's developmental disabilities program. "Until the expenditures are occurring, we have no way of knowing what services will be paid for and accessed."

Complicating matters, the state has no way to electronically calculate what it would cost if all clients used all their benefits. It has individual records but no overall database. The department plans a technology "enhancement" in January, Baxter said.

But at least a few signs point to higher spending ahead. At Independence Northwest, a brokerage that helps provide services for about 435 Portland-area adults with developmental disabilities, the average plan this year is running in the low to mid-$30,000 range, compared with about $11,000 last year, Executive Director Larry Deal said.

So far, the brokerage has seen an increase in average spending of about 16 percent, he said, and he expects that to rise if more providers become available.

Finding services

The rapid rollout left Oregon without enough time to expand the pool of providers before families had more money to spend, Deal said. He's also been holding twice-a-month information sessions that have drawn a total of about 750 people, he said.

"It's been difficult for everybody involved, from the folks in the field to the people at the state," he said. "It's been challenging to implement because it's meant deconstructing a system that's been around a long time and reconstructing it, all the while you're providing services."

Bailey, the Disability Rights Oregon board member, said he and his daughter scheduled three interviews this spring for two part-time caregiver jobs. Two were no-shows and a third declined a job.

Claudia Walker, 59, and her husband, Bill Fogleman, care for their 24-year-old son, Jackson Fogleman, who was born with multiple issues and needs constant supervision. He spends about 20 hours a week at a day facility, where he socializes and joins volunteer efforts at animal shelters, food banks and other places. He also receives in-home care.

But a "major staffing shortage" will make it tough for him to use more services, Walker said, even though his annual benefit climbed from $14,000 to $90,000.

"It's not a realistic dollar amount to tell a family because there's no way you can use it, and there's no way you can even find a way to spend it that's legal," said Walker, a Southeast Portland resident.

"It's nice to know that if something was to happen to one of us, that there's some money out there," she added. "But this is the first year, so I'm real curious as to how this plays out in the state of Oregon."

-- Yuxing Zheng