The federal health insurance marketplace is in its second year, and for the first time, there are individuals who will want to renew their coverage. Anne Packham, the lead navigator in Central Florida, explains why this group should actively renew their coverage instead of relying on auto-enrollment.

What's new in the marketplace this year?

The open enrollment period is shorter than last year. Last year the marketplace was open from Oct. 1 to March 31, but this year it's open from Nov. 15 to February 15, so that's only three months that people can get new coverage or renew their coverage.

Also, here in Central Florida we have more plans this year. For instance, before we had only four companies in Orange County and now we have six. So there are new plans and new prices, so we encourage everybody to go back in and shop and see what's available.

Why renew coverage? Can't you just let it auto-renew?

By now everybody who has coverage should have gotten a letter from the marketplace saying that you're still in the marketplace, this is your premium tax credit based on your income; and they should have gotten something from the health insurance company, saying that your plan is available again, do you want to renew, and this will be the cost. Or they might have received a letter that says we don't have that plan anymore but we have something similar, this is what it is, would you like to have that.

If you do nothing, you would be auto-renewed into the old plan or the new one, and get the same subsidy from the government. But if you go into your marketplace account, you can update your income information, you may have had a change in your family as well, and you'll find out if you're eligible for more help from the federal government.

Also, about 2 percent of people didn't give the federal government access to their tax information, so for those folks they will not have their subsidy renewed automatically. They have to actively go in and put in their income information in there, otherwise their plan continues to exist but they won't get any financial aid.

How do the subsidies work?

The help from the federal government is pegged to the second lowest-priced silver plan that's available in any area. So if the plan has gone up since last year, then the help you're getting from the federal government may have gone up as well. So we encourage people to actively re-enroll and no not let it just roll over again.

What other advice to you have for people who want to renew their coverage?

The first important thing is that the first deadline is Dec. 15, so if you want new coverage on Jan. 1 and want to avoid the issue of penalty for next year, you need to do everything for Dec. 15, including picking a plan and paying for it.

For those who are renewing, it is the same thing. You want to do that renewal by Dec. 15.

If you wait until after Dec. 15, you can still enroll, the marketplace is still open, but you've missed that deadline for Jan. 1 coverage.

We encourage everybody to seek help if you're not sure about the process. We're free of charge. We have area offices in Lake, Orange, Osceola and Orange counties. To make appointments with a local navigator, call 877-564-5031, or visit coveringcfl.net.

nmiller@tribune.com or 407-420-5158.