From left, John Kasich, Carly Fiorina, Marco Rubio, Ben Carson, Donald Trump, Ted Cruz, Jeb Bush, Chris Christie and Rand Paul at the Republican presidential debate last month. (Robyn Beck/Agence France-Presse via Getty Images)

Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) got a break when he failed to meet the polling criteria but nevertheless was allowed into CNN’s Dec. 15 debate. No more. Neither he nor Carly Fiorina will be on the main stage for the Fox Business News debate this Thursday. Paul says he won’t appear at the “kiddie table” with Rick Santorum, Mike Huckabee and Fiorina.

No matter. Paul’s campaign is effectively over. He’s at 4 percent in the RealClearPolitics averages for Iowa and New Hampshire. Consider that his father in 2012 took in 22.9 percent in New Hampshire and 21.5 percent in Iowa. The campaign has proved semi-disastrous for Paul, revealing his lack of national appeal, which corresponds to his political isolation in the Senate. He might want to focus on his Senate campaign, lest he lose that as well.

Fiorina, after showing promise in early debate outings, did not build on her campaign structure or message. In an era in which virtually everyone is running against Washington politicians, her anti-D.C. message is not unique. As with so many other contenders, she also suffered from Donald Trump’s mainstream media domination.

There will be seven at the main debate — Trump, Ben Carson (whose campaign is imploding and who just lost most of his New Hampshire super PAC staff to Sen. Ted Cruz), three current or former governors (Florida ex-governor Jeb Bush, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and Ohio Gov. John Kasich), plus two senators (Cruz and Florida’s Marco Rubio). With Carson likely to vanish (officially or not) after Iowa, the race then will come down to Trump and five professional politicians. Maybe experience and leadership chops are not entirely out of fashion. After early exits by Rick Perry, Scott Walker and Bobby Jindal, three of the final six will be governors.

Yesterday’s Quinnipiac poll showed Trump ahead of Cruz by two points. That is not statistically significant, but, once ahead by a healthy amount, Cruz now faces the potential for disaster. Iowa is a must-win state for him and an early loss would knock the wind out of him. As he tries to prevent that from happening, his time in New Hampshire shrinks and his position there will go downhill. It’s not clear he can sustain back-to-back losses, particularly if he comes in behind Kasich, Christie, Rubio and/or Bush in New Hampshire. If he loses in Iowa, many would blame overconfidence and the decision to spend critical time in the so-called SEC primary states.

Many pundits have opined that establishment Republicans would like nothing better than for Cruz to lose in Iowa. There are several reasons for this.

To begin with, Cruz cannot afford to lose Iowa, but Trump can. If Cruz loses, there is one less viable competitor in the minds of establishment Republicans. Second, Trump — for all his polling numbers and bravado — is widely regarded as the least viable of the top contenders. The party, if Cruz is out, is likely to reach quick consensus and back the most viable alternative (probably Rubio), thereby aiming to lock down quickly 70 percent or so of the electorate. And finally, let’s be honest: There is something delicious about seeing Cruz, who fawned and cowered in Trump’s presence, have his legs cut out from under him by another Trump ploy — challenging his citizenship.

Cruz and his supporters have spent so much time cultivating the far right and lying about fellow Republicans (They’re Democrats! They don’t want to repeal Obamacare!) — not to mention fanning conspiracy theories — that Cruz surely cannot be surprised that there are so many Republicans piling on (Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad, Fiorina and Paul got into the act recently) or at least letting him twist in the wind. Some might say that the pol who called Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) a “liar,” insinuated that Chuck Hagel took money from the North Koreans and suggested that the National Security Agency is regularly listening in to phone calls (not just collecting metadata) is reaping what he sowed.

In sum, if Cruz loses Iowa, we quickly would get down to Trump vs. the consensus mainstream Republican. That is why the infighting among the latter has gotten so tough. Jeb Bush hits Christie for New Jersey’s credit downgrades and expansion of Medicaid (the latter of which Kasich also undertook). Rubio hits Cruz on his VAT proposal, with an assist from the former head of Club for Growth. Bush hits Rubio on immigration (!), who responds via spokesman Alex Conant: “Jeb Bush and his establishment allies are trying to buy this election and they know Marco is standing in their way. That’s why their attacks grow more desperate by the day. When Marco is president, there will be no amnesty and we will secure the border. Period.”

Perhaps the debate this week will bring more clarity to the race. By thinning the herd for this week’s event, it has already helped.