PR Web

St. Louis (PRWEB) July 18, 2014

Valued Pharmacy Services (VPS) – an innovative PBM Consulting Company based in St. Louis – has entered into a joint venture with Truveris, Inc. , effective July, 2014.

Based in New York City , Truveris (http://www.truveris.com) develops software to drive efficiency, transparency and cost containment in the prescription claims process. Truveris helps payers of pharmacy benefits negotiate agreements with Prescription Benefits Managers (PBMs), validate claim payment accuracy, and ensure regulatory compliance.

Truveris' PBM bidding and selection technology clearly compares pharmacy benefit plans from various vendors and summarizes the plans' pricing and contract value for insurance brokers, analysts and consultants. The Truveris proprietary platform is the first to manage pharmacy benefit bidding, contracting, and invoice reviews in real-time.

Valued Pharmacy Services and Truveris have expanded on this revolutionary technology platform with the launch of central.rxchoice.com. Central RxChoice streamlines the RFP process for brokers and consultants in the Value Pharmacy Services Coalition , enabling pharmacy benefit re-pricing in just 15 minutes. Brokers and plan sponsors can go to one source for multiple PBM plan options and access three-year plan pricing models powered by a Truveris proprietary algorithm. Central RxChoice will allow them to immediately compare the offerings of several PBMs, including the Valued Pharmacy Services option.

Valued Pharmacy Services tackles skyrocketing pharmacy costs for companies of all sizes. Their highly successful "Coalition" approach ensures that all of their clients receive competitive benefit options typically reserved for larger companies and exclusive entities. In addition to leveraged-based Coalition pricing, Valued Pharmacy Services works on the cutting edge of Specialty Drug Management, Cost Containment and Monthly Trend Management.

Commenting on this strategic joint venture, Valued Pharmacy Services President Mike Rogers notes, "Our new partnership with Truveris and their proprietary platform will allow Brokers and Consultants on the Central RxChoice PBM technology platform to effectively produce a quote in literally minutes…sidestepping the arduous process traditionally associated with managing an RFP."

Rogers adds, "This new joint venture with Truveris will allow us to provide better options and increased services to both our current clients as well as new members of our Coalition."

For more information about the joint venture with Central RxChoice and Truveris, please contact National Sales Vice President, Michelle Sherrillo at (314) 218-5037 or via email at michellesherrillo(at)vpsrx(dot)com.

And to learn more about Valued Pharmacy Services (VPS) and the pharmacy benefit options they offer, contact Executive Vice President, Charlie Hartung at (314) 724-5562 or via email at charliehartung(at)vpsrx(dot)com.

Additional details about Valued Pharmacy Services are also available at http://www.vpsrx.com.

# # #

Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/2014/07/prweb12028387.htm