A traditional map doesn't give a true sense of how far World War II soldiers went in traversing the Pacific Ocean.

Showing that same path in a planetarium, there is an oh-my-goodness moment figuring out just how difficult that journey must have been.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

"The Pacific is usually where they cut the map on a globe, and there is no scale there. It's two-dimensional," said Dan Zielinski, director of the Jenks Public Schools planetarium.

"With the dome as a globe, it shows geography and spatial distances.

A person realizes distances are farther. Since using the dome with the World War II study, students say, 'Wow, from California to Japan is a long way.' It's on a sphere now, and we don't have to cut it or translate it in our heads."

The on-campus planetarium is perhaps one of the Tulsa area's most fascinating secrets.

Some people have heard of the district's planetarium. But they don't know much more than that.

"We knew early on not to completely throw our name out there because we needed to build up a library of shows," Zielinski said. "We didn't want to bring people in and keep showing the same show."

That will be changing now.

A healthy movie selection is available, and the public is finding this gem.

The planetarium is not just for entertainment purposes, although it seems that way.

"We are using our planetarium as an education tool," Zielinski said. "Most people think a planetarium is a place to come in, learn stuff and leave. But our unique placement on a big high school has provided access to a variety of experiences."

Student productions: Planetariums are rooted in science, but the Jenks facility is sprouting different branches.

The facility is part of the $22 million, 80,000-square-foot Jenks Math and Science Center funded by a $157 million bond proposal passed in December 2008.

With 120 seats, it is the largest planetarium on a high school campus in the world.

Since opening three years ago, the planetarium has built a library of about 20 films.

Of those, five were purchased, and 15 were made by Jenks students.

Students first produced a series on constellations because it was a natural starting point.

Next came a piece for younger audiences about the solar system, one about tides and another a fun overview of astrology.

The goal is to produce two each year.

Drama students handle the voice-over work, and the music department composes the music.

Tech-savvy students learn the programming — editing sound, creating animation and showing it on the dome.

Eventually, journalism and English students will be providing the research and scripts for the shows.

"Most people think this is college-level work," Zielinski said. "It's hard work. But the students step up. When you give them the opportunity of this magnitude, they always step up and say, 'I can do that.'

"They get that empowerment. They are so wonderful, humble and willing to learn."

Productions are viewed by the student body as part of classroom lessons, and they are made available for public viewings, as well.

Various topics: Just like the World War II piece, other topics are being explored.

Students are working on a show about the Sistine Chapel, which came from a request from the Advanced Placement art history teacher.

It will examine the history and symbolism of the paintings and an overview of artist Michelangelo's life.

"A normal person would look at the paintings and think, 'How pretty,' but the dome brings to life all these beautiful stories contained within them," Zielinski said.

His career has been in working at planetariums, beginning in one while studying science education at Bowling Green State University.

"I never thought it'd make me learn art and history," he said.

"I didn't know much about World War II. I am now fascinated with it. After going through the research, documentary and lessons, I want to know more about this.

"And who knew I'd be looking at art?"

Jenks is among the first to have an interactive program called Sci-Touch, which allows for a gamelike experience.

Students will be able to identify constellations directly on the domes and take control of animated spaceships through the planets.

With policymakers and elected officials continuing to use test scores as a measure of academic achievement, the planetarium is going a different direction.

It demonstrates the effectiveness of hands-on learning.

It brings together disciplines in a seamless way, giving students a chance to gain real-world experience.

It also is expensive.

The public — and those elected officials — should recognize that money is needed to build a top-quality education system.

Jenks has shown that the investment is paying off.

Planetarium showings

What: The public is welcome to view planetarium shows every Thursday at 7 or 8 p.m.; the times vary.

Where: Jenks Math and Science Center, Jenks High School

Cost: $5 for students, $7 for adults.

For more: For the latest on exact times and show titles, go to jenkscommunityed.com