Topics: Editor's Picks, Jon Stewart, millennials, Obamacare, The Daily Show, Entertainment News, News

As a 12-year-old suburban kid, “The Daily Show” opened my mind and won my heart. It was an odd favorite, because I otherwise avoided politics. The cathartic laughter over revelations of American hypocrisy and that calming moment of zen at the show’s end made it possible to learn about our government’s failures while staying optimistic. I never thought I’d someday be 26, still watching “The Daily Show,” and struck by this idea: Jon Stewart will help save America’s health care system.

When Stewart is not interviewing Scarlett Johansson or Johnny Knoxville, he’s building a strong case for why we must fight for a truly humane, affordable health care system – a single-payer universal health care system that substantially upgrades Obamacare. Thanks in part to guests like Johansson and Knoxville, “The Daily Show” is a megaphone reaching the key 18 to 49 age demographic; it ranks first in all of current late-night TV for winning our age group’s hearts and minds.

Back in October 2013, the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, Kathleen Sebelius, appeared on the show to sell us whippersnappers Obamacare insurance. Obamacare depends on young, healthy folks to enter into its marketplace and balance the costs of older and sicker citizens.

“Young people,” said Sebelius, “are one fall on the basketball court, one auto accident away, from a lifetime of hospital bills they can’t pay.”

Sebelius’ nudge felt almost endearing, like the effort of a concerned mother to protect her kin. But one must ask, how reformed is Obamacare if it will leave any of us or our loved ones vulnerable to “a lifetime of hospital bills” we “can’t pay”?

“We don’t get to pick and choose when we get sick,” Sebelius continued. “You’re more likely to live sicker and die younger without insurance.”

“Exactly,” Stewart said and spiked the conversational volleyball, “which is why I don’t understand the idea of staying with a market-based solution for a problem where people can’t be smart consumers.”