Scarlett Johansson and Matthew McConaughey star as ex-lovers in a commercial for Dolce & Gabbana's new scent "The One."

Sign Up for Newsletter

Scarlett Johansson and Matthew McConaughey star as ex-lovers in a commercial for Dolce & Gabbana's new scent "The One."

Titled Street of Dreams, the black-and-white short film is directed by Martin Scorsese and was shot in New York City.

"I love those streets, they're part of me because that's where I grew up," Scorsese shared in a statement about the clip.

The short film marks the first time Johansson and McConaughey have worked together onscreen. It shows McConaughey and Johansson enjoying a car ride in the Big Apple as they flirt with each other.

Watch Scarlett Johansson In The Under The Skin Extended Trailer

"I like your dress," McConaughey tells her. "I think I saw it in a magazine. You looked happy."

To that Johansson responds, "I was acting."

After McConaughey parks his car on Greenwich Avenue, the two head into his apartment where they talk about their past.

Scarlett Johansson's Hot Red Carpet Photos

"And we didn't need anything back then," McConaughey says.

"We needed everything back then," Johansson fires back.

"What if we could go back, would we?" he then asks her.

"If we did, could we make it stick?" she responds.

While they play a perfect pair onscreen, Johansson and McConaughey have other love interests at home. The 28-year-old actress recently got engaged to Romain Duriac. The two have been linked since 2012.

Scarlett Johansson Supports Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act

"I didn't think I was a jealous person until I started dating my current, my one-and-only," she recently told Esquire magazine. "I think maybe in the past I didn't have the same kind of investment. Not that I liked my partner less, I just wasn't capable of it or caring that much."

McConaughey tied the knot with his lady and model Camila Alves in 2012. The couple, who started dating in 2006, has three kids together - Vida, Levi and Livingston.