Topics: Olympics, Russia, sochi, Vladmir Putin, Winter Olympics, News

SOCHI, Russia (AP) — Flushed with pride after a spectacular showing at the costliest Olympics ever, Russia celebrated 17 days of sport-driven global unity on Sunday night with a farewell show that hands off the Winter Games to their next host, Pyeongchang in South Korea.

Fireworks and a countdown kicked off the closing ceremony in the Fisht Olympic Stadium, packed with spectators who chanted “Ro-ssi-ya! Ro-ssi-ya!” — “Russia! Russia!” —and were in a party mood after the high-security games passed off safely without feared terror attacks.

Giant screens flashed highlights from the 17-day games. With a 3-0 victory over Sweden in the men’s hockey final Sunday, Canada claimed the last gold from the 98 medal events. Russian President Vladimir Putin watched the proceedings, smiling as he stood aside Thomas Bach, the president of the International Olympic Committee.

The closing ceremony, a farewell from Russia with love, pageantry and protocol, started at 20:14 local time precisely — a nod to the year that Putin seized upon to remake Russia’s image with the Olympics’ power to wow and concentrate global attention and massive resources.

Its $51 billion investment — topping even Beijing’s estimated $40 billion layout for the 2008 Summer Games — transformed a decaying resort town on the Black Sea into a household name. All-new facilities, unthinkable in the Soviet era of drab shoddiness, showcased how far Russia has come in the two decades since it turned its back on communism. But the Olympic show didn’t win over critics of Russia’s backsliding on democracy and human rights under Putin and its institutionalized intolerance of gays.

Despite the bumps along the way, Bach is expected to use the closing ceremony to deliver an upbeat verdict on the games, his first as IOC president. One of Sochi’s big successes was security. Feared attacks by Islamic militants who had threatened to target the games didn’t materialize.

“It’s amazing what has happened here,” Bach said a few hours before the ceremony. He recalled that Sochi was an “old, Stalinist-style sanatorium city” when he visited for the IOC in the 1990s.

“You entered the room and you were looking at the roof so you would not be hit by something falling down,” he said.

As dusk fell Sunday, Russians and international visitors streamed into the stadium for a ceremony that will feature the extinguishing of the Olympic flame. Day and night, the flame became a favorite backdrop for “Sochi selfies,” a buzzword born at these games for the fad of athletes and spectators taking DIY souvenir photos of themselves.

Athletes will kiss goodbye to rivals-turned-friends from far off places, savor their games and achievements or rue what might have been. Absent will be five competitors tossed out after they were caught by what was the most extensive anti-doping program in Winter Olympic history, with the IOC conducting a record 2,453 tests.