LOS ANGELES — Mark Munoz couldn’t have seen it going like this.

The Lake Forest, Calif., resident and UFC veteran was excited to get back in the Octagon for the first time in nine months.

Roan Carneiro put a quick end to any thoughts of a memorable homecoming by submitting “The Filipino Wrecking Machine” in just 1 minute, 40 seconds in the main fight on the preliminary card at UFC 184 on Saturday at Staples Center.

Carneiro (20-9), fighting in the UFC for the first time in more than four years, got Munoz down and in side control. As Munoz turned and gave up his back, Carneiro, a black belt in Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, quickly went for a rear-naked choke. Munoz tried fighting it off, but it took Carneiro to realize Munoz was losing consciousness to let the referee to stop the contest.

Munoz (13-6), an All-American and NCAA championship wrestler at Oklahoma State, has lost four of his past five fights. The 37-year-old, who owns and operates Reign Training Center in Lake Forest, has struggled since losing to current middleweight champion Chris Weidman in 2012.

The bantamweight bout between Roman Salazar and Norifumi “Kid” Yamamoto was declared a no contest by referee John McCarthy under the doctor’s advice due to an eye poke. Salazar (9-3, 1 NC) poked Yamamoto in the eye in the first round, which was fairly lackluster as Yamamoto baited and waited for Salazar so he could counter. In the second round, Yamamoto poked Salazar in the eye twice, the second one on the reply clearly showing Salazar lunging forward to punch and Yamamoto (18-6, 2 NC) sticking his right hand out, his finger going into Salazar’s left eye midway through the second round. After a lengthy break in the action and examination, the ringside physician determined Salazar couldn’t see well enough to continue.

Welterweight Tim Means put on an impressive performance by hurting Dhiego Lima early in the first round with punches, elbows and kicks. Lima (11-3) appeared to recover, only to get clipped by a left across the chin. As he stumbled and fell, Means (23-6-1) jumped all over him before the referee jumped in at 2:17 of the first round.

Means, in his post-fight Octagon interview, made a pitch for one of the UFC’s two $50,000 performance bonuses: “Hey, UFC, I need some money. I just got a new car. So what’s up? 50 grand, baby!”

In a battle of heavyweights, it seemed to be only a matter of time before Derrick Lewis finished Ruan Potts, and the TKO finally came at 3:18 of the second round. Potts almost got Lewis in the first round with a leg lock, but Lewis (12-3, 1 NC) eventually unleashed some damage as Potts was on the ground. Potts could be heard on the telecast saying “I’m finished,” while on his stool between rounds, but he went out for the second round. Once in full mount, Lewis patiently teed off on Potts (8-4), who turned to his right and covered up. Lewis landed five consecutive lefts before the referee jumped in to stop the fight.

Valmir Lazaro won his first UFC bout with a split-decision victory over James Krause (21-7). The judges scored it 29-28, 28-29, 29-28 for Lazaro (14-3), who outworked Krause and scored more powerful strikes.

In the opening bout, Masio Fullen (10-4) earned a split-decision victory over Alex Torres (2-2). The judges scored it 28-29, 29-28, 29-28 for the San Diego featherweight by way of Mexico.