Buy Photo Rockledge barber shop owner Cathy Woods, who’s in treatment for Stage 3 breast cancer, cuts the hair of customer Jeff Host. (Photo: BRITT KENNERLY/FLORIDA TODAY)Buy Photo

Cathy Woods, who's never had much money for extras or sometimes, essentials, went for more than three decades without health insurance.

Now, at 59 and with breast cancer diagnosed in early 2014, the Rockledge barber shop owner faces a mastectomy.

She's thankful she could get health insurance last fall, through the Affordable Care Act — but she's still facing unknown treatment and bills she dreads.

"It disturbs me to know that if I closed my shop, they would give me Medicaid," said Woods, who at one time cut hair at Patrick Air Force Base.

"However, I'd no longer have the income to pay my mortgage and utilities."

Then there's Robert Esparza, 36, of Titusville, a husband and dad who works at Kennedy Space Center. He's insured and makes what many would consider a "good living."

And yet, when he went to the Parrish Medical Center emergency room with an eye problem, Esparza was left with a $925 bill he thinks was too high. He questioned the charges and still isn't satisfied.

He says he shouldn't owe so much for treatment that ultimately didn't help his problem.

"If I made $12 an hour, this bill would have broken me and possibly caused me to not be able to pay my mortgage or other important monthly bills," Esparza said.

We all have tales of woe based on health care costs and insurance.

We wait to see if Florida will accept federal Medicaid money by the June 30 deadline, or lose federal dollars that now subsidize our hospitals for the bills left unpaid by the uninsured and indigent.

And what will the Supreme Court decide on the ACA?

This I know: The cost of staying alive is killing some people — most figuratively, some literally. And so many, like Woods, don't have the time or money to factor political partisanship into their treatment.

When Woods started chemotherapy in January, there was a $700 co-pay for each round.

Help for uninsured?

"I had no idea where I was going to come up with $700 every three weeks," she said. "On top of that, I needed medicine ... three pills were $575. I maxed out my credit cards. One of my customers, bless his heart, gave me a check to cover the second round."

For a health care provider's perspective, I turned to Stuart Mitchell, executive vice president and chief operations officer at Health First.

QUESTION: How many uninsured people pass through Health First hospitals on an annual basis?

Mitchell: Based on FY14 volume with insurance changes through March of FY15, Health First's hospitals saw about 34,000 self-pay visits.

Q: How are patients' bills covered if they do not have private insurance, or Medicaid or Medicare, but show up at an ER and are admitted?

Mitchell: Patients without insurance who show up at the ER and are admitted are offered financial assistance to help with their bill. They fill out a financial assistance application to determine the level of assistance for which they qualify. Patients also sign a consent to treat that states they understand the hospital will be billing them for payment of the services rendered.

Q: What happens if a person with insurance goes to an ER but does not have the co-pay available at the time they are treated?

Mitchell: The person is seen without delay for his/her medical condition. A bill would then be mailed to the patient.

Q: What happens if a person with insurance questions their bill?

Mitchell: The bill is reviewed with medical record documentation and findings are discussed with the patient.

For any Health First billing inquiries, patients can call 321-434-5400.

Patients can discuss their bill with Patient Business Services to arrange payment options based on their ability to pay. Patients are not presented with a lawsuit if they cannot afford to pay their bill. Health First offers financial assistance in the way of discounts and payment arrangements.

Q: Where can individuals with questions about health care, period, go, whether they're on Medicare or Medicaid or simply don't understand their insurance?

Mitchell: Health First has 17 certified application counselors as part of our Financial Clearance team, available Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., to answer any insurance questions patients, family members or visitors may have.

Those without insurance who would like to speak to a certified application counselor for information about the Marketplace or other insurances can call 321-434-1945.

'Feels wrong'

Other hospital companies have similar programs.

Esparza is still frustrated.

"I just wanted the charges clearly defined, but I discovered the process is built to fight insurance companies," he said. "It just feels wrong. ... Most individuals don't ask questions when they get a bill from a doctor. I did, and the process is broken."

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1GFbMo3