By of the

If you're a business owner trying to make your company grow, and a team of experts offered to help you strategize and provide tools to help you expand, you'd expect to pay big money for such assistance.

Crystallizing a growth vision, putting together a high-quality list of prospective customer contacts and recommending ways to improve your company website are services that come with a hefty price tag.

But they didn't for Waukesha contract manufacturer Mathison Manufacturing Inc.

As part of a pilot program in which the University of Wisconsin Extension made a team of business advisers available at no cost to three metro Milwaukee-area companies that were identified as having the "appetite and aptitude" to grow, Mathison was able to focus on and accelerate its plans to increase business.

The process left Mathison President Al Leidinger grateful and impressed.

"It's not like bringing in a consultant where you say, 'OK, I pay you thousands of dollars and you tell me what to do.' They actually made us do work while they helped us. They put the information together for us, but we had homework every time we talked with these guys," Leidinger said. "It made us think about things. It kind of tied all of our thinking together to drive it in one direction."

Now, UW Extension's Mark Lange is hoping to make growth-minded business expertise available to many more Wisconsin companies.

With the help of a $50,000 grant from the Wisconsin Economic Development Corp., Lange plans to create and train "business intelligence teams" — small groups of experts who eventually could work with more than 100 state companies a year.

Lange noticed that, while there are various efforts to help new companies get started and to lure larger firms to the state, lots of local companies in Wisconsin could grow — and add jobs as a result — if only someone would provide planning help that they couldn't afford or were too busy to seek.

So-called second-stage companies — those that have moved beyond the survival stage and have 10 to 99 employees — are the target of UW Extension's new program.

"Their CEOs, as intelligent as they are, don't recognize the kinds of things they should be doing to grow their business," said Lange, who is executive director of the UW Extension's Division for Business and Entrepreneurship.

"They are busy working inside of it. So all of a sudden with this, they are spending some time talking with someone else about strategy, and they create a whole other way of how they think about their company."

The business intelligence teams include experts in market research, web marketing and geographic information systems.

The companies involved receive 30 to 40 hours of assistance from the experts, all of it online or via telephone or teleconferences.

Through the program, companies can learn to focus on and coordinate growth and marketing efforts, and end up with — as Mathison did in the pilot — a strong list of potential customers to call on as they expand.

Companies also will receive recommendations for improving the marketing capabilities of their website and connecting with customers through social media.

In the pilot program last year, which included Urethane Systems Plus Inc. and Bliffert Lumber & Hardware as well at Mathison Manufacturing, the company leaders worked with a regular team of experts drawn together by Lange from other states.

Lange wants to form new teams, each consisting of four members — a leader, a market research specialist, an expert on finding and mapping prospective customers, and a web and social media expert — who will be dedicated to expanding existing businesses in Wisconsin.

The experts will come from consulting companies in Wisconsin and, after training and certification, be paid roughly $100 an hour for their services, with that money generally coming from local economic development organizations that want to assist companies in their communities.

The $50,000 grant from the Wisconsin Economic Development Corp. will launch UW Extension's Business Intelligence Center. The money will be used to train the teams of experts who will work with state companies, Lange said.

Jason Scott, community development director for WEDC, said UW Extension's new program shares some economic development objectives with his agency.

"We're going to partner with them when possible," Scott said. "We are going to work with them to identify individuals who will be used to train the second-stage companies. We'll also be helping to identify second-stage companies that will be able to use the services provided by the team."

Several other states have programs to help existing companies grow, often called "economic gardening."

In the Milwaukee area, Scale Up Milwaukee, an effort organized by the Greater Milwaukee Committee to spur business growth, has some goals similar to UW Extension's Business Intelligence Center.

Lange said he supports Scale Up Milwaukee's work and there may be things the two initiatives can do together.

But he said the UW Extension program expects to work with more companies around the state in faster fashion.

"What we're saying is, if we build this program up, we are going to be working with hundreds of companies over time in really quick, short bursts that get them the information they need," Lange said.