Topics: 13 soldiers, assad, Editor's Picks, Election 2014, GOP, Immigration, isis, John Boehner, John McCain, mark salter, Mitch McConnell, Senate, Ted Cruz, The Right, Elections News, News, Politics News

It’s been a career filled with highs and lows, but when John McCain looks back on the closing months of 2014, the former Republican Party presidential nominee and current senator will probably remember the time as one of long-awaited and welcome returns. There were, of course, the results of last week’s midterms, which gave the GOP majority status in the Senate next year and put an end to eight long years of wandering. Once the new Congress convenes next year, McCain’s chairmanship of the powerful Senate Armed Services Committee is all but guaranteed.

In addition to the Senate majority, McCain teamed up with his longtime friend and creative partner Mark Salter to write a book about military service, American history and the value of an old-fashioned, martial sense of honor. The result is “13 Soldiers: A Personal History of Americans at War,” which looks at 13 men and women who fought for the U.S. — one for every major American war — and how the experience affected them.

Salon spoke with McCain over the phone about the book, the war on ISIS, what he thinks President Obama should do on immigration and what he hopes to see from the soon-to-be GOP-controlled Senate. Our conversation is below and has been edited for length and clarity.

You and Mr. Salter haven’t released a book in some time. What was it about this idea that made you want to get back into the mix?

It was an idea we’ve been kicking around with John Karp, our publisher … We haven’t done anything for a number of years, but I’ve always kicked around the idea.

Sometimes I talk about history, particularly with young people, and they yawn and kind of get a little restless, because it’s one thing to talk about the Civil War [and] it’s something else to talk about the people who were engaged in it and what happened to them, and, in other words, kind of personalize it.

People and leaders who ignore the lessons of history repeat them. That’s an old adage, but it’s very true … But how do you get people interested? You give them the examples of people who were actually engaged in war, but … you also try to give them the context of the conflict … and that way, I would hope, more young people might be more interested in [it]. That was a major motivation for it.

You mention how the lessons of history are important for leaders and would-be leaders. If you could have the incoming Republican freshman read one or two stories before taking office, which would you recommend?

Two, actually, for a little bit different reasons.

Oliver Wendell Holmes … was fundamentally changed by his experiences in [the Civil War] … but he went on to serve as a distinguished justice of the Supreme Court.

The other would be Monica Lin Brown, because she showed that there really should not be any debate over women in combat. It’s one thing to have a rifle or an AK-47 or whatever it is and do the fighting, but the only thing that the medics have is equipment to try to save lives — and yet they go into the same danger that the combat soldier or Marine does as well. She ran to the sound of the guns, and saved lives, and that one I think is a lesson for the debate about the modern-day military, that as long as they are physically and mentally qualified … then I think the argument about women in combat is probably dispensed with.

And if you could have the president read one chapter?

That is a good question. Maybe the story of Mikey Monsoor, because he might have a better understanding of the importance of the obligation we have to the men and women who have served and sacrificed not to have all of that wasted or lost because of lack of a better strategy.

Let me give you an example: I was in Louisiana campaigning for our candidate there and we went to a bunch of veterans’ events. At one of them, a young man came up to me and said, “Senator McCain, I was at the Second Battle of Fallujah” — as you know, that was the bloodiest single encounter when the surge began; we lost 86 soldiers and Marines, [and] I think 400 were wounded — and he said, “I lost four guys in my platoon. Now the black flags of ISIS fly over Fallujah. Tell me, Senator, what do I tell my friends’ mothers?”

That’s was a tough one for me to answer, and as you know, I believe that this could have been avoided by leaving a residual force behind, a stabilizing force behind. History will make that judgment; I’m growing a little weary of arguing it, but … maybe that would be the one [I’d have the president read] … We have to perform in a way that is worthy of these people’s sacrifice.

Well, about ISIS; I’m sure you’ve seen reports about the rebels we armed over there defecting to al-Qaida and often taking our weapons with them. What do you say to those who are opposed to intervention and point to this as proof that arming foreign fighters backfires?

I still think a seminal moment was when Hilary Clinton, David Petraeus, Bob Gates and others meeting with the president strongly recommended arming the Free Syrian Army, and he rejected that. I still to this day don’t know his rationale there. At that time, the equation on the battlefield [in Syria] was shifting in favor of [Syrian President] Bashar Assad … because the Iranians had convinced or ordered Hezbollah into the fight — some 5,000 talented fighters. The Iranian Revolutionary Guard was on the ground, training and equipping and fighting against the Free Syrian Army. And Bashar Assad, without the Iranian injection — well, in the president’s own words, it [was] not a matter of whether, but a matter of when Bashar Assad [would] go.

In response to the dramatic escalation on the part of the Iranians and the Russians (planeload after planeload of Russian weapons came in, too) … we basically did nothing to help [the Free Syrian Army], so they start getting beat. Now, when they are defeated, time after time, people start leaving them, because they see that they’re not winning. And that’s understandable. Some of them have defected to al-Nusra, because … their enemy is [ultimately] Bashar Assad …

There have been setbacks, but all of that was predictable. I keep on a desk in my office the pictures that were … recently on the front page of the New York Times. Thousands of people [massacred by Assad] … those pictures are gruesome. They show crimes against humanity. And, you know, it was 8,000 ethnically cleansed at Srebrenica that motivated Bill Clinton to go and fight and defeat Milosevic in Bosnia. Now we have 200,000 killed; and 150,000 Syrians are still in Bashar Assad’s prisons under the most unspeakable conditions. Sometimes I am accused of getting emotional about it. Well, I plead guilty. I plead guilty to being emotional about it. I’ll leave it to the judgment of the people of Arizona whether my emotion is justified or not.

So my response to those people who are now saying, “Oh, it’s all terrible; we can’t win, etc.” [is], Well, if you’re willing to stand by and watch Bashar Assad slaughter now 200,000 people [and create] 3.5, 4 million refugees … we will pay a price for that. I was in a refugee camp in Jordan … and I was being taken around by a woman who was a schoolteacher, and there were kids everywhere, children everywhere, and she said, “Senator McCain, you see these young boys?” And I said, “Yeah, they’re all over the place.” She said, “They and their parents believe that [America] has abandoned them, and they’re going to take revenge against you when they grow up.” My friend, we are going to reap a whirlwind.