A federal court ruled Thursday that religious organizations can't be handed massive fines for refusing to comply with Obamacare's birth control mandate.

The ruling form the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals Thursday heightens the chances of the case making it to the Supreme Court.

"Fifteen federal judges now agree that the government has no right to dictate or second guess a person's sincere religious beliefs," said Lori Windham, senior counsel of the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty. The fund has financed the legal defense for CNS International Ministries and Heartland Christian College, which brought the lawsuit over the birth control mandate.

The dispute centers over whether religious organizations can avoid the mandate to provide birth control in their insurance plans.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

Obamacare requires insurance plans to pay for preventive health services such as birth control. A religious organization can get an accommodation that allows for employees to still get birth control coverage, but these organizations don't have to pay for it. Instead, the government picks up the tab.

But various religious organizations such as universities and nonprofits complain that employees still get coverage for birth control under that option.

They instead want to have an exemption, which does not extend birth control coverage to plan beneficiaries. The exemption is traditionally only given to religious employers such as churches or associations of churches, according to the appeals court's opinion.

The appeals court ruled that the government's fines for CNS and the college, which only got an accommodation, do impose a burden on their religious beliefs.

"When the government imposes a direct monetary penalty to coerce conduct that violates religious belief, '[T]here has never been a question that the government 'imposes a substantial burden on the exercise of religion,'" the opinion said.

Also from the Washington Examiner 'Mosquitos are ravaging': Dems demand GOP cancel recess to pass Zika bill Democratic leaders in the House and Senate called on Republicans to cancel next week's Memorial Day recess in order to pass legislation to deal with the Zika virus, and vote on other issues, including President Obama's Supreme Court nomination. "You know, mosquitos are ravaging for the first time of the history of mosquitos, and they've been scourges for generations and generations," Reid said at a press event outside the Capitol. "But they've never, ever caused birth defects. They do now." Zika, which has been transmitted through mosquito bites, has been tied to birth defects in infants, and the Obama administration has warned that the virus could spread through mosquitos in the U.S. this summer.