Colorado is a great place to live and work, but there are some disturbing trends that, if not addressed, could make us less competitive and hobble our resurgent economy. One of them is the gap between career opportunities for our young people and their ability to take advantage of them.

Consider the following:

• Although Colorado is poised for above-average growth in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) and other in-demand industries with good-paying jobs, currently fewer than 25 percent of high school graduates are able to attain the post-secondary training and credentials required for employment in these fields.

• More than 16 percent of Colorado’s STEM workforce is close to retirement, making it difficult for our state to keep up with employer demand. As those workers leave, so too could the Colorado jobs they fill.

• In addition to our skills gap, Colorado has a serious diversity gap. Although females comprise nearly half of our workforce and Hispanics are the state’s fastest-growing population, both constituencies are underrepresented in STEM fields.

That’s why the General Assembly provided the bipartisan leadership to bring an innovative new education model to Colorado. The model, approved by the legislature and signed by Gov. John Hickenlooper, is called P-TECH (Pathways in Technology Early College High School), and it unites school districts, community colleges and employers to provide our young people with a clear pathway from high school and college to career. In an era of widespread disagreement over education reforms, P-TECH has garnered broad national support, from President Obama — who highlighted it in his 2013 State of the Union speech — to governors, mayors and the leaders of teachers’ and principals’ unions.

P-TECH began in New York in 2011 as a partnership of the New York City Public Schools, the City University of New York and IBM, which invented the P-TECH concept and has offered to partner in one of Colorado’s first P-TECH schools. These schools offer students a clearly structured, integrated six-year program (grades nine to 14) from which graduates obtain both a college degree and the academic and workplace skills for success in the global economy.

This is achieved by embedding workplace skills into a strong academic curriculum, providing each student with a mentor, leading structured workplace visits, and offering paid internships and a clear promise to be first in line for good-paying jobs upon graduation with IBM and the other companies involved.

With more than 14 million new middle-skill jobs being created over the next six years — jobs requiring postsecondary training, but not necessarily a four-year degree — P-TECH is just what Colorado needs.

In less than four years, the P-TECH network has grown from one school to 27. By this fall, 40 P-TECH schools will be open in Connecticut, Illinois and New York, with 100 employers involved. And by 2016, Rhode Island will join Colorado in the P-TECH network, which also will expand outside of the U.S. to Australia.

The two main reasons for this rapid expansion are open access and proven results. No testing is required for admission to P-TECH schools, which operate within existing district budgets. P-TECH schools serve historically underserved communities, which for the first time are seeing their children excited about learning and transforming their potential. And P-TECH schools post record-breaking attendance rates.

P-TECH schools don’t just motivate. They also allow students to take and pass credit-granting college courses while they are still in high school. In fact, some students in the first P-TECH schools are completing their six-year program a full two years ahead of schedule. Every one of these dynamic, motivated and prepared young adults is heading off to either a high-paying job at IBM or to a prestigious four-year college on a full scholarship.

We live in a time of rapid and extraordinary change, much of it led by industries right here in Colorado. But up to now, too little of that change has been focused on improving the education and skills needed by our most vulnerable young people and addressing the need that our companies have for highly skilled workers. P-TECH schools will do just that, preparing the next generation of Coloradans for full participation in the economy while keeping good jobs here at home and attracting more of them.

State Rep. Crisanta Duran is the majority leader of the Colorado House. She represents District 5 in Denver.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.