Throughout much of her campaign this time around, Hillary Clinton has used President Obama’s popularity as a shield, and, to some degree, a sword: Bernie Sanders’ universal healthcare plan is bad because it’s different from the Affordable Care Act, you can’t criticize her for super PACs because Obama had them too, etc. Likewise, her husband: Despite having been one of the most politically active first ladies in history, she takes credit for the Clinton-era stuff people like, while abdicating responsibility for the rest.

Now she’s taken a rare pot shot at the president on what’s becoming her signature issue: Gun control.

At a rally in New York City on Sunday, Clinton threw her erstwhile bff under the bus on the topic of “standing up to the NRA.”

.@HillaryClinton: “Only one recent president has been able to” stand up to the gun lobby https://t.co/Q0sG0xlb2rhttps://t.co/e8jVaU0pr7 — ABC News Politics (@ABCPolitics) April 17, 2016

“But you know what the most powerful lobby in Washington is? The gun lobby, which intimidates people, scares people. If you stand with me, we’re gonna do what only one recent president has been able to do, and that is stand up to them. When my husband was able to ban assault weapons. We’re gonna go right back at it.”

Fact check: Bill Clinton indeed banned assault weapons as part of his controversial Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994. But Obama wouldn’t have even had to think about this issue if it weren’t for the ban’s 2004 sunset, which seems like a concession Bill was readily willing to make, as it helped gather bipartisan support for the bill while setting up subsequent presidents for failure. I am not letting Obama off the hook for his lack of progress, but it wasn’t for lack of trying, and I’m not sure how such a widely loathed figure as a Clinton is any more likely to build the bipartisan coalition she needs to succeed. (And let’s remember how much flip-flopping she, herself, has done on the issue.)

Takeaway: Bill and Barry are human shields for Hillary to hide behind or throw under the bus, depending on what’s convenient at the moment.

[h/t ABC News | Photo: Getty]