With Donald Trump leading in polls even as he makes controversial remarks about women, does it leave a sour taste when one chooses not to speak out against him?

Heidi Cruz said she doesn’t think so. The wife of presidential hopeful and U.S. senator from Texas, Ted Cruz, spoke about her husband’s campaign during and after her speech at the Midland County Republican Women’s luncheon on Wednesday at Midland Country Club.

“What Ted is speaking to is letting everyone run their own race and that we should stay on the messages that matter to people,” Cruz said about her husband’s public pledge of not criticizing the other Republican candidates. “There are 17 candidates. Ted is going to run his race, and as he does so he is not going to speak ill of any candidate. I think the reason he’s doing that is, he wants the voters to decide.”

Cruz said that in the event her husband wins the election, he would look at “any of his colleagues on stage” as a potential member of his administration.

The crowd of at least 150 people warmly received Cruz, who interwove stories about her childhood and the couple’s two daughters with information about the senator’s campaign and policies.

Cruz listed three main principles of her husband’s campaign: job growth and opportunity, defending constitutional liberties and restoring the nation’s leadership on an international level.

“What Ted is running on is your values -- West Texas values,” Cruz said.

She received a round of applause when she listed abolishing the IRS as a goal, and said that repealing Obamacare -- which she and her family are now on -- is a top priority as well.

“We do need health care reform, but a system that increased people’s premiums and distorts free-market economics and has caused five major insurance companies to merge into three is not the way to go,” Cruz said.

She also spoke about the campaign’s recent rallies that have attracted thousands of people and admitted she was “shocked” when she found out many of them were members of other political parties. She listed her husband’s “consistent conservatism” on all issues as the reason that he has appeal across party lines.

“When voters know what their candidate stands for, they’re willing to vote for them on the issues, not because of the party that they’re part of,” Cruz said. “That’s how you get over crossover votes because they become issue voters. That’s where people come out and say … I am voting because of X not because of (the candidate’s) party.”

Following her speech, Cruz answered questions from the audience and the media. One question posed by a member of the MCRW was, “What will you do as first lady?”

“My interests are really on the economic side, and there is such a need for raising the standard of living for those at the bottom of the economic ladder in this country,” said Cruz, who served in the White House as the economic director for the Western Hemisphere at the National Security Council, among other positions. “I think you have to get into the education system when you start talking about giving kids a chance in the economic world, so we would focus on school choice as well.”

State Rep. Tom Craddick also spoke at the luncheon, reviewing laws passed by the House as well as those that stalled. He congratulated Midland City Council members on their success in passing the texting-while-driving ban, and acknowledged Mayor Jerry Morales and J.Ross Lacy, who were at the luncheon.

“You succeeded where I couldn’t,” said Craddick, who sponsored and introduced House Bill 80 that would have effectively banned texting while driving statewide.

Follow Cassie on Twitter at @Cassie_Burton51 or on Facebook at /CassieBurton15

# # #