Some Lowcountry residents have expressed concerns about the need to re-treat homes for termites after the floods of October.

Like any natural disaster, the historic flooding in South Carolina in early October continues to raise issues months after the event.

One question that some may not have considered is whether homes that experienced some level of flooding need to be re-treated for termites.

Charlie Ledford of Ledford’s Termite & Pest in Charleston said the company has been receiving calls from customers asking whether they needed to have another treatment to maintain contracts.

“We have not had to re-treat any homes to date,” said Ledford, basing that judgment on guidelines issued by the state’s Department of Pesticide Regulation.

Ledford said some pest management companies, however, may be capitalizing on fears of customers who may not need their homes re-treated.

“We have spoken with several customers and potential customers who have said their termite companies are charging them to re-treat due to the fact that there was standing water in their crawl spaces after the flood,” said Ledford, adding that it doesn’t necessarily call for re-treatment.

The pesticide regulation department, which is tasked with giving “nonbiased expertise,” set forth guidelines after the flooding.

“Simple flooding alone is not a cause for re-treatment. ... Every structure in the geographical area will not require re-treatment,” said Deputy Director Michael Weyman in a memorandum that was sent to pest control companies.

Cases calling for re-treatment basically involve disturbance along the foundation or if a certain chemical treatment was used.

Weyman said re-treatment is needed “if the soil within the treatment zone (approximately 6 inches deep and 6 inches wide immediately adjacent to foundation elements) demonstrates signs of erosion, displacement, shift or otherwise exhibits signs of being physically disturbed.”

He added that re-treatment is needed if significant amounts of soil, including silt, sand or mud, was deposited over the treatment zone.

If a company treated wood with borates, containing the active ingredient disodium octaborate tetrahydrate, or DOT, Weyman said judgment on re-treatment of wood exposed to floodwaters should err on the side of caution.

The inorganic salt could have leached from the wood and no longer provide termite protection. The same goes for treated wood exposed to running or dripping water.

He also urged homeowners to review pest-control contracts for guarantees for re-treatment in the event of flooding, as well to contact insurance companies to add the cost of re-treatment to any losses suffered.