By all accounts, retail health clinics and the technology used to support patient's visits at these facilities is an expanding segment of the healthcare industry. Given this fact, technology and service providers looking to expand their client base should consider the opportunities in this burgeoning market.

Download this free guide Expert Guide: Creating an MSP Sales and Marketing Plan Sales and marketing tend to be the areas of business that managed service providers struggle with the most. Learn how to develop a sales and marketing plan, increase your visibility, and tap into vendor resources to pay for initiatives. Start Download Corporate E-mail Address: You forgot to provide an Email Address. This email address doesn’t appear to be valid. This email address is already registered. Please login. You have exceeded the maximum character limit. Please provide a Corporate E-mail Address.

By submitting my Email address I confirm that I have read and accepted the Terms of Use and Declaration of Consent. By submitting your email address, you agree to receive emails regarding relevant topic offers from TechTarget and its partners. You can withdraw your consent at any time. Contact TechTarget at 275 Grove Street, Newton, MA. You also agree that your personal information may be transferred and processed in the United States, and that you have read and agree to the Terms of Use and the Privacy Policy.

As the country continues to undergo healthcare reform, retail health clinics, which are located in pharmacies, retail chains and supermarkets, provide acute and preventative care such as medical screenings and diagnostic services to patients usually at a lower cost than a doctor's office visit. This model of care is increasingly being viewed as an important component in the nation's plans to increase access to healthcare.

Channel partners have begun to take notice. According to a recently published report from Accenture, an IT professional services and consulting company, there will be a 47% increase in the number of retail health clinics between 2014 and 2017 when there will be more than 2,800 retail clinics operating across the U.S. Accenture's analysis also shows that those who find walk-in visits without an appointment a convenient way to access care will increase from 16 million in 2014 to 25 million in 2017.

Retail health clinics have yet to hit their stride as a channel partner market. But over time, industry executives expect opportunities to emerge in consulting and systems integration as clinics enter relationships with health systems, medical practices and other health organizations.

Retail health clinics: The business case The business case for retail health clinics' viability and sustainability has solidified in recent years. For a start, under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act more than 17 million people have gained health insurance coverage, and health plans are increasingly accepting payments for patient visits at retail clinics which are located in areas within physical proximity to large swaths of the population. Against this backdrop, retail health clinics are outfitting their facilities with clinical systems such as electronic health records (EHRs) to manage patient data, practice management systems to handle billing, human resource management and other business systems. They also deploy telehealth equipment to conduct doctor and patient sessions over long distances often using high-definition video conferencing equipment. Channel partners entering this space will find a market in a state of flux. Consolidation is occurring as interest in the promise of what retail health clinics can provide continues to generate investment dollars. In December, CVS Health Corp. announced the completion of a $1.9 billion deal to acquire Target Corp.'s pharmacy and clinic business. Under the terms of the agreement, 79 Target clinic locations will be rebranded as MinuteClinics, and CVS Health will open 20 new clinics in Target stores within the next three years. As for the technology landscape, MinuteClinics already use EHR technology from Epic Systems Corp. The EHR supports MinuteClinic's evidence-based care efforts and facilitates connectivity with hospital networks, physician practices and major health systems that are affiliated with MinuteClinic. What retail health clinics are primarily looking for is more novel technology, system integration and advisory services. Kaveh Safavisenior managing director of Accenture's health practice Epic's EHR is also being rolled out at Walgreens Healthcare Clinics as part of a plan to support long-term growth for its clinic business. Epic's EHR will connect Walgreens' clinics with health organizations to share patient medication lists, assist with medication reconciliations and review patient data during a patient's visit. Walgreens currently manages more than 400 Healthcare Clinic locations in 22 states and Washington D.C. A spokeswoman for Walgreens said a two-pronged growth strategy is being developed for its Healthcare Clinic business. "The first is to build a strong, viable model for retail clinics within our stores and grow our business by expanding the range of services we offer and leveraging technology in new ways to improve the patient experience," she said. "We are making significant investments in our core business, which is our Walgreens-managed clinics, such as [an] EHR platform being implemented this year to accelerate this part of our growth plan." The second component of its growth strategy is to explore partnerships with community health systems. According to the Walgreens spokeswoman, part of the company's growth plan entails entering into discussions with select health systems to explore a collaborative services model that fully integrates retail clinics into the health system care plan and care continuum. To advance this strategy, Walgreens recently announced two agreements, one with Providence Health and Services and the other with Advocate Health Care for those health systems to manage and operate retail clinics at Walgreen's stores.