Topics: 2016 election, Editor's Picks, George W. Bush, GOP, Jeb Bush, New York Times, Republicans, The Right, Media News, Politics News

Jeb Bush has a dirty little secret that he wants to tell, and he doesn’t even care who knows: He’s a “geek”! A nerd. He’s so silly like that, caring about policy all the time when all everyone else wants to do in life is have a good time.

Such is the message passed off in a weekend New York Times riff on the former Florida governor. It may be the most comically obvious attempt we’ve seen yet in the 2016 proto-campaign from Jeb’s handlers to show that he’s not an idiot like his elder brother, the former President Bush. The piece is filled with effusive quotes about how bookish and wonky and smart Jeb Bush is. Rarely is an image-crafting piece so indiscreetly dropped by a politician’s handlers. Hell, a reading list is even provided to run alongside the profile to offer even more proof that, yes, the rumors are true, Jeb Bush is literate. And the pace in which he devours middlebrow histories and libertarian at-length ranking and Bill O’Reilly’s “Killing ____” books is breathtaking.

The profile is mainly a laundry list of quotes submitted by his supporters.

Friends and former aides have variously described him as a “policy wonk,” an “ideas junkie” and, as Arthur C. Brooks, the president of the American Enterprise Institute, called him, “a top-drawer intellect.”… These days, the younger Mr. Bush peppers his speeches with statistics, academic-sounding references to “quintiles” and self-deprecating jokes about his own geekiness. A few weeks ago, he boasted to a crowd of Republican donors that he was “nerdy enough” to read City Journal, an obscure policy magazine published by the Manhattan Institute, a conservative think tank, then recited the names of his favorite writers at the publication. Aubrey Jewett, who has studied Jeb Bush as a professor of political science at the University of Central Florida, said he “seems to go out of his way to make it clear that he’s different from his brother, by the way he talks about himself, his goals and the details of public policy.”

Well, hot dog, the man knows what “quintile” means! He’s “nerdy enough” to read a moderate conservative think tank’s journal that aligns closely with his politics. He’s the policy wonk, ideas junkie, top-drawer intellect, the Aristotle of the Everglades. No one in history has come even close to being as smart as Jeb Bush. If he has any health issues, it may be that his brain is so full of facts that it could explode somewhere around the fifth year of his presidency. Can he do math, too? Oh, he can do math with the best of them. Perhaps his people also should have provided the Times with raw footage of him doing some light algebra sets before bed, though, just for concrete proof.

Is this really what Jeb’s team feels is its biggest political liability? That Jeb is perceived to be stupid, like his brother? Because that’s … misguided. Bush does need to distinguish himself from his brother, but in different ways and to different audiences.