Buy Photo The West Side Community Center on Dewitt Avenue in Asbury Park. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

Fifty years ago children flocked to the West Side Community Center for ping-pong, dance classes, talent shows and summer cook-outs.

It was a hub for local families to gather in the southwest quadrant. A safe haven for youth to go to after school.

Those days, residents say, are long gone.

“It’s dismal,” said former city mayor Kevin Sanders, who grew up attending the center’s activities. “It’s a shadow of what it was.”

The aging facility is in disrepair and the lack of funding in recent years has left it with a scarce list of programs and offerings for the community.

In fact, the only daily activity for youth at the West Side Community Center today is open gym for four hours on weeknights, according to Lori Ross, the acting executive director and board president.

Perhaps the biggest blow to the community center came in 2012 when it lost its 501C3 status, meaning charitable contributions were no longer tax-deductible. In many cases, private foundations will not give grants to organizations that are not tax-exempt, experts say.

The idle state of the West Side Community Center has made many residents concerned that the city’s youth have nowhere to go when they aren’t in school.

It’s become such a pressing issue that outgoing Mayor Myra Campbell announced last week that her first priority upon leaving office is to save the troubled center.

“I don’t see any life there,” Campbell said. “I don’t see neighborhood children going in and participating in activities.”

Campbell said she is organizing a plan to “resurrect the West Side Community Center so that it becomes a vibrant, lively building that the community can use.”

Center’s woes

Ross said the center is still functioning with its limited resources, but admits she could use more support from area organizations.

Ross is seeking partnerships that will provide funding and programming at the West Side Community Center.

“We are not dead, we are alive,” Ross said. “But we do need help.”

The center has continued some services, such as summer camp and a young adult at-risk program, Ross said. And she also rents it out for events, church services and wedding receptions, which generates money for the facility.

However, it has been difficult to garner support from some groups in recent years because of the high crime on Dewitt Avenue, where the center is located, Ross said.

Dewitt Avenue has been the site of shootings, murders and drug dealing in the last several years with some incidents happening directly in front of the center. At least three people were shot on Dewitt Avenue in 2013 and one person in 2014, according to police records.

Ross said she is looking to create a recovery plan that includes working closely with the city’s police department to ensure safety at the center.

Deputy Police Chief Anthony Salerno said police increased their mobile and walking patrols in the neighborhoods surrounding the West Side Community Center this year. Officers also patrol the area when there are events taking place.

The police presence, Salerno said, has reduced the crime in that neighborhood in recent months. Asbury Park police are committed to working with Ross and the community center, the deputy chief said.

“We can make sure we know what they are doing and we know what their needs are and that we can work around that and get officers when and where they are needed,” Salerno said.

Funding

Aside from crime, the West Side Community Center is in dire need of funding.

Rev. John Bradley, vice president of the center’s board of directors, said the loss of the 501C3 status in 2012 has made it nearly impossible to raise funds.

The IRS website stated that it revokes an organization’s 501C3 when it fails to file a Form 990-series return or notice for three consecutive years.

Ross declined to provide an explanation for why the center didn’t file.

“It was something that happened that we are now rectifying,” Ross said.

Both Ross and Bradley said the center could benefit from a better relationship with the city.

Ross has publicly accused the city of not providing jobs, funding or opportunities for residents on the west side.

She said Campbell and city officials have not been helpful in seeking funding for the community center’s revival.

Cassandra Dickerson, the city’s department head for community development, said that is not the case.

Asbury Park recently advertised the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) which provides federal funding for muncipalities to address community needs. Any organization in the city can apply for portions of the grant, Dickerson said.

In 2012, the city granted the West Side Community Center $68,000 in CDBG funds to renovate its bathrooms.

The center did not apply for the CDBG grant in 2013 or 2014, according to Dickerson.

Center’s needs

So what will it take to save the West Side Community Center?

Bradley said the center needs to hire an advisory council of professionals to assist its leadership with obtaining funding from different resources. He also said the center needs to expand its board of directors with new members.

“And they can give us some guidance on how to come out of the situation that we are in now,” Bradley said. “And try to get our heads above water and get some programs going.”

Derrick Griggs, who grew up going to the West Side Community Center, said the city needs a venue to keep youth off the streets and out of trouble.

Griggs said some in the community have lost faith in the center’s leadership after years of no progression.

“It was always just a nice, comfortable place for myself and other youth to go,” said Griggs, 39, of Neptune. “Now it seems like there isn’t anything going on.”

The center’s deteriorating physical state is also a concern for community members. Ross said she is seeking funding for renovations.

Isiah Jones, who also grew up in Asbury Park, said the center needs a complete overhaul so it can restore pride in the community.

“It doesn’t look welcoming,” said Jones, 33. “If we invest in it and raise the standards of the facility, I think it will change people’s approach to that neighborhood.”

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/16FFJr7