WASHINGTON -- With the House and Senate bitterly divided and only a small percentage of bills getting votes in both chambers, side-by-side voting comparisons are difficult for Louisiana's two leading Senate candidates -- Democratic incumbent Mary Landrieu and Republican Rep. Bill Cassidy of Baton Rouge.

That's because most House passed bills -- notably over 50 bills to repeal or scale back the Affordable Care Act and other bills to increase domestic energy production -- all died in the Democratic controlled Senate, without a vote. Cassidy supported the bills.

Meanwhile, Democratic proposals, favored by Landrieu, to increase the minimum wage, overhaul U.S. immigration laws and lower student loan interest rates, were blocked in the Republican-led House -- also without votes. The bills were also stalled in the Senate, with the GOP minority using the filibuster to block votes.

Still, some comparisons are possible.

Comparisons can be made for the 185 bills that have been passed by both the House and Senate and signed into law by the president. The low number of passed bills makes this Congress one of the least productive in U.S. history.

Among the bills that Cassidy and Landrieu both supported was a measure to block large increases in flood insurance premiums resulting from the 2012 Biggert-Waters law. Passage enabled both to take some credit. Cassidy helped draft the bill with Rep. Michael Grimm, R-N.Y., while Landrieu, working with Rep. Cedric Richmond, D-New Orleans, added affordability provisions, initially rejected by House Republicans, to limit yearly premium increases to no more than 18 percent and asking FEMA to "strive to minimize" policies with annual premiums that exceed 1 percent of total insurance coverage.

Landrieu backed all 185 bills that were signed into law by President Barack Obama, while Cassidy voted against only four of the bills -- a support rate of about 97 percent. He was also absent for four of the votes.

Cassidy opposed bills, supported by Landrieu and a majority in the House and Senate, to fund Hurricane Sandy recovery efforts, an extension of the Violence Against Women Act, a temporary spending bill to end the government shutdown in October, 2013, and a temporary extension of the debt limit.

The Violence against Women Act reauthorization included provisions designed to protect victims of sexual assault, domestic violence and stalking. It passed 286-138 with 87 Republicans voting yes. Landrieu said the bill provided important protection to women. At the time of the vote, Cassidy spokesman John Cummins said the congressman worried the bill would discriminate against faith-based organizations, echoing other conservative opponents who warned it could prevent church groups opposed to same sex marriage from providing services to sexual assault and human trafficking victims.

Cassidy, who had supported previous debt extensions, opposed the February, 2014 extension, pointing to the continued high deficits. Landrieu said that voting no would have led the U.S. to default on the debt, costing a drop in the U.S. credit rating that would have been very costly to taxpayers.

Cassidy said he opposed the Hurricane Sandy/FEMA bill because it included extraneous spending, but Landrieu said that had Cassidy's position prevailed it would have cost Louisiana $100 million for Hurricane Isaac recovery efforts.

Cassidy also opposed the temporary spending bill to reopen the federal government after a 16-day partial shutdown, citing continued unjustified federal spending. Landrieu said that the bill was negotiated by House GOP leaders and brought an end to a government shutdown that crippled services and left 2,000 state residents out of work, while hurting the economy, especially in Louisiana.

For the 113th Congress, Politico said that Landrieu, chair of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources, co-sponsored 10 bills that became law -- tied for second place in that category among most productive House and Senate members. The report on the Congress' legislative achievements doesn't mention Cassidy.

Cassidy, along with Tea Party Republican Candidate Rob Maness, continue to criticize Landrieu for voting for the Affordable Care Act in 2010, which they say has done much more harm than good. Landrieu defends a bill she calls imperfect, but vitally important to state residents who now can get affordable coverage -- even with pre-existing conditions -- and allows children to stay on their parents health insurance coverage through age 26.

Maness, the retired Air Force colonel who has criticized both Landrieu's and Cassidy's voting record, said he offers voters something different.

"My two Washington-backed opponents have spent more than $10 million of negative advertising, and voters are just sick and tired of the same old uninspiring, D.C. consultant driven, negative silly slap fights -- Louisianans deserve better," Maness said.

Cassidy spokesman John Cummins said this about Landrieu's record: "Senator Landrieu votes with President Obama 97 percent of the time, including casting the deciding vote for Obamacare while spinning falsehoods about the broken law. Dr. Cassidy opposes President Obama about that much of the time. Senator Landrieu may have a flexible relationship with the facts, but the numbers don't lie -- she's a rubber-stamp."

Landrieu spokesman Fabien Levy said this about Cassidy's record: "Congressman Cassidy and his campaign have rooted themselves in a hypocritical attack that conveniently leaves out how he has manipulated Senator Landrieu's record. It's no surprise because, working with the same numbers, everyone can see Congressman Cassidy has voted for more than 97 percent of the bills President Obama signed into law this Congress. While Senator Landrieu has voted with Louisiana 100 percent of the time, what's shocking about Congressman Cassidy's record is that on the very rare occasion he voted against a law President Obama signed, he displayed the most extreme, anti-Louisiana agenda."

Here's how some interest groups rate the voting records for Landrieu and Cassidy for the 113th Congress:

American Farm Bureau: Cassidy, 50 percent, Landrieu, 83 percent; U.S. Chamber of Commerce (2013) Cassidy, 77 percent, Landrieu, 50 percent; National Federation of Independent Business (2013): Cassidy, 100 percent, Landrieu, 36 percent; Alliance for Retired Americans: Landrieu, 100 percent, Cassidy, 0 percent; National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP): Cassidy, 22 percent, Landrieu, 89 percent; AFL-CIO: Cassidy, 10 percent; Landrieu, 100 percent, Family Research Council, Cassidy, 100 percent, Landrieu, 0 percent; League of Conservation Voters (2013) Cassidy, 0 percent; Landrieu, 69 percent; Heritage Action for American (conservative) Cassidy, 67 percent; Landrieu, 3 percent; and American Public Health Association, Cassidy, 13 percent, Landrieu 100 percent.

The Louisiana primary is Tuesday Nov. 4. If no candidate gets more than 50 percent of the vote, there will be a runoff on Dec. 6 between the two top finishers.