A homegrown Plainviewan has officially made his bid for a seat in Washington.

"Let's make this formal, I'd like to let you guys know that I am running to be the representative of District 19; for West Texas and the Big Country in our nation's capital. I'm excited," said Jodey Arrington as he addressed a crowd of supporters and media at an official announcement at the Bayer Museum of Agriculture in Lubbock.

On Thursday, Arrington formally announced his candidacy for the United States House of Representatives to represent the people of the 19th Congressional District of Texas. Arrington's announcement follows U.S. Rep. Randy Neugebaurer's decision not to seek re-elections for an eighth term in 2016.

Arrington said after lots of prayer and counseling with family, he was finally ready to make his run for District 19.

District 19 represents 27 counties in West Texas and the Big Country, including Hale, Floyd, Lamb and Lubbock.

"There are the three reasons I want to do this," said Arrington as he pointed at his three children, who were huddled near the podium with wife Anne.

"I want them to have the same security, liberties and opportunities that we had," said Arrington.

Arrington said the problems in Washington were threatening the security of a bright future for the children of America.

"We have to fight. We have to send people to Washington that will fight for the future of our country."

And for Arrington, that battle would be fought on three major fronts threatening the country.

"Number one, we have to strengthen our boarders and our national security," Arrington said. "We're a great nation and we have the tools and resources."

Arrington called out the federal government on what he called a lack of support to secure the nation's borders.

"It's shameful we can't secure our boarders and protect our people," Arrington said on breaches that were allowing drugs and people to be smuggled into the country.

In terms of national security and policy, Arrington called for America to take back its leadership roll while also strengthening the U.S. military to protect against dangerous groups like ISIS.

"I think our policies are weak and we have to restore America's leadership in the world. When we don't lead, the bad guys will, they'll feel that void," Arrington said.

Arrington said the second front will be limiting the federal government's power which he said was strangling the financially stability and economic growth of the country.

"We got to reign in the reckless and irresponsible spending," Arrington said.

Arrington blamed spending for the current $18 trillion national debt and called for a halt on a philosophy of printing new money and borrowing from other countries to cover debts.

"I wonder what it is going to be like when we hand the keys to these guys," said Arrington, once again mentioning his children. "These are shackles to the future."

Arrington also cited ideas of limiting the federal government's influence over legislation, calling recent decisions from the executive and judicial branches as abuse of power.

"When the Oval Office begins to legislate and we get legislation from the bench, what you get is an assault on the democratic process," Arrington said.

Arrington's third front called for repeals and limits to some federal regulations that he said are hindering economic growth.

"We have to release this pent up entrepreneurial energy. We've got to peel back excessive and sometimes abusive regulations," Arrington said.

Arrington elaborated on regulations that spanned from EPA restraints to regulations that were slowing the development of local banks.

Arrington also called for an overhaul of tax policy.

"We've got to have a tax policy that doesn't incentivize companies to make investment overseas or create jobs outside the United States," Arrington said.

Arrington pledged that he would dedicate his time to addressing the local issues facing District 19.

"I want to represent the values and the things that are important to West Texas and the Big Country," Arrington said.

"We have to have a strong voice and an effective advocate on Day One, to fight for the things that matter to us, protecting our values, and create policies that are going to support agriculture. To give farmers the tools that are going to make them successful."

Arrington touched on his support of lifting the ban on exporting American oil so it brings more jobs to West Texas as well as supporting research and development facilities and efforts like those being treated at Texas Tech.

He also called for a repeal of "Obamacare" and the institution of a more effective healthcare policy.

"Our frustrations are justified and we have got to do something about it. We can't just talk about it. It's too late for that," Arrington said.

"But the future's bright, we just got to hang in there."

Arrington previously worked for George W. Bush during his terms as governor of Texas and president of the United States. He was a senior adviser to Bush in the White House and the Texas governor's office. He was also Texas Tech's vice chancellor for research and commercialization. In 2014, he became president of Scott Labs in Lubbock.

Arrington as run for office before as he campaigned for Texas Senate in 2014, but lost to Charles Perry who grabbed 54 percent of the votes to Arrington's 30 percent.