The state Board of Regents has approved a plan to switch University System of Georgia retirees over to private plans for Medicare co-insurance.

The new system could actually save money for most retirees, according to Marion Fedrick, the University System of Georgia’s Vice Chancellor for Human Resources.

The typical retiree co-insurance plan will cost less because the risk pool will be much larger in plans offered in a health insurance exchange operated by the Aon Hewitt company, Fedrick said. Even retirees whose medical issues dictate that they choose more extensive plans will only pay a modest amount more than what they pay now, she said.

But only time will tell if that’s so, said Thomas Lauth, president of the University of Georgia Retirees Association.

“That’s the argument. I hope that’s true. Logically, I understand it. But the proof is in the pudding,” said Lauth, the retired dean of UGA’s School of Public and International Affairs.

Under the plan the Regents adopted Wednesday, the University System of Georgia, which includes UGA, will do away with its own self-funded health insurance plan for retirees. Instead, the system will deposit $2,736 next year into a “Health Reimbursement Account” which retirees can use to buy Medicare co-insurance or pay for other medical expenses, including dental costs. Medicare covers 80 percent of most medical costs; coinsurance helps retirees pay for the rest.

The new system goes into effect Jan. 1; retirees will have three months in which to choose a co-insurance policy from Aon Hewitt’s retiree health exchange. The Aon Hewitt exchange is not related to the exchanges created in the federal Affordable Care Act, Fedrick said.

According to a presentation Fedrick made to Regents at Wednesday’s meeting, the University System will avoid $6.8 million in additional retiree healthcare costs next year.

Instead, the University System will budget $43.3 million for retiree health care costs next year — the same as this year.

Retirees won’t have to sift through literally hundreds of available plans on their own before making a choice in a three-month sign-up period that begins Oct. 1.

Without the change, retiree health expenses would increase to a projected $50.1 million in 2016, $54.5 million in 2017 and $58.9 million in 2018, according to Fedrick’s presentation to the Board of Regents.

In telephone consultations, Aon Hewitt representatives will help narrow the choices, based on medical conditions, financial considerations and pharmacy needs, Fedrick said.

In addition, human resources professionals at University System colleges and universities are getting training in how to help, beginning today, Fedrick said.

UGA is going a step further than many state colleges and universities, and will hire additional workers to meet with retirees and help them choose.

Representatives of the University System and of Aon Hewitt will be in Athens for public meetings next Tuesday and Wednesday to explain the changes and talk about what’s coming up in the sign-up period.

The meetings will be held in the theater of Athens’ Classic Center at 300 North Thomas Street from 10 a.m.-noon and 2-4 p.m. on Tuesday, and 9-11 a.m. on Wednesday. University System officials underestimated attendance in April meetings they set up in the Georgia Center for Continuing Education to talk about the upcoming changes, and many retirees couldn’t get in to listen and ask questions. The Classic Center Theatre is a much larger space than the Georgia Center meeting room.

According to Lauth’s calculations, retirees and their spouses will get slightly less subsidy next year than under the University System’s self-insurance plan, in which the University System pays about 70 percent of the total cost of retiree co-insurance and the retiree or spouse about 30 percent. The University System is betting the move will work out to retirees’ benefit, however, because of lower overall costs.

“This is not unexpected or surprising to me because (1) this change in the way retiree health insurance benefits are provided is fundamentally about cost control, and (2) USG experts are assuming that with the expanded risk pool that comes with the change from the USG self-insurance approach to a private market insurance approach, insurance costs will be less for comparable coverage, Only time will tell if this assumption is correct,” Lauth wrote in an email.

Cost containment became necessary because health care costs continue to rise, and because the financial contribution of state government — the governor and General Assembly — is providing higher education a declining share of state of state appropriations, Lauth said.

The Board of Regents approved the change in but most retirees didn’t learn about it until this spring, which contributed to a lot of anxiety and uncertainty, Lauth said.

Now it’s time to move beyond that and make the transition as smoothly as possible, he said.

“I think the shift in the method of providing (retiree health insurance) is financially reasonable. The way in which it was rolled out was not very well done. But I think that is behind us. What’s important is that retirees don’t get hurt in the process,” he said. “I just hope we can get it done in three months.”

Follow education reporter Lee Shearer at www.facebook.com/LeeShearerABH or https://twitter.com/LeeShearer.