Amid the thousands of costumed heroes who filled the Denver Comic Con at the Colorado Convention Center lies “Artists Valley” where fans can meet the creators of their favorite stories.

While it’s an exciting moment for fans, many of the creators admit they find just as much pleasure in meeting with their audience.

“Interacting with fans is why I love doing it,” “Lady Death” creator Brian Pulido said Sunday. “For the type of material of what I do and what I’m known for, I see myself as an independent rock-and-roll band and I’m required to be on the road. So for me to meet people, talk to people, whether it be established fans or new fans, it’s the whole kit and caboodle for me.”

Ben Templesmith, best known as the artist of “30 Days of Night,” has been a guest at the Denver event since its debut in 2012. He said he enjoys coming to Denver because the convention still embodies a strong emphasis on comics rather than embrace the glitz and glamour of Hollywood movies, like some other conventions around the country.

“It’s still like a grassroot show,” he said. “It’s definitely bigger and it’s a really well-run show. It hasn’t lost its soul.”

Like Pulido, Templesmith enjoys meeting and talking with fans of his work.

“I’m not trying to sell myself to anyone new. If they find me, it’s great, but my art should speak for itself. I’m here for the people who know who I am, giving them the face time, thanking them for supporting my work, buying my books,” he said, “and let them know I’m not a scumbag.”

As writer Fred Van Lente sat at his booth, two men approached him with a stack of comic books to sign. He mentioned his new book “Ivar, Timewalker,” is on sale for just $1 apiece. The two men picked up the issues.

“It’s a great chance not just to make new fans but to sort of introduce fans of one book to another book you may be working on,” Van Lente said.

For writer and artist Jay Potts, a recent Denver transplant, the convention gives him an opportunity to display his work to a new audience.

“Every con has its own different feel and different vibe, and this has a very good vibe to it,” Potts said. “People are excited about the art, they’re excited about the artists, people are generally looking to try new things.”

Joe Nguyen: jnguyen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joenguyen