On track: Kate Spencer and Jack Stapleton. Photo: Wolter Peeters

Australian junior 5000 metre champion Kate Spencer moved a step closer to Commonwealth Games selection when she finished third at last weekend's national athletic championships in Melbourne but like training partner Jack Stapleton her main focus is on the 2016 Olympics and beyond.

The pair, who have been chosen for the upcoming World Junior Athletic Championships in Oregon, are members of the ASICS Sydney Running Academy - a group of promising athletes who train together under experienced coach Ken Green with the aim of qualifying for the 2016 Games in Rio, the 2018 Commonwealth Games on the Gold Coast and the 2020 Tokyo Olympics.

Both competed at the national championships, with Stapleton - the Australian under 20s 1500 metre champion - qualifying for the finals of his event and Spencer coming third behind Emily Brichacek and Eloise Wellings with a time of 16m.01.06s.

The 18-year-old is also Australia's No.1 ranked under 20s female in the 3000 metre steeplechase and was chosen in the team for the world junior championships in that event too.

Advertisement

"Kate is qualified for the Commonwealth Games," Green said. "It is just a matter of whether she is selected and if we think her development would be better at the world junior championships than the Commonwealth Games.

"Selection for the world junior championships is a big deal for both Kate and Jack. They will be racing the best juniors in the world and the world junior track and field championships is a tough gig. If they can make the finals and be competitive I reckon it will be a great step forward. If they go super well they might snag a medal, which is the thinking we are in at the moment.

"Hopefully in two years' time they are knocking on the door for Rio but the 2018 Gold Coast Commonwealth Games and the 2020 Tokyo Olympics are more realistic."

To help them and the other aspiring athletes under his charge prepare for the 2016 Olympics and beyond, Green has established a network of experts with sporting backgrounds, including former Sydney Roosters doctor John Orchard, Sydney FC human performance manager Craig Duncan and Surry Hills-based physiotherapist Ben Liddy, who is a well known middle-distance runner.

He has also convinced ASICS to sponsor the academy, which is based loosely on private running academies in the United States.

"If we can get some of these kids to the 2016 Olympics it would be great but we are looking to the 2018 Commonwealth Games and 2020 Olympics," Green said.

"It has got to be a three or four year plan but with the new funding structure from the Australian Sports Commission, unless you can clearly demonstrate that you are a medal prospect in Rio they are not interested so we have set up a privately funded academy to support people like Kate and Jack to get to the Olympic Games."