Lands' End Inc. CEO Federica Marchionni (left) interviewed Gloria Steinem for a story and photo spread in a spring catalog and on the company’s website. After an outcry from some opposed to abortion, the company quickly removed the article on the noted feminist from its website, causing even more fallout from those who accused the Dodgeville firm of caving in to the far right. Credit: Lands' End

By of the

Oops.

In what has the potential to become a case study in the pitfalls of marketing and crisis management, traditional-clothing retailer Lands' End has succeeded in successively alienating two broad swaths of potential customers.

Not to mention appearing tone deaf to America's ideological divisions.

The storm now raging may well blow over before long, but in the meantime Lands' End is getting tons of unwanted attention.

"It's never a good idea to look like you don't know what you're doing," public relations executive John Mose said of the company's self-inflicted wounds from its alliance with noted feminist Gloria Steinem. "Which is, I think, what it looks like now."

Mose and seven other marketing professionals and academics weighed in on two basic questions:

Was it wise for Lands' End to tie itself to Steinem, someone lauded by many but reviled by others?

And with the connection generating angry reaction from individuals, and threats to Lands' End's school uniform business, was it smart for the company to quickly erase references to Steinem from its website and issue an apology for the alliance?

"This is just one of those things that just should not happen," said Paul Argenti, professor of corporate communication at the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth College in New Hampshire.

The background: Dodgeville-based Lands' End, which is trying to amp up its sense of style and cultivate younger customers under CEO Federica Marchionni, decided to launch a new feature, the "Legend Series," in its spring catalog.

The series, Lands' End said, would be "our ode to individuals who have made a difference in both their respective industries and the world at large. We honor them and thank them for paving the way for the many who follow."

The first legend: Steinem, co-founder of Ms. magazine, author, feminist organizer, political activist ... and abortion-rights supporter.

The four-page spread kicked off with a large photo of Steinem (dressed in a Lands' End blazer, scarf and T-shirt) and featured an interview of her by Marchionni.

They talked about challenges for women in the workplace, the renewed drive for an equal rights amendment to the U.S. Constitution, and Steinem's path through life. Abortion wasn't mentioned, but that didn't stop the blowback.

"What are you thinking to glorify a pro-abortion feminist when you are trying to sell clothing to families?!" one woman wrote on the Lands' End Facebook page.

"How could you not understand that your family-friendly customer base does not want to see a rabidly pro-abortion woman (Steinem) honored as a hero?" wrote another.

Tuesday, LifeNews.com, which describes itself as "an independent news agency devoted to reporting news that affects the pro-life community," posted an article on the Steinem feature. A few hours later, the news organization subsequently reported, Lands' End removed references to Steinem from its website.

On Wednesday, Lands' End issued an apology:

"We understand that some of our customers were offended by the inclusion of an interview in a recent catalog with Gloria Steinem on her quest for women's equality. We thought it was a good idea and we heard from our customers that, for different reasons, it wasn't. For that, we sincerely apologize. Our goal was to feature individuals with different interests and backgrounds that have made a difference for our new Legends Series, not to take any political or religious stance."

In all marketing efforts, companies must consider beforehand "what's the worst thing that could happen," said Sara Meaney, managing director at Milwaukee-area advertising agency BVK.

And there is risk any time a brand links itself to someone, said Emory University marketing professor David Schweidel, who formerly taught at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Schweidel said breaking off with Steinem and apologizing was the right move if the company's school-uniform business was threatened.

And Syed Akhter, a marketing professor at Marquette University, supported the company's decision to separate from Steinem after the storm of criticism broke.

"I can understand why they pulled back so quickly, because they don't want controversy," he said. "No company wants controversy. ... If their goal was to bury it as quickly as possible, they did the right thing."

But most of the marketing experts interviewed said Lands' End erred in one way or another.

"It's just been a bad decision to associate your fantastic brand with something that was polarizing," said Neeraj Arora, marketing professor at UW-Madison and executive director of the A.C. Nielsen Center for Marketing Research.

"From a marketing standpoint, I think it's fair to say that there was a misstep."

Both Argenti, who researches and writes on corporate reputation, and Mose, who leads the public relations practice at the Cramer-Krasselt agency, said Lands' End's prompt abandonment of Steinem showed the company didn't think things through to begin with.

"You don't do something like what they did at the beginning, pick someone, and then say 'Oops. Sorry. We made a mistake,'" Argenti said.

"How do you make mistakes like that? This isn't a little start-up that doesn't know what they're doing. This is a fairly established organization that should know better."

Said Mose, "It's hard to think if you're sitting in that conference room with them and someone says, 'OK, what do we do if people start to complain about us working with Gloria Steinem?' and the answer is, 'Oh, we'll immediately issue an apology and retract everything.'"

"Who would do that?" he said.

Argenti criticized Marchionni, who took the helm at Lands' End one year ago. The former executive at upscale fashion retailer Dolce & Gabbana came to Lands' End under terms that, among other things, said she wouldn't have to move from her home in New York, nor be required to perform the majority of her duties at the company's headquarters in Dodgeville.

"There's no excuse for a CEO of a company that is public-facing not to be in a position to understand what the potential risks are of the decisions they make," he said.

Once in, though, Argenti said Lands' End should have stuck with its decision to feature Steinem.

"Let people complain about it," he said. "And say, 'We're sorry that people are upset (but) we did the interview, we stand by our interview, goodbye.' And write those customers off."

Marketing professor Ira Kalb of the University of Southern California also said Lands' End should have realized Steinem would raise the hackles of some. And with its speedy retreat, the company stands to anger another slice of the population, he said.

That's exactly what has happened.

By the end of last week, the tide of criticism on the Lands' End Facebook page had shifted, with the comments dominated by supporters of Steinem, feminism and abortion rights. As their counterparts on the other end of the ideological spectrum had done earlier, they, too, vowed never to buy from Lands' End again.

"You have lost my business by succumbing to pressure from the far right," one woman wrote. "I have been a Lands' End customer for 40 years. Gloria Steinem is indeed someone to be honored."

Said another, "Your 'apology' just changed who will be boycotting Lands' End."

The company declined to answer questions on the affair. In a statement on Friday, the firm said:

"Lands' End is committed to providing our loyal customers and their families with stylish, affordable, well-made clothing. We greatly respect and appreciate the passion people have for our brand. It was never our intention to raise a divisive political or religious issue, so when some of our customers saw a recent promotion that way, we heard them. We sincerely apologize for any offense."

Beyond the decisions of individual consumers, Lands' End may have feared damage to its school-uniform business. At least two religious-affiliated schools said last week that they would no longer buy from the firm.

One, School of the Ozarks, in Point Lookout, Mo., hasn't changed its mind after the apology, Sue Head, vice president for cultural affairs and dean of character education at the parent institution of the 297-student Christian school, said Saturday.

Head pointed to an August 2014 incident in which some Lands' End customers were rewarded for their patronage with subscriptions to men's magazine GQ, and the first issue they received featured a nearly naked model on the cover.

Head said she objected to the company, including to then-CEO Edgar Huber, and received profuse apologies.

"So I said, 'You know what, that's fine, but here's what you need to know: The first time you do something like this again, we're done.' And so, therefore, we're done," she said.

The flap doesn't seem to have bothered investors, though. Lands' End shares rose modestly at week's end. But they remain far below the level of early 2015, and the widespread publicity the squall has stirred can't be welcome news at a company that also has seen its sales decline even as it seeks new direction under Marchionni.

She is trying to add more style-conscious customers while holding on to the chino-wearing traditionalists who long have favored the firm's classic clothing lines.

But Hart Posen, a UW-Madison professor of management and human resources and a Lands' End observer, said by email that the Steinem episode suggests "a substantial gap in the top management team's understanding of the current Lands' End customer base."

Arora, who does research on brands associating themselves with social causes, said companies should choose efforts with universal appeal — things such as education or breast-cancer research.

"You want to be in a win, win, win situation," he said. "The company wins, the consumer wins, the cause wins."

Lands' End obviously didn't do that, but Arora, for one, doubts that the controversy will prompt customers to halt purchases to any meaningful degree.

"This is a blip, I believe," he said. "It was a misstep (but the) Lands' End brand itself, I believe, is strong, and folks on Twitter will find something else to complain about."