Buy Photo Linda Kaser of Fishers signed up under the Affordable Care Act but is finding it not as affordable as advertised. Because of their income, she and her husband don’t qualify for a subsidy under the new exchange plans. They now have coverage from different providers. (Photo: Joe Vitti/The Star )Buy Photo

The Affordable Care Act was written for people like Linda Kaser, Fishers.

The part-time college instructor has rheumatoid arthritis, a condition that made it expensive — and potentially impossible — to purchase health insurance on her own when insurers were allowed to deny coverage for pre-existing conditions and charge more based on health history.

But while Kaser was able to get coverage through the ACA's new health exchanges, she doesn't think the law has lived up to its name.

"There is nothing affordable in this act," said Kaser, who — with her husband — is paying about $1,400 a month for coverage.

MORE COVERAGE: Affordable Care Act puts end to local charity medical program

Self-employed Indianapolis tax preparer Ed Gagen likewise has not found the affordable part of the law.

Gagen and his wife went without insurance before the law took effect because they couldn't find a plan that fit their budget. Costs are even higher now, said Gagen, who is leaning toward staying uninsured, even though that means paying a penalty — either $95 a person or 1 percent of modified household income, whichever is higher.

"I think it's going to be far less than what the insurance would cost," Gagen said of the federal fee for people who don't buy insurance.

By contrast, Fort Wayne retiree David Kolhoff said the insurance he bought through the federal exchange is saving him money. And the process was a lot simpler than when he tried to purchase insurance on his own in 2012 and spent weeks answering an insurer's questions about his health history, only to be turned down because of some minor tests he'd had done.

"It was a mind-numbing, complicated mess," Kolhoff said. "It was like a full-time job there, just dealing with trying to get UnitedHealthcare to say, 'Yes, you're covered.' And with me, they said, 'No. You aren't covered.' "

As the March 31 deadline approaches for purchasing insurance through the exchange for those who aren't covered by an employer or a government program like Medicare, Hoosiers are coming to different conclusions about whether the law helps them. These differing outlooks — and the resulting decisions — are captured in people like Kaser, Gagen and Kolhoff, who face some of the highest premiums on the exchange because of their age, income and where they live.

The rate at which Hoosiers are selecting plans through the exchange is below the national rate, according to the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation's estimates of the potential number of those enrolling in each state.

About 12.4 percent of Indiana's potentially eligible population had selected a plan through March 1. That compares with 14.8 percent nationwide. And more than a quarter of potentially eligible residents have chosen plans in California, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Vermont.

Still, the roughly 65,000 Hoosiers who have selected a plan through the beginning of March is not a bad figure, said Jennifer Tolbert, director of state health reform for the Kaiser Family Foundation.

In addition, she said, it may not matter if the number of those enrolling lags.

"This is the thing that is hard to know, at least right now," Tolbert said. "You do need at least a critical mass of enrollees in these marketplaces in order for them to work. But what that critical mass is, it's hard to say."

What matters more than the number of enrollees is whether there's a mix of young and old, healthy and sick — and whether that mix is close to what insurers expected it would be when pricing their plans.

For people facing some of the highest prices, the experiences of Kaser, Gagen and Kolhoff show the different types of responses.

Not affordable?

Kaser, who supported the law, was initially pleased with how it helped her after her husband's employer stopped offering insurance. Kaser faced a difficult situation to get coverage on her own because of her health needs. Just one of her prescriptions for arthritis costs $2,500 a month.

Kaser considered herself fortunate to get on a temporary program the ACA created to cover people with pre-existing conditions until insurers were required to take all customers starting in 2014. The federal Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan was subsidized to keep premiums close to what a healthy person would pay on the individual market.

Subsidies also are available for the new exchange plans, but they are tied to income. Kaser and her husband's combined income is too large to qualify.

That meant that she went from paying $454 a month for a premium with a $2,000 deductible under the temporary program to $780 a month for an exchange plan with a $3,500 deductible. Cheaper premiums were available. But Kaser wanted a mid-level plan that would pick up most of the costs of her medications.

Kaser expected her costs would go up some when she transitioned to the exchange but not as much as they did.

"It means we're not able to put as much into retirement as we like," she said. "We had thought we'd take a trip in April, and we've canceled it because of looking at the budget."

Kaser faced the double whammy of both not being eligible for a subsidy and of being 61. One of the few ways insurers are still allowed to vary rates under the law is by age. Those closest to being eligible for Medicare are charged the most.

For example, a 61-year-old in Marion County will pay more than twice as much for mid-level plan as a 31-year-old.

"I just had my eye doctor tell me, 'Well, maybe we can hold off on the cataract surgery until you're on Medicare,' " Kaser said.

Insurers can vary costs by geography, and Indiana's rates are among the highest.

Indiana plans

According to the "weighted average premiums" that the federal government calculated for plans sold in most states, premiums for the cheapest "bronze" level plans in Indiana are the ninth most expensive in that category in the nation. The average premium for the second lowest-cost "silver" plan — the level that is used to determine the amount of subsidy — is tied with Maine for sixth most expensive.

Factors that can affect rates include how much competition there is among both insurers and health-care providers, how old and sick an area's population is, and whether patients and doctors in an area choose higher-cost procedures.

When subsidies are factored in, however, premium costs across states even out.

For example, a 60-year-old in Indianapolis making $28,725 a year would pay $751 a month before the subsidy for the second-cheapest silver plan, but only $193 a month with the subsidy.

Subsidies are available for those earning from 100 percent to 400 percent of the 2013 federal poverty level — from $15,510 to $62,040 a year for a couple.

Nearly nine out of 10 of the Hoosiers who have selected an exchange plan have qualified for a subsidy.

Forgoing insurance

But because Gagen and his wife earn too much for a subsidy, and because his age of 61 puts him in the upper tier of prices, he couldn't find coverage for the two of them for less than about $1,000 a month.

"They can drop that affordable word," he said. "I don't think it's affordable without subsidies."

Gagen doesn't think he should be required to buy insurance and plans to continue to go without.

"So far we've been pretty lucky," he said. "We've had some hospital visits. But we've been able to take care of them."

Finding a suitable plan

Kolhoff, 63, finds the idea of going without coverage frightening.

"One serious illness could wipe out most of my life's savings," he said.

After retiring at age 60 from Lincoln Financial Group, the employee benefits lawyer was able to use COBRA to extend his coverage for a time. But when he went to look for a plan on the individual market at the end of 2012, he was denied coverage because of blood test results that his doctor said were not a big deal.

Kolhoff was able to get on a plan for Lincoln Financial retirees at a cost of $642 a month.

His wife got a plan that is about the same price as the one she had purchased in the private market last year, but with lower deductibles and co-pays and broader coverage.

"So she got a lot better plan for $2 more a month," he said.

Kolhoff knows that he's fortunate to have the income to pay for insurance and hopes prices will come down as implementation of the law continues.

"It was expensive before the Affordable Care Act," he said. "I'm hoping the Affordable Care Act can make it less expensive and can get some control of these costs."

Tolbert, of the Kaiser Family Foundation, said it will take more than a few years to be able to assess how well the state's marketplace is functioning.

"It's way too early for that," she said. "We're all going to have to take a longer view."

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Who is the health exchange for?

It's for people who don't have insurance through an employer, or through a government program like Medicare or Medicaid? The nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation estimates that about 525,000 Hoosiers could potentially use the exchange.

How do I buy insurance through the exchange?

You can use the website, www.healthcare.gov, or call (800) 318-2596. If you want to find a trained helper in Indiana to meet with personally, call ASPIN Health Navigator at (877) 313-7215.

What's the deadline for buying insurance?

You must enroll by March 31. After that, you can't get coverage through the exchange for the rest of the year unless you've had a big life change, such as switching jobs, moving to another state or having a baby. The next open enrollment period starts on Nov. 15, for health insurance coverage that begins Jan. 1, 2015.

What happens if I don't buy insurance?

The penalty for not having insurance this year is either 1 percent of modified adjusted gross income that exceeds $10,150, or $95 per person — whichever amount is higher. The penalty increases every year. The fee is due when you file your 2014 taxes next year.

Are there are any exceptions?

There are several, including for people earning $10,000 or less a year, those with a religious objection, those whose insurance plans were canceled, and those who would have to pay more than 8 percent of their income to buy insurance. The exemptions can be found at: www.healthcare.gov/exemptions.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1oWhZTm