A woman's cadaver destined for medical research almost got left behind on the side of the road after somehow being shot out of a transport van.

A woman's cadaver destined for medical research almost got left behind on the side of the road after somehow being shot out of a transport van. Doug Kerr, CC BY 2.0

It’s a scenario that sounds much more entertaining in a raunchy comedy than it ever would in real life.

On Dec. 8 around 1:00 a.m., the deceased body of Wynell Joseph, 79, was found in a black body bag alone and covered in ice on the side of a road in Denton, Texas, by a police officer. Sinister as that might sound, Joseph’s presence there was actually the result of a bizarre accident rather than foul play: her cadaver, scheduled for donation to a medical research lab in Colorado, had somehow crashed through the back window of the transport van intended to get her there.

"I was like, 'what is going on here?'" Joseph’s son, Terry Harris told WFAA 8. "I couldn't believe they lost my mom out the back of a truck. And apparently they didn't know."

Wynell, or Nell for short, Joseph’s less than illustrious end was originally meant to be much more noble. The Fort Worth, Texas, woman succumbed to severe lung disease earlier this Thanksgiving, and her family agreed to donate her body to Phoenix-based medical research organization Science Care, where her body would be used to further study chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

In an interview with police, who have since declared the incident an accident, the driver claimed he was unaware of the breach. Police believe that his vision could have been obscured by a metal partition separating him from the numerous bodies he was transporting. Science Care, as of last week, however, has ceased using the services of their third-party transportation firm until they can determine exactly how the body was almost abandoned, though a mechanical failure is suspected.

Thankfully, Joseph’s body was still in salvageable condition despite the postmortem tumble, and her family has graciously agreed to continue with the donation.