In 2010, the Citizens United decision by the Supreme Court effectively blew apart the McCain-Feingold restrictions on outside groups and their use of corporate and labor money in elections. That same year, a related ruling from a lower court made it easier for wealthy individuals to finance those groups to the bottom of their bank accounts if they so chose. What followed has been the most unbridled spending in elections since before Watergate. In 2000, outside groups spent $52 million on campaigns, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. By 2012, that number had increased to $1 billion.

The result was a massive power shift, from the party bosses to the rich individuals who ran the super PACs (as most of these new organizations came to be called). Almost overnight, traditional party functions — running TV commercials, setting up field operations, maintaining voter databases, even recruiting candidates — were being supplanted by outside groups. And the shift was partly because of one element of McCain-Feingold that remains: the ban on giving unlimited soft money to parties. In the party universe, rich players like the Wylys, Tom Steyer or the Kochs were but single planets among many. The party bosses had to balance their interests against those who brought just as much to the table in the form of money or votes. A party platform has to account for both the interests of the oil industry and those of the ethanol industry; those of the casino industry and those of the anti-gambling religious right; those of Wall Street and those of labor.

With the advent of Citizens United, any players with the wherewithal, and there are surprisingly many of them, can start what are in essence their own political parties, built around pet causes or industries and backing politicians uniquely answerable to them. No longer do they have to buy into the system. Instead, they buy their own pieces of it outright, to use as they see fit. “Suddenly, we privatized politics,” says Trevor Potter, an election lawyer who helped draft the McCain-Feingold law.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Now we have Michael Bloomberg, who has committed to spending $50 million to support gun-control legislation; his Independence USA PAC, meanwhile, is spending $25 million this fall to elect “centrists.” We have the TD Ameritrade founder Joe Ricketts and his group Ending Spending, which has spent roughly $10 million so far this year to elect fiscal conservatives to Congress, an effort that has drawn support from the billionaire hedge-fund executive Paul E. Singer, who has also devoted tens of millions to Republican candidates who share his views on Israel. We have Mark Zuckerberg and his FWD.us, with a budget of about $50 million to push an immigration overhaul. In 2014, as of early October, when the campaigns had yet to do their big final pushes, overall spending was already more than $444 million, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. Roughly $231 million was from the parties and their congressional committees, the rest from outside spending. The biggest chunk of that by far came from super PACs — more than $196 million. Looking at those numbers, it’s not hard to understand why Crist was willing to wait outside a conference room in Coral Gables for Steyer.

Steyer, with his $50 million pledge, is one of the most deep-pocketed political arrivistes. But he has a long way to go to catch up with the Koch brothers, whose own group, Americans for Prosperity, already has political operations in every state that Steyer is contesting, along with 28 others. The group says it will spend at least $125 million this year.

The president of Americans for Prosperity is Tim Phillips. Tall and fit at 50, Phillips holds forth with evident delight, betraying the slight accent of his native South Carolina, on whatever topic is at hand. (A somewhat larger than usual breakfast, for instance, earns an emphatic “I’m in awe of our country at this moment.”) After attending Jerry Falwell’s Liberty University, Phillips worked on several congressional races before starting a consulting firm with the Christian Coalition leader Ralph Reed. The Kochs hired Phillips in 2005 to make Americans for Prosperity into a force that could defeat liberalism and elect true free-market conservatives — ones who understood that when business gets hurt, people lose jobs and the country suffers — and make them pay a price if they strayed. (David Koch is the chairman of the group’s foundation, while Charles Koch has no formal role.)

With the advent of Citizens United, any players with the wherewithal can start what are in essence their own political parties.

Americans for Prosperity started small, with an effort in Charles Koch’s home state of Kansas to defeat a proposed tax increase; it then moved on to spearhead a quixotic fight against the teachers’ union over pay in Wisconsin. As recently as 2008, the group’s activities were negligible, and it had just $7 million in its operating budget, according to its Internal Revenue Service filing. But after Citizens United, donations poured in. In 2012, it raised $115 million. It is impossible to know the identities of the donors, though the group’s annual closed-door conferences are regularly attended by many of the biggest conservative donors in the country, including the hedge-fund executive Foster Friess and the casino magnate Sheldon Adelson.

Where does the money go? Americans for Prosperity obviously spends a lot on television, but it also maintains offices in 35 states with 600 paid staff members. The group funds phone banks, big-ticket events and many other details like beer cozies and water bottles. Its biggest chapter is in Florida, where its 50 paid staff members work out of 10 offices and constitute a year-round organization that rivals that of the state Republican Party.

The A.F.P. offices are in the same brick corporate campus in Arlington, Va., that housed George W. Bush’s campaign in 2004. The narrow white hallways and gray cubicles would be somewhat grim if not for Phillips’s insistence that each staff member place an image of something he or she holds dear on their nameplates (a pinup of the actress Jane Russell, the logo of the University of Virginia or, on Phillips’s own door, a photo of the band U2, with his own head pasted atop Bono’s body). A.F.P. operates at such a low hum that it would have been hard to guess, at the moment I was visiting, how many different operations its staff members were overseeing simultaneously. There was a $1 million ad buy criticizing the Democrat Mark Begich in Alaska, as well as a new ad campaign against Senator Mark Udall, Democrat of Colorado. There was a series of rallies attacking the Democratic Senate candidate Bruce Braley in Iowa and a door-knocking campaign for Rick Scott.

Then there was the balloon. Phillips pointed to a photograph on the wall, depicting a scene from an event Americans for Prosperity held in Bozeman, Mont., in 2009: a 70-foot balloon awaiting takeoff. “We called it the ‘Cost of Hot Air,’ ” Phillips said. At the time, A.F.P. was trying to counter the movement to establish a cap-and-trade system. Many Republicans, including John McCain, supported such a system, and a bipartisan implementation of it seemed likely upon Obama’s election. A.F.P.'s balloon was part of a national tour to block it. “We put on the side of the balloon: ‘Cap and trade means: higher taxes, lost jobs, less freedom’ — six words.” It made dozens of trips, including one over Al Gore’s house in Tennessee. All the while, Americans for Prosperity, joined by other conservative groups, directed ads and phone calls pressuring lawmakers to vote against the major cap-and-trade bill when it came up for a vote in 2009; Phillips helped to rebrand the bill more negatively as “cap and tax.” It died in the Senate, and support for cap-and-trade among Republican officeholders fell to a negligible level, where it remains today. “I rode more hot-air balloons in that year-and-a-half period than I ever want to ride again,” Phillips said. “I do not like hot-air balloons.”

In the group’s efforts on behalf of Scott, Phillips says, the most important factor is the growth of the volunteer base of Americans for Prosperity, which it now numbers into the tens of thousands. The first lesson of party politics is that winning elections means getting out the vote, and getting out the vote means signing up volunteers. Phillips spends a lot of time thinking about what will keep them happy.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Given their negatives, neither Scott nor Crist was going to win by sweeping new converts off their feet. Big spending on television was certainly threatening to make a difference for Scott. But if Crist could catch up on TV, with Steyer’s help, the election was going to be decided by which side did a better job of identifying new sympathetic voters and then prodding them out to the polls. It required the hard work of knocking on doors, which can be especially brutal under the hot Florida sun.

The movement is independent of the party, which is the way Phillips wants it. When Rick Scott said he would support an expansion of Medicaid under Obamacare, Americans for Prosperity let him know about its displeasure through a deluge of phone calls and letters and even a protest at the State Capitol. Scott ultimately made no effort to push it through the Legislature, many of whose Republican members have been supported by the group as well. “I think he started hearing from some other voices, A.F.P. and some of the other organizations,” Chris Hudson, the group’s Florida director, had said, “and I think they sort of superseded what was going on in his own staff.”

Phillips said the group’s volunteers would have it no other way. “They have to feel like the organization is genuinely a principled outfit,” he said. “If they think you’re just an appendage of the party, they can go to the party. Why do they need you?”

‘If they think you’re just an appendage of the party, they can go to the party. Why do they need you?’

Later in August, Kat Taylor, who has been married to Tom Steyer for 28 years, offered to show me around TomKat Ranch, the family’s 1,800-acre spread on the central California coast, and talk about how the family had become involved in climate politics. Taylor, 56, is slight yet muscular, with short and wavy gray hair and a tattoo of a flowering vine around her impressive biceps. She spends part of her week overseeing the ranch, and its 130 head of grass-fed cattle, but most of her time is spent running the community bank that she and Steyer founded in 2007, when all four of their children were older and more independent. Taylor supported Steyer in his latest political mission, she said, even after he told her, “This is going to give us a lot more visibility, and it won’t all be positive.”

Still, she was bothered by the questioning of his motives and the occasional charges of hypocrisy from the press and his political enemies. Yes, she patiently explained to me, Steyer’s firm made many millions from investments in coal mines and coal-fired power plants in Asia and Australia, as it had in all sorts of other industries. But that was long before he came to believe that the fate of the planet depended upon curbing carbon emissions, and he has since divested his personal portfolio of any fossil-fuel-related investments. Taylor had also learned to deflect the inevitable questions about whether he was preparing his own run for office. (“I don’t think he thinks that’s the right priority right now,” she said.)

Steyer has been involved in politics for years. He was a major fund-raiser for John Kerry’s 2004 presidential campaign and in 2006 worked closely with Chris Lehane, a longtime Democratic strategist, to defeat a Republican effort to change California’s electoral-college rules. (Lehane has been acting as Steyer’s personal political strategist ever since.) In 2012, though, Steyer read an essay in Rolling Stone (“Global Warming’s Terrifying New Math”), in which Bill McKibben, the writer and climate activist, suggested that fossil-fuel interests had too much money at stake to let the political system do anything about carbon emissions. The only alternative, McKibben wrote, was a mass movement, and the only way to start a mass movement was to articulate a consistent, fact-based moral argument for change. At that moment, Taylor said, “Tom realized that the climate threat was near, present, imminent, massive — and aggravates every other crisis, whether it’s hunger or civil rights.” He had to do something different. So a few months later he and Taylor invited McKibben to the ranch for a war council.

We were in the ranch’s spartan barn house when Taylor recounted this. The council had been right there, beneath the reclaimed wood beams. Lehane was there, and so was John Podesta, Bill Clinton’s former chief of staff who would later join the Obama White House as an adviser. They all considered various ways to act. They agreed, finally, that Steyer should try a few experiments, but should come out with particular force against the Keystone XL pipeline, which would link oil-rich Canadian sands to refineries on the Gulf of Mexico. In March 2013, Steyer sent a letter to Stephen Lynch, a Democratic congressman and pipeline supporter who was seeking the Senate seat left vacant by John Kerry when he became secretary of state. The letter demanded that Lynch renounce his support for Keystone by “high noon Friday” or face aggressive opposition. It was an obvious stunt, but it got attention. Lynch declared that “billionaires won’t shove me around”; Steyer responded by providing Lynch’s primary opponent, Ed Markey, an anti-Keystone congressman, with nearly $700,000 in campaign support. Markey, who said he did not want Steyer’s help, won handily. In Virginia that same year, Steyer bought $8 million in television ads and mailings to highlight the climate-change skepticism of the Republican gubernatorial nominee Ken Cuccinelli. The Democrat, Terry McAuliffe, a former chairman of the Democratic Party, won by 2.5 percentage points.

How much credit Steyer can claim in either of these victories is debatable. But by early 2014, just about every Democrat considering a competitive run this year, including Charlie Crist, had made a pilgrimage to see Steyer in San Francisco. And in April, the State Department announced it would delay its decision on Keystone XL pending an analysis of expected legal challenges.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It was a victory, but it did not necessarily echo the consistent, moral argument of McKibben’s initial call. As we spoke, NextGen was spending about $100,000 to build and operate a wooden Noah’s Ark on wheels that it would drive around the state, taunting Scott for his failure to address climate change. It was also spending $2 million on an ad campaign that blamed Scott for the failure of Duke Energy, a major Scott contributor, to upgrade one nuclear power plant and build another, for which it had to increase utility fees, despite the fact that Scott had no direct say over this decision. Even beyond the publicity stunts and elisions of fact, NextGen’s campaign largess was itself a capitulation to the post-Citizens United world. Steyer was applying pressure to the political system in a way no average American could. It seemed undemocratic. But Steyer saw it as simple pragmatism; the other side was “playing multiples,” he said, and he had to operate “in the real world the way the real world works.”

Our tour wound down in front of a long, waist-high granite pool filled with koi, the remains of an unsuccessful attempt at sustainable fish farming that now doubled as a huge outdoor dining table. As we stood beside it, Taylor told me about charts she had seen, apparently online, placing Steyer at the center of a web of liberal interests: a conservative answer to the many liberal diagrams of “The Kochtopus.” The connections were all real, or at least many of them were. That was the whole point of playing multiples. But the comparison seemed to bother her. “There’s a private empire and the Earth,” she said. The Earth was there for all of us.

“And the private empire is?” I asked.

“Private.”

And it was true. But it was also undeniable that Steyer presided over an empire of his own that, for all his transparency, was not quite public.