Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders engaged in an issues-heavy, at times fiery, tete-a-tete at Thursday night's MSNBC debate. But despite sparring over who is more progressive, the fact remains: "Clinton and Sanders voted the same way 93 [percent] of the time" when they overlapped in the Senate, tweeted FiveThirtyEight's Nate Silver. The disputes – on universal health care, Wall Street "excess," Syria and Iraq – were degrees (granted, important ones) of difference. But one area in particular split the two presidential hopefuls neatly: the death penalty.

Clinton, when asked if she supported capital punishment, answered in the affirmative. "I do, for very limited, particularly heinous crimes believe [the death penalty] is an appropriate punishment," she told moderators Rachel Maddow and Chuck Todd, pointing to terrorism in particular and citing Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh's sentence as "appropriate." Sanders, who has advocated publicly to abolish the death penalty, acknowledged that yes, terrible crimes are committed, but noted that often innocent people, frequently minorities, are the ones put to death. He also expressed a "deeper reason" for his opposition: "I just don't want to see government be part of killing. That's all," he said.



[READ: Clinton Comes Out Swinging Against Bernie Sanders in Democratic Debate]

Miriti Murungi at Fusion takes issue with Clinton's answer, saying the McVeigh example "makes him a poster child for a policy that even Clinton has acknowledged has much further-reaching implications beyond punishing a bad man for doing bad things." The death penalty is flawed, she writes, and part of a system that is too. Clinton has openly acknowledged this, too, Murungi writes; she noted last year there's evidence "the death penalty has been too frequently applied, and too often in a discriminatory way." And how does Clinton define a "particularly heinous" crime, anyway? Even if she did so clearly, says Murungi, that crime would still be prosecuted in an already-broken court system. "There's really no argument over whose death penalty position is more progressive," she writes, but Clinton's stance makes sense when shes's playing the long game, which includes winning over centrist-leaning Democrats. If Clinton wins the nomination, Murungi writes, "her path to White House will probably not be aided by having spent several months arguing that she's the Progressive-in-Chief on every issue."

"The exchange between Clinton and Sanders shows that [the death penalty] is mostly a moral, ethical argument," notes German Lopez at Vox, but Sanders' position more closely resembles that of the Democratic base. Pointing to a 2015 Pew Research Center survey, Lopez notes that Democratic support for abolishing the death penalty has risen sharply – from 25 percent in 1996 to 56 percent in 2015. "Perhaps that's why this is an issue that can come up at debates at all now," he writes. "Just a few decades ago, after all, both sides of the aisle were passing laws that strengthened the death penalty. Today, at least Democrats disagree with the government executing people."



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]