Katzenberg disclosed that he's already maxed out to Grimes’s campaign. | REUTERS Katzenberg raising money for Grimes

Kentucky Senate candidate Alison Lundergan Grimes will tap the Hollywood money well later this month with the help of entertainment industry power broker Jeffrey Katzenberg, according to an email invitation obtained by POLITICO.

In a message to undisclosed recipients, Katzenberg, the DreamWorks executive and prominent Democratic political donor, urged his allies to turn out to support Grimes at events in Los Angeles on Sept. 26.

Story Continued Below

Katzenberg disclosed that he has already maxed out to Grimes’s campaign against Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, and called the Kentucky race “a pivotal election that can get the Senate working again.”

( QUIZ: Do you know Alison Lundergan Grimes?)

“There is no more important election being held next year in this country,” Katzenberg writes in the email. “As the Senate’s Minority Leader since 2007, McConnell has used the filibuster 420 times to block legislation and appointments that were supported by a clear majority of Senators … We are talking about outright obstruction of the democratic process.”

He continues: “Alison is the antidote to McConnell and all he represents. She can win, and she will win if she gets the support she needs.” The events in Los Angeles, Katzenberg says, “will be a chance to help her seize the momentum and get her campaign off to an early and strong start.”

Grimes, who announced her campaign in July, will face an early test of her candidacy when she files her first fundraising report after the end of the quarter on Sept. 30. McConnell had nearly $10 million in the bank at the end of the last reporting period – a huge head start over any potential challenger who would have to start from zero.

( PHOTOS: 10 star-studded fundraisers)

The Democrat, currently Kentucky’s secretary of state, has kept a light public schedule since kicking off her Senate bid and has focused on vacuuming up donations from party donors eager to unseat the Senate’s top Republican.

Katzenberg’s involvement in the race is a notable sign of national Democratic support for Grimes – or, perhaps more precisely, the ferocity of Democratic opposition to McConnell. The filmmaker donated millions to the pro-Obama super PAC Priorities USA Action in 2012 and hosted a fundraiser for the president’s reelection in May of 2012.

In his email, Katzenberg acknowledges that recipients “may not yet know the name Alison Lundergan Grimes.”

“But,” he says, “I’m certain you know the name Mitch McConnell.”

( PHOTOS: Mitch McConnell’s career)

Katzenberg did not immediately respond to an email seeking comment on his support for Grimes. A Grimes campaign aide said only that “people across the country share the same feeling as the people of Kentucky” when it comes to McConnell.

McConnell spokeswoman Allison Moore said it’s “no surprise that Obama’s liberal Hollywood friends are supporting Alison Lundergan Grimes’s campaign against Mitch McConnell.”

“They’re obviously not concerned about Kentucky’s representation, but they know that a Grimes victory would mean eliminating the last obstacle to enacting the full Obama agenda, implementing Obamacare, and officially taking out Kentucky’s coal industry,” Moore said.

Justin Barasky, a spokesman for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, fired back that McConnell is “the meanest, most negative campaigner in all of Washington.”

“Unfortunately for Mitch McConnell, he faces two strong challengers, and the Kentucky Senate race will now focus entirely on how after three decades in Washington Mitch McConnell is the number one reason for partisan political dysfunction and gridlock,” Barasky said, alluding to the GOP primary challenge McConnell faces from Louisville investment manager Matt Bevin.