COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. – University of Colorado Colorado Springs Athletic Director Steve Kirkham accepted the resignation of Scott Peterson today as the Head Softball Coach. The team was notified today and his resignation will be effective immediately.

“I would like to thank Scott for his hard work and dedication to the Mountain Lions the last 15 seasons,” Kirkham said. “We wish him the best of success in his future endeavors.”

Peterson led UCCS to the NCAA tournament in 2004 after sweeping the RMAC regular season and tournament championships. He won more than 350 games and made eight conference tournament appearances since 2003. Peterson coached nine All-Americans and two Academic All-Americans.

“This has been a difficult decision, but one our entire family is excited about,” Peterson said. “The opportunity to work full time with our very successful family business is just too good to pass up. I have loved coaching this sport for so many years and it has been incredibly rewarding.

“We have recruited wonderful student-athletes at UCCS and that is what makes me the most proud. I would like to thank all of the coaches I have worked with at UCCS as well as my longtime assistant, Don Pettrow, for his tireless work to keep this program successful. In addition, having two former players on staff was very rewarding as they truly ‘gave back’ to the program. My wife Cathie has been just as important to this program as I feel I have been. She has seen every game over the past 15 years and knows every player and their parents, she has been very supportive, and she too is excited about our new adventure.

“Chancellor Shockley-Zalabak trusted me to be the first full-time Head Softball Coach at UCCS and I can't thank her enough. Dr. Glenn Williams was the person who was a true mentor and supported me to take on this position head on and I miss him terribly. He continues to support UCCS athletics from above. To all of the players, you have been awesome and I know our friendship will continue. We will stay right here in beautiful Colorado Springs and look forward to seeing the continued growth of UCCS.”

A national search will begin immediately.