Did you know that each time you wipe your butt, you are adding to the billions the Koch brothers make each year? Even if you tried to avoid these guys and their awful practices, its almost impossible due to everything they have their hands in.

Politics. It is rumored that David and Charles Koch combined contribute multi-millions of dollars to right wing, conservative, Tea Party agendas. Everything from anti-worker to funding a campaign that re-segregated high schools in North Carolina these brothers have attempted to buy their mark on American Politics.

Environment. The big part of the brother’s fortune comes from a giant network of both oil and gas pipelines. In particular, it has been stated that a big chunk of the damage caused by hurricane Katrina was at the fault of these specific pipelines and the marshlands surrounding the area. A lawsuit was filed against Koch Pipeline company for their part in the destruction of nearly 1 million acres, and for millions more acres that are dying.

Health Care. They spent millions trying to prevent the Affordable Care Act from going in to place.

These brothers are even anti-helping those who really need it. After hurricane Katrina, they lobbied lawmakers asking them not to help those whose homes were ruined in the storm. Their group, “Americans for Prosperity” approached lawmakers with their own agenda that would place limits on rate increases for insurance premiums and put limits on the actual flood insurance. So in a situation like hurricane Katrina, they not only destroyed the natural barriers that could have lessened the damage, but they also tried to limit the payout of those who really needed it once the storm left.

These guys have had a tremendous amount of success and more power to them for being successful. One would only wish they would put some of that financial success to serve less hateful causes. You know it’s bad when they attempt to give a hospital $100 million dollars and the NAACP, Nurses Association and Working Families Parties all protest.

Trying to boycott them if you disagree with their politics, is extremely difficult because their parent company owns everything from several brands of paper products and Dixie cups to the pipelines that carry oil and natural gas we use. They make fibers and spandex and have cattle ranches. They produce fertilizer and yes, even the toilet paper we wipe our butts with. That is how I am going to choose to look at my contribution to their wealth. Instead of thinking of it as putting money into their pockets to fuel their evil, I am choosing to wipe my butt all over their ideals instead.

Some of their brands are listed in the image below