Tim Sloan / Associated Press President Obama during the 2013 State of the Union.

President Barack Obama is set to make his State of the Union address on Tuesday evening, his second since winning re-election. We’ll carry the speech in full on an NBC News Special Report beginning at 9 p.m. ET and anchored by NBC's Brian Williams, along with live analysis and reaction immediately after.

Consider this your official guide to follow, fan, like, and participate in our NBC News State of the Union coverage, both on–air and away from the television.

On-air

NBC News will provide complete coverage and analysis of President Obama’s State of the Union address to Congress on Jan. 28, starting at 9 p.m. ET, and including the Republican response from Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers (R.--Wash.) immediately after. We'll also include some of the best #NBCPolitics tweets on-air.

NBCNews.com and Zeebox

NBCNews.com will live stream (bookmark this link) our entire State of the Union coverage on the web, mobile and tablet, including arrivals beginning at 8:40 p.m. ET to be followed by the Special Report. We’ll also offer slideshows, analysis and a curated view of social media reaction from NBC News political personnel and more at NBCNews.com.

In addition, NBC News has partnered with Zeebox to create a unique “Vote with the Nation” sentiment meter during the entire speech. It’s a simple process: hit thumbs up if you agree with the President and thumbs down if you disagree. We’ll be tracking the highs and lows throughout the speech and will reveal the biggest moments after. You can also partake in State of the Union trivia, NBC/WSJ polling and watch real-time analysis from NBC correspondents. Visit Zeebox on the web, or download the Zeebox app today.

Twitter

Viewers can be a part of the State of the Union experience on Twitter by following and joining the conversation using the #NBCPolitics hashtag and following @NBCNews for curated analysis from all of our political analysts. If you’d like, we’ve also created a “State of the Union” Twitter list to make your experience even easier to enjoy:

Facebook

Turn to NBC News and NBC Politics on Facebook for a live stream of State of the Union coverage, in addition to highlights, polls, photos, analysis and more.

This story was originally published on