I can’t decide which is more telling about last week’s health care train wreck in Nashville:

1. The fact that Gov. Bill Haslam stood by for two years, allowing Obamacare bogeymen to fan flames of distrust in everything associated with the White House, and then thought he could sweep in and change everybody’s mind through a special legislative session?

Or —

2. The fact that six of the seven Republican senators who killed Insure Tennessee in committee, denying health coverage to 280,000 low-income citizens, are — ta-da! — conveniently enrolled in the state’s medical insurance plan?

If it’s No. 1, Hizzoner needs a refresher course in Politics 101.

Right or wrong, you can’t be “agin” something and then suddenly be “fer” it. At least you do at your own peril.

Perception too often is reality. It doesn’t matter that Insure Tennessee differed from the federal Affordable Care Act; what matters is that opponents of both linked them like blood brothers.

The resulting face-slap for Mr. Haslam: Ye reap what ye sow.

If the answer is No. 2, it reinforces the image of sleazy politicians of all stripes: I got mine; screw you.

But hold on; it gets worse. This vote to shaft part-time workers came from people who are part-time employees of the state themselves!

However you cut it, here was a despicable display of 100-proof, middle-finger politics.

It is doubly — not to mention tragically — ironic that just days after the poor were cast aside, hundreds of needy Tennesseans flocked to Chilhowee Park for treatment by Stan Brock’s Remote Area Medical teams.

Let that sink in.

Brock (yes, the same man who earned fame on the “Wild Kingdom” TV series and has dedicated his life and fortune to humanitarian causes) established RAM to bring health care to isolated communities. It is both shameful and embarrassing that many of these “isolated communities” lie in the center of Southern Appalachian cities today.

Oh, well. Perhaps something positive will rise from the ashes of this dumpster fire. I’d like to think there will be enough adverse reaction to right this wrong somewhere down the pike. Maybe there’s a way to bridge the gap.

But you never know. Radicals take great pride in cutting off their noses to spite their faces.

In the meantime, life goes on.

The low-income and disfranchised will continue to worry about staying well.

And down at the legislative country club, they’ll keep worrying about the condition of the putting greens.

Party on.

Sam Venable’s column appears Sunday and Thursday. He may be reached at sam.venable@outlook.com.