Loveland Boys and Girls Club junior staff member Sydney Miller, right, chats with Marcus Aguilar-Pauli, 10, and Makaila Lopez, 7, as they color together Wednesday in the club's art room. Miller has been selected as Loveland Youth of the Year for 2015. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Eighteen-year-old Sydney Miller originally went to the Loveland Boys & Girls Club to have somewhere to go after school while her parents worked.

And now she doesn't want to leave.

Miller, a 12th-grader at New Vision Charter School, will have until the end of the summer to go to the clubhouse before she starts college.

"Everyone has that place they consider their second home. For some, it's the gym, school or their best friend's house. Mine is the Boys & Girls Club," Miller said in the speech she wrote for the Loveland Youth of the Year contest that monthly winners can enter based on essays and speeches they write and their volunteerism and involvement in the club.

Miller, a member of the club for six years and a junior staff member, has been selected as Youth of the Month six times in five years and as the Loveland Youth of the Year for the 2014-15 school year. She competed before three judges Jan. 13, against one other applicant in the senior category for youth ages 14 to 18; there were three entries in the junior category for youth 13 and younger.

The Wellington and Fort Collins clubs also have Youths of the Year, and a Larimer County Youth of the Year for all three clubs will be announced at the 2015 Youth of the Year Breakfast on Feb. 5.

"The judges thought she did a really good job conveying what the benefits of being a club member are," said Kathi Wright, executive director of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Larimer County.

The Speech

In her speech, Miller said the Loveland Boys & Girls Club helped her with her confidence, leadership and job skills. She participated in the club's Smart Girls, Girls Group and Not-a-Hater groups, where she learned about building relationships, making good choices and accepting others. She served in two leadership groups as vice-president of Torch and president of Keystone for almost three years . And she was on the Boys & Girls Clubs of Larimer County's board of directors in 2013.

"She's consistently acted like a role model while she was here," said Christy Doyon, unit director of the Loveland Boys & Girls Club. "She is a good listener. She listens to what her peers have to say, and she cares quite a bit. She wants to do a good job, and she wants her peers to do a good job."

Miller participated in community service projects, such as highway cleanups, spending time with residents in an Alzheimer's and dementia home and teaming up with a suicide prevention center to educate students about depression and suicide.

"I feel a lot more confident. I never thought I'd be this confident to do all this," Miller said.

Before she joined the club, Miller said she was shy in elementary school, spending time alone reading or drawing. She was bullied, insulted and beat up after school, and recalled being teased. To escape the bullying, she changed schools in fourth grade to attend New Vision Charter School, where she tried to fit in by wearing makeup, straightening her hair and wearing whatever was popular, she said in her speech.

"I wanted to make sure I had friends. I didn't want to be alone anymore," Miller said in her speech.

The Benefits of the Club

Miller started developing friendships at the Boys & Girls Club, which is next door to the school

"I made a lot of friends here," Miller said. "I'm confident being myself here. ... Everyone is so friendly and welcoming."

Miller said the staff helped her, too, "on everything from homework to if that cute boy likes me," as she said in her speech. "They didn't help me just with my problems though; they also helped me recognize my value and self worth. They taught me to love myself and not be afraid to show my weird and quirky side. ... They created a safe and amazing place for me to express myself and my ideas without fear."

Through the club, Miller learned she has a passion for computers and technology. She plans to attend Red Rocks Community College in Denver to earn an associate's of applied science degree in video game development.

"For me, it's a giant puzzle, and I get to put it together to make it into something awesome that other kids are going to want to play," Miller said.

The state level Youth of the Year competition will be March 23. Regional and national competitions will follow.

"It feels like all the work I put in the club didn't go unnoticed, and I felt appreciated. It made me very, very happy," Miller said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm