Adrian Peterson wants out of Minnesota. What began as speculation grew roots when his agent became engaged in a shouting match with Vikings representatives at the NFL combine. An uneasy relationship became exposed and crawls toward divorce.

The Vikings continue to maintain that Peterson can return and anchor their offense. That is hard to envision. These types of feuds don’t end well. Peterson met with commissioner Roger Goodell in New York this week to seek reinstatement. Peterson deserves the right to work and is seeking a new chance in a new city. That is reasonable. What is not is the explanation. Peterson doesn’t believe the Vikings showed enough support after the allegations surfaced that he excessively disciplined his son.

If ever a situation presented itself not to play the victim, this is it. There is a victim in this case: his son. The Vikings made a decision based on business and values. Punishing a child is viewed differently across the United States, cutting across geographical lines. What Peterson said was a learned behavior was not seen this way in the state of Minnesota.

When major sponsor Radisson pulled its sponsorship of the Vikings, Peterson wasn’t returning to the field. Minnesota turned to the league and Peterson landed on the commissioner’s list, an unknown trapdoor that opened as the league embarrassingly scrambled to deal with issues of violence last season.

Peterson stewed in disbelief. It stung, no doubt. He deserved the right to appeal during the season. But it was a league matter at that point, not the Vikings’ problem. And did I mention that Minnesota paid him last season? Peterson can’t throw his hands in the air with the “woe is me” attitude when he never missed a check. The reality of the situation is that the NFL lacks credibility when disciplining players. It is the definition of arbitrary. Don’t try to find logic over the past 18 months, because it’s absent.

Peterson, of course, can take exception, can be upset. But ultimately he put himself in this position. It was never the Vikings’ responsibility to rationalize his behavior. They can show compassion without understanding and tried to walk a jagged line.

Which brings us back to Peterson. Let him go. He desires an exit. Minnesota should grant his wish. It won’t be easy in a league where every good team has a solid running back but no club wants to pay a premium for one. Where he will play is a mystery, because the Vikings don’t want to give him away. The Cowboys, Cardinals and Jaguars all make sense.

It is the irony of the situation. Peterson played the victim, making it difficult to trade him. Other teams are wise. They will wait until the Vikings blink, knowing that Peterson could threaten to hold out. I wonder if the Vikings are upset that Peterson didn’t show them respect when they didn’t cut him or bury him in the press. It’s a two-way street.

Peterson deserves a fresh start. But he needs a fresh outlook: Humility would serve him well. Footnotes. The Broncos’ players can’t hide their delight in the defensive switch to a 3-4 alignment. T.J. Ward told me what others are thinking: Last year’s defense was too vanilla. Wade Phillips is old in years, but young in vision. If he doesn’t turn this defense into a frothing pack of blitzers, it will be a surprise. … Last week, the Broncos worked out CSU-Pueblo defensive lineman Josh Bredl, a former high school star at Horizon. Bredl might not make it, but it’s latest sign of how powerful the Thunderwolves’ program has become. CSU-Pueblo quarterback Chris Bonner has a chance to get drafted.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck