Entrepreneur Sanjay Singh and his company hCentive built health insurance exchanges in several states, as well as the federal small business exchange SHOP. (Photo: Jack Gruber, USA TODAY)

RESTON, Va. — As a software engineer in this outer suburb of Washington, Sanjay Singh was literally and figuratively outside the Beltway in 2008 when the Affordable Care Act was finalized on Capitol Hill.

That didn't matter to the self-described "public policy geek." He pored over the Senate Finance Committee's markup of the legislation and sat riveted in front of C-Span during the Senate markup of the health law.

Where others read and heard mind-numbing bureaucratese, Singh saw a business opportunity. As he heard how health care would be sold on state marketplaces, he saw the potential that lurked in setting up these exchanges.

Six years later, a guy who made less than $200 a month in 1991 writing software code in India has a company with multimillion-dollar contracts with Massachusetts for its insurance marketplace and the federal government to run the Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) exchange. Last year, hCentive helped launch the successful, largely glitch-free exchanges in New York, Kentucky and Colorado — and its software continues to power them.

When ACA open enrollment started Oct. 1 last year, "everyone went to HealthCare.gov to see what it looked like," says Singh, 47. When they couldn't get on or found glitches, "the people working on that were making news. This time around, we don't want to be making news."

Singh is OK with this article, however, as he's among 10 finalists for USA TODAY's Entrepreneur of the Year. A winner will be selected in December.

"The role we are playing ... has become central to the success of the ACA," says Singh, a soft-spoken, slightly built man. He's right. As anyone who followed the tumultuous rollout of the federal insurance exchange, HealthCare.gov, last year knows, getting the sites to run can be synonymous with getting people health care.

Singh remembers hearing a woman call into an NPR show telling the story of her son, who had a pre-existing medical condition and never had been able to get insurance until the ACA. "Once it went live, she was desperately trying to sign up, but because of the glitches, she could not complete the application,'' Singh says.

She was on hold so long for the call center that it drained her cellphone battery, and she said she felt like her son's health was slipping out of her hands.

Singh reminds his employees of stories such as that to emphasize "how important this work is" when they spend evenings and weekends on the job.

The HealthCare.gov website. (Photo: Don Ryan, AP)

For the federal and state sites his company works on, hCentive can provide regulators with a "workaround ... that can literally mean life or death," Singh says.

Massachusetts had enacted its own health care program long before last fall. When it tried to meld its site, the ACA provisions and a state subsidy program, the results were so miserable everyone had to sign up on paper.

Singh says being chosen to overhaul that site was the company's biggest honor since Massachusetts was supposed to be the shining example of health care change. When it was announced, "I was almost crying," Singh says.

Singh not only believes in his technology but the law it supports, says Maydad Cohen, who is in charge of Massachusetts Health Connect. When a "triage meeting" was needed for the site, Cohen says, Singh not only came to the meeting, he was involved in the IT discussions.

Vas Bhandarkar, who was on the board of Singh's former software product outsourcing company, GlobalLogic, says the company needed to boost profits several years ago. "Most CEOs and most presidents would immediately bring their scalping pen and knife," Bhandarkar says. "Singh instead used technology to add customers without adding or firing people." The company was sold to a private equity firm last year for $430 million.

Singh says he has learned big lessons from his years as an entrepreneur. One is to quit your day job. "If you cling to your current job as a safety net and do the start-up on the side, you are almost guaranteed to fail," he says.

It's "too hard to do it alone," he says. Start with a team of two or three people you can trust who are like-minded and have complementary skills to improve your chance of success. He recommends "being nimble" and recognizing that quick adjustments will be needed.

hCentive's growth potential extends far beyond government work. Along with five government clients, hCentive has more than 10 insurance industry clients.

Manoj Agarwala, hCentive's president, has worked with Singh since the two toiled as low-paid software engineers in India. He says the two believed they could "start from a level playing field" and compete with far bigger players on exchanges.

"We bet on this idea, but ideas are a dime a dozen," Agarwala says. "What matters is how well you execute them."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1CEYTeX