M.Scott Mahaskey/POLITICO Obamacare's first tax season So far, all is quiet as the 'individual mandate’ finally kicks in.

Obamacare’s first tax season includes all the elements needed to ignite a political firestorm. Yet with only days to go until the filing deadline, nothing’s burning.

Americans are reckoning for the first time with the most unpopular part of the law — the individual mandate — and having to prove they’ve had health insurance or to cough up a penalty. As they’ve done their taxes, many people have learned they owe money because they underestimated income when buying subsidized coverage in 2014. Some have had to delay their returns because the government in February sent an inaccurate form on their subsidy total.

Story Continued Below

There’s been no real uproar, though. Beyond a short-lived flare of criticism after HHS acknowledged those inaccurate subsidy forms, conservatives who might have been expected to keep piling on have stayed relatively silent. Press releases protesting the mandate penalty have been few.

Obamacare’s impact on the tax season hasn’t been mentioned even a single time this year by Washington’s major Sunday morning talk shows or in the weekly Republican address.

“I’ve been surprised how quiet it’s been in the political realm,” said Larry Levitt, senior vice president for special initiatives at the Kaiser Family Foundation. Although advocates feared a reprise of the anger that followed cancellation of many pre-Obamacare policies in fall 2013, “that really hasn’t happened.”

It helps that the Affordable Care Act’s initial penalty is fairly modest — $95 or 1 percent of an individual’s income, whichever is larger. And ACA allies have been preparing consumers for months — for what they could face for being uninsured last year or for underestimating their income when applying for coverage. That took a lot of the surprise out of tax season, unlike the very unexpected jolt of those 2013 plan cancellations.

As for people who got caught up in the erroneous forms mess, the IRS granted some individuals dispensation from refiling and others more time to send in their return. HHS also opened a six-week special enrollment period to give still-uninsured consumers even more time to avoid next year’s much larger penalty.

But like other tax details related to Obamacare this year, the extra sign-up window isn’t drawing much attention. Only 36,000 people had enrolled through HealthCare.gov as of last week, CMS said — a fraction of the 4 million who the Congressional Budget Office estimates will pay the mandate penalty for 2014. (Enrollment could suddenly spike, of course, as procrastinators at last finish their taxes or as the special period comes to a close April 30 .)

That’s not to say certain individuals haven’t had ACA problems, and they could have a spotlight this week when a House Ways and Means subcommittee holds a hearing on both the law’s individual and employer mandate.

Tax preparers say the filing season has definitely been more complicated because of the health coverage provisions. The most vexing issue: Helping the filers who underestimated how much they would earn annually when they first bought subsidized insurance on the exchanges, triggering a larger premium credit than they should have received.

They now have to reimburse the government for those overpayments, usually in the form of a smaller tax refund. An H&R Block study in February found that more than half of Obamacare enrollees would have to pay back some of their subsidy, although a Treasury Department official said most will still get a tax refund.

Jennifer MacMillan, a California-based tax professional credentialed by IRS, said one of her clients owes about $11,000 because he qualified for a large subsidy when he first enrolled, then got a promotion at work and received a raise that pushed him over the subsidy-eligible threshold.

“The ones that are rough are really rough. If anybody’s got a weird situation and they went through one of the marketplaces, it’s been a nightmare,” MacMillan said. “Human nature is, get the best deal you can. If you’re just filling out a form on the computer that determines how much your premium’s going to be, living in hope, you’re going to go for the lower number. All those people got trapped and didn’t realize they were going to have these consequences.”

Reaction to both the mandate penalty and the reconciliation process has been mixed. Levitt worries that people who have trouble repaying too-large subsidies will be deterred from signing up for future coverage.

“The reality is most people don’t understand their tax return. They just look at the bottom number,” said Elizabeth Colvin, whose organization, Foundation Communities, offers enrollment assistance and runs a volunteer tax preparation site in Texas. “If it’s different from what they expected or what they got in previous years…they’re sort of blaming Obamacare.”

But others are jumping at the extra opportunity to enroll in coverage and avoid a penalty in 2015. Juanita Mainster, an insurance navigator with the Epilepsy Foundation of Florida who works at a volunteer tax site in Miami-Dade County, estimated that 90 percent of the uninsured filers she’d encountered were doing so.

“When you’re sitting here with the tax preparer and they’re saying, ‘Well, now you have to pay a penalty because you didn’t maintain coverage, and this is the amount of the penalty,’ it’s a shock to them,” Mainster said. “They’re just very grateful to have the opportunity to have a navigator present to assist them so they don’t have to go somewhere else.”

Tax preparers and enrollment assisters say they expect the situation to improve next year, as both consumers and preparers adjust to Obamacare’s requirements. Several characterized this season’s issues as “growing pains.”

Still, next year’s penalty will be much steeper, the bigger of $325 or 2 percent of income. And that could give consumers, and certainly policymakers and 2016 presidential candidates, new reason to complain.