Democrat Harry Reid, the current Senate Minority Leader, has announced he will not seek re-election when his term expires in 2016. After nearly 30 years in the Senate, Reid has established quite a legacy for his efforts in advancing liberal ideology. Here are four of his progressive accomplishments:

1. Health Care

The Affordable Care Act may be better known as Obamacare, but the law could just as easily have received a Harry Reid nickname as well. The senator made passing the health care bill a top priority and negotiated with politicians on both sides of the aisle to ensure it would have enough votes to pass. According to political analysts, it’s no exaggeration to say that the legislation was unlikely to pass without Reid’s efforts.

Reid himself called the ACA “the most important thing we’ve done for the country.” Although the Republican Party still threatens to dismantle Obamacare, getting it passed in the first place was the real trick. Now that Americans have had the opportunity to see that expanding access to medical insurance to those who previously could not afford or qualify for it is hardly the evil idea it was rumored to be, Republicans will have a much harder time getting rid of something that’s wound up being fairly popular amongst citizens.

2. Downgrading the Filibuster

With partisanship running strong in the Senate, Reid grew tired of the incessant filibustering that blocked the legislative body from accomplishing even the most routine of tasks. In order to minimize future obstructions, Reid helmed a controversial decision to change the way presidential appointments and judicial nominees are approved. Now, rather than needing a hard-to-obtain 60 votes to get approved, a simple majority is all it takes.

Republicans called Reid’s change a “power grab,” but it’s a rule that they now benefit from since Republicans now have the majority in the Senate. Pointless posturing over appointees just leaves important federal jobs unfilled. It’s a way of reducing the gridlock and saving the filibustering for issues that really matter.

3. Reproductive Issues… in a Roundabout Way

While most Democrats support a woman’s right to choose, Reid actually considers himself “pro-life.” Unlike most politicians who oppose abortion, however, he’s not anti-woman’s reproductive health altogether. It’s crazy when the same people who gripe about abortions also vote to block birth control, sex education and other ideas that would help women avoid having unwanted pregnancies in the first place.

In 2006, Reid teamed with (then) Senator Hillary Clinton to launch the Prevention First Amendment. The law acknowledged that people on both sides of the abortion debate have deeply held convictions, and called on the government to put forward more money to expand access to family planning programs and emergency contraception

He may not be pro-choice, but at least Reid is a man who understands that decreasing abortion means starting to eliminate the reasons women have abortions. His 92 percent approval rating from Planned Parenthood proves that a politician can have personal objections to abortions and still not be a jerk when it comes to reproductive health.

4. Environment

When it comes to the environment, Reid has never waivered, earning a perfect score from the League of Conservation Voters. He may not be the most vocal politician on this issue, but that doesn’t stop him from always doing the right thing.

Reid’s office includes three energy/environmental staffers so that he can help safeguard the EPA’s powers. He’s voted to close coal plants, protect public lands, maintain clean water, slow the effects of climate change, and even give extra consideration to endangered species. The planet will miss having his consistent vote, un-swayed by private interests.

Photo Credit: Korean Resource Center