Topics: Body Image, Body Wars, Builimia, dogs, Eating Disorders, Editor's Picks, Life stories, Noble Beasts, Rescue dogs, Life News

When I was a small child, I would roar and meow and quack and moo. My father, years before alcoholism destroyed him, would film me while I got on my hands and knees and pretended to be a dog or beat my chest like a monkey or puckered my lips like a fish – without self-conscious reservation. I wanted to be Jane Goodall when I grew up. Near my bed, I kept a picture of her touching the fingertips of a chimp. On my shelves, I kept all her books. No one called me crazy.

I never dreamed of growing up to become a rock-bottom bulimic, a person swallowed by a ceaseless desire to fill up and get empty. But I suppose the only future in a child’s dream is a good one.

When I first stuck my hands down my throat at 17, I wanted to lose some weight. Animals couldn’t make the guys I liked like me back. Animals couldn’t make me fit in with the popular girls. Animals couldn’t keep my father sober. Animals couldn’t give me the things I needed to be OK.

I believed power and love accompanied a thinner body. But the things you believe can be a choke chain. They can steal from your dreams, your dignity, your ability to care for yourself and others.

What you believe can steal your life.

—-

When I was 18, I participated in a homemade bikini contest in Springfield, Mass., dead sober, at a club called, strangely enough, the Hippodrome. My best friend Alicia was doing this contest, and in my eyes she had the perfect body, the perfect face, the perfect style. I wanted to be just like her, so when asked to sign up, I didn’t flinch.

The emcee introduced Alicia as “One Yummy Treat,” and she strutted on-stage in front of a crowd of a hundred club-goers, with just a few Reese’s Pieces wrappers taped to her naked body. She doused herself in whipped cream, squatted down and smacked the floor with her hands. The audience went wild and panic came over me. I was wearing two cupcake wrappers taped over my nipples and one over my crotch, nothing covering my ass. My legs, freshly shaven and covered in oil to make them glisten under the spotlight, wouldn’t move.

“Birthday Surprise,” the emcee called, and a woman tapped me on the shoulder and said, “You’re up.”

The stage vibrated beneath my feet while speakers boomed Juvenile’s “Back That Azz Up.” Pink and blue lights beamed like lasers around the room, and the crowd whistled and hooted, and the louder the crowd became, the more their desire exhilarated me, the more I could grind and shake my ass.

I came in second. I beat the girl who wore just a garden hose over her body and a sunflower in her hair. I beat the one covered in liquefied chocolate, and I was thrilled. I went back to the prop room beaming with pride. Looking good, without a doubt, was worth it.

The prop room was small and dimly lit, filled with piles of fake flowers, glitter, whipped cream cans and pinwheels. While I unpeeled the cupcake wrappers from my body to get dressed, a colony of black ants swarmed around some cake crumbs in the corner of the room. Other girls took shots and pictures, put their six-inch heels back on. I watched a dozen inky black specks trek in a single file line with cake crumbs on their backs. They disappeared and reemerged from a small hole in the wall, focused only on their mission, clueless about their fragility, how they could drown in a wad of spit or be smashed by a finger in two seconds. They didn’t have wings, just wiry legs carrying them in and out of the darkness.

Where were the ants putting these crumbs? And why were they always in search of more?

When I think back to the girl in that prop room, I wish I could tell her to find stable ground, to stay away from anything that told her the size of her body mattered, whether in a magazine or in a crowd of throbbing dicks and clapping hands at the Hippodrome or anywhere in the known world. I wish I could tell her to stay close to things she loved. Find joy, I would say. Feel alive.

But I didn’t know how. My father drowned in seas of vodka and denial. I stuck my fingers down my throat and reached all the way to my heart and tried to yank it out. I didn’t know that the dark hole in my life was deep inside me, an endless urge for more. I didn’t know that in five years I would be hospitalized and living in a rehab center with women who were too thin to walk and only allowed themselves to eat things like computer paper and carrots. I didn’t know that I would wake up with raw knuckles, bloodshot eyes and the feeling that my throat was on fire, and that would be normal. For eight years, I grew sicker and sicker until I was vomiting up to 20 times a night.

Every morning, I believed I could make a choice to be sane around food and eat like a normal person. I believed I could make a choice not to lie or hurt the people I loved. I vowed to do better, for my mother, for my sister, for myself, but by noon those promises were in the toilet. My whole life was.

—-

When I was 25 and two years out of rehab, I worked in the marketing department for a local humane society. During the night I would gorge and vomit and self-loathe, and during the day I would escape from my desk to be with homeless pit bulls, labs, poodles, chihuahuas and mutts of every kind.

There, somehow, I could face the truth: I was hungry for more than food. I was hungry for the world to work according to my rules. Hungry not to feel pain, discomfort, fear. Hungry, as a person is, to be wanted and liked. As much as I claimed I wanted to get better, I was afraid of going back to rehab, afraid of change, afraid of accepting how powerless around food I’d become. I hungered for the familiar, even if it was sick.

Part of my job was to put adoptable animals on TV, to hold them while explaining their personality and needs to news anchors. One morning before the sun came up, the sky purple and the full moon still visible, I went to the oldest part of the humane society to retrieve a 5-month-old gray pit bull puppy. I wore jeans I couldn’t button, a wrinkled T-shirt and heavy make-up to cover the bags under my eyes. I’d slept only three hours, having emptied my kitchen of all things drenched in sugar and salt. I had gorged and vomited all night.

Concrete kennels with metal bars lined the outdoors, and the puppy scheduled for TV trembled in the back corner of her pen. No one was around this early in the morning, and I unlocked her door, entering her space. The heavy metal clanked shut behind me. The dogs all around us wailed and cried and lunged at the bars. I squatted down low and plugged my ears from the noise, prepared to wait however long it took for the dog to feel comfortable, to decide I was safe. Sometimes, they never did.

After a minute or so, however, she approached. She was tentative, cautious. Her floppy ears moved back and forth like antennas. Her short, stocky body was more plump than muscular. She probably weighed 40 pounds.