Both boys, girls finish in fourth

Brush junior Clay Shaver rounds the turn in the boys 4x200 meter relay at the Strasburg Indian Invite. The relay was one of two events Brush took first place in, and both Beetdiggers boys and girls team scored a team high in points at the meet on Saturday. (Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times)

STRASBURG — No meet records would be set by the Brush Beetdiggers track and field team at the Strasburg Indian Invite on Saturday, but both the boys and girls team turned in their best performances of the season at the meet.

Two relays would take first place for the Beetdiggers, one for each team. The 4x200 meter relay secured the fastest time to score 10 team points for the boys, as did the 4x400 meter relay team for the girls.

Junior Tristan Volk broke the previous meet record in discus with a throw of 141 feet and six inches to finish in second place, and added a third place finish in shot put to score in the field events for the boys. Junior Kaitlyn Hernandez also scored in both throw events for the girls team, taking second place in discus and eighth place in shot put. Also scoring in girls discus for the Beetdiggers was junior Cali Bills, who came in fourth.

The big story for Brush was placing in 16 separate track events in Strasburg, including a total of eight relays. In the girls 4x800 meter relay, Brush came in second, and the girls 800 sprint medley relay grabbed third place. Taking second in relays for the Brush boys was the 4x200 meter relay, and the 4x100 meter relay for the Beediggers secured third place to give Brush six relays that placed in the top 3.

Three individuals also placed in the top 3 on the track for Brush. Junior Faith Bowen was the highest placing individual for the Brush girls on the track with her second place finish in the 800 meter run. Senior Cameron Alexander took second place for the Brush boys in the 400 meter dash, and senior Mario Sanchez came in third in the 100 meter dash.

Advertisement

With a time of 23.50, junior Clay Shaver scored for the Brush boys by finishing fourth in the 200 meter dash. Sophomore Molly Link also placed in the 800 meter run with Bowen, taking fifth place. Two Beetdiggers would place in the top 5 in the girls 3,200 meter run, led by junior Kaelyn Arujo-Vuittonet, who came in fifth, and following up right behind her for sixth place was freshman Ashley Hinojos.

Alexander help grab some more team points for the Brush boys with his sixth place finish in the 800 meter run, clocking in at 2:11.43. The girls 4x100 meter relay came in sixth place, giving the Beetdiggers 17 total events that the team placed in the top 6.

Three more events saw Brush grab one final team point by coming in eighth place. The eighth relay that scored for the Beetdiggers was the boys 4x800 meter relay.. Two distance runners scored a team point by coming in eighth place too, as Hinojos scored in her second event of the day in the girls 1,600 meter run, and sophomore Toby Uhrig came through in the boys 3,200 run to score a team point as well.

Both Brush teams would walk away with fourth place finishes. Leading the way was the boys team with 62 points, and the girls followed with 61. The two team totals were the highest number of points scored by the boys and girls team this season, as the Beetdiggers are now on a tear and turning in strong performances in the final month of the season.

This weekend, the Beetdiggers will hit the road to Keenesburg to compete at Sterling High School in the Patriot League Championships,giving the team another chance to compete against some of the schools they have seen all season long in competition while maintaining their recent success as a program.

Brandon Boles: 970-867-5651, sports@fmtimes.com & Twitter @FMT_Sports