Volunteers gathered Feb. 13 at New Life Community Church, the joint ministry of Luling United Methodist and First Union Presbyterian in Luling, to share love with nursing home residents. Volunteers made over 100 Valentine cards, then headed to visit Ashton, Ormond and Luling nursing homes to hand out the valentines and sweet treats. The children's tone chime choir also performed songs for residents.

Singers needed

The Community Chorus of the River Parishes is looking for new members to begin its 2015 spring season. The chorus, directed by Brian Martinez Jr., is open to all, from middle school age through adults.

Four concerts are usually performed each season, two each in December and April/May. Rehearsals are held on the second and fourth Thursdays of every

month, 7 to 9 p.m. at R. K. Smith Middle School, 281 Judge Edward Dufresne Parkway in Luling.

No auditions or previous experience necessary. For more information, call 985.652.0162 or email ccrpsings@gmail.com.

Headpieces win again

For several years, myself and a group of residents from Luling participate in the Muses parade in New Orleans. Our float did it again. We received second place for our headpieces. Last year, our group won first. The headpiece was in line with the theme, "Are You There, God? It's Us." The piece sat on blue wigged heads.

Membership drive

Luling residents are invited to join the St. Charles Council on Aging Inc. The annual general membership drive is being held in March. Membership is open to anyone 18 years old or older, residents of St. Charles Parish who are interested in the welfare of senior citizens. Membership is not required for citizens 60 and over to participate in the services provided by the Council. It is not necessary to renew membership each year. There is no fee. Membership applications are available at all senior activity centers and the administration office of the Council. For information, call 985.783.6683.

AARP free tax service

The AARP is offering free tax aide on Mondays and Fridays from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. at the West St. Charles Community Center in Luling. Participants need to bring their tax information and a copy of their home insurance declaration page. The report for the Affordable Care Act, documentation of Medicare or health insurance also are needed. For more information call 985.307.1447 or 985.785.6989.