Sunset Pool adds wheelchair lift, steps to aid disabled

Lyza Weisman,12, who has spinal muscle atrophy, swims in the water Saturday after being lowered by a special lift from her wheelchair into Sunset Pool. Weisman's father Ward walks at pools edge. ( DAVID R JENNINGS / Daily Camera )

In the water, 12-year-old Lyza Weisman moves easily. She walks and floats and stretches with pleasure, her wheelchair left behind for the moment.

In the water is freedom. Once she can get there.

But last summer at Sunset Pool, that was a bit of a challenge.

"I had six kids with me and checked them in, and then said 'Oh, if someone could help me with the chair?'" said Lyza's grandmother, Janet Mulay. " They said 'Oh, it's not handicapped-accessible.' I said 'You're kidding me.'"

No kidding. No chair lift. No way in.

And now, no longer a problem.

This season, Sunset Pool has a brand-new wheelchair lift along with a set of "transition stairs" to help people in and out who can't use a ladder. Longmont recreation director Jeff Friesner said the changes are part of an overall Americans with Disabilities Act upgrade taking place over the next few years.

The stairs had already been part of the redesign, he said, but the lift — installed in the first week of June — was worked in after discussions with Mulay.

"These are things we can do that help people use a very popular pool during the summer months," Friesner said. The Longmont Recreation Center already has a lift but, he said, on a beautiful day, swimming outside is simply more fun.

The roots of the upgrade go back to 2010, when some changes to the ADA went through, including new requirements for pools, playgrounds and other recreational areas. For example, a pool that's more than 300 feet around — like Sunset — would have to have at least two different ways to get in and out.

The city estimates the total list of changes at about $5 million. But it doesn't all have to be done at once. As a first step, Friesner said, the city is getting ready to upgrade playgrounds in each quarter of the city "so if you live in the south part of town, you don't have to drive to the north side to have a playground you can use."

Design is scheduled to begin this year on playgrounds in seven city parks: Lanyon, Spangler, Affolter, Dawson, Raber, Rothrock Dell and Kensington North. An ADA playground replacement at Kensington South was finished this year.

The new lift and steps at Sunset come to about $18,000. Friesner said there's still one more upgrade he'd like to make there when possible: removing a slope from the parking lot.

"It's not flat enough," he said. "If somebody gets out of their car and into a wheelchair, they may roll before they're ready."

For now, though, Lyza and her family are thrilled. She has tried out the lift already, she said, and it works perfectly.

Now she just has to get used to the other idiosyncracies of an outdoor pool. Like the water temperature.

"I was freezing!" she laughed. "But it was good. It was very nice to be able to get in."

Contact Times-Call staff writer Scott Rochat at 303-684-5220 or srochat@times-call.com