The supply potential of the U.S. has been hampered by a shrinking labor force. Britain might have some lessons on how to fix that.

As Barack Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers notes in the latest Economic Report of the President, growth and unemployment have looked broadly similar in the two countries. But whereas the decline in U.S. unemployment owes a lot to a shrinking labor force, the opposite has happened in Britain: Its participation rate–the share of the population either working or looking for work–has been stable or risen slightly since 2008 (depending on the age group). In the United States, it has dropped sharply.

This isn’t because of superior demographics. Britain’s population is aging, just like that in the United States. In fact, the participation rate would have dropped roughly a percentage point based on aging alone, the Bank of England estimates.

Mark Carney, the bank’s governor, says it rose for several reasons. One is that in Britain, like in the United States, many people who might have retired saw their wealth shrivel up during the crisis and had to keep working.

But two factors are unique to Britain.

First, in 2010 the earliest age at which women can claim a government pension—the equivalent of U.S. Social Security—began rising from 60 to 65 to match the age for men, and the default retirement age has been abolished. This has kept both older working women and their husbands in the work force longer.

Second, the safety net was reformed in 2010, requiring some welfare recipients–such as single mothers with older children–to apply for jobless benefits instead, which requires them to look for work. One study found that the participation rate of people affected by the changes rose by eight to nine percentage points.

In the United States, changes to the safety net may push in the opposite direction. The introduction of the Affordable Care Act, and the expansion of some existing means-tested credits such as for children and higher education, increased disincentives for those on lower incomes to work, since the benefits shrink as wages rise. This creates a very high implicit tax rate. It also means some people who had to work to get health insurance may no longer, because they can get insurance through the ACA. This happened too recently to explain much, if any, of the decline in participation, but will be more of a factor in coming years. In addition, the fiscal cliff deal raised the top marginal income tax rate and lowered the level at which several middle-class tax breaks phase out, raising their marginal tax rates and at the margin discouraging work.

The full retirement age for Social Security in the U.S. has been steadily rising under changes passed in 1983, and will eventually reach 67 for those born in 1960 or later. But most workers retire early and claim a reduced benefit. The average age of people claiming Social Security for the first time in 2013 was 64.3. Mr. Obama was at one point prepared to consider raising the retirement age of Medicare to match that of Social Security, but has since abandoned that position. Republicans have supported the idea in the past, but that support has wavered recently.

Another source of declining participation in the United States is disability insurance. Five percent of the adult population now collects it, compared with 3% in 1995. Recipients generally lose their benefits if they earn more than a token amount, so there is a strong disincentive to leaving the program. If recipients were regularly reevaluated and required to look for a job if they had some capability of working, that would slow the intake into the program and encourage some to leave. But Mr. Obama has yet to advance any proposals for reforming disability, other than to propose shifting some of the funds in the old-age security fund to the disability fund so that the latter doesn’t go bust next year.

The British experience hasn’t been all positive. Wages, adjusted for inflation, have fallen there, as has productivity. Precisely why remains a mystery, but one theory is that the increased supply of workers held down wages and encouraged employers to substitute labor for equipment. Many of the jobs created there have been part time.

Nonetheless, once people have returned to the labor force, they develop the formal and informal skills needed to stay there and in time become more productive and better paid. Britain has thus dealt with its labor supply challenge better than the U.S., and the U.S. should take notice.

Related reading:

Capital Account: Economy’s Supply Side Sputters

The U.S. Economy According to the White House in 10 Charts

White House Sees Workforce as Best Bet to Tackle Deficits

White House Growth Proposals at a Glance