It’s hard to beat the mission statement of China’s Tian Ge Interactive Holdings Ltd., which has raised roughly $194 million in a Hong Kong initial public offering and is set to begin trading on Wednesday.

“Our mission is to bring optimism and joy to the masses through live social video interaction,” the company’s prospectus begins.

That message seems to have inspired investors in the online video company. High demand for the online social video company’s stock helped its IPO price at HK$5.28 per share, the high end of its range of $4.50 to $5.30 per share.

A woman uses a computer in an internet cafe at the center of Shanghai. Reuters

What’s to like about Tian Ge? The company’s live social video platforms offer investors access to a population of consumers who are interested in—and interested in spending money on—interacting with each other online. Tian Ge users join massive live video chatrooms to participate in, or simply watch, a range of activities, from musical performances to lectures, karaoke and birthday parties. It’s a bit like a monetized version of Google Hangouts.

Tian Ge makes money off of virtual currency it and its distributors sell to users, and which the users spend on virtual gifts, which they grant to each other and chatroom hosts as “tokens of support or appreciation,” according to Tian Ge’s prospectus.

This rather unusual business model was brought about by trends in Chinese urbanization, in which “millions of people in China have moved to new environments with fast-paced lifestyles and a lack of established social networks,” and thus seek communities online, the company’s prospectus notes. What Tian Ge calls “the social impact of a multi-decade single child policy” and high Internet penetration rates have also helped spur the trend. China’s “live social video community industry” has grown from 220 million yuan in 2009 to 3.8 billion yuan in 2013 and is projected to grow to 13.3 billion yuan ($2.14 billion) in 2017, the prospectus states.

Another Chinese company with a somewhat similar line of business to Tian Ge, YY Inc., has been an investor favorite since listing on Nasdaq at the end of 2012: YY’s stock value has more than quintupled since its IPO and the company is presently valued at more than US$4 billion.

One potential cloud on Tian Ge’s horizon, however, is China’s ongoing “Clean the Web 2014” campaign against pornographic content online, which has hit the stock of internet companies like Sina Corp. While Tiange notes it hasn’t been affected by the campaign so far, it cautions that it “cannot assure you the PRC regulatory authorities will not deem us as facilitating the transmission of pornographic or other illegal information.”