SPRINGFIELD - Baystate Health in Springfield and UMass Memorial Health Care in Worcester plan to collaborate on specialized medical care, research projects and public health projects championing better nutrition and combating poor health habits.

The two hospitals announced Thursday that they had signed a nonbinding letter of intent. to explore new collaborative opportunities between the two not-for-profit health care giants. Baystate has 824 beds across four facilities: Baystate Medical Center, the western campus of Tufts University School of Medicine, in Springfield; Baystate Children’s Hospital, also in Springfield; Baystate Franklin Medical Center, in Greenfield, and Baystate Mary Lane Hospital, in Ware. Of the total beds, 709 are at Baystate Medical Center and the Children's Hospital in Springfield. Baystate has a total of nearly 10,000 employees

UMass Memorial Health Care, with 1,200 beds and bassinets and 13,200 employees. UMass Memorial is the clinical partner of the University of Massachusetts Medical School.

Neither organization's ownership, structure, governance, academic relationships or medical staffs will be affected by this agreement. Nor will Baystate or UMass Memorial be precluded from partnering with other organizations.

Spokesman Benjamin C. Craft reiterated that a full merger is not in the works.

"This is the beginning of a discussion," Craft said. "We are exploring opportunity."

With changes in the health care industry, including the federal affordable care act, hospitals across the state that had always considered themselves competitors are now working together, said John W. Polanowicz, state secretary of Health and Human Services. He pointed to the affiliation of Northampton's Cooley Dickinson Hospital with Massachusetts General Hospital earlier this year as well as other mergers across the state.

"Part of what is going on in health care is that all these institutions are trying to solidify their positions the best they can for a future we can't really perceive right now," Polanowicz said on a visit to The Republican. "I believe there will be benefits on the cost side. Where can we establish centers of excellence? Where can we work together and not duplicate services?."

On their own, Baystate and UMass Memorial might not have enough use for a particular sub-speciality, or facilities for a specific treatment required for a relatively rare condition..

"But if they cooperate, a center can be established in Springfield or Worcester so patients who need that specialized care can get it a t least a bit closer to home," he said.

The trend can go too far, Polanowicz said, using the example of a statewide health-care marketplace dominated by three or major players.

"That would be bad for competition," he said. "But I don't see any evidence of that."'



Craft had examples of where the two institutions can cooperate. He said UMass Memorial is a leader in diabetes care.

"We like to think we do a very good job treating people with chronic heart failure," Craft said. "Now what can we learn from each other? What are the best practices?"

Another opportunity could involve pooling patient populations for medical research. Federal grant programs for researchers often require a larger population of sufferers than either Baystate or UMass Memorial has on hand. but if they work together, medical researchers at both locations can get that money.

Also, Baystate and UMass Memorial can also work together to address big public health questions like nutrition and asthma, Craft said.