President Barack Obama's approval rating is down to its "lowest point ever," according to a Quinnipiac University poll released Tuesday.

Just 39 percent of American voters approve of Obama's job performance, down from 45 percent at the beginning of October. Fifty-four percent now disapprove.

For the first time, a majority thinks Obama is not "honest and trustworthy" -- just 44 percent say he is, while 52 percent say he is not. Voters are about evenly split as to whether he has strong leadership qualities, and as to whether he "cares about the needs and problems of people like you."

Trust in the federal government as a whole is also tied for a record low, with just 15 percent saying they trust politicians in Washington to do what is right most of the time or almost all of the time.

Though HuffPost's polling average puts the GOP's favorable rating at just 28 percent, Qunnipiac found that congressional Republicans had a slight edge over Obama on a number of issues. Voters are now slightly more likely to trust congressional Republicans than Obama on the economy and the budget, and about as likely to trust them on health care and immigration.

While a majority of respondents approve of Obama's handling of terrorism, fewer than 40 percent approve of his handling of foreign policy, the economy, health care, immigration or the budget. Support for his signature health care law is at 39 percent, down 6 points from the beginning of October. Survey respondents were about equally split on whether the president "knowingly deceived the public" when he said people who liked their health care plans could keep them once the Affordable Care Act went into effect. In fact, certain plans will be canceled because they don't meet the law's requirements.

The Quinnipiac survey is just the latest of several to show Obama's ratings declining in the past few weeks. A Pew Research survey found Obama's approval rating at 41 percent, with record low ratings on the economy and health care, while an NBC/Wall Street Journal poll put his overall rating at a record low 42 percent, due to what the pollsters described as "the accumulation of setbacks since the summer."

HuffPost Pollster's average, which includes all publicly available polling, puts Obama's approval at just under 43 percent.

Quinnipiac surveyed 2,545 registered voters by phone between Nov. 6 and Nov. 11.

Also on HuffPost: Presidents On Inauguration Day Presidents On Inauguration Day

1 of 38 Barack Obama (2009) Barack Obama delivers his inaugural address after being sworn in as 44th U.S. president at the Capitol in Washington on January 20, 2009. Share this slide:

(TIM SLOAN/AFP/Getty Images)