Maybe I shouldn’t feel bad that I do not understand Confederate Gen. Braxton Bragg, as it appears that none of the real experts do either.

Bragg seems to have few admirers, and even the historians that have anything good to say about him seem to do it through gritted teeth.

On the other hand, there are legions of Civil War commentators who are ready and eager to heap scorn upon him, and to cast his memory into the fiery pits of Hades.

He was a good organizer, but he would argue with a gate post. He was an adequate quartermaster, but he had no, repeat no, ability to get along with his subordinates.

He was personally brave in combat, but he could not seem to bring all his troops into battle in any cohesive fashion. He had a good strategic sense of where to march his army, but tactically he did not have a clue as to what to do with it when it arrived. He had a few glimpses of organizational brilliance, but the man was a helpless, hapless boob during a battle. Bless his heart.

The short version on Bragg is that he had no business commanding an army. When organizing or supplying an army, he would have been brilliant, even if prickly and pompous, but as a field commander he was a complete bust.

His officers knew it. Even most of his soldiers knew it.

Bragg’s only apparent qualification to be an army commander was that he had been Confederate President Jefferson Davis’ roommate at West Point years before. Bragg had Davis’ confidence — and his ear — and so Bragg stayed in command of the Confederate Army of Tennessee long past any positive effect that he might have had.

During the spring and summer of 1863 Bragg’s Army of Tennessee was resting and recuperating around Tullahoma from their battle with Rosecrans’ Union Army of the Cumberland at Murfreesboro the previous winter. The Union Army was also resting and resupplying at Murfreesboro, but the Lincoln administration was putting tremendous pressure on Rosecrans to get a move on.

They were insisting that Rosecrans, who had the larger force, defeat Bragg, and move on Chattanooga.

Bragg, at Tullahoma, was not getting any rest. He was angry at his loss at Murfreesboro, and he was taking it out on his generals and officers. It was an unhappy and demoralized Confederate Army that Rosecrans attacked in late June of 1863, and the Confederate defense dissolved before Bragg’s bewildered eyes.

Bragg retreated all the way to Chattanooga, an important rail junction that guarded the approaches to Georgia, and especially Atlanta. It was a brilliant and nearly casualty-free victory for Rosecrans, but it lacked what the Union government had in mind — blood, lots of blood.

Rosecrans was then ordered to follow and destroy Bragg’s army at Chattanooga, and open a way into the heart of the Confederacy. Chattanooga presented a formidable challenge to Rosecrans.

The city is hemmed in by high mountains and the twisting, winding Tennessee River. The river presented many obstacles to navigation by Union steamboats, and the railroad into the city ran along the bank of the river, at the foot of those mountains. Any Confederate with a crowbar could destroy the Union supply line at will. A Union army at Chattanooga could easily be bottled up and starved out.

Rosecrans studied the maps of the area, and decided to take Chattanooga from the west. Taking the railhead at Bridgeport, Ala., southwest of Chattanooga, he broke his army into detachments, and sent them through the mountain passes to take the city from the rear.

It turned out to be easier said than done.

Bragg saw through the movement, abandoned the city and fell back into North Georgia behind the barrier of Chickamauga Creek.

The widely separated Union Divisions are marching through the mountain passes to the west with an ever growing string of supply wagons in their wake. Back and forth they run like a chain of ants from the railhead at Bridgeport to the ever far away Union troops.

Union commanders begin to worry about out-pacing their supplies, and their men going hungry. It is not a happy prospect.

In the meantime, and unknown to his Union army adversaries, Bragg is being heavily reinforced. From Mississippi, the remains of the Confederate army left after the fall of Vicksburg is riding the rails to join Bragg.

Also from Virginia by rail comes Gen. James Longstreet with two divisions of his corps, fresh from the disaster at Gettysburg.

Soon Bragg will be able to field an army that outnumbers that of his enemy. It is an unusual occurrence, and Gen. Braxton Bragg begins to plan an offensive to attack the widely separated divisions of Rosecrans’ army.

Desperate, bloody battle is coming to Chickamauga Creek.

◆◆◆

Bob Duncan is director of the Maury County archives. Email him at bduncan@maurycounty-tn.gov.