"It's been a very challenging situation everywhere."

Medicaid, the public health insurance program expanded under the Affordable Care Act, now covers nearly one out of every five New Jersey residents, according to the latest enrollment figures.

More than 420,000 people signed up for insurance since New Jersey allowed more people to into the program, according to Valerie Harr, director of the division of medical assistance and health services for the N.J. Department of Human Services.

While that flood of applications produced long delays in people getting coverage, the state recently paid for extra outside workers to tackle the backlog, Harr said.

About 80,000 of those people already qualified for the program under the old income guidelines - but didn't realize it until they attempted to enroll in Obamacare policies and found they were poor enough to qualify for Medicaid.

All told, 1.7 million New Jersey residents will now have the bulk of their medical expenses covered by Medicaid.

The enrollment backlogs that have bedeviled the program since New Jersey became one of the states to expand Medicaid are nearly cleared up, Harr told a quarterly meeting of public health and welfare providers.

Between 9,000 and 12,000 applications remain unprocessed statewide, Harr said - a far cry from the tens of thousands that piled up in county welfare offices last summer.

The solution was to pay Xerox, an outside contractor already handling some of the program, to hire 127 new workers to process applications.

That will cost $7.5 million through the rest of this year, said Nicole Brossoie.

"It's been a very challenging situation everywhere," Harr said.

Three counties - Sussex, Camden, and Cumberland - have no backlog now, according to Harr.

Applicants in the 18 remaining counties will see their cases shifted to Xerox, which had previously staffed the state's Medicaid call center.

Harr said that while she was unsure if the state could meet a goal of clearing the backlog by May 1, she anticipated that being achieved by the end of May.

The surge of Medicaid applications, combined with the failure of an new computer system that was to have linked all state welfare programs, clogged the application pipeline throughout much of 2014. The state ended up canceling its contract with Hewlett Packard, the contractor for that project, with little beyond a $7.5 million refund to show for it.

Applicants complained of going months without hearing anything back from the state, while workers in county welfare offices said they were inundated with paper files, stacks of which clogged hallways in some cases.

During the application crunch, New Jersey got permission from Washington to postpone checking with recipients annually to make sure they continued to remain eligible for the program.

When the eligibility checks resume, they will be staggered so workers aren't overwhelmed by the added paperwork, Harr said. County offices still have about 450,000 people whose continued eligibility needs to be confirmed.

"We're just trying to manage workflow, trying to do what's necessary to get the work down," she said. "We're doing what we can to support the counties."

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com, or at (732) 902-4557. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.