Q: I am six weeks' pregnant with my first child and already hearing tales of inaccurate due dates and unnecessary induced labor. I used an online due-date calculator that puts my delivery around May 31, 2015. Should I believe it? — Jessica R., Indianapolis

A: First, congratulations, and we hope you enjoy this amazing journey. However, an online calculator isn’t the very best way to figure out your estimated due date.

Updated guidelines for estimated due dates came out this month from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: They say counting out 280 days (40 weeks) from the first day of your last period isn’t accurate enough to allow for optimal prenatal care. That calculation is based on the assumption that every woman has a 28-day cycle and ovulates on day 14. The truth is that around 80 percent of women deliver anywhere between 37 and 42 weeks.

The new guidelines recommend an ultrasound during your first trimester so the fetus’s precise size and head circumference can be measured. That, taken with the info about your last period, allows a far more accurate estimated due date.

For example: If you have an ultrasound before you’re 14 weeks along and the fetal size suggests a due date that’s more than seven days different from an estimated due date based only on your menstrual period, the ultrasound due date should be the one that is accepted as accurate. If your pregnancy was from in-vitro fertilization, the latest guidelines state that your estimated due date should be calculated from both the age of the embryo and the date of the transfer.

Whatever your due date is, remember: Get regular prenatal check-ups; take prenatal vitamins; eat a baby-healthy diet (you’re eating for 1.1, not two people); and don’t gain too much weight (25-35 pounds if you started at a healthy weight, 15-25 pounds if you’re overweight, less than 15 pounds if you’re obese).

And pick up a copy of our book “You: Having a Baby.” It’ll help you consider and plan for the many choices you’ll be making — from food to delivery location. Good luck with your labor of love!

Q: My sister and my brother-in-law often get really angry with each other in front of their two kids, ages 6 and 9. Last time I was around, I had to step in and change the subject so they’d cool down. I can see their arguing bothers the kids — it bothers me! I’m going to say something, but what? Any advice? — Susan K., Provo, Utah

A: Oh, yes. Start by telling them that having disagreements in front of the kids is one thing. Disagreements are part of life, and they can teach kids about the importance of critical thinking, the art of compromise and using warmth and humor to solve disputes. That is CONstructive. But having a nasty, angry argument in front of your children is something else. It can be very DEstructive, especially if it happens on a regular basis. It can cause children long-term psychological damage and harm a child’s developing ability to identify and control positive and negative emotions.

How are children supposed to learn how to deal with tough emotions such as fear and sadness when there’s emotional chaos all around them? Often they don’t; research shows those kids are more likely to suffer from anxiety and depression in the future. Violent parental arguments can even be considered emotional child abuse, and emotionally abused children can end up with worse mental health problems than kids who’ve been physically or sexually abused.

So it may be time for the grown-ups to get counseling, before the children start blaming themselves for their parents’ arguments, which is usually what happens. You can find a nondenominational family counselor at www.theravive.com, or if your sister and her husband belong to a religious organization, you may ask them to start there.

Getting help is tough, but sooner is better than later.

Dr. Mehmet Oz is host of “The Dr. Oz Show,” and Dr. Mike Roizen is chief medical officer at the Cleveland Clinic Wellness Institute. Submit your health questions at www.doctoroz.com.