Amber Stevenson (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights An estimated 1 in 6 men have had unwanted or abusive sexual experiences in childhood.

Sexual abuse often contributes to many of adult men’s mental health, personal and work difficulties.

There are many myths surrounding unwanted or abusive sexual experiences of boys and men.

A recent televised interview by veteran journalist Barbara Walters of “20/20” did a huge disservice to male victims of sexual abuse.

Throughout the interview with Mary Kay Letourneau and her now-husband, Walters repeatedly referred to the child rape as a “relationship” and an “affair.”

Hardly mentioned was the fact that Letourneau was this child’s second-grade teacher. Later, when she began sexually abusing him, she was his sixth-grade teacher.

Instead of taking ownership for the heinous acts she committed, Letourneau dismissed her responsibility by saying that he “flirted with her” and “was in love with her.”

She ultimately pled guilty to two counts of felony second-degree rape of a child.

Media outlets have sensationalized this story, even saying that Letourneau had “celebrity status” while in prison. Unfortunately, this story is not rare, and in recent years we have heard similar stories of women in positions of power and authority exploiting and molesting our young boys.

Researchers now estimate that one in six men have had unwanted or abusive sexual experiences in childhood.

This equates to more than 19 million of our brothers, fathers, sons, partners and friends who are impacted by this problem.

Even more startling is that these numbers are likely an underestimate of the actual prevalence.

The problem of sexual abuse often contributes to many of adult men’s mental health, personal and work difficulties.

Studies show that men who don’t address those childhood experiences are at a significantly higher risk for a range of negative consequences, such as symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder and depression, alcoholism and substance abuse, pornography addiction, anger issues, problems in intimate relationships and suicidal thoughts and attempts.

There are many myths surrounding unwanted or abusive sexual experiences of boys and men. So what are the facts?

• Girls and women can sexually abuse boys. These boys are not “lucky,” but exploited and harmed.

• If a boy liked the attention he was getting or got sexually aroused during the abuse, this does not mean he wanted or liked being manipulated or abused, or that any part of what happened was his responsibility or fault.

• Boys can be sexually abused by both straight men and gay men. Sexual abuse is the result of abusive behavior that takes advantage of a child’s vulnerability and is in no way related to the sexual orientation of the abusive person.

• Whether he is gay, straight or bisexual, a boy’s sexual orientation is neither the cause nor the result of sexual abuse. By focusing on the abusive nature of sexual abuse rather than the sexual aspects of the interaction, it becomes easier to understand that sexual abuse has nothing to do with a boy’s sexual orientation.

• Boys and men can be sexually abused and it has nothing to do with how masculine they are.

• Most boys who are sexually abused will not go on to sexually abuse others (www.1in6.org).

We want to shatter the myth that males aren’t victims. In the last fiscal year, the Sexual Assault Center provided counseling services to 79 males under the age of 18 and 57 males over the age of 18.

We also provided a Male Adult Survivors’ support group. We understand the impact that childhood sexual abuse has on boys and men.

For more information, contact the Sexual Assault Center at (615) 259-9055, use the center’s 24-hour crisis and support line at (800) 879-1999 or visit its website at www.sacenter.org.

Consider attending a Stewards of Children training, an evidence-informed training for parents and adults that offers practical ways that we can all be empowered to protect the children in our lives and prevent sexual abuse.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1HJmtt6