Therapy Dogs of Boulder County visit campus to help students de-stress

If you go What: University of Colorado winter commencement ceremony When: 9:30 a.m. Saturday, Dec. 20 Where: Coors Events Center More info: colorado.edu/commencement/ceremonies/winter

It's a ruff time of year for University of Colorado students, many of whom are spending the weekend holed up in the library, coffee in hand, as they prepare for final exams.

Cramming for tests is made a bit easier with a visit from a sleepy, doe-eyed four-legged friend.

For the last few weeks, calm pups from Therapy Dogs of Boulder County have been "soaking up stress" inside libraries on the Boulder campus, said Jane Collier, who coordinated the campus visits.

On Thursday, she and Cooper — a 2-year-old English yellow lab with big brown eyes — "pawsed" for an hour inside the Wolf Law Building.

"He's just here to be petted and soak up your stress," Collier told a group of students who knelt down to pet Cooper. "He's a stress sponge."

If he was stressed from all the petting, Cooper didn't show it. The handsome lab welcomed the love, eventually falling asleep on the cool stone floor.

"It's really hard work being this adored by everyone," Collier joked.

The theme for teams like Collier and Cooper visiting the law school this week is "Paws to Refresh." CU undergrads start a week of finals today before heading off for a three-week winter break. The winter commencement ceremony is Saturday.

Collier said she gets new requests each semester for therapy dogs to visit campus departments and buildings. A group of dogs and their humans visited Norlin Library last week and saw more than 400 students in two hours, Collier said.

Olivia Abrant was one of three undergraduate students who spent the better part of an hour with Cooper and Collier, blowing off steam before she finished a final paper and studying for several upcoming tests.

Cooper, a therapy dog, takes a nap while being petted by Zach Maas, left, freshman in chemistry, and Leah Sauerwein, right, a sophomore in integrative physiology and psychology, in the Wolf Law Building at the University of Colorado. The dogs are visiting the campus to help students de-stress ahead of finals. (Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera)

"Pretty stressed," Abrant said, describing her feelings ahead of three finals today and Monday. "It's pretty 'phew,' like way up there, through the roof."

Abrant, a junior studying computer science, said her study plan is pretty straightforward: once she starts, she keeps going until it's time for the test.

"I don't take a lot of breaks," she said. "I try not to watch (television) shows or anything like that because often that just gets in the way. So I've started studying now and my break time is minimal."

Reider Larsen, a freshman studying aerospace engineering, stopped by because he said Cooper reminded him of his yellow lab at home.

Though he has four finals this week, Larsen said there's one that really worries him — calculus.

He said he de-stresses by making sure not to talk about finals during meals.

"I'm not too stressed at the moment," he said. "I'm actually doing pretty well. I'm not too worried about most of them."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta