Pittsburgh-area hospitals offer some of the best and most consistent prices on hip and knee replacements in the U.S., according to a survey issued by Blue Cross Blue Shield insurers.

Those prices are the ones paid by insurers, not by the patients. Patient costs, as always, vary based on the design and richness of their health benefits plan.

But for the local Blue Cross carrier, Highmark Inc., knee and hip replacement reimbursements to local hospitals are a bargain compared with what’s being paid in other cities.

Locally, the average cost of a knee replacement was $23,751, the fourth-lowest average cost among 64 markets surveyed, according to BCBS claims data from a three-year period. Hip replacements were, on average, $22,134, fifth-lowest of the 64 markets.

These figures, according to the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association, reflect actual negotiated price rates paid by the insurers, not the wholesale “chargemaster” prices quoted by hospitals. As such, they provide a window into the shrouded, complicated world of hospital economics.

The figures include the reimbursed cost of the surgery, as well as expenses related to the full “episode of care” — physical therapy, anesthesiology, in-patient medications and the price of the implanted device itself.

It’s not an apples-to-apples comparison; prices here and elsewhere are driven by unique market dynamics, the market share of the Blue Cross insurer, the ability of local hospitals to push back on price, even real estate values.

Which helps explain why in New York — the highest-cost market — the average knee replacement costs BCBS carriers more than $61,000. A hip replacement in New York City costs more than $59,000.

Price variation among the various hospitals that are able to perform such replacements is low in the Pittsburgh area, too — about 40 percent between the lowest-cost knee replacement ($19,307) and the highest ($26,973).

Compare that with a market such as Dallas, where knee replacement reimbursements can run as low as $16,772 or as high as $61,584, a variation of 267 percent for the Blue Cross payers (other insurers may pay different rates to different hospitals).

Hip replacement variation in Pittsburgh was 32 percent (a range of $19,456 and $25,696). The worst market for price variation is Boston (313 percent).

The Pittsburgh region, said Mark Piasio, medical director of provider strategy and integration at Highmark Inc., has a lot of hospitals per capita. “We’re rich in providers. They all do a good job. That puts some downward pressure on prices,” Dr. Piasio said.

Still, even a 30 percent variation is too much in his eyes, let alone 313 percent.

“If one hospital can do it for $17,000, why is another charging $60,000?” he asked. “None of it whatsoever is it based upon any value … We know that this isn’t right and fair, [so] what are we going to about it?”

The Blue Cross Blue Shield Association and its research unit, Blue Health Intelligence, analyzed hip and knee replacements because they are among the fastest-growing types of major orthopedic surgeries. (In 2011, there were more than 645,000 hip replacement surgeries in the U.S., and 306,600 knee replacements.) And orthopedists, generally, are among the highest-paid specialists, making more than cardiologists and oncologists, on average.

“The phenomenon of extreme price variation in health care can have obvious financial consequences for individuals and employers,” the report said, particularly as employers continue to shift employees toward plans with higher deductibles, higher levels of co-insurance, and higher annual out-of-pocket caps.

“All it takes is one fall through the cracks and you could end up with a fairly significant bill,” said Joe Martin, executive director of the Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council, which will be releasing its own hospital-by-hospital study on hip and knee costs in the first half of 2015.

Until recently, costs billed to and paid by health insurance companies were a guarded secret because if Hospital A learned that Hospital B was getting paid 20 percent more for the same procedure, it might want a raise.

That insurers are now willing to publicize such data, even without identifying the hospitals by name, “is a reflection of how the marketplace is changing and becoming much more transparent about pricing issues,” Mr. Martin said.

Much of that is driven not by patients, who still aren’t terribly engaged on pricing data, but by businesses, which still pay the bulk of under-65 health costs in this country.

“Employers are becoming more and more aware that they can play in this game,” said Stuart Guterman, vice president for Medicare and cost control at The Commonwealth Fund, a private health policy foundation.

They can do so by doing preferential hospital contracting — for example, steering employees to the lowest-cost, highest-quality providers for certain procedures, and making employees foot the overage if they decide to have the procedure done at another hospital.

Insurers also realize that individual health plan buyers are more likely to be bargain-hunters than people who get health coverage through work. With millions of Americans acquiring health plans through the Affordable Care Act’s online marketplace, “Health plans have to go out and acquire these lives one by one,” said Douglas Ghertner, CEO of Change Healthcare, a consumer engagement and cost transparency consultant.

“There’s a massive retail-ification of health care,” he said. “That means being more consumer friendly.”

Even if businesses and patients don’t yet fully use the data, there’s value in simply publishing it, Mr. Guterman said.

“That kind of wide variation [in cost] is a sign of a health care market doesn’t work well,” he said. “Shining sunlight on that situation helps.”