The recent editorial in the Daily Local that seems to favor of West Chester University’s secession from the Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education (PASSHE) does not represent the views of all WCU faculty and other campus citizens who care about access to public higher education. Certainly, as the editorial suggests, we would not want anything that happens to WCU to have a negative impact on our community.

However, many of us worry that that is indeed what would happen if WCU leaves PASSHE.

The Daily Local’s editorial mentions that the legislation’s authors, Senators Dinniman and Tomlinson, are in favor of secession, as are “other trustees and advocates for West Chester.” Note that the people who do the educating of WCU’s students – the faculty – are not included in this group. Many faculty were taken by surprise by the legislation, and many have grave concerns.

First, tuition. WCU exists so that future Pennsylvania citizens have access to college education — a necessity not only for personal success but for a flourishing Commonwealth. WCU is the only reasonable option for students of limited means to obtain four-year degrees in the greater Philadelphia area. However, if WCU becomes a state-related institution, the first year tuition hike for one of WCU’s students is estimated to be about $550 or 9 percent. In subsequent years, tuition would likely increase faster than inflation because of increased debt and rising personnel costs.

Advertisement

This will certainly have an impact not only on whether a student will be able to attend WCU but what a student would be able to spend in the local economy. The faculty union, APSCUF (Association for the PA State College and University Faculty), has shown that PASSHE campuses contribute $6 to their local economies for every $1 invested by the state appropriation. Many students spend their Ram Bucks in downtown businesses. We cannot endanger this.

Faculty were also amazed to learn that a decision introduced to them as requiring lengthy deliberation and thorough discussion seems already to have been decided. For example, WCU’s foundation, the arm that manages donations to WCU, has hired a PR firm to “sell” the new legislation.

No one likes to be under the thumb of a state administration that makes unreasonable demands, and faculty support reducing unnecessary and onerous state control. But the potential effects on student financial commitments, student programs of study, faculty and staff working conditions, and a local university’s financial burdens may outweigh any increased flexibility upper administration gains from not having to answer to Harrisburg. And certainly it will cost a lot more for WCU to set up a local finance system, course management software, enrollment software, health care plans, library access, and other processes by which our students benefit from PASSHE economies of scale. These costs will need to be passed on to students.

The story that WCU had to give up money to Harrisburg last year is simply not true: it was money that could have been WCU’s if an unbalanced funding formula had been implemented. However, the formula was not ultimately used, and so the money was not WCU’s to give back. WCU is in excellent financial shape at present and has no need to split from the state system in order to survive.

Indeed, independent auditors’ reports have shown that even the other campuses are not truly “in trouble,” although some are claiming that is the case.

Unfortunately, this legislation does not address the real problem, which is that our state government, led by an anti-public-education governor and legislative majority, has backed away from any commitment to public education at any level. To keep higher education affordable for all Pennsylvanians, we should be working to restore the huge cuts that state universities have absorbed in the past decade and find alternatives to raising tuition.

Contact your legislators to ask them to oppose SB 1275 and make a real commitment to supporting higher education in Pennsylvania.

CHERYL WANKO

WCU faculty member

Dissecting the Florida election

Chris Matthews, he of the “thrill up my leg” when he hears Obama speak -- well, maybe not so much lately -- is mad at Florida voters for having elected an underdog Republican over a heavily funded, better known Democrat for a coveted U.S. congressional seat. Above all, he’s annoyed they don’t understand that Democrats have the answers to their problems, that “Democrats generally can see the complexity of our times.” He added, “They don’t think they have all the answers. They’d like to see some deal making between the parties and across the aisles.”

Get it? The president, in particular, who never misses the opportunity to insult Republicans, accusing them of wanting to starve children, throw “Grannie over the cliff”, and above all, of being constantly at war against women -- he and the rest of his party, that paradigm of bonhomie and cooperation, Harry Reid too we presume, would “like to see some deal making between the parties and across the aisles?” Sure. And I’d like to have the same vacation benefits as Michelle Obama too, but it aint gonna happen!

Both parties are studying the results of the Florida special House election to determine its portent for the forthcoming fall elections. The unpopularity of the president and his signature Obamacare legislation played a part in the outcome but that wasn’t the entire story. The sense is that many voters are fed up with the accumulative scandals that have plagued this regime and have had enough of their lies and dissembling, are frightened at the incessant dropping job numbers and labor participation rate and constant ideological war on the economy. And they have also had enough of the unfair coverage accorded them by the lapdog media. Recent Rasmussen polls show the public has become cynical of the press and media and are less inclined to rely on them.

Finally, there is a feeling that government is getting too big, too intrusive, that we are being robbed of our freedoms, of our independence. The malaise is not so much about Obamacare and all the scandals, “Fast & Furious” gun running, the IRS, the spying on Associated Press and Washington reporter James Rosen, the NSA surveillance case. Rather, as so many commentators are suggesting, they are symbolic of a breakdown of our country as we’ve known it, and Obamacare is merely the last straw, the one that’s breaking the camel’s back. Oh, it’s a major one for certain, flawed beyond repair, but in Florida the vote is saying “ENOUGH” not so much to Obamacare per se but rather to big government; this is going too far, we have to put a stop to it before it further metastasizes.

And many are saying, this is what the Democrats are likely facing in the fall, a sort of perfect storm, an accumulated anger over five plus years of lies and dissembling, the scandals, a blatantly unfair and overbearing media, Obamacare (which was undemocratically shoved down the electorates throats creating seething bitterness), and finally the reality that this is a leviathan government out of control.

JOHN de CARVILLE

Chester County

Cheers to a healthy spring

After several months of crippling snowstorms and flooding, I really look forward to spring weather, green grass, and flowers in bloom.

The advent of spring is also a great opportunity to turn over a new leaf on our dietary and exercise habits. In fact, I’ve been told that hundreds of communities celebrate the advent of spring with something called the Great American Meatout.

Local health advocates host educational events, where they ask visitors to get a fresh start this spring with a healthy diet of vegetables, fresh fruits, legumes, and whole grains. For those who need a little encouragement, their website provides useful information and a chance to pledge a healthy diet for one day or more.

WES KOGEL

West Chester