Topics: Birth Control, Church and State, Hobby Lobby, religious liberty, Reproductive Rights, Politics News

A federal court on Tuesday denied the University of Notre Dame’s challenge to the Affordable Care Act, finding that the current accommodation is sufficient to address the university’s stated religious objections to birth control and that it can’t prevent private insurers from doing business with students. In other words, the court found once again that allowing a third-party insurer to provide birth control coverage to its employees and students does not violate Notre Dame’s sincerely held beliefs.

A brief refresher for those who have lost track of the dizzying number of Hobby Lobby-style challenges against the new healthcare law: the Affordable Care Act requires some employers to include comprehensive contraceptive coverage in insurance plans to employees. The coverage, like any other earned benefit, is part of a worker’s wages. It isn’t some gift from your super generous boss.

But there are exceptions. Churches and houses of worship don’t have to comply, and religiously affiliated nonprofits don’t have to directly provide coverage. Under the original accommodation, if a religiously affiliated nonprofit, like, say, Notre Dame, wanted to opt out of covering birth control, all it had to do was sign a form that would trigger a third-party insurer to pay for and provide the coverage. But many of these nonprofits argued that this accommodation wasn’t sufficiently, uh, accommodating.

Which led to the Obama administration to introduce a “fix” in 2014 — an accommodation to the accommodation. Instead of filling out a form, the new policy allows these nonprofits to directly notify the Department of Health and Human Services of any religious objections they have to birth control and then HHS will arrange for the coverage.

But if you can believe it, Notre Dame stayed resolute in its challenge to the law, arguing that, even with the new accommodation, the law still violated its beliefs. It also, in effect, wanted the court to force the insurers providing contraceptive coverage to stop doing it. Because under Notre Dame’s logic, doing anything at all that may result in people accessing birth control — even if it’s just notifying the government that you have an objection or staying out of a business relationship between third-party insurers — is an undue burden.

The court didn’t buy it. As the Wall Street Journal reported, in a 2-1 ruling, a three judge panel of the Seventh U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Chicago said that Notre Dame had failed to demonstrate why it was entitled to a preliminary injunction. It also found that the Obama administration had hit the correct balance between religious liberty and access with the accommodation.