HAVERFORD TWP. — School directors last week approved a contract extension negotiated between the school district and Haverford Township Education Association.



The board authorized administration and special labor counsel to incorporate the terms into a collective bargaining agreement effective Sept. 1, 2015, to Aug. 31, 2017. The district’s current agreement with HTEA expires Aug. 2015.



Solicitor Greg Parker said the extension provides a salary increase of 2.42 percent in 2015-16, and 2.45 percent in 2016-17.



The extension also calls for increases in employee premium contributions to health care coverage of 1 percent each year, Parker said. And, it contains language permitting parties to open discussions and move to mediation if necessary, if the Affordable Care Act presents unanticipated costs the district feels require negotiation.

The association includes more than 400 teachers, counselors, librarians, speech/language therapists, school psychologists, school nurses, occupational therapists and school social workers.



Board President Denis Gray thanked parties for their work.



“It makes running the district smooth,” he said.



In other business at the meeting, Parker reviewed proposed revisions to the district’s Transportation Video Monitoring policy. Parker said the changes were driven by Act 9 of 2014. Act 9 amended Pennsylvania’s wiretap statute, creating an exception that expressly allows audio taping on school buses and vehicles.



However, Parker noted that three conditions must be met. First, the board must officially adopt/revise school policy to authorize installation of the audio taping equipment. It must also post proper notices on the buses and vehicles that carry the equipment. The district also must send written notification via regular mail to parents and students.



Parker proposed adding language to the district’s current videotaping policy to include audio monitoring, and to state the board’s authorization of audio taping as permitted by the statute, for disciplinary and/or security purposes. Changes incorporate all three requirements, Parker said. Continued...