Protesters in Riga, Latvia, gathered outside Latvia’s Parliament in January 2013 to heckle lawmakers on their way to vote for changes in a law that would allow the Baltic country to adopt the euro. Associated Press

In a recent Heritage Foundation report, colleagues and I analyzed data on fiscal policy in Europe since 2007. Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia endured the deepest recessions and had among the most extreme policy responses to the financial crisis.

Before to the global recession, the Baltic countries had rapid growth as their productivity and wages converged toward the European average. During the crisis, it was crucial for policymakers to protect that convergence. As events in Greece have shown, full integration into the European Union does not guarantee that productivity and wages will catch up. So although it ran counter to conventional wisdom, Latvia maintained a currency peg to the euro.

Despite low debt burdens initially, the deficits and debt-to-GDP ratios in Latvia and Lithuania practically exploded as the crisis began. Their borrowing costs were high as well, as markets feared currency devaluation. But borrowers’ fears eased relatively quickly–much more so than in southern European countries, where debt, rather than currency devaluation, was the primary concern.

Latvia and Lithuania also focused their fiscal adjustments on the spending side. Although they raised some taxes, their revenue rates were slightly lower in 2012 than 2007. In Estonia, on the other hand, taxes were increased sharply, first to prevent a large deficit and then to fund expansions in the entitlement state.

The Baltics’ return to growth in 2011 and 2012 seemed to confirm that the convergence process was still strong. Estonia’s growth stumbled in early 2013, but Latvia and Lithuania continued to expand.

Experiences in the Baltics emphasize the amplified risks and opportunities facing small countries. Foreign direct investment is always important but can stop suddenly. A huge proportion of the labor force emigrated from the Baltics to higher-wage countries–easing unemployment in the short term but exacerbating the region’s pension problem.

Now, having returned to growth after an economic crisis that threatened their fiscal health, productivity and foreign investment potential, the Baltic economies can resume their pursuit of convergence to European incomes.

Salim Furth is senior policy analyst in macroeconomics at the Heritage Foundation’s Center for Data Analysis. He is on Twitter: @salimfurth.

RELATED IN THINK TANK:

Did Tax Increases or Spending Cuts Spur Greater Growth in Europe?

Portugal’s Lost Decade

The Truth About Budget Austerity After the Financial Crisis

Get more from Capitol Hill, first thing in the morning, by signing up for the Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter: on.wsj.com/CapitalJournalSignup