A dress made from condoms. (Design and photo by Vermilion)

If you go What: The Art of Fashion Club meeting When: 6:30-7:30 p.m. Wednesday Where: University of Colorado campus, Koebel 302 Who: Open to any CU students Activities: Club members will be making and organizing details for a craft table to raise money for flood relief, scheduled to be stationed around the CU campus on Friday. Info: afc@colorado.edu, facebook.com/theartoffashionclub

Design and photo by Vermilion.

When I was in college in a faraway traitorous land whose mascot may or may not have been a ram, I joined a lot of clubs.

All of the clubs. For the free pizza.

And then I ran for president of all of the clubs so I could stagger pizza-packed club meetings throughout the week, thereby providing a constant stream of greasy glutenous dinners for myself and all of the other club hoppers. Oh yes, there was a gang of us.

It was survival. And somehow evil, I'm sure. But my role as Fuehrer of the German Club did ultimately lead to my second major in German, which karmically repaid my pizza perpetration by requiring an extra semester of college, and a degree that has never once been useful in my career or adult life. Well, other than that one time I rapped in German over the intercom at work.

Advertisement

Needless to say, college clubs have a special place in my heart.

Jessica Beard is the president of the Art of Fashion Club at CU, but for a different reason. (I'm not even sure they allow pizza in Boulder, do they?) Beard, a junior studying information management, says she decided to get involved with the club because CU doesn't have a fashion merchandising major, and she wanted to make her own opportunities on campus.

The Art of Fashion Club is only two years old, but it's already making a name for itself, partnering with other organizations around the city.

Next week, club members will plan a craft sale to raise money for flood relief. But we're not talking jenky God's eyes made out of yarn. These are some of Boulder's most fashionable DIY-ers, so expect cool, chunky, upcycled bracelets, giving a new use to the unused. Beard plans on making infinity scarves out of old clothes, too.

The club has events planned with Serengetee.com, which sells different fabric patterns that raise money for more than 30 different causes around the world. On Dec. 8, the club has plans to join Fashion for a Cause and the Fashion Design Student Association of CU for a fashion show.

And on Nov. 8, the Art of Fashion will participate in a condom fashion show.

The event, "Condom Couture: A Safe & Sexy Fashion Show and Fundraiser," is organized by Boulder Valley Women's Health Center, in celebration of the organization's 40th year. The show, at the Boulder Theater, 2032 14th St., features fashions made out of condoms, all provided by Women's Health.

Yes, my dear stunned reader friend, condoms. Like, well, you know, Kondom. Gummi. That's German for "condom." Marking the first time I've used that degree on the job. And also the first time I've ever wondered whether I could squeeze my waist into a condom, sort of like a mini skirt.

And now to quickly change the topic, I shall rap in German.