I know my television is too loud.

I’m asking people to repeat themselves more often.

I’m the restaurant patron asking the manager to please turn down the music so I can hear my friends across the table.

Almost two-thirds of Americans over age 70 have meaningful hearing loss, experts say, and I probably will be among them. I should do something about it.

One reason I haven’t is the average price for hearing aids: roughly $2,500, often more — and most of us need two. That helps explain why only 20 percent of those with hearing loss use hearing aids.

Medicare declines to cover a number of products and services that older beneficiaries need. Dental care ranks high on my personal list of exclusions that make the least sense, but the fact that the 1965 Medicare law specifically prohibits the national insurance program from paying for hearing aids is also a strong contender.

So it’s heartening to notice some recent developments that might lead to more rational policies and more affordable and accessible devices.

An October report by the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology recommended federal actions to “simultaneously decrease the cost of hearing aids, spur technology innovation and increase consumer choice options.”

The council suggested, for example, that the Food and Drug Administration permit a “basic” hearing aid, for mild to moderate age-related hearing loss, to be sold over the counter — something every state now prohibits.

The report also urged the Federal Trade Commission, whose rulings enabled consumers to comparison shop for eyeglasses and contact lenses, to treat hearing devices more like visual ones.

“It should be like a prescription for eyeglasses,” said Dr. Christine Cassel, co-chairwoman of the council’s hearing technologies working group. “In every other aspect of our lives, advances in electronic technology have made things cost much, much less. That hasn’t happened with hearing aids.” Almost annually, she noted, “some congressperson gets energized about this and tries to pass legislation” to remove Medicare’s hearing aid restriction. Last year, it was Rep. Debbie Dingell, D-Mich., with six Democratic co-sponsors. The bill stalled in committee, but “we are not giving up the fight,” Dingell said in an email.

Driving down the cost of the devices could make them more widely available in several ways.

“If it’s $200 instead of $2,000, more people could pay out of pocket,” Cassel said. “And that also means Medicare might cover it” — unlikely at current prices.

It’s clearly possible to provide good devices for far less than we now pay. The Department of Veterans Affairs, which negotiates with manufacturers for lower prices, provided comprehensive hearing care to more than 900,000 veterans in 2014 and dispensed almost 800,000 hearing aids without copays. The average cost per device: $400.