Sunbelt Rentals, Fort Mill, S.C., recently has been active in acquisitions, adding ECM Energy Services, Scottsdale, Ariz., and Hebbronville Lone Star Rentals, Midland, Texas, to the company’s portfolio.

ECM Energy Services in early September entered into an asset purchase agreement to sell its equipment rental division to Sunbelt Rentals. The terms of the agreement are confidential.

Kevin Groman, CEO, ECM, said, “Sunbelt Rentals is a stellar company and I am very pleased our successful turnaround of the equipment rental division enabled this transaction. The safety-focused and customer-centric cultures of both companies will pave the way for a smooth integration of ECM’s equipment rental operations and employees. Sunbelt is the second largest equipment rental company in the United States, and with its oil and gas services division, it has positioned itself, like ECM, to provide unmatched customer service to the oil and gas sector. In addition, I am excited that this acquisition will enable our customers to grow more rapidly through Sunbelt’s existing footprint, fleet and access to capital.”

A portion of the proceeds will be used to repay lenders, resulting in a significantly strengthened balance sheet with minimal debt. Post transaction, ECM will focus exclusively on its water and traffic logistics division and continue to provide service to customers in the Marcellus and Utica basins.

Separately, on Aug. 1, Sunbelt also acquired the business and assets of Hebbronville Lone Star Rentals, Midland, Texas, an energy-related rental and service company with eight locations for $36 million.

Its customer base consists almost entirely of oil producers in the Permian Basin and Eagle Ford Shale and has locations in Beeville, Gonzales, Charlotte, Carrizo Springs and Laredo to serve those in the Eagle Ford Shale area and in Midland and San Angelo, Texas, as well as Carlsbad, N.M., for the Permian Basin.

Lone Star rents boom lifts, reach forklifts, light towers, portable restrooms, trash bins and trash trailers, and other surface equipment used primarily in the completion process in the oil and gas industry. Sam Lovett, owner of Lone Star, has been retained as a management member of Sunbelt’s growing oil and gas division. The Stansberry Firm represented Lone Star in the transaction.