Ruth Bader Ginsburg was already full of herself.

Over the past year with Obama crumbling faster than a cookie in a metal crusher and Reid and Pelosi being as appealing as a car accident in their front yards, they turned to Ginsburg as their government icon.

That was a strange decision because what they really needed her to do was leave. Sure they're pretty confident that 8 years of Obama will be followed by Hillary, but it's still taking a big gamble on the biggest country in the country which despite forcing gay marriage and ObamaCare fines on everyone, hasn't exactly delivered their full agenda.

Suppose Ted Cruz wins and ends up appointing someone to replace Ginsburg who makes Scalia look like a bleeding heart liberal.

But Ginsburg hasn't been willing to take one for the team.

Feeding her colossal ego by calling her Notorious R.B.G. and other embarrassing behavior that only desperate lefties whose messiah is stuck in Ebolaland and Iraq are capable of has backfired. Gingsburg is now more reluctant to leave than ever.

Why should she? This is the first time she's been popular in... ever.

Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s rap name is the Notorious R.B.G. At least, that’s what her fans on Tumblr call her. Ginsburg recently praised the Tumblr page and admitted she owns a few Notorious R.B.G. t-shirts. “I think a law clerk told me about this Tumblr and also explained to me what Notorious R.B.G. was a parody on,” Ginsburg said to NPR’s Nina Totenberg. “And now my grandchildren love it and I try to keep abreast of the latest that’s on the Tumblr. I have — and in fact I think I gave you a Notorious R.B.G. [t-shirt]. … I have quite a large supply.”

Do I have to state the obvious? Bears don't leave if you keep feeding them. Political hacks whose knowledge of the law is somewhere below that of actual rap stars (with good reason) don't retire if you turn them into celebrities.

Ginsburg is so desperate for fame that she's collecting her meme-of-the-moment shirts because it's the closest she's ever come to being popular or relevant. She follows a Tumblr page dedicated to her.

It's pathetic, but her narcissism may help turn the Supreme Court further to the right. Then she'll really be notorious.