A gun-loving, Christian mother-of-three who claimed she wanted 'liberals' heads to explode' with her far-right views and prolific, controversial pictures on social media, has admitted that she had an extra-marital affair.

Holly Fisher, from West Virginia, made a statement on Facebook on Sunday night after coming close to being outed over the affair.

Mrs Fisher allegedly cheated on her military veteran husband with Joel Frewa, former communications director for the Tea Party.

On her Facebook profile page, she posted a length message which read: 'When I got thrown into the political spotlight last year, it was completely unexpected and a whirlwind. I was excited for the attention, but also scared and overwhelmed.

Prolific right-wing political commentator Holly Fisher posted publicly on Facebook following her reported extra-marital affair with Tea Party member Joel Frewa (right)

'There was a lot of media, then traveling and so many great opportunities. In the midst of all of this, I lost myself. I’ve admitted this over the last few months and people know I’ve went through a personal struggle. I never went into details.'

The young mother admitted that the pressures of her burgeoning media career came close to destroying her marriage.

I didn’t know where I was going to go next or what I was going to do. For a very short period in the middle of that, I actually believed my marriage was over and found someone else. Right-wing commentator Holly Fisher

'I’ve been married since I was barely 20, most of that marriage was in the army life. With deployment, kids, career changes, etc. we’ve had our ups and downs, like most couples,' she wrote.

'In the overwhelming mess of the political spotlight and trying to find myself and where I belong, I actually completely lost myself. I lost my faith in my marriage, I lost my faith in this life that not only I’ve chosen for myself, but a life that I promote. Happy military wife with kids and church and happy, happy, happy. False. My life crumbled. My marriage crumbled. I lost my faith in God.'

She added: 'I didn’t know where I was going to go next or what I was going to do. For a very short period in the middle of that, I actually believed my marriage was over and found someone else.'

Mrs Fisher told Daily Mail Online on Monday that following her marital problems last year, she and her husband were back on track.

The mother-of-three is prolific on social media about her gun, pro-life and Obamacare opinions. She allegedly cheated on her husband on Election Night 2014

She said: 'In the fall we both decided to recommit ourselves to God and to each other and get back to the life our kids deserve to grow up in.

'There's really not much more to it than that; I knew I slipped far away from the person I'm supposed to be and my husband helped me climb back and now we are stronger and happier than we have ever been.'

Mr Frewa refused to comment to Daily Mail Online on the alleged affair.

Hundreds of people posted online in support of Mrs Fisher being honest about her marital problems.

The story had originally emerged via GotNews.com after editor-in-chief Charles C. Johnson approached Mrs Fisher with various Tea Party sources who claimed she and Mr Frewa had an affair.

The liaisons allegedly took place at a Faith & Freedom conference and on Election Night 2014.

Mr Frewa reportedly resigned from the Tea Party News Network and is now communications director at non-profit organization, The Tea Party.

Following his wife's message on Facebook, her husband David Fisher posted a loving message in support of his wife.

He wrote: ' @HollyRFisher I am with you always. We crossed this bridge and will walk together now with our heads high. I love you. Matthew 6:14-15'

Mr Fisher then came out swinging in his wife's defense, posting a series of angry and threatening messages online to those who had discovered her affair with a Tea Party staffer.

Mrs Fisher told Daily Mail Online on Monday that she and her military vet husband, David Fisher (pictured), had worked through their marital problems

To celebrate the Supreme Court's controversial birth control decision, Holly Fisher posted a photo of her wearing a pro-life T-shirt, while posing in front of a Hobby Lobby store and holding a Chick-fil-A drinking cup

Last year, Mrs Fisher provoked vitriol from the left and support from the right after launching herself into the media spotlight with a series of provocative images.

She was prolific with her online posts and media appearances where she discussed her beliefs about guns, abortion and health care among other political hot issues while sharing gun-toting pictures of herself in skimpy vests.

Last July, following the Supreme Court decision on birth control, she posted a photo wearing a pro-life T-shirt, while posing in front of a Hobby Lobby store and holding a Chick-Fil-A drinking cup.

The Supreme Court had ruled that certain private companies cannot be required to pay for specific types of contraceptives for their employees.

‘Attention Liberals: do not look at this picture. Your head will most likely explode,’ read the caption on the photo posted on July 1.

Not content with the reaction she had generated, Mrs Fisher then posted a photo showing her standing in front of the American flag holding a gun and a copy of the Bible on July 4.

‘Biggest complaint I'm getting about my #HobbyLobby pic is there's no gun, bible, or flag. Tried to make up for it,’ she tweeted.

Once again the image generated a lot of online heat and was also quickly turned into a Twitter meme, with many calling her the American Taliban.

In the meme, Fisher's photo is side-by-side with an image of Sherafiyah Lewthwaite, an international terrorist known as the White Widow who is part of the Al-Shabaab Islamic militant group.

The meme, which shows Lewthwaite in a similar stance while holding a gun and a copy of the Quran, says: 'Explain the difference.'

Mrs Fisher received a wealth if support from the Tea Party community after admitting to her extramarital affair on social media on Sunday

'My new nickname is "American Taliban" it seems. You know how I know the lefties don't really think I'm a terrorist? They hate me,' Fisher wrote in response to the backlash.

The wife of a military combat vet, Fisher also stirred up controversy on social media when she claimed that Obamacare had caused her family to lose access to her baby’s pediatric cardiologist.

She said last year that she had always been 'extremely conservative and passionate about my views'.

The young mother said that, in response to a perceived growing left-wing society, she wanted to grasp 'the perfect opportunity to show where I stand'.

She added: 'I didn't do it to try to change minds of those who disagree with me, but more so to show like-minded people that they’re not alone and it’s okay to stand up for what you believe in, even if it’s not popular right now.

'I want younger Americans to know it’s okay to not follow the current liberal path.'