U.S. Congressman Steve King, R-Iowa, will face strong competition from the left as he campaigns for re-election this year, but it might surprise Republican voters to find out that he is also being challenged by a member of his own political party.

Paul Lunde, an Ames attorney and author of four books, has announced his plans to run against King in the Republican primary that will take place later this year. Lunde is vying for the opportunity to represent Iowa’s 4th Congressional District, which includes Ames and Story County.

Lunde, a Harvard Law graduate and Army veteran, said his decision to challenge King came about after King failed to acknowledge some ideas Lunde had for the country.

“I drafted these constitutional amendments, and I asked him several different times to introduce them in Congress and he didn’t do it. He didn’t even reply to my requests,” Lunde said.

The 12 amendments that Lunde drafted and sent to King include plans to stop deficit spending by the government, balance the budget without an income tax increase, make Social Security permanent, modernize the courts and repeal the mandates in the Affordable Care Act while leaving the sections dealing with pre-existing conditions and allowing young people to stay on their parents’ health insurance.

This is not the first time Lunde has ran for office, including a run for the senate in 2014 and two campaigns for the same congressional seat that he is seeking now in 1988 and 1992.

Currently, Lunde is collecting the necessary signatures to get his name on the ballot for the 2016 election. Lunde said he is a long way away from the 1,866 signatures required, but he said he will keep going until the mid-March cutoff date for candidates.

“I have several hundred but I don’t have anywhere near 1,866,” Lunde said.

He added that he sent nominating petitions to the GOP county leaders of the district in an attempt to gain more signatures at the Iowa caucuses next month.

Lunde may face an uphill battle while taking on King in the GOP primaries, but he said he thinks the people of the district will support his views when they hear his message.