The Hillary Clinton campaign has announced that ardent late-term abortion advocate Wendy Davis will stump on Hillary’s behalf in the state of Iowa. For those who do not remember, former Texas state Senator Wendy Davis lost her bid against Governor Greg Abbott by more than 20 percentage points. But Davis’s real claim to fame was proudly defending late-term abortion by standing for hours during a state Congressional filibuster. Weeks after Davis endorsed Clinton, the 2016 Democrat presidential candidate

decided to fly her to Iowa so Davis can campaign on Clinton’s behalf.

In her first act as a Hillary pundit, Davis poked at Carly Fiorina over her opposition to Planned Parenthood’s baby parts operation after they were exposed by the Center for Medical Progress in a series of undercover videos. “I think she’s part of the problem,” Davis told KXAN, “And she has demonstrated that she too is going to take a position that’s contrary to that many people in this country…” she said.

Even though Hillary Clinton claims to be an advocate for children, she is a long-time advocate of abortion, even late-term abortion. She recently supported Planned Parenthood when gruesome videos released by CMP showed their top level staffers negotiating the price of baby parts. In 2009, Hillary Clinton praised the founder of Planned Parenthood. Margaret Sanger was known for her eugenic beliefs which targeted the poor community with sterilization. She also addressed the Klu Klux Klan.

On her campaign website under “issues,” Hillary reiterates her support of Planned Parenthood and abortion:

Hillary will stand up to Republican attempts to defund Planned Parenthood, which would restrict access to critical health care services, like cancer screenings, contraception, and safe, legal abortion. She will fight to protect the Affordable Care Act, which bans insurance companies from discriminating against women and guarantees 47 million women and counting access to preventive care.”

Davis has also been a defender of abortion, having had one herself. During her failed gubernatorial campaign in Texas, Davis received funding from Planned Parenthood, NARAL, and the abortion lobby. Davis recently admitted to aborting her own daughter after 20 weeks because of a “brain deformation,” calling her abortion an act of “love.”

A message linking Wendy Davis’s abortion stand to Hillary’s posted to the “Women for Hillary Organizing Event” says the campaign is “so excited to have Wendy Davis.” According to the Clinton campaign, Davis will travel to several venues in Iowa raging from Des Moines to Cedar Falls, Dec. 17-18, to talk about “Clinton’s commitment to protecting women’s access to health care and defending Planned Parenthood from Republican’s attacks” – code for abortion on demand for any reason at any time.