Artist ties sculptures made of found objects to film stories

San Francisco-based artist Jerry Barrish stands by one of his pieces called "Dogs Playing Poker" while talking on June 25 about his assemblage found object art at the Loveland Museum/Gallery. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: "Cast and Crew: The Sculpture and Film of Jerry Barrish." When: Runs through Sept. 14; museum open Tuesday-Sunday. Where: Loveland Museum/Gallery, 503 N. Lincoln Ave., Loveland. Cost: $5 admission; free days on July 18, Aug. 21 and Sept. 10. More info: call 962-2410 or visit lovelandmuseumgallery.org.

Marlene Dietrich poses with a sultry leg on a stool, only the legs are made out of pipes and the chair is made out of metal scraps.

Behind her at the Loveland Museum/Gallery are sculptures made from chopsticks, tire pieces, old buffing brushes, oil funnels, Tupperware lids and car parts.

The show, "Cast and Crew: The Sculpture and Film of Jerry Barrish" of found art turned into sculptures, will be open at the Loveland museum until Sept. 14. After that, the exhibit will continue to tour at other galleries around the country.

Jerry Barrish attended his first assemblage art show in 1989 after he had just started creating his brand of art. The artists used rusted metal, twisted old furniture or old dolls. The junk these artists looked for usually had its own intrinsic beauty.

None of them were using plastic.

Neither were they telling a story with their work.

Barrish's pieces are full of stories. And the parts don't start off with any beauty at all. It's just stuff people didn't want.

Advertisement

"I'm fortunate to have found a unique voice," he said.

He first started mining the beach near his home in Pacifica, Calif., in 1989 and made an assemblage Christmas tree. Then he created small figures and later, larger figures. The pieces he found would dictate what he made.

He created four dogs sitting around a poker table because he remembers as a young boy going to the barbershop with his father and seeing calendars of dogs playing poker.

The assemblage found object art piece called "Marlene" by Jerry Barrish is part of an exhibit called "Cast and Crew: The Sculpture and Film of Jerry Barrish" that runs through Sept. 14. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"I just loved those dogs playing poker," he said. "They were in every gas station."

When he went to Berlin on a six-month artist grant, he decided to design a depiction of Marlene Dietrich, a famous German film and theater actress from the early 20th century.

He had to look for specific pieces to make her wide-brimmed hat and skirts.

Barrish has worked in film and art during his career. He decided he wanted his creations to act in film, too, so he wrote two scripts; one about Marlene Dietrich and the other called, "The Sanctity of Marriage."

When people watch the videos in the gallery, they will recognize the actors and crew posed throughout the show, he said.

"None of these pieces (in the show) were made for the video," Barrish said. "Everything in the two videos are displayed here. The interesting thing is you don't have a clue how big things are in real life."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Benes at 970-669-5050 ext. 530 or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter. twitter.com/jessicabenes.