Open enrollment for Obamacare is now underway. While 17.6 million Americans have signed up for coverage in the 5 years since the Affordable Care Act passed, there are still hundreds of thousands of people who remain uninsured. In Atlanta alone some 400,000 people have no health insurance.

This year the Obama Administration is pulling out all of the stops to get the word out that everyone should be covered. V-103’s Ryan Cameron, host of the Ryan Cameron Morning Show with Wanda Smith joined hosts of 4 other radio stations in a special invitation to interview President Barack Obama and other senior administration officials about the importance of people being covered by healthcare. Cameron and radio hosts from Seattle, Kansas City, Dallas, and Tampa sat down with Senior Advisor Valerie Jarrett, U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Sylvia Burwell and Cecilia Munoz Director of the Domestic Policy Council in one on one interviews.

Jarrett had a special message for women telling Cameron there are things that are covered without a co-pay like domestic violence counseling, screenings for mammograms and pap smears and all other things that women need to do on a regular basis so there are no more excuses for not taking care of themselves.

In addition to urging Americans to sign up for healthcare during the open enrollment period, President Obama issued a challenge to 20 cities, including Atlanta to sign up the most people by December 15 and win a special visit from the President. Here are the cities involved in the challenge:

· Atlanta, GA · Milwaukee, WI · Charlotte, NC · Nashville, TN · Chicago, IL · New Orleans, LA · Dallas, TX · Oakland, CA · Denver, CO · Philadelphia, PA · Detroit, MI · Phoenix, AZ · Great Falls, MT · Richmond, VA · Kansas City, MO · Salt Lake City, UT · Las Vegas, NV · Seattle, WA · Long Beach, CA · Tampa, FL

Atlanta Mayor Kasim Reed enlisted the help of V-103 and Ryan Cameron to get the word out by visiting the White House on his behalf for the conversation with the President. V-103 is the only music formatted station invited to participate in the “Live from the White House” conversations.

Listen to the People’s Station V-103 Monday morning at 7:30 am. for the special interview with President Obama on the Ryan Cameron Morning Show with Wanda Smith.