Lame duck presidents face a frustrating challenge. There they are, looking at their last one or two years in office with an eye towards taking advantage of the time left to complete unfinished agenda items and building a legacy in the process. And yet no one seems to be cooperating. Congress – especially when it's headed by the opposing party – is often disinclined to help out someone on his way out, and the attitude is amplified when they think they themselves are being excluded or overridden. Presidential candidates aren't very useful. Those in the opposing party are eager to cast the sitting commander-in-chief as a failure, and even those in the same party are determined to be their own men and women, separating from the president on select issues. And the media, arguably a bit bored after a more than six-year arranged marriage with the chief executive, are turning their collective attention elsewhere, less interested in the vision of someone who is looking at the end of the career road.

[READ: The Death of the Bush Doctrine]

Obama, then, has ended up doing what he's often done in the earlier part of his presidency: go it alone. And while Republicans complain about the "imperial" nature of Obama's presidency, the president's approach has brought him two potentially huge foreign policy accomplishments with Iran and Cuba. And with it, Obama is displaying a confidence and comfort rarely seen in his first six years. Obama isn't just adopting a nothing-to-lose attitude of a fourth-quarter president. He's acting like he's in the fourth quarter and ahead by two touchdowns and a field goal.

"I think he's fed up with Washington, and the kind of post-partisan president has become the partisan president," says Larry Jacobs, a University of Minnesota political science professor. "It's either resignation or an arrogance." But acting alone may be his own option, Jacobs notes. "There's not one iota of hope that Republicans will behave in a way that is supportive of the president."

After a series of domestic policy wins – notably, delivered by the judicial branch – Obama showed that the legislative branch is limited in how much it can control the executive. The Supreme Court upheld a critical part of the Affordable Care Act, as well as a lesser-discussed ruling reinforcing laws against housing discrimination. Same-sex marriage was declared the law of the land, adding to executive orders and agency rulemaking the president has engineered to support gay and lesbian couples as well as transgender Americans. While Obama (who once opposed gay marriage) was not the driving force behind the legal evolution, the matter will forever be associated with his presidency and his era, making it part of his historical legacy.

And in his demeanor, the president has been bolder as well, especially on the matter of race. Early in his presidency, Obama was verbally swatted down for comments related to African-Americans Skip Gates, a Harvard professor arrested in his own home, and Trayvon Martin, an unarmed teenager shot in Florida. But Obama seems recently to be unafraid of any backlash on racial comments telling mourners in South Carolina that he was tired of hearing entreaties for a "conversation" on race after a tragedy like the church shooting occurs. "There's no shortcut. We don't need more talk," Obama said.

At a recent news conference, the president dressed down a reporter who asked why Obama was "content" to leave four Americans detained in Iran. And when it came to the controversial Iran deal itself – a pact that could fail badly or mark a historic moment in Middle East peace and international security – Obama openly invited more criticism of the deal so he could address it.

[PHOTOS: The Big Picture – July 2015]

On Tuesday, the U.N. Security Council backed the nuclear deal the Obama administration and other foreign partners negotiated with Iran. That was the day after Cuba and the U.S. re-opened embassies in each other's nations after a more than half-century, Cold War freeze-out. The rapprochement, combined with Iran, could give Obama a solid foreign policy legacy, as well.

But again, Congress is not ready to let the president rack those two foreign policy victories. On Cuba, lawmakers are pledging to hold up the normalization of relations, either by refusing to confirm an ambassador or by denying the funds needed for the embassy itself. And on Iran, virtually all Republicans and some Democrats are opposed to, or skittish about the Iran deal, worried that it gives up too much in sanctions relief without getting enough assurances that Iran cannot develop a nuclear weapon.

Some of the pushback, Democrats say, is simply an automatic rejection of a president they don't trust or much like – and whose legacy they don't want to enable. It's unfair, says Sen. Dick Durbin, an Illinois Democrat and assistant minority leader, to suggest that Obama was only working on the Iran and Cuba deals to secure his personal legacy. And "to think they'd oppose the agreement before it was even [finally negotiated] raises serious questions about their motivation," Durbin says.

But there are substantive concerns as well. Both Iran and Cuba raise the broader matter of economic sanctions, and whether they are effective in pressuring a country toward democracy and nonproliferation. The Cuba embargo has done little to change things in the island nation, critics of the policy note, in part because the sanctions were not multilateral. In Iran, international sanctions brought the Iranians to the negotiating table, proponents of the deal say, but would not serve to force Iran to completely abandon any nuclear program, even a peaceful nuclear energy program. The international community, which wants to do business with Iran, was also not likely to continue sanctions indefinitely, they note.

But Sen. Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee and chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, says that isn't entirely the point. "It does put our country in a box" if other nations do not continue the economic pressure, Corker says, but that doesn't mean the U.S. should not use its power to impose sanctions. "People do want to do business with the United States," he says.

[MORE: Obama's Use of the Bully Pulpit Will Determine His Legacy]

It's also not clear whether Iran and Cuba will indeed be genuine legacy-making issues for the president, says Duke University political science professor Peter Feaver, a former National Security Council adviser during the George W. Bush administration. "It can have two different meanings – the trophies you put on a wall or a mantelpiece," and the sort of deals which stand the test of time, resulting in a more secure world, he notes. "Did this administration get it right, or did they take a gamble they didn't need to take?" he says.