John Sheehan, FACHE, was named President, UW Health American Center and Senior Vice President, UW Hospital and Clinics in June 2013.

Before that, the Sun Prairie native served as Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer at UnityPoint Health-St. Luke's Hospital, a large community hospital with 560 beds serving northeast Iowa, based in Cedar Rapids..

Prior to joining St. Luke's, Sheehan served as Vice President of Hospital Administration at ThedaCare, a 420-bed hospital system in Appleton; and at Danville, Penn.’s Geisinger Health System, a 540-bed tertiary care and teaching hospital with an academic medicine partnership with the Thomas Jefferson University. He held various roles and responsibilities including developing the nation's first rural Medicare HMO network, and served as Geisinger Medical Center/Central Region’s Vice President of Operations. John started his career as Vice President of Operations of St. Mary-Corwin Regional Medical Center, a large community hospital in Pueblo, Colorado.

UW Health at The American Center, will open to patients on Aug. 17 with the grand opening at the end of July 2015. As part of The Star’s Executive Q & A Series, Sheehan agreed to answer a few questions ranging from his background to the new facility itself.

The Star (TS) Before we start with the actual questions, please give a brief biographical sketch, including your relationship to the Sun Prairie community, as well as where you fit in with the Sheehan Family (i.e., relationship to Curt and Fran).

John Sheehan (JS): I am the son of Curt and Mary Sheehan and nephew of Fran and JoAnn Sheehan. My mom is the only one still with us and she lives in Sun Prairie. Curt and Fran were teachers and coaches in Sun Prairie for over 40 years. My dad was principal of the high school for over 20 years. Curt and Fran are both members of the Wisconsin High School Football Coaches Hall of Fame and volunteered many hours of their time to build the park and recreation programs in Sun Prairie as well as other activities to support the school system and community. This service culminated in them being honored by the community, naming a city park after them.

My mom is also part of the Krebs family from Sun Prairie and is a registered nurse and worked for Dr. Syty and Nelson in Sun Prairie until she was almost 70 years old. JoAnn was a teacher at Sacred Hearts for over 40 years. As you can see, these four individuals and their families are part of the fabric of Sun Prairie and touched many lives. I grew up in Sun Prairie and graduated from SPHS in 1979.

TS: How did your upbringing in Sun Prairie prepare you for your field? What specifically about your education prepared you for the health profession? Did you think it would bring you back to the Sun Prairie area?

JS: I was always taught by my parents that education and healthcare were the most meaningful careers because of your ability to make a difference in a community and help others. I always have felt I channeled their perspectives in becoming a healthcare administrator. I think my dad contributed to Sun Prairie becoming one of the best school districts in the state and we all benefited from this in terms of the foundation to pursue higher education and ultimately, our professional goals. I always thought I would retire back here but this unique, even, once in a lifetime opportunity to build a healthcare campus that is on the doorstep of my hometown and part of a great organization like UW Health, I could have never imagined. To build this new and innovative healthcare campus from the ground up is an honor.

TS: Explain how your life experience helped prepare you for the specific role of being the administrator for the new hospital.

JS: My dad used to say that discipline is an important part of a student’s life so the importance of continuous learning and staying focused on your goals were an emphasis. Also, sports were a big part of my younger days so striving to be the best, being a great teammate, and practice makes perfect were things I learned. I had many teachers and coaches from Sun Prairie High School that I remember fondly. My mom and dad were role models in terms of service to the community and they always taught me actions speak louder than words.

More importantly, my wife, Amy, who passed away last year, was a Type 1 Diabetic and suffered through many healthcare battles including a kidney transplant and brain cancer. My daughter also has a chronic condition.

My experience having watched them as patients has had a profound impact on me and what I believe is necessary to make a true patient-centered environment.

That has been a goal of UW Health at The American Center from the beginning with patient and family advisors being involved both in design of the facility, but also in how we operate on a day to day basis.

TS: Tell our readers what services the new UW Hospital will offer, and describe the urgency and reasons for building the hospital where it will be located.

JS: UW Health at The American Center will be an integrated healthcare campus with some unique areas of focus opening on August 17, 2015.The facility was conceived in 2005 when land was purchased in The American Center Parkway.

This location was seen as both convenient and easily accessible but also able to serve the parts of Dane County and beyond that are growing in population and aging, requiring the services we will offer. It also allows us to move some services to this location so we can renovate and improve our facilities at the main campus.

We will provide inpatient and outpatient services focused on the surgical specialties of orthopedics, urology, general surgery, and bariatrics.

The facility will have 56 beds and 14 operating rooms. We will also be an access point into the UW Health system through our 24/7/365 emergency department and significant ambulatory capabilities.

We will offer some new programs in the areas of health and well-being and sports performance that we are very excited about and we think will benefit the communities we serve greatly. The facility is a half a million square feet and is essentially divided into three wings; hospital, clinic, and sports performance/wellness. Adjacent to UW Health at The American Center will be the new UW Health Rehabilitation Hospital, opening in late 2015.

TS: Describe how the new UW Hospital will be involved with the local community – specifically, involvement with local schools and community organizations, and in particular, in Sun Prairie.

JS: We want to work with local communities and high schools to keep our community healthy. We have the experts and we are in a position to help. We have programs that can promote health and well-being and train athletes, young and old. We want to offer volunteer opportunities so students can see the value and importance of careers in the healthcare profession. Personally, I very much want to connect again with the Sun Prairie School district to see if we can work together in some new and innovative ways.

TS: According to the website nursingguide.ph, the United States alone has a current demand for 1.2 million nurses because of retirements from the profession. How will staff at the new UW Hospital encourage Sun Prairie High School students to enter health-related professions, including nursing?

JS: We can offer programs in this area and also encourage volunteer opportunities that will allow students to see the importance of the nursing role. As they choose nursing, UW Health has an expansive internship program. Our nursing leadership will reach out to the schools as well.

TS: Describe the impact the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, will have on UW Hospitals and on the opening of the new facility. Do you anticipate more chronic or acute health care cases from populations who do not currently have insurance?

JS: The Affordable Care Act affects every health care organization in the nation in a number of ways.

It provides a way for formerly uninsured people to obtain health insurance and therefore will make it easier to access primary care earlier in the course of an illness. UW Health has added primary-care staff and has changed the way we deliver primary care in order to be able to treat new patients who formerly may not have had routine access to care. The ACA also emphasizes cost control. The American Center site will allow us to provide some services in a lower-cost setting than the main hospital at 600 Highland Ave.

TS: As a follow-up, has the Affordable Care Act resulted in medical professionals from UW Health and UW Hospitals and Clinics leaving the profession? If so, how do you plan to keep them in the profession (besides working in a new facility)? If not, do you anticipate more leaving the profession in the future?

JS: We have not seen an increase in the number of health-care professionals leaving the field, and except for retirements (which are growing in number because so many nurses are of retirement age) we don’t anticipate more leaving in the near future.

TS: Give us some specifics about the hospital itself – how will it be designed differently than the existing UW Hospital? What is the anticipated number of patients each year?

JS: The facility was designed with a tremendous amount of patient, family, and staff input. We think this will allow us to minimize wait times and bring services to the patient as much as possible and make it a great experience.

We will be LEED certified and very efficient in terms of our use of natural resources.

We want to focus on the health and well-being of our communities versus just a place to go when you are sick, so this will definitely be a unique aspect.

We will offer many community programs so we hope many people will take advantage of them.

TS: How will UW Hospital gauge whether or not the new facility is a success?

JS: We will be defined by the impact and response of the communities we serve.

We are dedicated to providing a compassionate patient and family experience and excellent clinical quality that UW Health is known for in Wisconsin.

TS: Anything else to add?

JS: We are getting close to ending the construction journey but this will be only the beginning for UW Health at The American Center.

I very much want to hear from the people we will serve.

My email address is JSheehan@uwhealth.org and my number is (608) 332-4213.

We would also encourage you to sign up for our blog, Play by Play, at uwhealth.org to watch our progress.