Topics: 2015 Toronto Film Festival, anti-lgbt discrimination, Editor's Picks, ellen page, Freeheld, Julianne Moore, LGBT Rights, Marriage equality, Peter Sollett, TIFF, Entertainment News

One of the buzziest films at this year’s Toronto International Film Festival is “Freeheld,” Peter Sollett’s biopic about Laurel Hester (Julianne Moore) and Stacie Andree (Ellen Page), a lesbian couple who fought a landmark battle against Ocean County, New Jersey’s county legislature to allow Laurel to transfer her pension benefits to Stacie after she was diagnosed with terminal cancer in 2005.

While the film is powerful in its own right, there are a number of real-life events that make the experience of viewing “Freeheld” particularly profound: June’s SCOTUS’ historic marriage equality ruling, as well as the fact that co-lead Ellen Page came out while shooting the film, making her one of the very few (if not the only) openly gay actresses to play a gay character in a major Hollywood film. We sat down with Sollett to talk about the process behind the film, Ellen Page’s historic coming out speech, and the future of gay marriage in this country.

The following interview has been lightly edited and condensed.

What drew you to this story?

What drew me in was Ron’s amazing script. I found it to be one of the most moving love stories I’d ever read. And Ellen Page was attached to it when I read it and I thought: This is going to be fantastic.

When you signed on to make the film, how much were you thinking about the current political landscape surrounding gay marriage?

It was very much in our minds in different ways at different times. While were making the movie it seemed that the Supreme Court was not going to be able to avoid this case, and we didn’t know how they were going to take it or how they were going to roll. And we thought that either we were going to have a film that dramatized the reasons we needed marriage equality in the country, or we were going to have a film that reminded everybody how it was the activism of thousands of people over many years that turned the country toward marriage equality and reminded us why we need to defend it. In both ways, a movie worth making and a movie we would be proud of.

In making the film, did you have any hope or intent to change the opinions of viewers who may not have been on board with gay marriage?

I didn’t, and I didn’t want us to be trying to persuade people. I think if our agenda was to persuade people to adopt a certain position on an issue then we ran the risk of making a film that was didactic and ultimately that people resisted. Our agenda was to make a beautiful love story. And we felt that if the audience invested in that love story then they would support the concept that [their] love is as equal as any other.

Julianne Moore and Ellen Page had such a powerful onscreen dynamic. As a director, how did you help them foster this onscreen relationship?

It was fascinating. You’re talking about two of the great screen actors of our time, and it’s thrilling to watch, it’s thrilling to witness greatness at work. We spent a lot of time together; we spent a lot of time with the real-life people. And the ladies spent time on their own, getting comfortable with one another. But they’re good. They can figure it out.

Julianne Moore’s last TIFF film, “Still Alice,” where she also plays a character with an illness, won her the Oscar. Do you have awards on the brain at all?

Not really. I didn’t know about “Still Alice” — I knew she had made a film before our film but I didn’t know the guys who made it — I didn’t know what the story was while I was shooting. And I was like, oh, uh, hmm, interesting, in good ways and… we’ll see. And we were cutting the movie and she was at the Oscars and we were texting and it was all very exciting, and then she won, and it was great for her and great for our film and hopefully more people will see it and enjoy it.

How important was it for you, and for Julianne and Ellen, to portray Stacie and Laurel accurately? Were the characters in the film very close to real life, or was there some artistic license there?

They’re pretty close. I mean, obviously when you distill a whole life down into a few hours you emphasize certain aspects of peoples’ characters so you can tell the story in a concise way. But both of those actors did extensive research with the real-life characters and their families and did the very best to render them in a way that was accurate.

Did Stacie like the film?

Yeah, we showed her the film and she was really moved and happy and relieved, and I’m really looking forward to seeing it together. I’m looking forward to having a lengthy conversation with her.