Dual-eligible 101 Read about the nuts and bolts of Michigan's efforts on dual-eligible patients in this Q&A

Improving quality and reducing costs are primary goals cited by participating HMO and mental health organizations in Michigan's dual-eligible demonstration program. (See story.)



Executives I interviewed believe they will improve quality by improved care coordination. The cost reductions, or savings, are baked into the blended rates paid to the participating organizations.



For example, monthly rates per member have been cut by 1 percent the first year, 2 percent the second year, and 4 percent in year three. Those guaranteed rate cuts have made providers nervous.



As one of the more ambitious pilot projects in President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act, the dual-eligible program projects to cut at least 7 percent of costs over the next three years.





Related Links

But two new reports — from theand— concluded that reducing costs and coordinating care is more difficult than expected.Dave Tigue, president for, which operates four clinics in Detroit, said it is too early into the program to know whether the payments are adequate to cover costs."We wanted a little higher (rates), but we don't see a problem now," Tigue said.Dick Miles, the top state administrator of the program, thinks the rates are adequate and hasn't heard any complaints about the rates. He said it also was too early to tell if quality and care coordination has improved for the 35,000 enrolled patients.Another goal is to improve care in 74 monitored measurements, including rate of falls, body-mass weight assessment, breast cancer screening, colorectal cancer screening, annual flu vaccine, readmission rate and satisfaction.Kerry Branick, an administrator with the, said she expects to have interim quality and patient visit data on Michigan this summer and first-year evaluation completed by the end of the year.Joe Ferguson, former CEO of, said the number of dual-eligible patients treated at Advantage's five health centers in Detroit have tripled the past two years to about 9 percent of 25,000 annual patients."We are seeing more patients because some doctors are leaving their practice and their patients are coming to us and re-enrolling in the program," Ferguson said."We are OK with those payments," he said. But their effect can be hard to predict. "We are different than primary care offices. We don't get additional resources to manage those patient populations, and our patients tend to be more distressed."Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325. Twitter: @jaybgreene