While Obama has been busy attempting to create a legacy it looks as if a legacy has been creating itself behind the scenes without much work on his part. Obama is set to make 64-year history for worse back to back midterm loss ever.

According to The Washington Times on Nov. 2 Obama is now inching up on Harry Truman’s midterm loss record, which has maintained the top spot in history for the most midterm losses back to back for the past 64 years.

The State website is also reporting that Obama is set to do what no other president was able to do in the past 50 years and that is to have “two horrible, terrible, awful midterm elections in a row.” It is more than likely that Obama will walk away with the legacy of the worst midterm loss of any two-term President since Harry Truman, who also had a less than stellar outcome for his Democratic Party.

Truman’s record loss for his back to back midterms was 83 House seats. He lost 55 seats in 1946 and the remaining 28 seats out of the 83 were gone in the election of 1950. Even the bookmakers are getting in on the turmoil of the U.S. political field today.

The Vegas odds makers are having a field day with the midterm election with a GOP “landslide” predicted in Tuesday’s mid-term elections. Gambling 911 reports that Vegas odds maker, who is also the former Libertarian VP candidate, Wayne Allyn Root predicts a “blood bath” among the Democrats during Tuesday’s midterm elections.

Root predicted the Republicans would win 50 to 60 Congressional seats in the 2010 midterms and the experts said he “was out of his mind.” The GOP won 63 seats. The Times poll suggests Tuesday’s results will be even worse than were seen in 2010 for the Democratic House seats. According to Root the landslide will be very similar to the 2010 midterm outcome.

In 2010 the GOP had the biggest landslide in almost a century and that was based on Obamacare. This midterm election is based on “the fear of the healthcare scare of our lifetime-Ebola,” said Root. When the Democrats are even trailing badly in Massachusetts, which is a staunch Democratic state, that says a lot about the midterm projections.

Many Democrats are not wanting Obama’s help on the campaign trail. Root said that “Democratic candidates are making believe that Obama never existed. Root goes on to say:

“Now those same Democrats…Obama's brothers and sisters in socialist policy…are on the run from Obama like he’s contagious. The medical term might be "loser's disease." They don’t want Obama anywhere near them. Not on the stage with them. Not in a photo. Not in the same city. Not in the same state. Obama is as toxic as Ebola…to Democrats!”

Root believes that Obama’s refusal to seal the borders when it comes to Ebola and his naming of an “Ebola Czar” who knows nothing about healthcare "sealed the deal and his legacy.” After sending 4000 U.S. military troops into the Ebola-saturated areas in West Africa to “face the invisible enemy,” people see Obama’s overall approach to Ebola as “incompetence.” “This is madness,” said Root.