SCHAUMBURG, Ill., Oct. 27, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Quadrant 4 System Corporation (QFOR) ("Quadrant 4" or the "Company"), a leading technology company offering state-of-the art SaaS (Software as a Service) and PaaS (Platform as a Service) based Exchange Solutions, today announces it has joined the The Private Exchange Coalition (PEC) www.pecoalition.com as a new member. PEC is the premier industry association for organizations affiliated with private exchanges and includes the following firms, Connecture, Array Health, Bloom Health, ConnectedHealth, Softheon and Leavitt Partners.

The Private Exchange Coalition (PEC) was originally formed by five industry-leading private exchange technology vendors as a means to promote shared industry standards, best practices and increase awareness of the powerful ways private exchanges improve the selection, administration and use of employee benefits. PEC aims to help establish private exchanges as a long-term solution for enabling consumers to easily evaluate and select employee benefits that best meet their health care, economic and lifestyle needs. The PEC will be a catalyst for bringing best in class e-commerce solutions to the employer-sponsored insurance market.

John Fiacco, a founding member of PEC and CEO and Co-founder of ConnectedHealth www.connectedhealth.com, said, "I've known Robert Steele for a number of years and think highly of him and the innovative work he is doing at Quadrant 4 Health. I believe he'll bring a great perspective to the PEC."

Robert Steele, President of Quadrant 4 Health, affirmed, "Quadrant 4 is excited to join the Private Exchange Coalition. Each participating organization possesses a desire to see the Affordable Care Act work for all stakeholders. We are thankful to Leavitt Partners www.leavittpartners.com for their help in uniting Quadrant 4 with the PEC and look forward to identifying best practices for our industry through this esteemed group. We believe our Social, Mobile, Analytic and Cloud (SMAC) approach to building platforms will bring a unique perspective to the PEC and look forward to being a contributing member."

Dhru Desai, Executive Chairman of Quadrant 4, stated, "The Private Exchange Coalition is quickly becoming the premier industry group dedicating to improving consumer exchange literacy, advocating on behalf of the industry with a common voice and developing data interoperability standards. The market recognizes the strides that Quadrant 4 is making in our healthcare business and we are gratified to be invited to be part of the formation of this elite club."

About Quadrant 4 System Corporation

Quadrant 4 System Corporation is a SMAC (Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) technology company offering state-of-the art SaaS (Software as a Service) and PaaS (Platform as a Service) based Exchange Solutions in Healthcare (QHIX), Education (QEDIX) and Media (QBLITZ). Quadrant 4's highly scalable vertical cloud platforms coupled with our Global Professional Services organization provide our clients with a competitive advantage in the marketplace. Please visit www.qfor.com for more information.

About The Private Exchange Coalition (PEC)

The Private Exchange Coalition (PEC) is the premier industry association for organizations affiliated with private exchanges. The coalition seeks to increase awareness of private exchanges and the innovative capabilities they provide for improving the selection, administration, and use of employee benefits while promoting shared industry standards and best practices.

Forward-Looking Statements

This release contains forward-looking statements, which are subject to the inherent uncertainties in predicting future results and conditions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact should be considered to be forward-looking statements. Certain factors could cause actual results and conditions to differ materially from those projected in such forward-looking statements. We do not undertake any obligation to release publicly revised or updated forward-looking information, and such information included in this release is based on information currently available and may not be reliable after this date.

Raymond A. Catroppa, CFA raymond.catroppa@qfor.com Quadrant 4 System Corporation +1 (917) 363-1448