As the first semester of the school year reaches the halfway mark, countless college freshmen are becoming aware that their clothes are feeling rather snug.

While the so-called freshman 15 may be hyperbole, studies confirm that many students do put on five to 10 pounds during that first year away from home. Now new research suggests that an underlying cause may be the students’ widely vacillating patterns of sleep.

A study in the journal Behavioral Sleep Medicine looked at the sleep habits of first-semester freshmen. Researchers followed 132 first-year students at Brown University who kept sleep diaries. After nine weeks, more than half had gained nearly six pounds.

Was it abbreviated sleep? Optimally, experts say, teenagers need about nine hours and 15 minutes a night. These freshmen averaged about seven hours and 15 minutes. In the journal PLOS One, researchers reported that when teenagers are sleep-deprived, they more readily reach for candy and desserts.

Or were the Brown students’ late bedtimes the scale-tipping factor? On average, they went to bed around 1:30 a.m. A study in the journal Sleep found that each hour later that bedtime fell during the school or workweek was associated with about a two-point increase in body mass index.

While both factors may have played a role, the researchers in the Brown study identified a new one: variability. Unlike workers, who typically wake around the same time, students whose class schedules differ daily are inclined to sleep in one morning and get up earlier the next. Lures of the nonacademic variety can also wreak havoc on a good night’s sleep.

As they reset their body clocks, they set themselves up to pack on the pounds. Much like shift workers and frequent fliers, their metabolisms keep readjusting, and they might feel too tired to exercise and gravitate toward foods dense with sugar and starch.

“Variability is taking the field of sleep research a step further,” said Dean W. Beebe, an expert on adolescent sleep at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.

Habits developed in the first year of college can be significant, said Brandy M. Roane, lead author of the Brown study and an assistant professor at the University of North Texas Health Science Center.

“It’s a crucial period when they’re on their own and their health behaviors are solidifying into long-term behaviors,” said Roane.

Roane said the study implicitly emphasized the importance of parents helping their children establish good sleep habits while under the same roof. She urged parents to teach children about their sleep needs.

“A lot of parents give up setting bedtimes when their teenagers are in high school,” she said. “At college, no one says, ‘you can’t sleep till 1 p.m.,’ so students need the skills to figure that out.”