WASHINGTON — In the first results of a long-delayed Obama administration initiative to hold parole-like hearings at the prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, a military panel has recommended transferring a Yemeni detainee who had been ordered held indefinitely without trial, the Pentagon announced on Wednesday.

The decision to change the status of the detainee, Mahmoud al Mujahid — who had been considered too dangerous to let go under any conditions — was made by a so-called Periodic Review Board. President Obama issued an executive order establishing the review board system in March 2011, but it had not been used before Mr. Mujahid’s hearing last fall.

“By consensus, the P.R.B. members found that continued law of war detention is no longer necessary to protect against a continuing significant threat to the United States and that Mujahid is therefore eligible for transfer subject to appropriate security and humane treatment conditions,” the military said in a statement.

The panel did not say which country Mr. Mujahid should be transferred to, but it is generally understood that most Yemenis will ultimately be repatriated. Still, the change does not mean he is likely to leave anytime soon; 55 other Yemeni detainees have long been recommended for transfer if security conditions could be met, but remain stranded at Guantánamo because of instability in Yemen.

David Remes, a lawyer for Mr. Mujahid, said Mr. Mujahid was “delighted” by the board’s decision.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Now that he’s been cleared, he should be transferred,” Mr. Remes said. “The fact that he’s a Yemeni should not hold him back.”

In the latest setback for the Obama administration’s hopes to winnow the population of low-level Yemeni detainees, a major terrorist attack on Dec. 5 on Yemen’s Ministry of Defense by a Qaeda-affiliated insurgent group led to an indefinite delay in a trip to Yemen by a United Nations agency that had been planned for this month.

The agency has been working with the Yemeni government to develop a rehabilitation program for some prisoners in Yemen. American and Yemeni officials have separately discussed using the program to handle some Yemeni detainees from Guantánamo.

The Dec. 5 attack, in which at least 52 people were killed, is being cited by congressional critics of Mr. Obama’s goal of closing the prison. The Pentagon is set to a deliver a classified briefing next week to the House Armed Services Committee about detainee matters, and congressional aides say questions about the implications of the attack on efforts to repatriate Yemenis are a top worry.

“I continue to be concerned about the security implications of transferring dangerous people to dangerous places like Yemen,” said Representative Howard P. McKeon, Republican of California, the chairman of the committee, who also noted that Yemen had “a history of mass prison breaks.”

As lower-level detainees from other countries have left Guantánamo, Yemenis have become the largest proportion remaining, making up 87 of the 155 prisoners there. A few are high-level suspects designated for trial, while a task force in 2009 and 2010 designated about two dozen prisoners — including Mr. Mujahid — for continued detention without trial. But the bulk of the Yemenis were recommended for transfer if security conditions could be met, which has proved difficult.

Last May, Mr. Obama recommitted his administration to moving lower-level prisoners, and he lifted a moratorium on Yemeni repatriations. Since then, 11 detainees have been transferred — more than had left in the previous two years — but none went to Yemen. Still, administration officials say they are actively reviewing the Yemenis’ status on a case-by-case basis.

One official familiar with the effort said policy makers were considering several options. They include trying to persuade the Saudi government to take custody of several Yemeni detainees who have tribal or family ties in Saudi Arabia; finding other countries willing to resettle a Yemeni or two; and repatriating a particularly low-risk Yemeni to see how it goes.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The potential rehabilitation program, officials say, has raised a possible way to reduce the risk of repatriating larger numbers of the Yemenis. In a joint statement last August, Mr. Obama and Yemen’s president, Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, cited the Yemeni government’s plans to “establish an extremist rehabilitation program to address the problem of violent extremism within Yemen, which could also facilitate the transfer of Yemeni detainees held at Guantánamo.”

About that same time, Yemen reached out to the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, seeking help from its Disengagement and Rehabilitation of Violent Extremists and Terrorists initiative, diplomatic officials said.

The program, which was begun in 2012, has worked with Nigeria and other countries in the Sahel region of Africa, in Indonesia and in Tajikistan, among others. Its employees include Douglas Stone, a retired Marine general who was credited with successfully revamping American detention operations in Iraq, and later designed an overhaul of detention practices in Afghanistan.

The United Nations agency held meetings in Rome in August and in London in October with Yemeni officials and a group of potential donor nations — including the United States — that are already working in Yemen, diplomatic officials said. The consortium’s planned visit to Yemen this month, which was postponed by the Dec. 5 attack, has not been rescheduled, the agency’s director, Jonathan Lucas, said in a phone interview.

“We have to wait for the security situation to improve for the U.N. to start operating missions to Yemen,” he said. “We don’t have any time frame at the moment.”

A person familiar with the agency’s methods, who was not authorized to speak on its behalf, said its recommendations center on creating a secure prison center where detainees could undergo intensive, individualized assessments by psychologists, sociologists, religious leaders, family members and others.

The goal is to identify what motivated each prisoner to get involved in a terrorist or insurgent group — ideological commitment, peer pressure, a desire for adventure or money — and separate the more extreme inmates from the moderates. Intense counseling, with the help of family and community leaders, can significantly reduce the risk that the more moderate prisoners will participate in terrorist activities after their release, the person said.

Mr. Mujahid is the first of several Yemenis who had been designated for indefinite detention to be scheduled for Periodic Review Board hearings. A leaked 2008 threat assessment file said he was captured by Pakistan in December 2001 and was ranked as “high risk” if released, portraying him as a “committed jihadist” and a likely bodyguard to Osama bin Laden.

An official familiar with the review of Mr. Mujahid’s case said that the 2008 intelligence assessment was outdated.