Photo

ON THE ROAD ACROSS SOUTH AMERICA

As a child, I lived in Brazil in the 1950s, and I marveled at the technological prowess of the Maracanã Stadium, which was always filled to capacity with fans watching their adored Pelé. Yet sewage flowed in some streets, and mudslides were common in the beachside communities of Ipanema and Leblon after heavy tropical rains. Monte Reel’s article evoked both the splendor and the squalor I knew back then. DAVID M. KLEINMAN, New York, posted on nytimes.com

I know change is inevitable, but it’s hard for me to imagine Puerto Maldonado, Peru, as a city of 200,000 people. My partner and I visited in 1978, when it was just a village, on our way to a local eco-lodge. For an amateur botanist, birder and natural-history buff, the idea that you could take an exit off a highway, probably cluttered with motels and fast-food joints, to Cuzco, the capital of the Incan Empire, makes my skin crawl. It meant something to get there 30 years ago. Now will it be a rest stop? DAVE EBERT, Westford, Mass., posted on nytimes.com

I lived and worked in Brazil and Peru and several other Latin American countries, but I must confess that it never occurred to me that it would be possible to ride a bus from Lima to São Paulo. It’s impressive that the Brazilians have built some kind of a road from the Atlantic Ocean to Porto Velho, but it’s astounding that there is a road from there across the Andes. JACK COBB, Reston, Va., posted on nytimes.com

This journey brings back memories of my own unsuccessful quest to cross South America in 1970. I started on foot in Peru, where I was working in earthquake relief with the Peace Corps, and eventually hitched on buses and trucks. I made it to La Paz, Bolivia, but I never reached Brazil. I have wonderful memories, though, of those earthquake survivors who shared what little they had as I trekked from the ruins of one mountain village after another. THOMAS L. COBB, Saratoga Springs, N.Y., posted on nytimes.com

IN THE COMPANY OF TRUCKERS

On a trip between Chicago and New York, my car filled with blue smoke, so I stopped on the Pennsylvania Turnpike. A semi pulled over, and the driver saw that my fan belt had broken. He found a bunch of belts in his truck and put one on my car, then followed me down the road. What a guy! Thank you to all truck drivers, like the one who rescued Rachel Kushner, and especially to my knight in shining semi, wherever you are. NANCY KANE, Belfast, Me., posted on nytimes.com

A JOURNEY TO THE CENTER OF THE WORLD

As a 16-year-old in 1959, I learned parachute-landing falls from Jacques-André Istel, whose jump school and center had just opened in Orange, Mass. Istel is truly the father of sport parachuting in the United States and is responsible for promoting it as a safe activity. I am delighted to see that Istel is on this side of the sod with his zest for innovation still intact. HENRY GREENLEAF, Tucson, posted on nytimes.com

What an absolutely amazing man. We could all learn from his appreciation for the things that make us human. His vignettes seem to hold the grandeur of history as well as the charm of absurdity. And I find great irony in the term “center of the world,” because Americans seem to feel as if they are the center of the world. BARBARA E. KASUBA, Candler, N.C., posted on nytimes.com

HOW OBAMACARE COULD UNLOCK JOBS

The ultimate “job lock” is the one a worker faces if he has a pre-existing condition that could lead to exorbitant premiums or even denial of coverage before passage of the Affordable Care Act. When I tried to open a business with two other employees, we could not afford coverage because one of us had had bypass surgery. We were locked into jobs that were less productive and profitable than what we could have accomplished in a new business. In the U.S., health care costs as a proportion of the G.D.P. are about double those of most industrialized nations. But by focusing on that, we overlook the nonmonetized costs of undermining entrepreneurial potential in our country. PETER B. MEYER, New Hope, Pa., posted on nytimes.com

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Don’t expect an avalanche of entrepreneurs pursuing their dream because of the A.C.A. I know many small-business owners, and never once have I heard, “If only I could get health insurance, I could open my business.” When we opened our two restaurants with small-business loans and savings, our business plans included the cost of health insurance. If you have a great idea, a solid business plan and some savings, you can embed your health insurance in your start-up costs and get a loan. MARK ROMAN, New York, posted on nytimes.com