Cardiovascular disease is the number one cause of death in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Heart disease, stroke and high blood pressure are responsible for one out of every three deaths. Cardiovascular disease is also the leading cause of death for American Indians. February is American Heart Month, and Oklahoma City Indian Clinic (OKCIC) is offering tips to help keep Oklahomans’ hearts healthy and strong.

“The heart is the powerhouse of the body,” said OKCIC physician Dr. DeKoda Bost. “As the hardest working muscle in your body, it needs proper nutrients and care to run smoothly. It’s important to understand risk factors for heart disease and how to prevent it. Maintaining a healthy diet, exercising regularly and not smoking are essential heart-healthy habits.”

OKCIC is offering the following tips to maintain a healthy heart:

Avoid trans fats. Trans fats, natural and artificial, can raise your cholesterol levels and increase your chance of developing heart disease and stroke. Cut out foods containing hydrogenated vegetable oils, as they may contain artificial trans fats. Check food labels when shopping, and eat more vegetables, fruits, poultry and fish while limiting sugary foods and red meat.

Cut back on salt. Eating too much salt can significantly raise blood pressure, which puts a strain on the arteries. This increase in blood pressure can ultimately lead to a clogged artery and increase the chance of a heart attack. Ask your doctor what your recommended sodium intake should be. Healthy teens and adults should limit their sodium intake to no more than 2,300 mg a day (about one teaspoon of salt). Children, adults over 51 years old and those with diabetes or high blood pressure may need to keep their sodium intake even lower.

Exercise regularly. Creating an exercise routine and sticking to it can have many positive effects on your health. Working out can increase circulation to and from the heart, reduce inflammation of the arteries and lower cholesterol and fat levels. Spending 30 minutes a day exercising can make a big impact on your overall cardiovascular health.

Don’t smoke. Cigarette smokers have a significantly higher risk of developing heart disease. If you currently smoke, talk to your doctor about ways to quit. Your dentist and pharmacist can help you find support, too. From over-the-counter medicines like the nicotine patch to prescriptions, there are plenty of options to help you start quitting.

Take control of your stress. Stress can play a key role in the healthiness of your heart. Like salt, it can increase blood pressure, too. Taking deep breaths, laughing out loud, getting enough sleep and organizing your surroundings are just a few small ways you can manage and lower your stress.

For more information, visit okcic.com.

About Oklahoma City Indian Clinic

Oklahoma City Indian Clinic (OKCIC) was established in 1974 to provide excellent health care and wellness services to urban Indians in central Oklahoma. The clinic staff cares for more than 18,000 patients from more than 220 federally recognized tribes every year. Urban Indians can receive a range of services, including medical, dental, pediatrics, prenatal, pharmacy, optometry, physical fitness, nutrition, family programs and behavioral health services.