Kiz: As a child born in South Bend, Ind., shortly after Notre Dame star Paul Hornung won the Heisman Trophy, isn’t it obvious what my answer is? The Stanley Cup. Of course. The Heisman is an individual award, for guys who like to strike a look-at-me pose. Heisman is the original selfie moment. Me? I’m all about winning, the team and celebrating with my brothers. So Lord Stanley’s Cup rules.

Hooch: Here’s the Heisman, stiff-arming Stanley’s Cup. The Cup is cool, but it looks like something awarded to the winner of the 3A state football title in ’78. The Heisman, this is art — my kind of art, art for the sports fan who has the John Elway “Rifleman” poster framed. A cast bronze ball carrier, 13.5 inches tall and weighing 25 pounds, immortalizing a hero each December. Winter chills, to be sure.

Kiz: When the Stanley Cup gets handed from Joe Sakic to Ray Bourque, that’s the essence of what sports is all about. Yeah, I’m crying, bro. The Heisman? It regularly gets handed to Jason White or Gino Torretta or somebody who can’t play. It has become a cliché. And the Heisman goes to … the quarterback on a team ranked near the top of the national polls. Excuse my yawn, bro. It’s the most boringly predictable reality show since “Real Housewives of …”

Hooch: First of all, “Real Housewives of Atlanta” is underrated. Second of all, for every Jason or Gino, there’s Bo or Tebow, single-named Heisman legends. And what’s cool is that for a year, Torretta was indeed the best. And we’ll always remember that amazing season, regardless of the fact his pro career was a bust. We can name more Heisman winners than even the teams that won the Cup. How many readers remember that the Lightning and Hurricanes won Lord Stanley’s chalice?

Kiz: Ever try drinking from the Heisman? The Cup is a party. If my foggy memory is accurate, the sun rising on Miami Beach and the Cup in 1996 was the perfect ending to the best all-night rave of my life. And one more thing: You gotta love how the Cup grows as a living history of the game, built one line at a time with tiny names engraved on the trophy. In fact, Charlotte and John Grahame, a mother and son from Denver’s first family on hockey, are both on the Cup. Now that’s cool.

Hooch: Ever try drinking as the Heisman winner? You never have to buy a beer again.