'Incredibly gracious' man giving out millions to MTI, Mitchell ACT, soccer complex in Mitchell

Earl Nordby, third from left, participates in the groundbreaking for the Nordby Exhibit Hall in May. (Evan Hendershot/Republic)

Nordby, 84, owned the Pepsi Cola Bottling Company operations in Huron, Mitchell, Chamberlain in Pierre, and the retired businessman still has his soft spot for the communities where he lived and worked.

"I felt I was fortunate enough to have had the opportunity to make this money in the cities that I was able to make it in, so I just felt it would be nice to thank them," Nordby said earlier this week in an interview with The Daily Republic.

This weekend at the State Fair in Huron, the early stages of Nordby's most recent large donation will be on display. Nordby donated $1.5 million to go toward a new 4-H Exhibit Hall at the South Dakota State Fairgrounds. The 47,000-square-foot facility for the state's 4-H members is under construction and is expected to be completed by next year's state fair.

After an initial $1 million gift, he upped the ante with an additional $500,000 to get the project closer to completion.

Nordby's philanthropic spirit dates back to 1965, soon after he purchased the Huron headquarters of what would become his bottling empire in the state. Since then, Nordby has given millions to local organizations and fundraisers to kick start several projects throughout the region.

For Nordby's generosity and business acumen, he was named to the South Dakota Hall of Fame in 1997, but the donations kept flowing from Nordby's wallet after he was recognized with a his Hall of Fame induction.

Nordby has given numerous donations to his hometown of Huron, and he's proud to be of service. He said his donation to the building, known the Nordby Exhibit Hall for 4-H, Youth and Community, helped to energize a fundraising campaign that recently surpassed $4 million in total donations.

"I think donating to the Nordby 4-H complex has moved a lot of people in that direction," Nordby said.

Thanks in part to Nordby, the state's 4-Hers will soon have a facility that will feature an exhibit hall, a performance stage and classroom areas. But Nordby's recent $1.5 million gift is just one of several ways he's helped local organizations in the region.

During Mitchell Technical Institute's four-year Educating People, Empowering Communities campaign, Nordby and the Nordby Family Foundation was the largest donor. Nordby provided $1 million to the fundraiser and his family name will grace the institute's largest building for years to come.

With his $1 million gift to MTI, the institute will use $250,000 for billboards along Interstate 90, $500,000 will be used for a staff endowment and another $250,000 has been designated as a permanent endowment to provide nearly full-tuition scholarships to four students annually.

Nordby's daughter and Mitchell resident Diane Des Lauriers said it's in her father's nature to help the communities that helped him succeed.

"I just think he's incredibly gracious and he has a passion for South Dakota," Des Lauriers said. "In the towns that his businesses were in, he's probably the strongest supporter I know."

Nordby's contributions to Mitchell did not begin with the large contribution to MTI. He's been pumping donations into Mitchell projects and organizations for years.

In 2005, the Mitchell Area Community Theater found itself converting a former balloon museum into an auditorium. When approached with the opportunity to help the fundraising campaign, Nordby added the organization to a long list of recent beneficiaries in the form of a $100,000 gift.

The $100,000 offering earned Nordby the opportunity to name the building after his former business. Now known as the Pepsi Cola Theater for the Performing Arts, the building serves as a replacement to the State Theater that burned down in 2004.

Nordby was happy to help the Mitchell ACT grow into its full potential at the new theater, and he recalled a memorable moment in 2005 when some fellow contributors to the project joked that they were unhappy with his contribution.

Some friends of Nordby approached him the day he received naming rights to the theater to say that they were disappointed he donated so much. When Nordby asked why, his friends told him they felt obligated to donate more after seeing his unselfish contribution. He was glad to inspire the additional donations.

Along with the gift to the Mitchell ACT, he also helped fund the 10-field soccer complex on the north side of town. With his $240,000 gift, the Pepsi Cola Soccer Complex became the second facility in Mitchell named in the honor of Nordby and his business.

After years of contributions and millions doled out to help various projects in his home state, Nordby does not regret his philanthropic efforts.

"I started donating to communities that had been good to me because they bought a lot of my soft drinks," said Nordby. "So I felt it would be valid if I reciprocated it back to the communities and helped them."