KODIAK, Alaska (AP) - With time ticking off the game clock, and Kodiak trailing Wasilla by double figures, coach David Anderson peered down the bench and motioned to three players.

Chris Caguing, Brian Caguing and Augistine Caguing all stood up, strolled to the scorers’ table and nestled side-by-side on one knee waiting for a whistle.

The whistle finally came with 1 minute, 10 seconds left in last Saturday’s game, and for the first and last time, the three brothers took the floor together, the Kodiak Daily Mirror newspaper (http://bit.ly/1C2PvBM) reported.

The crowd went wild as the public address announcer introduced each one. With each name, the noise level raised.

“It is something that I will remember for the rest of my life - it was a once in a lifetime thing, unless we all play college ball together,” Chris said.

Chris is a senior, Brian a junior and Augistine a sophomore. It was the first time all three had suited up for a varsity game this season, and it came on Kodiak’s senior night.

Chris and Brian have played varsity for most of the season, while Anderson called up Augistine from the junior varsity team specifically to give Chris a chance to play with all of his siblings.

“You try to figure out something to make it special for the seniors, and I thought that would be great for him to get out there with his brothers,” Anderson said.

Chris soaked up all 70 seconds of his time on the floor, in what turned out to be a 13-point defeat. None of the brothers cracked the scoring column, but it didn’t matter.

“I was telling my brothers on the sideline just to have fun. This is my last time with you guys on the court,” Chris said.

The three brothers have bonded over basketball. They all played Little Dribblers. They all spent their summers playing hoops under the midnight sun and they all played in the Philippines on vacation.

“We share the same room, all three of us,” Brian said. “It is all basketball stuff.”

Chris has played at every level, except for this year. He doesn’t get on the floor much, but when he does he gives it his all. The 5-foot-5 guard has scored 25 points this season.

“It is something new to me because in the past three years of my basketball career I have played a lot,” Chris said. “This year was something different. I am happy where I am and at least I am part of a team. Just being with the team, bonding with them and playing with them makes me happy.”

Even though Chris doesn’t contribute in many games, his impact is felt in practices.

“He gets in these guys’ faces like we want him to,” Anderson said. “He is a tough player and all over the court on these guys. He is great for that. He has a great attitude and it takes a special person to do that.”

And for one night, with their parents in the stands, the Caguings had their moment on the court.

“That minute and 10 seconds was something pretty special to me,” Chris said.