He comes to Colorado via Boston, in search of his first Stanley Cup after nearly two decades in the NHL. He is considered one of the game’s classiest players, which makes it hard not to root for him as a sentimental favorite. Joe Sakic and Patrick Roy will help try to get him that first Cup.

This is the story line for Jarome Iginla, almost identical to the one Ray Bourque had when he came to the Avs in 2000 from the Bruins. A year after his acquisition, Bourque was handed the Cup by Sakic after the final game of his career, the definition of the storybook ending.

If Iginla ever raises a Stanley Cup with the Avs, he probably would receive the handoff from team captain Gabe Landeskog — just as Sakic did for Bourque after Game 7 of the 2001 Finals.

“That’s a hope one day,” Iginla said after signing a three-year, $16 million contract with the Avs last week.

But is it just a fantasy? Iginla wouldn’t have chosen the Avs over several other suitors — including the Eastern Conference regular-season champion Bruins — if he thought it was.

“With this group, I think the sky is the limit,” Iginla said. “When I think of some of the teams that have had success in the NHL in the last five or six years, I think of Chicago; they were a very young, very talented team that moved up very quickly, that had a very talented young core when they won.

“Pittsburgh was pretty young when they won. Boston had a pretty young core when they won, too. I think Colorado has a lot of young guys, whether in their first year or third or fourth year or whatever, they’ve been confident and been able to play their way and just keep getting better. I’m excited to be able to come for three years and be part of that, and grow with the guys.”

Three years an important part of deal

Let’s be clear: The Avs will remain seen by most pundits as outside shots to win the Cup this coming season, especially playing in the brutal Western Conference. They lost a key forward, Paul Stastny, to a division rival, St. Louis, and failed to sign any of the bigger-name defensemen on the open market. The replacements for Stastny and P.A. Parenteau were two players 36 or older — Iginla and Daniel Briere. The biggest addition to a defense that needed help was 34-year-old Brad Stuart.

Let’s also not be naive and say the Avs’ contract offer, particularly the three-year term, had nothing to do with Iginla’s choice of Colorado. Even Iginla admits that.

“It was important, from one side, for my family and I to have that stability, to be able to buy a house and set some roots down again,” Iginla said. “You don’t want to come and just have one shot at it, on a one-year deal.”

But Iginla said he is sincere in his belief that the Avs offered the best hockey option among his suitors, that being able to check off the box of “Cup contender” made him sign.

“Next year, the year after, I think they just keep getting better and better,” said Iginla, who has scored 560 goals, including 30 or more in 12 of the past 13 seasons. “I expect to be good for the guys. I won’t be taking it easy. I expect to be contributing.”

Can Iginla, 37, still keep up in the faster-paced Western Conference?

“I’m excited to back to the West. As far as a different style of hockey, east to west, I don’t know if I noticed that much of a difference. I would say the West seems to be a little bit more physical, but the (difference) wasn’t as big as I thought,” he said. “As far as being able to fit in, I believe I can. I felt better as the year went on in Boston. Not to be arrogant or anything, but I still believe I can be very good, and not be able to contribute offensively and be a good player.”

From Edmonton to archrival

Iginla, whose full name is Jarome Arthur-Leigh Adekunle Tig Junior Elvis Iginla, is the son of a Nigerian-born lawyer father, Elvis, and former music teacher mother, Susan. He grew up in Edmonton, Alberta, but spent the first 17 years of his career with the nearby rival Calgary Flames.

He is a part owner of the Kamloops Blazers of the Western Hockey League, the junior team he played on, and is known as a tireless champion of charitable causes everywhere he plays. While in Calgary, he gave more than $700,000 to KidSport Calgary, a foundation that helps underprivileged children play sports.

Among the people Iginla has most looked up to in his career is Sakic, the Avs’ executive vice president of hockey operations. They were linemates on the 2002 Team Canada Olympic club that won its first gold medal in 50 years, and while Iginla said he didn’t name one of his three children Joe specifically because of Sakic, “it didn’t hurt.”

Sakic said he called Iginla when the June 25 period for talking to free agents started, and believes his signing best addresses areas of need up front in the wake of Stastny’s departure.

“Jarome was always tops on our list to replace (Stastny),” Sakic said. “He’s a big power forward on the right side who brings leadership. He’s a proven winner. He might not be in his prime, but he’s still got a lot. Our core guys are all young, and you want to surround them with great veteran leadership.”

Adrian Dater: adater@denverpost.com or twitter.com/adater