SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

During a town hall meeting at a summit with the Washington Fellowship for Young African Leaders, President Obama explained to a young African student that to succeed, a burgeoning country required a system of laws.

He explained:

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Regardless of the resources a country possesses, regardless of how talented the people are, if you do not have a basic system of rule of law, of respect for civil rights and human rights, if you do not give people a credible, legitimate way to work through the political process to express their aspirations, if you don’t respect basic freedom of speech and freedom of assembly … it is very rare for a country to succeed.

Obama made his remarks as critics have denounced his “lawlessness,” particularly through his 2012 Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) order, his decision to trade five Taliban detainees at Guantanamo Bay for Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl, and his controversial Obamacare law.

The Supreme Court recently ruled 9-0 against Obama after his illegal appointments to the National Labor Relations Board.

House Speaker John Boehner has filed a lawsuit against the President for his lawlessness. In a CNN op-ed expalining his lawsuit, he wrote:

Too often over the past five years, the President has circumvented the American people and their elected representatives through executive action, changing and creating his own laws, and excusing himself from enforcing statutes he is sworn to uphold — at times even boasting about his willingness to do it, as if daring the American people to stop him.

Other Republicans, such as former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin, have called for Obama’s impeachment because of his lawlessness.

“President Obama’s rewarding of lawlessness, including his own, is the foundational problem here,” Palin said in a Breitbart News exclusive, adding:

It’s not going to get better, and in fact irreparable harm can be done in this lame-duck term as he continues to make up his own laws as he goes along, and, mark my words, will next meddle in the U.S. Court System with appointments that will forever change the basic interpretation of our Constitution’s role in protecting our rights.

According to the Los Angeles Times, Obama is planning to give some form of amnesty to as many as 5 million of the estimated 11 million people who entered the country illegally. White House Senior Adviser Dan Daniel Pfeiffer explained to reporters last week that his decision would come at the end of the summer and would be based on “solid legal footing.”