We urge you to support Hillary Clinton if you are voting in Oregon’s Democratic presidential primary. She is, without hesitation, the best candidate in the primary.

Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders can be a compelling speaker — all righteous indignation and flying hair. But experience matters more. Clinton as secretary of state, as senator and as first lady, has a much deeper and broader range of experience.

And the right policies matter even more. There has been a substantial Democratic debate about means and ends, and quite simply, we believe Clinton has a better sense of what’s good policy than Sanders.

On health care, Sanders basically wants Medicare for all. He would push to have more government intrusion into health care and more government takeover of the economy. That’s not acceptable for loss of control, what it will do for innovation and the list goes on. Clinton has the much more reasonable approach of working to improve the Affordable Care Act to keep costs down for consumers.

On foreign policy, Clinton has the clear edge in experience. She would be much more likely to strengthen and not cut the country’s armed services. She says to fight terror the United States must continue air strikes and may need boots on the ground. Sanders calls on Muslim nations to make more of an effort. Sure, but that’s not enough.

On trade, Sanders promotes an economically dangerous protectionism. He has a consistent record of opposing trade agreements. He believes in tariffs to protect American goods from having to compete fairly with foreign goods. That may sound appealing to protect some noncompetitive American jobs, but it raises prices for everyone else and will likely quickly devolve into an escalating war of tariffs. Clinton’s views on trade have zigzagged, but she is not a protectionist. She will work toward compromises balancing the competing interests.

On the economy, Clinton says she will cut taxes for the middle class, invest in infrastructure, clean energy, scientific and medical research, and close some tax loopholes. She wants the government to offer carrots for companies to invest in employees and strip tax benefits when companies ship jobs overseas. Sanders indicts the rich and powerful and aims to take them down. His big idea is that he says he will break up the big banks, but when pressed about this major change to the economy he clearly doesn’t know how it would work.

There are legitimate criticisms of Clinton, starting with the email server and on from there. She is the right choice in experience and because of her policies. And there is one other thing we would add about Clinton. We know it is not acceptable to the most partisan corners of the parties, but she is willing to work across the aisle to make government work. Vote for Clinton.