Help sought for an American tradition

As a community we are moving forward with plans for the 2016 Independence Day Celebration on Marco Island. The purpose of this letter is to ask for your help in sustaining the level and quality of this year's fireworks display, which is such an important part of our American cultural tradition.

This year, the total cost is $52,000 for our fireworks display. What complicates this event for Marco Island is the requirement of a large commercial barge (which is approximately 30 percent of the total cost). The Marco Island City Council has voted to contribute $26,000. Donations/contributions from businesses and individuals will make up the remainder of the funds needed.

The fireworks display attracts many visitors to Marco Island who consequently contribute to the Island's summer economy — just when we need it most.

I hope you will donate what you can to Marco Island's long-standing fireworks display this year. For your contribution, you will be recognized, by name, through our annual "Thank You" spot in the local newspapers and on the Chamber of Commerce website.

Please make your contribution payable to the Marco Island Fireworks Fund and mail to:

Marco Island Area Chamber of Commerce

Fireworks Fund

1102 North Collier Blvd.

Marco Island, FL 34145

If you prefer, you are welcome to bring your contribution to our offices in person. If you have any questions, please don't hesitate to call on us. Your support for this important community celebration is greatly appreciated!

Sandi Riedemann

Executive Director, Marco Island Area Chamber of Commerce

Health insurance

There are two measures of the efficacy of a country's health care system — life expectancy and infant mortality rate.

According to the CIA, the U.S. ranks 28th and 39th, respectively. This pitiful showing results from being the only industrialized nation without the right to universal health care.

A majority of Republicans view health care as a privilege, not a right, and are the only group, not just in the U.S., but in the world, with this viewpoint.

The Affordable Care Act is an attempt to broaden health care coverage and improve our rankings. While flawed, it does recognize that it cannot work without participation by the young and the healthy. The act has been trashed by all of the Republican presidential hopefuls.

Their solution is to break down the artificial "lines" which limit the insurance companies from selling their products in all states.

Their solution will not work because the health insurance industry has been exempted from antitrust regulations since 1941. They can, and do, allocate markets and fix prices. They have already divided up the states to maximize their profitability and have no intention of changing even if asked nicely by a Republican president.

Richard Coddington

Naples and Chagrin Falls, Ohio

Who needs a clean, safer world?

Abolish the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). It is the rallying cry of some politicians running for president. Why not?

As a former partner in a small chemical company, safe disposal of toxic chemical waste was a financial burden to us. Gone were the days we could dump our waste down the sewer drain without concern of polluting the water/land environment.

So what if it was the source of cancer or some other disease in humans or animals? Come on!

The EPA regulations affected our bottom line.

Without those regulations, I may have been able to purchase a Mercedes instead of a Ford. It wouldn't mean that I would have hired another chemist, just more in my pocket.

Consider the money larger companies have to absorb to keep the kids and grandkids and the world environment safe. What a waste of cash!

Let us join those smart politicians and support their efforts to eliminate the EPA.

Who needs a clean, safer world?

Henry S. Kolesinski

Naples