Photo

To the Editor:

Frank Bruni (“College’s Priceless Value,” column, Feb. 11) struck a chord with me. The idea that any university’s mission might be simply to meet the “state’s work force needs” frightens me. A university education is not the same as attending trade school. It is a brief respite in an otherwise hectic and behind-schedule life, where we are allowed the luxury of thinking, a discipline recently overlooked and seemingly undervalued.

In the corporate world, we make snap decisions, which should not be confused with quick thinking. Imagine how poor those decisions will become if we eliminate the foundation of a liberal arts education in college.

So let our youth “stay a little” in colleges and universities to study broadly in areas that don’t seem to have direct relevance to their fields of study. I want a physician who has read “Macbeth,” a financial adviser who adores Mozart, a lawyer who revels in the beauty of a van Gogh or a Dalí.

I want geophysicists who respect Margaret Mead and Dian Fossey. Electrical engineers who can quote Aristotle, Plato and Socrates. Because I think that learning, that knowledge, affects our thought processes in big and little ways, all the time, every day. And we are better for it.

MARY LOVE MATTOX

Bellevue, Wash.

To the Editor:

I am glad that Frank Bruni started his column with the question “What’s the most transformative educational experience you’ve had?” The critical word in the question is “transformative,” and it is the one I have used every semester when I ask my students a simple question: What is the purpose of education?

Giving the students a few minutes to ponder, I then engage them in a discussion about the nature of education. While many of them reply that the purpose of education is to “train ourselves in a given subject,” to “get a job,” to “better ourselves,” to “improve the world,” to “become informed citizens” and so on, I always end my discussion by telling them that the purpose of education is to “transform” themselves, that their college experience is all about change in the context of mental evolution above everything else.

I also remind them that the function of their professors is to serve as the spark that lights the eternal flame of learning, but that it is truly up to them to continue to fuel this fire for the rest of their lives.

MICHAEL HADJIARGYROU

Old Westbury, N.Y.

The writer is professor and chairman of the life sciences department at the New York Institute of Technology.

To the Editor:

Frank Bruni is correct for calling out those who view undergraduate institutions as trade schools whose primary purpose is to guarantee students high-paying jobs. There are jobs that afford one a high income without a college degree. Yet I would argue that every citizen deserves the cultural literacy enjoyed through political science or literature.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

My undergraduate degree is in philosophy. Its value was to teach me to think critically, a skill in short order when every meme is posted on Twitter, commented on and then discarded based on emotion or the sensibility of the day. When I graduated from college, I was asked, “So, what are you going to do with a degree in philosophy?”

Prepared by a discipline that taught me logical reasoning and limitless delight for inquiry, I went on to do many things: work in corporate communications and human resources and teach English. It is as a teacher that I try to inspire my students as profoundly as Mr. Bruni’s Shakespeare professor did.

LYNDA RICH SPIEGEL

Forest Hills, Queens

To the Editor:

Frank Bruni does not mention one highly practical reason to study Shakespeare. To function effectively in any world, including in business, one must have some understanding of human beings. Is there a richer source of wisdom about this complex phenomenon than his plays?

HELEN HILL UPDIKE

New York

To the Editor:

A year ago, I read about a data science program that sounded like a great career segue, but it had a prerequisite of calculus. Having gotten no further than Algebra I, I went back to college in the evenings and took precalculus and calculus, and am now studying statistics.

At 61, I’ve had to work very hard at my studies. I’m no longer certain of my goal or whether I’ll get there, but being immersed in the academic environment has been invigorating, and rediscovering the beauty, truth and, yes, practical applications of mathematics has been its own sweet reward.

JOHN WILLIAMS

New York