The Republican race for the 16th District U.S. Congressional seat has included accusations of dirty tricks and the dredging up of past election law violations.

At the center are opponents and second cousins, Chet Beiler and Lloyd Smucker, who are vying to succeed retiring U.S. Rep. Joe Pitts in parts of Lancaster, Chester and Berks counties.

Christina Hartman is running unopposed on the Democratic ballot.

The Republican race has been marked by a flurry of controversial mailers from the campaigns and a slew of negative TV ads. Spending has topped more than three-quarters of a million dollars between them.

On the issues, Smucker's website identifies education, urban renewal and good government as priorities. Smucker is an outgoing state senator.

If elected to congress, though, he said he'll support a "formal declaration of war to defeat ISIS and other radicalized enemies of freedom" and "a balanced budget amendment and holding the failing bureaucracy accountable."

He said a tax increase has never received his support and that he has stood strongly against Governor Wolf's proposed tax hikes.

Smucker says his congressional campaign has also been endorsed by the National Rifle Association and ACTION of Lancaster and Chester Counties.

His opponent, Manheim businessman Chet Beiler, says he plans to "protect constitutional freedoms" and "the right to life for all." He's also focused on securing the border with Mexico, combating the "growing threat we face from radical Islamic terrorists," the national debt and what he calls government overspending by "career politicians." Beiler says he sees private sector experience as the way to fix public sector problems.

But beyond these talking points, much more of the focus of this race has been on the candidates — their records, characters and apparently their mutual distaste.

Beiler has attacked Smucker, a soon-to-be former state senator, for his supposed "liberal" leanings and "liberal" voting record.

Smucker has also attacked Beiler, a Manheim businessman and former county GOP chairman, for being charged in 2001 with an election law violation, a charge which was later dismissed after Beiler served community service. He's also accused Beiler's supporters of a misleading mailer campaign targeting Smucker donors.

Beiler has in turn sought to cast the 2001 election law charge against him as water under the bridge and an innocent mistake. He has focused instead on Smucker's votes for aspects of the Affordable Care Act, specifically for more control over federal Medicaid money under the law. Beiler has also hit Smucker for his senate vote against a law that sought to penalize so-called sanctuary cities. Smucker said the bill needed more work first.

When reached by PennLive for comment, Smucker's campaign said he voted against the overall Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, as a state senator.

The back and forth has accompanied a series of increasingly aggressive TV advertisements and fact checks, counter ads and inflammatory online posts.

There was intrigue, although comparatively minor, on the Democratic side as well.

In March, Dr. Gary Wegman, a Reading-area dentist, dropped out of the race after irregularities with his nominating petitions were discovered and challenged by a party committeeman. His exit left Christina Hartman unopposed on the Democratic ballot.

Wegman called it an oversight, but one that was also insurmountable at that juncture in his campaign, and with little over a month left to go before the primary.

His bowing out left only Christina Hartman to face off against the Republicans in November. At 38 years of age, Hartman is younger than most congressional candidates. She has spent 15 years in international development and human rights advocacy for organizations including Freedom House and the National Democratic Institute.

She notes the 16th District's changing demographics and said leaders like outgoing congressman Joe Pitts no longer represent the majority of its residents.

Correction: This article has been updated to remove a reference to an election fraud charge against Beiler. Correctly, it was an election law violation.