Reuters

Among the companies with shares expected to actively trade in Friday’s session are United Parcel Service, Bank of New York Mellon and McDonald's

UPS warned of disappointing fourth-quarter and full-year results, as higher-than-expected seasonal expenses dragged down profits and currency headwinds continue to make a dent in long-term earnings growth.

Bank of New York Mellon said higher foreign exchange revenue and equity market values were unable to offset lower performance fees and losses in fixed income, as the bank posted weaker-than-expected results in the fourth quarter.

McDonald’s posted a worse-than-expected 21% drop in earnings its December quarter, rounding out a dismal year for the fast-food chain that prompted core changes to its business. But U.S. same-store sales edged up 0.4% in December.

General Electric said growth in its industrial segment again helped drive better-than-expected earnings in its fourth quarter, as the company continues a multiyear shift away from reliance on financial earnings and toward industrial growth.

Honeywell International said its earnings edged up in its fourth quarter, though the company again said it is taking a cautious outlook on the global economy. Results narrowly topped expectations.

State Street said strength in its trading-services and forex trading segments spurred strong earnings growth in the fourth quarter, despite unfavorable currency effects.

Kimberly-Clark swung to a loss in its fourth quarter and gave a disappointing outlook for the 2015 year as the consumer goods company struggles with currency volatility and increased competition in its diapers segment.

Deere & Co. on Friday announced another round of layoffs, impacting 910 employees at its agricultural equipment facilities in Iowa and Illinois, as the company scales back production amid weaker demand.

Shareholders of Family Dollar Stores overwhelmingly approved being sold to Dollar Tree, choosing regulatory certainty over a riskier-but higher-offer from Dollar General

Starbucks said its earnings surged as the coffee chain reported stronger traffic and sales at its U.S. cafes for the holiday quarter. The company also said Kevin Johnson, a former chief executive at Juniper Networks and 16-year veteran of Microsoft, will take over as president and chief operating officer on March 1.

E*Trade Financial Corp. reported a drop in fourth-quarter earnings Thursday after the online brokerage took actions to pay down debt in the most recent quarter. The online brokerage also announced regulatory approval that will allow $430 million to be paid out to shareholders.

DreamWorks Animation SKG said it would cut 500 positions in a restructuring of the troubled entertainment studio’s core animation business.

Rockwell Collins said soaring sales in its information-management system, as well as stabilizing revenue in its key government-services segment, boosted its earnings for the December quarter.

LeapFrog Enterprises on Thursday withdrew its financial projections for the year that ends March and said it expects to swing to a loss in the December quarter on disappointing holiday sales.

Kansas City Southern reported a 24% increase in earnings, on increased carloads and strength in its automotive and chemicals segments, though lower gas prices and the depreciating peso dented revenue growth.

Capital One Financial posted higher revenue and net income for the fourth quarter and raised its provision for credit losses.

BP PLC’s former chief financial officer for exploration and production has been appointed Apache vice president and CFO, Apache said Thursday.

The National Institutes of Health on Thursday detailed its plans to test an Ebola vaccine on thousands of Liberians, with the help of two major drug companies, GlaxoSmithKline PLC and Merck & Co.

Joe's Jeans said Friday that Chief Executive Marc Crossman has resigned but will stay on at the company as a consultant, two months after the jeans retailer warned it could be delisted from the Nasdaq Stock Market if it doesn’t get its stock price above $1.

Apple said J. Crew Inc. Chief Executive Millard “Mickey” Drexler plans to step down from its board of directors in March. The turnover on Apple’s board is the latest sign of Chief Executive Tim Cook placing his own stamp on the company four years after he took over for Steve Jobs, the company’s iconic co-founder.

Intuitive Surgical fourth-quarter profit fell 12%, as operating expenses offset higher revenue from an increase in procedures performed with its da Vinci robotic surgical system.