Topics: anti-vaxxers, Autism, Ben Carson, Books, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Rand Paul, Innovation News

About 100 pages into Steve Silberman’s new book about autism, “NeuroTribes,” I began to wonder how exactly Silberman had managed to pull the whole thing off. By most rules of publishing, “NeuroTribes” shouldn’t exist. Yes, it’s a readable, engaging story. But it’s also a serious political and sociological critique, couched in a 500-page-long piece of original historical scholarship.

Silberman, a veteran Wired contributor, intended to write the book in a year. Instead, he took almost five. Luckily, his publishers stuck with him.

On the historical side, Silberman traces our society’s attempts to diagnose, explain and treat autism. That story is vivid, and often tragic—one of misplaced diagnoses, paranoid theories and ill-considered therapies that amount to institutionalized child abuse.

More than a history of autism, Silberman is examining the dark side of a society that fetishizes normalcy. Along the way, he’s asking some charged questions: How do we decide which kinds of minds to accept as normal, and which to dismiss as deformed or diseased? How should we recognize the diversity of human cognition? These questions are not just academic abstractions. They have implications for the basic rights, opportunities and social status that we afford to millions of people.

Over the phone, Silberman spoke with Salon about anti-vaxxers, the concept of neurodiversity, and whether autism represents a civil rights frontier.

This is a hefty book.

A lot of journalists write books, and they’re a couple hundred pages long. They’re sort of idea-advertisers, you know. The reason why I was writing this book was that I felt like there was a terrible problem that needed solving.

A couple of decades ago, the estimates of autism prevalence and the rates of diagnosis started going up very steeply. In basically every story that I read—Salon, the New York Times, the New Yorker, everybody—there would be some sentence that would say, “The reason why the number of diagnoses is increasing is a mystery.” And yet when I talked to people who have been in the field for a very long time, they kind of knew why the rates were going up. Did they know a hundred percent why the rates are going up? No, because science is always an open question. But, they had a sense that the diagnosis had been radically rewritten by [British psychiatrist] Lorna Wing and her colleagues in the late 1980s and early 1990s. And that accounted for the huge iceberg of diagnoses.

Into that vacuum of information came a million theories, including Andrew Wakefield’s hypothesis about the MMR vaccine. So on the one hand you had some really sketchy explanations for why the diagnoses were going up, and on the other hand, you had [people saying], “It’s a mystery!” I felt like there was a massive problem in science communication that needed to be solved by someone who was willing to do a lot of grunt work, and go deeply into the past.

Even going back to the 1940s, autism was a dumping ground for anxieties about modernity and mechanized society. Back then, people blamed industrialization for the presence of autism. Today, it’s vaccines and chemicals.

That’s still happening. On [Neil Young’s] new album, “The Monsanto Years,” he blames the rise in autism on Monsanto and pesticides, based on this bullshit video from an MIT computer scientist who makes a ridiculous claim that Monsanto pesticides will cause almost half of all children on Earth to be autistic by 2025. Autism is still a projection screen for everyone’s fears about modernity.

You know, there’s a Forbes columnist, Emily Willingham, who wrote a wonderful post called “This Just In: Being Alive Linked to Autism.” And it’s really true; if you look at the parade of theories over the decades, it’s everything from increasing parental age—which, by the way, might have something do with a slight increase in autism—to stuff like refrigerator mothers, which determined the course of autistic people’s lives for decades, unchallenged.

Basically, blaming autism on bad parenting.

[Psychiatrist Leo] Kanner eventually ended up blaming autism primarily on parents, what he called refrigerator parenting. And that not only added a terrible burden of shame and stigma to the day-to-day challenges of raising an autistic child, which we all know are considerable, but his recommended course of treatment was to remove the child from the home and put the child in an institution, so that the child would be removed from the allegedly toxic family environment.

One of the things I constantly hear is, “How come I don’t remember a lot of autistic kids around when I was young?” There are several reasons, but one of the main ones is that non-verbal autistic kids were put away in institutions. Their parents were told to quietly remove their photos from the family albums, to never mention the children again.

We’re still dealing with autism like it’s this wacky historical aberration, caused by GMOs or whatever, instead of realizing that autistic people have always been here in large numbers, and that they need help, and that we’re not helping them and we’re not helping their families.

Should autism be understood as a disorder? As a disability?

Well, it’s certainly a disability.

OK, but what does it mean for something to be a disability?

Well, you know, blindness is a disability, or deafness is a disability, or being in a wheelchair is a disability. Disability is something our society understands and knows how to accommodate. We often don’t do it well. We need much more input from disabled people to figure out how to get it right. But it’s not something that’s beyond our means and collective imagination as a society.

Autism is a cognitive disability that deserves appropriate accommodations and support across the whole lifespan. Is it a disorder? The NIH and the Autism Speaks website describe it as a disorder. To me, disorder is like a theological label. It’s like saying that it’s against nature. There’s a proper order, and autism is not it, so let’s call it a disorder.

Autistic people have been around for a long time. At least one in 68 schoolchildren, the CDC currently estimates, is autistic. There are nearly as many autistic people [in the United States] as there are Jews. So, disorder? I don’t know. What’s disordered is our response to autism, which is to stigmatize it, and to call it a plague, and to describe autistic kids as kidnapped and not leading the life they were meant to lead. Really? Who’s to say? Perhaps we should help the autistic people who are here lead the best possible lives they can.

We forget how much these diagnostic categories shape our approaches to the world.

Yes, and the forgetting is not limited to lay people either. I’ll give you a very clear example. A couple of years ago, the CDC revised its estimate of autism’s prevalence among American schoolchildren up to 1 in 88. Now it’s 1 in 68, but then it was 1 in 88. And the director of the CDC, Thomas Frieden, simply explained that this was probably good news because their data indicated that pediatricians, teachers and parents were getting better at identifying autism in the early years of life. That’s why the numbers were going up, he suspected.

However, they also invited the former president of Autism Speaks, Mark Roithmayr, to the press conference. What Roithmayr did was to take out the Merriam-Webster Dictionary and read the definition of the word “epidemic.” And he said, you know, as of this morning, autism is officially an epidemic in the United States. It was a statement based on nothing. But the former chief science officer of Autism Speaks—Geraldine Dawson— immediately went out to all the networks and TV shows, and said, “It’s an epidemic. It’s an epidemic.”

We have to figure out some way to talk about autism that doesn’t create a fake epidemic—that acknowledges the fact that autistic people have been here for generations, ignored and isolated, and not given the help they needed. Is that an emergency? Yes. Is it a public health crisis? Yes. But it’s not the kind of public health crisis that is happening because there were no autistic people 20 years ago, and now there are millions.

Let’s say my child is born autistic. Is my kid going to live a worse life than someone who isn’t autistic? If so, then is autism a problem that needs to be fixed?

I’m gay. When I came out to my parents in high school—you know, they weren’t bad people. When I came out to them in high school, they were not ready to deal with it. My father wouldn’t even talk about it for years. They sent me to a therapist for a cure. Why? Because they feared that I would have a very unfulfilling life.

I can’t blame them for that, you know. Back then, homosexuality was classified as a mental illness in the DSM, the same diagnostic guide in which autism is classified as a disorder. Technically, I was mentally ill. So, technically, I needed a cure. However, after a couple of sessions, the therapist looked at me and said, “You know, you seem perfectly happy to me as you are.” Even I was afraid that I would have a terribly unfulfilling life. I thought I would never meet anyone. And now I’m a happily married gay man, because society changed in ways that destigmatized homosexuality and that allowed certain accommodations, like the Supreme Court just did for gay couples that want to get married.