Jefferson County Sheriff Ted Mink paid tribute to Sgt. Sean Renfro, who was killed while off-duty when an out-of-control vehicle struck him after he stopped to direct traffic at a multicar accident Saturday afternoon near Conifer.

“I know he was off-duty, but certainly he was doing what he was compassionate about doing — helping his fellow man,” Mink said during a news conference Sunday. “He could have driven by and gone home.”

Renfro, who was on the southbound side of U.S. 285, was hit by a northbound Ford Escape after driver Blair Gledhill, 22, of Denver, lost control, said Cpl. Heather Cobler, spokeswoman for the Colorado State Patrol. Renfro was pronounced dead at the scene.

The State Patrol is investigating the crash and does not believe alcohol or drugs contributed to it, Cobler said. CSP is considering weather and road conditions while also looking at other factors such as the speed of the vehicle, she said.

The crash that killed Renfro was the third in a chain reaction of accidents on an icy, snow-covered stretch of southbound U.S. 285, about 8 miles west of C-470.

The first accident was a single-car collision between a Mitsubishi SUV and the side of the mountain. No injuries were reported from that crash, according to the patrol.

Two people in a truck stopped to help the driver of the Mitsubishi SUV. Their truck, parked on the shoulder of southbound U.S. 285, was then rear-ended by a sedan. No injuries were reported from the second crash.

At this point, the State Patrol arrived. Renfro and a friend stopped to help CSP direct traffic. Shortly after that, Gled hill lost control of his vehicle, hitting Renfro, his friend and the truck.

Renfro’s friend and the previously uninjured people in that truck also were taken to area hospitals with “moderate to serious” injuries.

Trooper Jacob Cleveland also suffered minor injuries from flying debris and was treated at the scene, Cobler said.

“If you know Sean, it’s not surprising,” Mink said, describing how Renfro helped a man and woman who were in the first car that had crashed into the side of the mountain.

“Typical Sean, he took them out of their car and put them in his truck so they could stay warm, while he was outside, doing what he needed to do.”

Renfro had four children, two of them adopted from Russia, Mink said.

“That is just a little snapshot of his big heart.”

Mink said he is proud of Renfro, a 15-year veteran of the sheriff’s department.

Mink warned drivers to slow down and be cautious when snowy conditions exist. “When conditions are like they were yesterday afternoon, people have to pay attention to their driving habits,” Mink said.