Topics: Amy Schumer, bill cosby, Books, Chris Rock, Comedy, David Letterman, Editor's Picks, Jerry Seinfeld, judd apatow, Louis C.K., sick in the head, Stephen Colbert, Entertainment News

Judd Apatow’s new book, “Sick in the Head,” consisting of 37 interviews conducted with other comedians over the years, is essentially a love letter to comedy. As Apatow writes in the introduction, “I have been completely obsessed with comedy for about as long as I can remember,” explaining that “by my fifteenth birthday, my obsession was full-blown. I needed to become one of them. The question was, how to do that? And the answer seemed clear: Meet them. Talk to them. Get to know them. Learn their secrets.” As a teenager, Apatow interviewed a number of his idols as part of a high school radio show he hosted, and “these interviews would inform the rest of my life. They contained the advice that would help me attain my dreams.”

The resulting book, which features interviews spanning four decades with comic luminaries from Michael O’ Donoghue and Garry Shandling to Amy Schumer and “Key & Peele’s” Jordan Peele and Keegan-Michael Key, contains personal tributes to each of Apatow’s subjects, from praising Louis C.K. (“one of those people who are so brilliant and funny and uncompromising that sometimes I need to avoid their work”) to gushing over Lena Dunham (“every moment with her has been a joy”).

But Apatow isn’t the only one who showed up for the love fest. Indeed, the book isn’t just comics talking to comics, much of it is comics talking about comics, praising their contemporaries and the comedic idols that came before them, and name-checking the industry luminaries who have inspired and guided them throughout their careers. Here are eight of the book’s fondest moments of comic-on-comic praise:

1. Stephen Colbert on Letterman (2014)

In an interview from 2014, Colbert spoke about his admiration for David Letterman — whose “Late Show” desk he will be taking over in the fall — describing himself as Letterman’s “ur-audience.” As he put it: “His show started in ’82, the year I started college. Dave was it. Johnny was great, I loved Johnny. I’m the youngest of eleven children, and my elder sisters would wake me up to watch Carson with them because they didn’t want to watch it alone. I would be like a toddler watching Carson with them, but Dave — Dave was like us. Dave was stupid. And I loved it. His disrespect was to his own form.”

2. Chris Rock on Jerry Seinfeld (2014)

Rock had a lot of praise for his fellow comics, from Eddie Murphy (“the funniest man on earth”) to Richard Pryor (Rock said being praised by Pryor was one of “the highlights of my life”), but perhaps his strongest words were for stand-up legend Jerry Seinfeld. As Rock put it: “Jerry’s got no fucking pressure. God bless him, Jerry Seinfeld, one of the greatest comedians of all time and one of the cockiest bastards to ever live … To his credit, he writes some of the best jokes ever. He really does. I mean, they’re like Billy Joel songs, you know what I mean?… That shit’s American. Everybody likes those records. And Jerry Seinfeld writes jokes like that. Everybody gets those fucking jokes. I’ve seen that guy work fucking Mexican crowds, black crowds, it doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter. He’s fucking cocky and kills every night.”

3. Harold Ramis on Bill Murray (2005)

In this interview from 2005, the late Harold Ramis spoke fondly and at length about his longtime collaborator Bill Murray, despite the fact they had hardly spoken since a falling out in the early ’90s. As he put it: “I’m attracted to outlandish and excessive human behavior. Any experience with Bill Murray is better than any other experience because he does things no one you know would ever do. Every ride with Bill is a potential adventure. I say this with love and considerable distance, because I don’t talk to him and I don’t see him.”

4. Louis C.K. on Cosby (2014)

In a fascinating interview with Louis C.K. from 2014, before the sexual assault allegations against Bill Cosby reached a cultural tipping point, C.K. spoke out about his childhood admiration for the now-disgraced comic (Apatow — who would later come to be one of Cosby’s most staunch critics — also referenced his admiration for the comic in his introduction to the book, with the caveat that he “was going to talk at length about Bill Cosby, but I can’t, in good conscience, because he has more sexual accusers than I have had partners.”)