With state agencies in Oklahoma facing budgets cuts, families on Medicaid are worried.

While lawmakers report they've come up with a plan to prevent further cuts, some are concerned this is only a quick fix and health care isn't being made a priority.

4-year-old Malachi likes to play and laugh just like any other kid...

"He's everything he is the sweetest little guy; he just has the best sense of humor. He's just a ray of light in our lives," said Mom Angela Hornsby.

But in his few short years of life, the challenges Malachi has faced have been anything but normal.

"He does have down syndrome which was prenatally diagnosed. He's also a cancer survivor at the ripe old age of 4," said Hornsby.

Mom Angela Hornsby says Malachi was also born with a congenital heart defect that lead to open heart surgery. Hornsby says he has to be closely monitored by doctors, take medications, and take part in occupational, physical and speech therapies.

"If I didn't have that extra help in addition to private insurance, my child, his life would be in danger," said Hornsby.

Even as a working mom, Hornsby relies on the state's Medicaid program to help with mounting bills.

"It terrifies me with the proposed cut to in home waivered services," said Hornsby.

Hornsby says Malachi has been on the waiting list for 4 years for state provided disability home services. She says the typical wait is 10 years, and funding could be cut more.

"Our health care is the building block for sustainable good life. And without that, things will continue to crumble," said Hornsby.

Hornsby tells us she's beyond frustrated Governor Mary Fallin refuses to accept additional Medicaid funding through the Affordable Care Act. And she's worried without a long term fix for the Oklahoma budget crises, more services will be in jeopardy.

"My message to my legislator would be, you represent me, you represent Malachi, our lives matter," said Hornsby.

Hornsby encourages everyone to write their legislators and most of all vote in state and local elections.

The Oklahoma Healthcare Authority which oversees the state's Medicaid program says they're grateful for lawmakers' hard work. They say the current budget legislation would minimize the impact on health care professionals and help avoid deeper cuts.