The task is to hunker down and protect the gains until Christie leaves office, one way or another.



The Highlands Act was signed by former Gov. Jim McGreevey 10 years ago Sunday, at a time when bulldozers were tearing up the region at breakneck speed equivalent to about 11 football fields a day.

That frenzy has stopped, thanks to the act’s restrictions on new building. The water in the region’s giant aquifers remains pristine, supplying about half the state. The region’s natural beauty will be handed down to new generations, mostly intact.

So for all those who worked on this epic endeavor, take a bow. This was a landmark achievement, passed with solid bipartisan support.

Don’t rest long, though. Because Gov. Chris Christie opposes this law, saying it infringes on local control and diminishes land values. He would probably like to repeal the act, but he knows the Democratic Legislature would not allow that. So he has worked to cripple its enforcement through bureaucratic sabotage.

He has appointed several people to the Highlands Council, including its chairman, who want to repeal the act, something like putting Sarah Palin in charge of implementing Obama­care. He forced the removal of its longtime executive director, Eileen Swan, a Republican who commanded respect from all sides, and replaced her with a political hack who lacked credentials.

The real test will come in the next year or two, as the Highlands Council works to revise its master plan. So far, the protections in the law have prevented any major backsliding. But Christie’s appointees are inclined to lower the standards and allow more dense development.

“I want to see less strict zoning,” says one of them, Rob Walton, a Hunterdon County freeholder. “Some would call that undermining the act.”

Walton would like to simply revoke the act, as Christie would. He estimates that at least six of the 14 sitting commissioners are of the same mind. So the fate of the Highlands rests now on a razor’s edge.

The task is to hunker down and protect the gains until Christie leaves office, one way or another.

* * *

Critics of the Highlands Act are on more solid ground when they complain about the broken promise of compensation.

These protections enhance the value of some properties and, in the long run, of the region as a whole. But what about the landowner who was counting on subdividing and selling his or her property to finance retirement, and is now blocked from doing so by the restrictions in the act?

The irony is that Christie cites this as a core problem, and yet has made it worse.

Former Gov. Jon Corzine allocated $10 million to compensate landowners in 2008, while Christie has sent nothing. Green Acres purchases in the Highlands have dropped off as well, from more than 12,000 acres in 2004 to about 1,000 acres last year.

Meanwhile, a program intended to allow these landowners to sell development rights has flopped. The hope was to allow owners of pristine lands to sell these rights in zones that towns set aside for more dense development, where the water supply is not at risk. But so far no town has established such a zone, so there is no market for these development rights.

A similar program is working in the Pinelands, where the zones are mandatory. So that part of the Highlands Act needs a second look.