LONDON – Be prepared to hear an awful lot about "Brexit" in coming months.

It may sound like the brand name of a terribly wholesome breakfast cereal, but Brexit is actually media shorthand for the possibility that the United Kingdom will end its 42-year membership in the 28-country European Union. Conservative Prime Minister David Cameron has promised British voters a referendum on the country's EU membership some time before the end of 2017.

But in all likelihood, the historic vote – which will have a huge impact on Britain's future economic potential and world status – will happen next year. And the outcome is in no way certain.

"It's really a toss-up," says Adam Drummond, research manager at Opinium, a British polling firm.

Related Content Related Content Obama Is Wrong About the Paris Attacks First off the president should acknowledge that this atrocity was committed by Islamic jihadis.

Last week, Cameron publicly outlined four demands he's making to reform EU membership. If he can persuade the other members to largely meet them, he says, he'll campaign to keep Britain in the European project. But Cameron also stressed that he's not wedded to EU membership. If his reform negotiations fail, he said, "we will have to ask ourselves: 'Is this organization for us?'"

But Cameron mostly talked up the benefits of EU membership. "I think everyone in the party knows that Cameron wants to stay in Europe," says Stuart Wilks-Heeg, a professor of politics at the University of Liverpool. But that places him in a minority within his own party – polls indicate that a plurality of Tory members favor Brexit. And Euroskeptic Conservatives say they're a bulwark against pressure from the right coming from the anti-Europe United Kingdom Independent Party (UKIP), which won 4 million votes – 12.6 percent of the total – in last May's general election.

The EU began life in the years after World War II. Often called the Common Market then, it was mainly a trade zone designed to economically unite the countries of Europe that had spent centuries warring with one another. Britain joined in 1973, and its membership was approved by British voters by a wide margin in a 1975 referendum. Since then, however, the EU has evolved into a single-market super-state that includes its own currency, the euro (a monetary union of 19 EU members, but not Britain), a parliament and an executive body, the European Commission, that promulgates rules on issues ranging from trade to human rights to immigration.

Euroskeptics argue that Britain pays billions of pounds in membership fees, but gets only bureaucratic grief in return, and that the country could do better economically by negotiating its own trade deals and by gaining full control of its borders to limit immigration. Pro-Europe advocates claim that British trade would suffer if it pulled out of Europe, its largest trading partner, and that a Britain outside of Europe would lose economic and leadership status.

"For most U.K. voters, Europe is not at all at the top of the agenda," Drummond says. But immigration – especially since 2004, when a rule change allowed for large influxes of immigrants into Britain from Eastern European member states, particularly Poland – is a major concern to voters, and that's given the Out camp traction. UKIP "has done a good job of boosting the negatives of Europe with immigration," Drummond adds.

The free movement of goods, capital and people is a bedrock principle of the European project. So Cameron's not tackling immigration directly. Instead, one of his four demands would require immigrants to wait four years before being eligible for benefits. His other three demands: protection of non-eurozone countries from economic discrimination; reducing the EU bureaucracy to improve competition; and allowing Britain to opt out of some efforts to forge an "ever closer union."

Of the latter three demands, it's thought that European leaders will find ways to meet them – and may have already done so in private. But any reform that might work to limit immigration could prove tricky to negotiate. And although last week's terror attack in Paris has kick-started a new debate on Europe's open borders and may harden attitudes toward Syrian immigrants, Wilks-Heeg says that, for now, "it is hard to gauge how British public opinion will move in response to the Paris attacks, and to what extent and in what direction."

Ultimately, says Vernon Bogdanor, a professor of government at King's College, London, "I think he'll get a deal, and he'll call it a great triumph. But that will be a difficult message to sell."

Slideshow Countries That Accept the Most Migrants Christopher Furlong/Getty Images The European Union agreed this week to a plan for distribution of refugees across the continent, despite dissent from four member countries. As thousands fleeing unrest in the Middle East and North Africa travel to and across the EU, member nations have hesitated to formalize a quota system that would mandate each country to resettle a specified amount of people. The Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania and Slovakia all rejected the plan that attempts to relieve stress put on arrival nations like Greece and Italy. France and Germany back the plan.



According to data from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the number of new asylum seekers rose by 46 percent in 2014 and is expected to climb even higher in 2015. Here’s a look at the five countries in the 34-member organization that took in the most permanent immigrants in 2013, the year of the most recent data.

1. The United States 1. The United States Julio Cortez/AP The U.S. remains the top country for receiving migrants, taking in 989,900 in 2013. This number measures lawful permanent resident status granted and does not include migration to the U.S. by other means. These new immigrants brought the entire U.S. foreign-born population to 13 percent of the total population.



The U.S. is also the top refugee resettlement country, with an annual cap of 70,000 people per year. In 2013, the U.S. admitted 69,900 refugees, a 20 percent increase from the previous year. Secretary of State John Kerry announced Sunday that the U.S. will increase this amount in the coming years to help share the burden of the world’s current migration crisis. The U.S. will take 85,000 next year and increase to 100,000 by 2017.

2. Germany 2. Germany Sean Gallup/Getty Images Germany took less than half of the migrants welcomed by the U.S., accepting 468,800 permanent immigrants in 2013. Countries sending the most migrants to Germany were all in the European Union, with Poland, Romania, Italy, Hungary and Spain sending the most. The most migrants coming from non-EU countries arrived from Russia and Syria, which had 18,000 and 17,000 people leave, respectively.



Many migrants currently traveling to and through Europe hope to reach Germany because of its wealth and job opportunities. EU law states that refugees must apply for asylum in the first EU country they set foot in, but many are trying to avoid applying in poorer countries. Some of these countries, like Hungary and Croatia, have taken measures to try and keep migrants out. Many smaller countries also oppose a mandatory quota system for redistributing migrants. 3. The United Kingdom 3. The United Kingdom Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP In 2013, the U.K. took 291,000 permanent immigrants. In 2014, there were 5.2 million foreign nationals living in the U.K., an increase of 4 percent from the previous year. The amount of people granted permission to stay in the U.K. permanently in 2014 decreased by one-third from the previous year to 103,100. This is thought to be in part due to a law that required people to have knowledge of “language and life in the United Kingdom.”



In 2014, 24,900 people filed for asylum in the U.K. Of the 19,900 application decisions made that year, 41 percent were granted asylum or another kind of protected status. The U.K. has been somewhat insulated from the migrant crisis enveloping Europe because it is separated from the rest of Europe’s land mass by the English Channel.

4. France 4. France Romain Lafabregue/AFP/Getty Images France received 259,800 permanent immigrants in 2013, about a 3 percent increase from the previous year. Census data from 2011 shows that there were 5.6 million immigrants in the country, with the most arriving from Algeria, Morocco and Portugal.



France received about 66,000 applications for asylum in 2013, up 7 percent from the previous year. More immigrants in France are signing integration agreements, which generally involve civic lessons and can also prescribe language training. 5. Canada 5. Canada Dan Kitwood/Getty Images Canada admitted 258,600 permanent immigrants in 2013, with the highest numbers coming from China, India and the Philippines. Immigrants tend to be highly skilled, with 46 percent of people ages 25 to 64 having earned a bachelor’s or advanced degree.



Nine percent of those admitted as permanent residents in 2013 were refugees. Of those, 5,600 were admitted as government assisted refugees, which was 15 percent below the target of 6,800. Canada also resettled 6,200 refugees under its privately sponsored refugee program.

x of x

Certainly, hard-core Europhobes won't buy it, but they're not Cameron's audience. With current polling showing both sides commanding around 40 percent of the vote, the premier's task is to persuade a majority of the undecideds that it is better to remain in the EU. And Drummond says Opinium's polling shows that how the question is framed matters. When Cameron claims his negotiations have changed the status quo for the better, "that produces a healthy swing to the stay side."

Another potentially strong arrow in Cameron's quiver: corporate Britain. Big business' main lobbying group is the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), and its members largely support remaining in a "reformed" EU because they say it protects British trade and jobs. The CBI's backing would boost Cameron, Drummond says, which is why the anti-side has been pushing the organization to tone down its pro-Europe stance.

But there are big hurdles. For instance, most of the top-selling U.K. newspapers are right-leaning and produce reams of anti-Europe stories. So there's a good chance they'll join the Out campaign. Timing is also a factor. Estimates on when it will be held vary from early summer of next year to next fall. "The later it takes place, the further away it is from any government honeymoon," Drummond says, referring to the Tories' general election victory last May.

Finally, there's turnout. No one can predict how many voters will opt to vote on the referendum. "Most of the people who are passionate on this issue are those who want out," Drummond says, "so the higher the turnout the better for the stay-in side."

But passion doesn't alway trump risk. In last year's Scottish referendum on Scotland leaving the U.K., the Yes campaign tapped into a deep well of frothy Scottish nationalism, but in the end 55.3 percent of Scottish voters decided independence was too risky and nixed it.