'The Gilded Age is back – and we know how well that went for everyone.'

Buy Photo One of the completed homes, under a vintage Sycamore tree, at Greystone on Hudson, a new high-end gated community on 100 acres in Tarrytown, photographed June 4, 2015. (Photo: Mark Vergari/The Journal News)Buy Photo

If I had to put a hard number on just how many bathrooms is too many for a single-family home, I'd probably guess way fewer than 11.

But what do I know? I've never house-hunted beyond the "2.5BR" market, and I probably won't be hitting any open houses at Greystone-on-Hudson, either. The super-luxe 100-acre development in Tarrytown and Greenburgh will feature 20 estates ranging in price from $5 million to $20 million.

The first just came on the market at a hair under $10 million.

First look: Super-luxe development debuts in Tarrytown, Greenburgh

Buy Photo Andy Todd, the president of the Greyston Mansion Group, gestures toward a ravine plot at Greystone on Hudson, a new high-end gated community on 100 acres in Tarrytown, photographed June 4, 2015. (Photo: Mark Vergari/The Journal News)

"Maybe the seller could up the bid by a thousand and change and get a nice round figure," quipped Facebook commenter Frank Moliterno. "Or would that scare away potential buyers?"

One-liners like that were plentiful among the responses to Bill Cary's piece last weekend on Facebook and on lohud.com. A recurring theme was that the 20,000-square-food debut was too gauche (Ira Roth), too much to heat (Ronald Keeperman) and had too many windows to wash (Lisa Anthony).

There were even two holy cow's and a gee whiz. But the dominant theme could best be described as indignation – or class envy, depending upon your perspective.

"This is really stupid," wrote Laura Kerns. "No one needs this much house."

"Wants and needs are very different," Tim Osborne shot back. "No one needs a tattoo but they get them anyhow."

"It's sad, really," David Raguso wrote. "This county just doesn't care about the average person."

Said Dana Doyle, "Bye bye, middle-class! The rich folk are taking over!"

Some might note that, this being Westchester, they already had.

"With the ongoing increase in income inequality, these mega-McMansions are sure to find buyers," Susan Rubin weighed in, adding ominously, "Until the collapse happens."

Buy Photo An alcove on the second floor in one of the completed homes at Greystone on Hudson, a new high-end gated community on 100 acres in Tarrytown, photographed June 4, 2015. (Photo: Mark Vergari/The Journal News)

Like others, Daphne Philipson questioned the need for so much square footage. "The Gilded Age is back – and we know how well that went for everyone."

Of those irked by the ostentatious new construction, Reuben Garcia-Carrasquillo was among the most thoughtful, I thought.

"Wretched excess," he wrote. "There is nothing wrong with being financially successful, but why then not be reserved about it? How much house does a man need? Find meaning in meaningful things."

Indeed. But isn't there an assumption there that prospective buyers are seeking meaning in meaningless things? How big is too big? How reserved is reserved enough? I couldn't venture a guess, personally.

Some were not so much annoyed but still critical of the new homes, critiquing the exterior appearance specifically as a hodgepodge of conflicting architectural styles. "Looks like it was thrown together at different times by different moods," wrote Erika Kislaki-Bauer.

Eileen Healy Rehill lamented the addition of "more overly priced McMansions" in Westchester rather than "nice yet affordable housing for the middle class." She was far from the only one, with housing for seniors and the disabled also mentioned.

Ann Ehret-Laubner Apgar's take was a succinct mix of being unimpressed yet looking to live and let live.

"Not for me," she wrote, "but I am glad someone who wants it can own it and enjoy it."

And never be far from a bathroom.

Grab a cup of coffee and join me and a few of my colleagues this and every Friday morning and a discussion of local issues or whatever's on your mind. Follow @lohud on Facebook and Twitter to see where we'll stop next.

Buy Photo The den in one of the completed homes at Greystone on Hudson, a new high-end gated community on 100 acres in Tarrytown, photographed June 4, 2015. (Photo: Mark Vergari/The Journal News)

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1MVNUyr