Topics: Albert Kahn, Dream City, Editor's Picks, Facebook, millennials, New York City, Photography, Technology News, Life News

A few years before World War I, the French banker Albert Kahn began a project to document a world that he believed was on the cusp of great and sudden change. Equipped with an early type of color film, Kahn’s photographers journeyed to the jungles of the Amazon and Sub-Saharan Africa. They recorded the final years of the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires, as well as daily life in Ireland, Norway and the United States. By 1931, when Kahn was forced to halt the project due to financial troubles, he had amassed some 72,000 autochromes, which he boldly christened “Les Archives de la planète.”

Ironically, the most famous images from Kahn’s collection were taken in the streets and squares around his Paris home. They depict a city whose characters — merchants, soldiers, grandes dames and dandies in stovepipe hats — recall the paintings of Manet and Caillebotte; and whose signs and streets may be recognized from the photographs of Eugène Atget or Charles Marville. And yet, in their original form or with digital color enhancements, the Kahn autochromes are uniquely mesmerizing, for they bring lucid color to the period between the fall of Realist painting and the rise of color film that sometimes seems, to the modern observer, to have existed in black-and-white.

But the color is only part of their charm. Why did these photos go viral while the tribes of the Amazon or the villages of Ireland remain curiosities? Because of the city, of course. Paris in these images is at once familiar and foreign, a combination that enthralled the millions who saw these images when they circulated on blogs and social media last winter.

They demonstrated the extent to which old photographs of cities, like cat videos, have gained unforeseen popularity on the Internet. Once relegated to municipal archives, libraries and postcard collections, vintage urban photos have given rise to thriving online communities where enthusiasts celebrate a wide range of scenes. They offer the evidence of a history lesson and the beauty of a museum piece, and like an old top 40 hit, provoke a peculiar sense of yearning – a paradox of warmth and loss – that is at once highly personal and shared by thousands.

On the Facebook page “Old Images of New York,” Todd Berkun posts black-and-white photographs of the Chrysler Building, the Brooklyn Bridge and street scenes that include bocce players and clam peddlers.

In September, “Old Images of New York” (inspired by an eponymous page for the city of Philadelphia) had some 17,000 fans; now it is quickly approaching 200,000, which puts it a rung below news outlets like Salon (312K fans) and Bloomberg News (387K). But in terms of interaction — in Facebook lingo, the number of people “talking about this,” which factors in likes, comments and shares — Berkun’s stats regularly eclipse those of Salon, Bloomberg, the Atlantic, Slate, Vanity Fair and the Wall Street Journal.

In brief, the site exerts a magnetic pull over its fans. Postcard-style images, like this anonymous 1931 photo of rainy trolley tracks glistening beneath the lights of Times Square, tend to perform the best. But Berkun tries to cultivate a balance of the iconic and the unknown. Alongside landmarks, he’ll throw up a shot of Satchel Paige at Yankee Stadium, or a ’40s streetscape from the Tenderloin. The term “old” allows him great leeway. The 1984 Thanksgiving Day Parade, captured on black-and-white film, seemed old enough for his audience, as do regular photographs of the twin towers.

Berkun has no background in photography. At his day job, he sells ink and toner online. But he has rapidly become something of an expert on the shutterbugs of old New York. The site frequently features Berenice Abbott (“a legend,” says Berkun), whose “Changing New York” series was commissioned by the WPA, and other well-known mid-century photographers, such as Ewing Galloway and the Life magazine staffers Margaret Bourke-White and Alfred Eisenstaedt. Still others, like P.L. Sperr and Eugene Armbruster, remain largely anonymous, so Berkun researches and writes short profiles of them.