Regarding “Cry for me, Argentina” (Opinion, Feb. 28): After reading Roger Cohen’s ode to the self-destruction of Argentina, I had to run to my computer and perform a quick search. Was I dreaming? Wasn’t the United States deeply involved in Argentina’s political upheavals? Ah yes, here’s some $30 million in annual aid to the military dictators from the Ford and Reagan administrations. After the dictators fall, here’s the United States obstructing efforts to bring them to justice. And the “disappeared” of whom Mr. Cohen speaks with such reverence? The savagery they fell victim to was, according to documents released in 2002, backed by Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, and by many accounts actively supported by the C.I.A. To extend Mr. Cohen’s metaphor of the child who won’t grow up, it is oddly selective and misleading to omit the role of its abusive uncle, Uncle Sam.

Maia Ettinger, Guilford, Conn.

Mr. Cohen manages, in slightly more than 800 words, to reduce an entire country, its people and history into a caricature designed for easy consumption. He indulges in descriptions of Peronism that would each require 800 words to be properly defined. He makes the “Dirty War” into a quaint image of Argentine women sobbing uncontrollably. Even the headline turns Argentina into an antiquated symbol and an image of Madonna singing a pop song.

Marianela D’Aprile Knoxville, Tenn.

I know that the Peronists’ main goal, their perpetuation in power, comes at the expense of the Argentine economy, but they are very effective at pushing policies (some, like same-sex marriage, that are quite progressive) by building political alliances with both the right and the left. That pragmatism has become the signature of the party, a skill that no other political force has mastered, which is also why Argentina still suffers from the bad and enjoys the good that Peronism brings.

I hope that other political forces will address Argentina’s long postponed economic issues while maintaining a progressive social agenda, but if they want to compete with Peronism in future elections, they will have to learn a lot from them.

Victoria Ballerini, Brooklyn, N.Y.

Mr. Cohen claims that we are a nation that never grew up, a child among the grown-up nations. I believe that this depends on your definition of progress. Progress means that nations have the ability to cooperate with others, to build bridges of solidarity with neighboring countries, and to develop laws that ensure full compliance with human rights. Today, Argentina is considered one of the main emerging economies. In 2013, G.D.P. per capita reached $18,600, the second highest in Latin America. My country has a strong tradition of defending education and public health: It spends 6 percent of its G.D.P. on education and culture, and 9.5 percent of its G.D.P. on health. Despite our history of dictatorships arising every time we began to make progress, Argentina has managed to grow in every way.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Valentina Risso Puerto Madryn, Argentina

I was struck by Mr. Cohen’s comparison of President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner with Isabel Perón. Isabel was never elected; Cristina has been elected twice, both times by wide margins. The article suggests both were widows who came to power over the dead bodies of their husbands; but Cristina was elected while her husband, Néstor Kirchner, was still alive. Any person covering Argentina during the last 11 years knows that the Kirchners were, if anything, a team running the country. Cristina was a successful lawyer, senator and legislator for decades before becoming president; Isabel Perón was a cabaret singer and dancer. Under Isabel Perón the policies that led to 30,000 disappearances were put into place; under the Kirchners hundreds of those guilty of “Dirty War” crimes have been tried and sentenced.

Joe Goldman, Buenos Aires

Putin wants his Russian empire

Regarding “Russia has already lost the war” (Review, March 8) by Chrystia Freeland: Yes, the Russians’ attitudes toward Ukraine are rooted in the status quo reaching back a few hundred years. Yes, the Russians’ sense of history makes them worry about their western buffer. But the most important reason President Vladimir V. Putin will never accept a truly independent Ukraine is not really as complex as has been suggested. The success of a democratic Ukrainian society in which corruption has been reined in and oligarchy eliminated would completely undermine the legitimacy of Mr. Putin’s project to recreate an autocratic Russian empire. As such, it can never be permitted.

Daniel Bronheim, Great Neck, N.Y.

Natural gas and climate change

Regarding “Tempering oil dependence” (Opinion, Feb. 26): Dennis C. Blair and Michael W. Hagee’s argument that we should reduce our dependence on oil “through more deployment of fuels like electricity and natural gas” is flawed. As they should know, electricity is not a fuel but an energy product that requires fuel to produce. Their advocacy of natural gas overlooks mounting evidence that methane emissions from natural gas threaten to seriously exacerbate global warming. It is no longer credible to argue for natural gas production while ignoring its environmental costs and dangers.

Adrian Kuzminski, Fly Creek, N.Y.

A partisan take on Israel and Iran

Regarding “Don’t let up on Iran” (Opinion, Feb. 25): An opinion article jointly signed by the president and the chairman of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee is about as useful as one written by the commander of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards about Israel. The authors ignore Israel’s role in fanning the flames of radical Islam, encouraging America to embark on so-called wars of choice, and disingenuously exaggerating foreign threats in order to conceal its own illegal settlement expansion.

Hamid Varzi, Tehran