Bush called Obamacare a 'monstrosity of consolidating power in Washington, D.C.' Jeb Bush talks alternative to Obamacare 'monstrosity'

Jeb Bush says that Obamacare is a “monstrosity” and wants the government to focus instead on a catastrophic coverage plan to help people who experience costly medical crises.

The potential Republican 2016 presidential contender said that he doesn’t see Obamacare being repealed before President Barack Obama leaves office. But once it is, he wants to see a different plan.

Story Continued Below

“The effort by the state, by the government, ought to be to try to create catastrophic coverage, where there is relief for families in our country, where if you have a hardship that goes way beyond your means of paying for it, the government is there or an entity is there to help you deal with that,” Bush said in Iowa last weekend. “The rest of it ought to be shifted back where individuals are empowered to make more decisions themselves.”

Catastrophic health plans are typically less expensive than a comprehensive insurance policy and only cover health costs in the case of a major medical event such as a cancer diagnosis or significant injury. The plus side for the consumer is that they are cheap; the downside is that they don’t cover care for more routine illnesses or conditions, including doctor’s appointments.

Bush called Obamacare a “monstrosity of consolidating power in Washington, D.C.,” saying the law suppresses wages and adds uncertainty to investment. The former Florida governor labeled it the greatest job suppressor in the “so-called recovery.”

Bush has long voiced opposition to Obamacare and has stressed that the GOP’s best response would be a solid alternative. He said he’d rather see a health system that is “consumer-directed” and gives the patient a relationship with his or her health provider.

“We restore [a patient-doctor relationship in the health system] by repealing — if possible at some point, I think that’s post presidency of Barack Obama — the Affordable Care Act, Obamacare,” Bush said Friday at a fundraiser for Iowa Rep. David Young. “And replacing it with a model that is consumer directed, where consumers, where patients, have more choices, where they have more of a direct relationship; where the subsidies, if there were to be subsidies, are state administered; and if there are to be exchanges, they aren’t coercive exchanges; where there’s no employer mandate, employee mandate or requirements of services provided that are extraordinary; where people have more customized types of insurance based on their needs; and it’s more consumer-directed so that they’re more engaged in the decision-making, and they have more choices than what they have today.”

Bush cited Medicaid reforms that he put into place in Florida, which he calls a defined contribution plan, and says that he increased patient and physician satisfaction and reduced costs.

Katie Glueck contributed to this report.