Sunday, May 24, 2015

Maddie Denton of Murfreesboro, Tenn. fiddles her way to a third victory at the 1890s Day Jamboree Old Time Fiddle Convention in Ringgold - photo by Randall Franks

Rhythm in Motion of Cookeville, Tenn. won the bluegrass band competition at the 1890s Day Old Time Fiddlers Convention - photo by Randall Franks

Rhythm in Motion of Cookeville, Tenn. took top honors in the team dance competition at the 1890s Day Old Time Fiddlers Convention on May 23 in Ringgold - photo by Randall Franks

Maddie Denton (second from right) of Murfreesboro, Tenn. won the Randall Franks Trophy at the 1890s Day Old Time Fiddle Convention May 23, 2015. In the fiddle off, she faced Caleb Bryant (third from left) of Northport, Ala. winner of the 11-15 category, who won second, Johnny Ray Watts (center) of Lineville, Ala. from 22-50 category, who placed third, and Tim Daniels (second from right) of Lawrenceburg, Tenn. winner of the 51 and up category, who placed fourth. Fiddle off contestants receive their awards from Randall Franks (third from left), organizer Lewis Taylor (right) and 1890s Day Jamboree Chairman Ronal Graham (left). - photo by Butch Lanham

Organizers at the 1890s Day Jamboree Old Time Fiddlers Convention welcome over 125 contestants including fiddlers, guitarists, mandolinists, bands, banjo players, and cloggers from states across the south to Ringgold, Ga. May 23, 2015.

Instumentalists struck a chord as dancers twirled into the hearts of audiences as they cheered dozens of musicians on to victory to win nearly $7,000 in prize money sponsored by Walter Jackson Chevrolet stage at the historic Catoosa County Courthouse.

“We marked our tenth contest this year and every year I am more amazed at the youth and the level of talent that they are sharing for the judges,” said contest organizer Lewis Taylor. “Our volunteers work tirelessly to make this event something everyone can enjoy. Without them, our high caliber judges, and our sponsors, we would not do this successful an event.”

Mr. Taylor is a champion harmonica player winning titles in several states and numerous contests.

Maddie Denton of Murfreesboro, Tn. won the Randall Franks Trophy at the 1890s Day Jamboree. Denton also won the 16-21 age category for the chance to compete for the trophy.

In the fiddle off, she faced Caleb Bryant of Northport, Ala. winner of the 11-15 category, who won second, Johnny Ray Watts of Lineville, Ala. from 22-50 category, who placed third, and Tim Daniels of Lawrenceburg, Tenn. winner of the 51 and up category, who placed fourth.

The top prize is named in honor of Appalachian Ambassador of the Fiddle Randall Franks, “Officer Randy Goode” from TV’s “In the Heat of the Night.” On the heels of a Grand Ole Opry appearance, he cheered the top four competitors on in their bid to win the Randall Franks Trophy and the $500 prize. He presented the winners on the main stage with Taylor and chairman Ronal Graham.

Once holding the title of Georgia State Bluegrass Champion, the International Bluegrass Music Museum Bluegrass Legend and Independent Country Music Hall of Fame inductee is a former member of Bill Monroe’s Blue Grass Boys, Jim and Jesse’s Virginia Boys and numerous other groups who as a guest star often shared his talents for the Grand Ole Opry. Mr. Franks hosts the Grand Master Fiddler Championship at the Country Music Hall of Fame in Nashville each year. For more information, visit randallfranks.com.

“So many share with me how they are uplifted by seeing the youth share their talents on stage,” he said. “We are blessed the 1890s Day Jamboree committee strives to keep the tradition of the fiddle contests a vital part of the American musical fabric.”

Rhythm in Motion of Cookeville, Tenn. won the team dance competition, Dixie Rhythm Cloggers of Gordo, Ala. took second place, Main Stage Fusion won third and Main Stage Revolution received fourth, both from Springfield, Tenn.

In the bluegrass band competition Breaking Point of Murfreesboro, Tenn. won first place, A Step Ahead of Greenbrier, Tn., won second, Crossroads of Wedowee, Ala. took third, and New Grass Express of Chattanooga, Tn. received fourth , and Spatial Effects of Tunnel Hill, Ga.

Rob Pearcy of Smyrna, Tn. won both the guitar and mandolin contests and received the back up guitar award. Maddie Denton of Murfreesboro, Tenn. took third in guitar and second in mandolin. Bobby Nobley of Wedowee, Ala. took third in the mandolin competition and Elijah Jenkins of Wilder, Tenn. won second in mandolin.

Brett Martin of Loachapoka, Ala. won first in banjo, while Shane Cothran of Franklin, Tenn. achieved second place and Cody Harvey of Signal Mountain, Tn. won third.

The next 1890s Day Jamboree Old Time Fiddlers Convention will be Memorial Day weekend Saturday2016 in Ringgold. For more information, visit www.cityofringgold.com, or www.1890sDay.com or Like the event on Facebook.

2015 1890s Day Jamboree Old Time Fiddle Convention winners:

First – fourth places

Fiddlers:

Randall Franks Trophy Fiddle Off:

Maddie Denton – Murfreesboro, Tenn.

Johnny Ray Watts – Lineville, Ala.

Caleb Bryant – Northport, Ala.

Tim Daniels – Lawrenceburg, Tenn.

Ages 10 and under:

David Lin – Lexington, Ky.

Meredith Hudson – Gordo, Ala.

Abby Vaughn – Berry, Ala.

Ages 11-15:

Caleb Bryant – Northport, Ala.

Matthew Lin – Lexington, Ky.

Benjamin Lin – Lexington, Ky.

Jaden Smith-Borne – Nashville, Tenn.

Ages 16-21:

Maddie Denton – Murfreesboro, Tenn.

Andrew Lin – Lexington, Ky.

Kate Moss – Gordo, Ala.

Lyndsey Batts – Springfield, Tenn.

Ages 22-50:

Johnny Ray Watts – Lineville, Tenn.

Bill Jones – Clinton, Tenn.

Gail Johnson – Lavergne, Tenn.

Cheryl Chunn – Greenbrier, Tenn.

Ages 51 and up:

Tim Daniels – Lawrenceburg, Tenn.

Marcia Denton – Murfreesboro, Tenn.

Mack Snoderly – Maryville, Tenn.

Doug Carson – Flintstone, Ga.

Bluegrass Band:

Breaking Point – Murfreesboro, Tenn.

A Step Ahead – Greenbrier, Tenn.

Crossroads – Wedowee, Ala.

New Grass Express – Chattanooga, Tenn.

Spatial Effects – Tunnel Hill, Ga.

Guitarists:

Rob Pearcy – Smyrna, Tenn.

Elijah Jenkins – Wilder, Tenn.

Maddie Denton – Murfreesboro, Tenn.

Best Backup Guitarist:

Rob Pearcy – Smyrna, Tenn.

Mandolinists:

Rob Pearcy – Smyrna, Tenn.

Maddie Denton – Murfreesboro, Tenn.

Bobby Nobley – Wedowee, Ala.

Banjoist:

Brent Martin – Loachapoka, Ala.

Shane Cothran – Franklin, Tenn.

Cody Harvey – Signal Mountain, Tenn.

Cloggers:

10 and under:

Brayden Chunn – Greenbrier, Tenn.

Meredith Hudson Gordo, Ala.

Treble Chunn – Greenbrier, Tenn.

Ages 11-20:

Tanner Dunn – Cookville, Tenn.

Kelcy Tomlin – Springfield, Tenn.

Melody Williamson – Murfreesboro, Tenn.

Ages 21-30:

Jamie Hash – Walland, Tenn.

Kris Jamison – Waverly, Tenn.

Kevin Lovelace – Murfreesboro, Tenn.

Ages 31 and up:

Cheryl Chunn – Greenbrier, Tenn.

Amanda Herron – Cookeville, Tenn.

Cassie Cornish – Hendersonville, Tenn.

Clogging Team:

Rhythm in Motion – Cookeville, Tenn.

Dixie Rhythm Cloggers – Gordo, Ala.

Main Stage Fusion – Springfield, Tenn.

Main Stage Revolution – Springfield, Tenn.