The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) recent rule on Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing is designed to transform the nation’s racially and economically segregated neighborhoods into communities of opportunity by fostering compliance with civil rights and fair housing laws. Coming on the heels of the Supreme Court’s decision in Texas Department of Housing and Community Affairs v. Inclusive Communities Project (ICP), which reaffirmed that disparate impact claims are cognizable under the Fair Housing Act (FHA), the HUD rule provides another tool for advocates and governments to use in dismantling historic patterns of residential segregation and discrimination.

Using the FHA and other civil rights statutes to challenge discrimination in all forms, whether intentional or resulting from policies that have a discriminatory effect on protected classes, has reduced inequality and increased social mobility. To mount such challenges the FHA has been paired with another important civil rights era statute the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA or the Act). The ECOA was enacted in 1974 at the tail end of a decades-long campaign by civil rights activists to eradicate discrimination in public accommodation, housing, employment, education, and credit based on race, gender, and other immutable characteristics. Recognizing the vital role credit played in modern society, Congress established a clear national policy that every person should have equal access to credit, and that no person should be denied credit based on characteristics unrelated to his or her creditworthiness.

ADVERTISEMENT

The Act’s purpose, ensuring equal access to credit, remains as relevant today as it did over forty years ago. Despite passage of the ECOA, discriminatory credit practices did not disappear. The economically and racially segregated communities that were redlined in the past bore the full brunt of the predatory lending crisis. During the subprime lending boom, members of these communities were targeted for high-risk, high interest rate loans. Devastated by high rates of foreclosure, the communities were stripped of wealth and continue to suffer adverse effects from predatory mortgage lending practices. These segregated neighborhoods are also saturated with fringe financial services, among them payday lenders, check cashers, rent-to-own stores, and pawn shops.

Disparate impact claims have long been recognized under the ECOA, and the use of that legal theory in this context is further strengthened by the Supreme Court’s decision in ICP. The text, legislative history, and purpose of the Act, the implementing agency’s interpretation, and Circuit court decisions all recognize the disparate impact doctrine under the ECOA.

As the ICP Court instructs, antidiscrimination laws must be construed to encompass disparate-impact claims where their text refers to the consequences of the action and not just the mindset of the actors, and where that interpretation is consistent with the statutory purpose. The text of the ECOA states plainly that it is unlawful to discriminate in any aspect of a credit transaction on the basis of race and other protected factors. The ECOA carefully lays out what is not considered discrimination and disparate impact claims are not explicitly prohibited. The Court noted that statutes that use language similar to ECOA’s have been construed to include disparate impact.

The federal agencies charged with supervisory and regulatory authority over the ECOA have long recognized disparate impact liability under the ECOA. Regulation B has fully recognized disparate impact liability since 1977. The legislative history of the ECOA makes clear that Congress recognized the use of disparate impact theory in earlier civil rights statutes, most notably Title VII, and considered and ratified its inclusion in the ECOA to challenge discrimination against groups that were systemically disfranchised from the credit marketplace.

The ECOA continues to play a dominant role in protecting Americans’ financial security. This month, the DOJ and the CFPB reached a settlement with Honda’s financial arm for discriminatory interest rate markups on cars sold to thousands of African-American, Hispanic, and Asian borrowers. Such enforcement actions are in keeping with the central purpose of the ECOA.

Congress and the CFPB should stay the course and encourage the effective and appropriate use of the disparate impact cause of action by both public and private advocates in order to enforce the ECOA and achieve its intended goals. The availability of credit, as Congress noted, “determines an individual’s effective range of social choice and influences such basic life matters as selection of occupation and housing. Indeed, the availability of credit has a profound impact on an individual’s ability to exercise the substantive civil rights guaranteed by our Constitution.”

Williamson is an attorney and directs the Racial Justice and Equal Economic Opportunity Project at the National Consumer Law Center.​