Topics: Affordable Care Act, Congress, Editor's Picks, Obamacare, Republicans, Supreme Court, Politics News

Here in Southern California we have a weather phenomenon this time of year we call “June Gloom.” It refers to a marine layer that settles over the coastal areas at this time of year creating an overcast, cool climate through most of the month. This year, however, June gloom seems to be a national phenomenon among healthcare wonks and decent human beings who are anxiously awaiting the Supreme Court’s ruling on the Obamacare lawsuit, King v. Burwell. It would have been hard to imagine just a couple of years ago that a fatuous argument such as that set forth by the plaintiffs in the case could ever make it past even the drunkest federal district court judge, but here we are. For those unfamiliar with the details of the case, it’s summed up simply in this Fact Check:

The plaintiffs in this case — David King and three other Virginia residents — argue that the language of the ACA stipulates that insurance subsidies should only be available in states that set up their own exchanges, not states that rely on the federally run HealthCare.gov. The plaintiffs focus on language in the law about subsidies being available for those enrolled in an exchange “established by the State.” The federal government, meanwhile, argues that the law, as a whole, makes clear subsidies should be available for those enrolling in any exchange, whether established by the state or federal government.

Everyone involved in the drafting of the bill, including Republican Olympia Snowe, has said that the phrase “established by the State” was the result of a clerical error that happened when the House and Senate bills were merged. This is obvious to any sentient being since it would have made no sense whatsoever to create a federal exchange at all if only states that have their own exchanges could participate in the federal subsidies. It makes your head hurt to think about the fact that our judicial system would take such a case seriously.

But it did and the consequences could be very extremely serious. This isn’t a constitutional question but rather a statutory one, so the Court could decide that the plain reading of the whole bill shows the intent of the Congress to allow people to claim the subsidies if their state declined to create an exchange — the only sane interpretation. Or, if they wanted to make a point, they could simply say that the law was unclear or even make the completely ludicrous assumption that the Congress must have meant to create a completely useless federal exchange, deny qualified people subsidies and basically make the healthcare plan topple from its own weight. In either of those last events, the Court would essentially be sending it back to Congress where it would, in the normal course of events, change the wording in that one passage, pass it quickly and send it to the president, no harm done.

And that’s what has so many people feeling that June gloom this year. If the Court does anything but accept the plain meaning of the statute, we are in big trouble. This is because everybody knows that we have as much chance of the Republican Congress properly fixing a passage in the Obamacare legislation as we have of the Congress deciding that the Guantánamo detainees should all be granted American citizenship. It’s beyond imagination. If these times were normal the Court could simply throw it back to the legislature and wash their hands of the matter, feeling confident that the Congress would not be so crass as to create havoc in the economy or hurt millions of people simply on the basis of a technicality. But the the Court knows very well what the results will be. Sadly, few people can have any confidence that the majority of conservative justices gives a damn about that.

As everyone awaits the Court’s verdict, many political observers are looking at how the fallout will affect the upcoming elections should the subsidies on the federal exchanges disappear. Clearly, the private healthcare market will be upended, probably nationally, but assuredly in the states where the subsidies would no longer be available. (The story of why those states declined to create their own exchanges is as cunning and underhanded as the rest of this twisted right-wing plan to ensure that millions of sick people are denied affordable healthcare.)

There’s plenty of analysis out there that indicates many individuals will suffer and probably die. And the more optimistic of these observers believe that (if the Court doesn’t do this in its ruling) Republicans will quickly pull together some sort of extension and transition so that people don’t suddenly have the rug pulled out from under them.

Pessimists, on the other hand, see no evidence that the Republicans have any contingency plans in place and, in fact, assume the GOP sees this as a huge political opportunity. Yes, it’s hard to imagine that a right-wing lawsuit that snatches health insurance out of the hands of millions of people and leaves them completely in the lurch could be a big plus, but these are Republicans we’re talking about. And they have no problem turning rotten lemons into poison lemonade.