It is getting ugly in Republican Land. Today, Fox News disclosed that top Republican officials sent them opposition research to be used against Ted Cruz during his Fox News Sunday interview.

Video:

Wallace said, “This has been one of the strangest weeks I’ve ever had in Washington. And I sat that, because as soon as we listed Ted Cruz as our featured guest this week, I got unsolicited research and questions, not from Democrats, but from top Republicans who — to hammer Cruz. Why are Republicans so angry at Ted Cruz?”

Can you imagine the shock on Chris Wallace’s face when he got his usual weekly talking points, and they targeted a Republican instead of a Democrat? That is an earth shaking event at Fox News. It should be noted that Wallace did exactly what the Republican establishment wanted during his interview with Cruz. He went out of his way to prove that the Texas senator’s plan was destined to fail. Chris Wallace may or may not have used the opposition research that he was provided, but he definitely did everything he could to kill support for the Cruz/DeMint defund Obamacare movement.

It is easy to understand why Republicans are so angry at Ted Cruz. Sen. Cruz spent the summer aligned with Jim DeMint and his former PAC Senate Conservatives Fund. The Senate Conservatives Fund has been running ads targeting Republican senators in their home states with the demand that they support shutting down the government unless Obamacare is defunded. The fact that Cruz could cost some of her fellow Republicans their seats is probably why they are so angry with him.

Wallace’s bemused revelation demonstrates that right wing media has a greater influence over the Republican Party than the leftward media has on the Democrats.

Fox News is not a news organization. They are an active participant in Republican Party politics. Fox News is working hard to discredit Cruz and prevent a government shutdown because they are a part of the Republican Party. Fox News isn’t covering the news. They are helping to make it.

The hit on Ted Cruz was ordered from the top of the Republican Party, and Fox News was a very willing hit man. The truth about Fox News is that they will always and forever be about protecting the Republican Party, not practicing journalism.