George Soros just loves to meddle in American politics - especially if it's in support of liberal causes.

Soros's Open Society Foundation proudly claimed to have given $100 million dollars to "immigrant rights" projects in the United States. Of the $16.7 million of this money that BMI identified, at least $5,300,755, nearly a third, went to organizations that also supported other liberal causes, including abortion, gay marriage and Obamacare.

With $38.9 million in revenue in 2010 alone, the National Council on La Raza ($2,410,000 in Soros funding) calls itself "the largest national Hispanic civil rights and advocacy organization in the United States." It's also one of the most blatantly liberal. La Raza focused heavily on promoting the Affordable Care Act, as well supporting same-sex marriage. It has also been outspoken critic of the Tea Party.

Amnesty International ($844,088 in Soros Funding) has been decidedly anti-Israel, pro-abortion, anti-traditional marriage and campaigned for clemency for Bradley Manning (referring to him by his new female moniker, "Chelsea"). According to Amnesty, the "right" to marry someone of any gender you choose is "enshrined in international human rights standards." Throughout its website, Amnesty International refers to LGBT issues as "LGBT Human Rights," thus by default labeling traditional marriage supporters as suppressors of human rights. The Immigrant Resource Center has a strong emphasis on LGBT Immigrants, as does the group Immigration Equality.

The National Latina Institute for Reproductive Health focuses more on Obamacare and abortion "rights" than it does on immigration, but still gets $100,000 from Soros. A press release for this group called the "Conscience Clause" negotiations, which were aimed to keep those morally opposed to contraception and abortifacients from having to pay for them, "a political play that will hurt Latina health."

Soros has aided hundreds of left-wing groups in America since 2000 under the auspices of his Open Society Foundations. In just 10 years, he gave more than $550 million to liberal organizations in the United States. This has included money going to fund liberal agenda topics like Earth Day, gun control, government funding of student loans and even the IRS targeting of conservatives.

Only a fraction of the records for the $8 billion that Soros claims to give to charities around the world is accessible through the Open Society Foundations' American 990 tax forms. Because of this, the list below is partial, and reflects only part of the $100 million that the Open Society Foundations claim to have given to U.S. immigration groups.

National Council on La Raza Soros funding: $2,410,000



Immigrant Legal Resource Center Soros funding: $1,645,000



Amnesty International Soros funding: $844,088



Immigration Equality Soros funding: $301,667