The financial downturn in Spain’s newspaper industry has claimed its most prominent journalist to date, Pedro J. Ramírez, who was ousted as editor of El Mundo, the conservative newspaper he founded 25 years ago.

But rather than blaming his dismissal on the newspaper’s financial losses, Mr. Ramírez accused Spain’s government of engineering retribution for El Mundo’s recent reporting on a series of corruption cases, one of which involved Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy.

“This is a show of force by a government that wants to send a message, not just to El Mundo, but to the whole media sector, that whoever acts in a way that the government sees as inconvenient will pay the consequences,” Mr. Ramírez said in a phone interview Saturday. “What is happening under Rajoy is particularly serious because it’s about using a time of clear economic weakness to force the media to be docile, servile and practice self-censorship.”

Mr. Ramírez was ousted Thursday after a board meeting of Unidad Editorial, El Mundo’s parent company, which is owned by RCS MediaGroup, an Italian company.

Mr. Rajoy has not commented on Mr. Ramírez’s removal. But Luis de Guindos, the economy minister, told the radio station Cope that “the government has a lot of other things to do” besides trying to influence a newspaper’s management.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Several governments of late have come under criticism by free press advocates. The top editor at Ming Pao, a newspaper in Hong Kong, was removed last month from his post by its owners, leading to complaints that his departure represented the Chinese Communist Party’s efforts to subdue the territory’s independent media. Last week, prosecutors in Egypt filed criminal charges accusing 20 journalists for Al Jazeera television of conspiring with the Muslim Brotherhood.

In Spain, Mr. Rajoy in August had addressed lawmakers and accused El Mundo in Parliament of manipulating information. Mr. Rajoy denounced “a circle of libel” against his governing Popular Party, based on accusations made by Luis Bárcenas, the Popular Party’s former treasurer, who is in prison awaiting trial on charges of tax evasion and masterminding a slush fund to pay kickbacks to Mr. Rajoy and other senior conservative politicians.

El Mundo had backed Mr. Rajoy in three successive general election campaigns, the third of which — in November 2011 — allowed Mr. Rajoy and his Popular Party to return to power with an absolute majority in Parliament. Mr. Ramírez said he “had a good relationship with Rajoy until he came to power.”

Mr. Ramirez, who is commonly known in Spain as Pedro Jota (Spanish for his middle initial), started in journalism in the 1970s, just as Spain was returning to democracy and rebuilding a free press after Franco’s lengthy dictatorship. In 1980, then only 28 years old, he took charge of the newspaper Diario 16, but was eventually forced out over a journalism dispute. In 1989, he started El Mundo, rapidly establishing its reputation for investigative reporting by unearthing information relating to the GAL, a secret paramilitary force sponsored by the Socialist administration to help fight ETA, the Basque separatist movement.

Advertisers in Spanish newspapers spent about 600 million euros last year, or about $808 million, less than a third of the total in 2007, just before the financial crisis. Like other Spanish newspapers, El Mundo has also struggled to switch to an online pay model; the paper’s has yet to yield significant revenue. In November, RCS, the Italian group, was forced to inject €400 million of capital in Unidad Editorial, El Mundo’s parent company, to keep it afloat.

Juan Antonio Giner, president of Innovation, a media consultancy based in London, said Mr. Ramírez’s removal could be the prelude to RCS’s selling off assets or breaking up its Spanish operations.

“To eliminate a strong founding editor such as Pedro J. Ramírez was a key prerequisite for potential partners in the Spanish newspaper arena to consider mergers and acquisitions changes,” he said.

In fact, Mr. Ramírez’s personality has generated controversy beyond the newsroom. In 1997, he became the talk of the town as a participant in a sex video. The scandal resulted in a criminal case that established the video was specifically circulated to damage El Mundo. Among those convicted was the personal assistant of Felipe González, Spain’s former prime minister.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

On Saturday, commenting on his dismissal, Mr. Ramírez said, “I don’t want to present myself as a martyr or a victim, but I do think that what is happening in El Mundo is a symptom of how the quality of democracy is falling back under Rajoy.”

Mr. Ramírez was replaced by El Mundo’s deputy director, Casimiro García-Abadillo, who has been with the newspaper since its 1989 creation. Asked about reports of a multimillion-dollar severance package, Mr. Ramírez demurred.

“I would have been happy to die as director of El Mundo without ever receiving any such indemnity money,” he said.