5 Critical HR Issues in 2015

All businesses survive or thrive based on the capabilities of their personnel, and that includes credit unions. Staff members are not only the credit union’s most expensive resource, but also its most volatile, and numerous laws and regulations exist to make sure staff members are treated fairly and equitably in the workplace. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to CUTimes.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited CUTimes.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical CUTimes.com information including comprehensive product and service provider listings via the Marketplace Directory, CU Careers, resources from industry leaders and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM and CU Times events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including Law.com and GlobeSt.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

1. More Overtime Costs? Wage and hour laws have everything to do with treating employees equitably, and possible changes to the Fair Labor Standards Act could lead to the reclassification of some salaried staff as Wage and hour laws have everything to do with treating employees equitably, and possible changes to the Fair Labor Standards Act could lead to the reclassification of some salaried staff as non-exempt. That means that employees who heretofore have been working however many hours it takes to get their jobs done could suddenly be eligible for overtime pay , and that could be challenge credit unions at both the financial and personnel levels. ”The Department of Labor is in the process of issuing new regulations, but they haven’t come out yet,” Gregg said. “Everyone is waiting to see what the changes will mean to their employee classifications.”

2. Who owns your data in an increasingly electronic world? These days every aspect of both personal and professional lives is governed by electronics, and that can pose problems for credit unions unaware of the nebulous nature of data ownership. These days every aspect of both personal and professional lives is governed by electronics, and that can pose problems for credit unions unaware of the nebulous nature of data ownership. “The main question facing employers is how to control the electronic system, prevent the improper use of that system and maintain the ownership of the work that is done within the credit union,” Gregg said.

3. How anti-social can workplace social media get? If an employee at work posts on his personal social media account that his boss is a moron, does the maligned boss have any disciplinary options? If an employee at work posts on his personal social media account that his boss is a moron, does the maligned boss have any disciplinary options? “A response could be considered a protection of the employer, or it could be considered an invasion of the employee’s privacy,” Gregg said. “If there is a line that’s drawn, it’s getting much harder to find.”