On fire: Adam Taggart. Photo: Jonathan Carroll

Frustrated Western Sydney Wanderers boss Tony Popovic believes his side threw away victory against the Newcastle Jets at Hunter Stadium on Saturday night.

Leading 2-1 going into injury time, a frenetic late push from the Jets ended with Adam Taggart tapping home from close range, denying the visitors all three points.

After clawing their way in front following Taggart's first-half opener, Popovic was left disappointed at seeing his players failing to hang on in the final minutes.

“It's always tough to take when you concede so late and it was scrappy goal. We had a few chances to clear the ball but we didn't,” he said. “They kept it in there, the ball bounced around a bit and fell to a player who was in the right spot and scored. It was disappointing to concede so late.”

Advertisement

Popovic said the Jets were outplayed for the majority of the night and only looked threatening as the minutes ticked away.

“It was two teams working extremely hard and we started very well in the game, but then they scored a wonder goal,” he said. “They gained some confidence and they lifted, so it was good for us to get a goal right before half-time. They were two very nice goals in the first half but you could see in the second half there was only one team that I felt was going to win the game.

“They sat back and tried to get us on the break. It was only in the last five minutes that we were under pressure and we weren't good enough to hold out.”

For the first time since the start of the season, Popovic decided to keep the same starting side for a second straight week, ending the rotation policy that has divided opinion across the football landscape.

Asked if he would keep the same side for a third straight week, Popovic was circumspect, admitting returning players could force his hand.

“First we'll have a look at how the players are after the game, how they recover and if there's any injuries,” he said. “Hopefully we'll get a few more bodies back for selection. We're hoping to have Mateo [Poljak], Jerome [Polenz] and Iacopo [La Rocca] back this week. That's good, because the squad's getting healthier and the more choices we have, the better.”

While new Newcastle coach Clayton Zane was delighted at seeing his team pinch a late equaliser, he wasn't so thrilled at seeing Joel Griffiths sent off after the full-time whistle.

Griffiths, in his first game for Newcastle since 2010, believed a last-second attack should have been permitted by referee Ben Williams. Taggart was clear on goal before being body-checked by Wanderers' keeper Ante Covic, who would have earned a red card.

However, Williams had already ended the match, and took umbrage to Griffiths' objections, promptly sending him off.

“If that's the case that the ref blew his whistle before that action occurred, then I guess we have to abide by the rules of the game,” Zane said. “It's a tough one to swallow because I thought we were always a threat on the counter-attack tonight. It would have been great to have seen what would have been the last action. But there were other ebbs and flows in the match that could have decided it. You can't always rely on one moment to be enough.”

Zane told the media after the game that Griffiths felt hard done by and the club would consider appealing.

“I spoke to him after the game and he said he was in dialogue [with the referee] and he didn't think it was a red card,” he said. “Obviously a lot of players didn't know the situation and maybe that could have been handled a little bit differently. I didn't even know on the bench it was over due to the crowd noise. The club might want to appeal that, based on some leniency from common sense.”