Staff members will bring forward information on $2 million EWI request

City staff members will be bringing information on a proposal to City Council's study session Tuesday on funding EWI with $2 million over the next six years.

The meeting will take place at 6:30 p.m. at the Council Chambers at 500 E. Third St.

The funding for the company that boasts itself as a leader in engineering and technology organization in North America dedicated to manufacturing technologies would go toward execution of the business plan and construction of a Colorado operation at the Rocky Mountain Center for Innovation and Technology, according to a council memo.

The item is informational only, and staff members will be looking for direction from councilors before creating a formal resolution to bring back for a vote.

The council memo states that city staff members have taken tours and had meetings at the EWI headquarters in Columbus, Ohio, since they first learned about the company three years ago, as well as in Colorado and at RMCIT.

"During this time, it has become evident to all involved that an EWI Colorado would be an incredible asset to the Mountain States region, the State and to Loveland. Their differentiating and cross-cutting technologies will be impactful for the private sector and make Loveland a destination for innovative manufacturing capabilities, resources and support," the memo states.

City Council approved spending $300,000 to fund a statewide manufacturing assessment with EWI last year, and the study is expected to be completed in the fall.

Advertisement

"EWI will produce a high level summary of their results that can be shared publicly, but will retain ownership of the study with only the City of Loveland having access to the specific data," the memo stated, adding that the company feels confident that it will be able to establish a branch at RMCIT.

The memo states that helping to fund the company, a 501(c)(3), would attract more companies to Loveland and RMCIT, put Loveland "on the map" when it comes to manufacturing technologies and will serve as a sales tax and property tax generator.

The project's total budget is $6 million, with the "gap funding" coming from The Four Front Initiative and the Office of Economic Development and International Trade.

Councilors will also discuss capital expansion fees for 2016 in their meeting Tuesday.

For more information on the meeting, go to cityofloveland.org.

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.