Which? reveals the best and worst UK hotel chains Premier Inn and Travelodge go head-to-head

Premier Inn has beaten Travelodge in the battle to be crowned top ‘budget’ hotel, as part of a Which? survey to find the best UK chain hotels.

Luxury hotel brand Sofitel takes overall top spot in this year’s survey, with an impressive customer score of 83%, the highest out of all 29 hotel brands featured.

Premier Inn comes in second on 82% and Warner Leisure Hotels finishes third on 80%.

Best budget hotels

In the battle of the ‘budget’ brands, Premier Inn, Which? members' most used hotel chain, continues to go from strength to strength, as its customer score rose from 76% last year to 82% this year.

Premier Inn consistently comes near the top of the table, but Travelodge, Which? members' second most used chain, languishes near the bottom. However, this year’s results show that Travelodge may have made a start in closing the gap with its ‘budget’ rival.

Travelodge is still sitting 22 places below Premier Inn, with a customer score of 60%. But last year it had a customer score of just 50%. Since then, Travelodge has been implementing a £57m modernisation programme, which may be bearing fruit in the improved ratings.

By autumn 2014, more than 80% of Travelodge hotels across the UK were due to have a new look, and all its rooms were due to feature the upgraded king-size Travelodge Dreamer bed.

Britannia Hotels bottom

Britannia Hotels remains in bottom spot for the second year running, with an abysmal customer score of just 33%. The hotel chain has 47 hotels across the UK, including the well known Adelphi Hotel in Liverpool. Members commented on ‘run down’ hotels that are ‘well past their best-by dates’.

You can see how each of the 29 hotel chains performed in the full table of survey results, which shows ratings for bedrooms, bed comfort, value for money and cleanliness, and features hotel brands including Best Western, Hilton, Holiday Inn, Holiday Inn Express and more.

More on this...