Executive Briefing | by Athena Mandros | October 16, 2015

In 2013, we saw the majority of long-term services and supports funding shift from institutional care to home- and community-based services (HCBS) for the first time ever (see Over 50% Of Medicaid LTSS Expenditures For HCBS In 2013). And this is not the only shift affecting the long-term services and supports (LTSS) market – there is increased implementation of managed long-term services by state Medicaid programs.

Managed long-term services and supports (MLTSS) programs finance and deliver institutional care and/or HCBS through managed care organizations (MCOs). Historically these services, in particular HCBS, have been provided through the fee-for-service delivery system. States have begun to move to managed LTSS in an effort to control cost, as well as provide a more comprehensive benefit either through additional services or serving additional individuals.

As of October 2015, there are 18 states that have an MLTSS program in operation. (This excludes states with dual eligible demonstrations and Programs for All Inclusive Care of the Elderly, or PACE.) Additionally, there are seven states with plans to implement LTSS and two states that are expanding their current MLTSS programs.

The OPEN MINDS team has conducted a new analysis of these MLTSS programs. There are some observations that we found in our analysis:

States are including dual eligibles, but not the I/DD population – Of the 18 states with MLTSS programs, 16 use MLTSS to serve the dual eligible population. However, only five states are using MLTSS programs to serve the I/DD population. Historically, both populations are “high users” of all Medicaid services. What may account for the difference is the large push from the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) to coordinate care for dual eligibles and the pushback from I/DD stakeholders (see States Grapple With The ACA’s Intellectual & Developmental Disabilities Provisions).

MLTSS is not synonymous with integrated care – Although many states are providing MLTSS, few are proving a comprehensive set of benefits. Only eight of the eighteen states provide a comprehensive array of benefits (HCBS, institutional care, physical health, behavioral health, and pharmacy services) in a single MCO contract. And three states have MCO contracts that only cover LTSS services. Whether having all services integrated under one organizations is good or bad depends on your perspective (see Carve-Out Or No ).

1115 waivers are authority of choice – In order to use managed care to finance and deliver MLTSS, states need two approvals from CMS, an HCBS approval and a managed care approval. Although there are a number of ways and combinations that states can use to implement MLTSS, the majority (ten states) have chosen to use a stand-alone 1115 waiver and one state is transitioning to a 1115 waiver. An 1115 waiver gives states greater flexibility in designing their program and can allow them to provide a more comprehensive benefit. For example, five states use their 1115 waiver to provide services to HCBS to individuals who typically do not qualify for these services.

Managed care is likely to continue in LTSS – with seven more states implementing MLTSS programs in the near future. To see an analysis of state MLTSS programs, be sure to check out our market intell report: Which States Provide Medicaid Long-Term Services & Supports Through Managed Care?: An OPEN MINDS Market Intelligence Report. The report answers a number of questions, including:

What are Managed Long-Term Services & Supports? What States Have Implemented MLTSS & What Are The Different Components Of An MLTSS Program? What State Medicaid Plans Are Operating MLTSS Programs & What Are Their Characteristics What State Medicaid Plans Are Planning To Implement MLTSS?

In addition, the report has detailed state-by-state charts of populations included in MLTSS programs, services included in MLTSS program, and the type of MCO contract. The report is free to all OPEN MINDS Circle premium members, and can be purchased in the OPEN MINDS e-Store for $495.