To the Editor:

According to a recent Gallup poll, only 42 percent of Americans have faith that government is operating in their interests on domestic matters, and 49 percent trust the government on international matters. I believe that this is a key reason that many Americans are opposed, wrongly in my opinion, to the Affordable Care Act.

Vietnam turned a whole generation sour on government. My brother went over a Goldwater conservative and returned as an anarchist war protester. But we did not learn. The Iraq war was totally unnecessary and cost thousands of American lives and will eventually cost trillions of dollars. It’s not hard to understand why Americans are skeptical of unilateral intervention in Syria.

Other more recent government actions have bred public mistrust. For example, very little was done by Congress to control Wall Street after the economic collapse in 2008. Many called for charges to be brought against financial criminals and stricter banking laws to prevent a future meltdown. What they got was a watered down, ineffective Dodd-Frank Act.

Photo

I could cite many other examples, including Watergate and the current Congressional impasse that led to a government shutdown. The point is that Americans are generally fed up with what they see as government incompetence and lying.

In my view, this is why Americans do not believe that the Affordable Care Act is being enacted to help them. They have been told time and time again that government actions are in their interests, only to find out that they are not.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Unfortunately, this time the program in question addresses a real problem, lack of insurance. But the public will not listen.

JACK BERNARD

Monticello, Ga., Oct. 1, 2013

The writer is a retired health care executive and former Republican Party chairman of Jasper County.

Editors’ Note: We invite readers to respond briefly by Thursday for the Sunday Dialogue. We plan to publish responses and a rejoinder in the Sunday Review. E-mail: letters@nytimes.com