IRONDALE, Alabama – U.S. District Court Judge Callie V.S. Granade of Mobile has ruled against EWTN Global Catholic Network in its request for protection from the government mandate that it must provide coverage of contraception and sterilization as part of its employee health care coverage.

The ruling was made on Tuesday, June 17, and EWTN issued a statement this morning.

"We are extremely disappointed with the decision reached by the court in this case," said EWTN Chairman and CEO Michael P. Warsaw. "The opinion issued is clearly inconsistent with the decisions reached in nearly all of the cases decided to date. The fact that the court has dismissed the serious issues of conscience and religious freedom that EWTN has raised is very troubling.

"As an organization that was founded to uphold the teachings of the Catholic Church, we do not believe that contraception, abortion-inducing drugs and voluntary sterilization should be defined as health care. We simply cannot facilitate these immoral practices," Warsaw said. "We have no other option but to continue our legal challenge of the mandate. We are making an immediate appeal to the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals in Atlanta."

EWTN filed its original lawsuit on Feb. 9, 2012 after the government issued the first set of rules for the mandate. That first suit was dismissed on technical grounds by Federal Judge Sharon Lovelace Blackburn of Birmingham on March 25, 2013. EWTN filed its current lawsuit October 28, 2013 against the Department of Health & Human Services and other federal agencies seeking to stop the government from imposing the HHS contraception mandate. The State of Alabama and Attorney General Luther Strange joined EWTN as a co-plaintiff in the new lawsuit.

"Alabama has a proud history of protecting our First Freedom," said Strange. "We have been honored to continue that tradition by standing with EWTN and protecting rights of conscience for all Alabama citizens, and we will continue to support EWTN as it appeals the district court's disappointing decision."The Becket Fund for Religious Liberty filed both lawsuits on EWTN's behalf.

"This decision is out of step with the overwhelming majority of decisions in similar cases nationwide," said Lori Windham, Senior Counsel at the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty. "Over 80 percent of cases have protected religious objectors from this mandate."

EWTN Global Catholic Network, founded by Mother Angelica, is available in over 230 million television households in more than 140 countries and territories. EWTN offers direct broadcast satellite television and radio services, AM& FM radio networks, worldwide short-wave radio station, Internet website www.ewtn.com, electronic and print news services, and has a publishing arm.

See also: EWTN appeals federal judge's ruling upholding Obamacare contraception mandate