You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Message: * A friend wanted you to see this item from WRAL.com: http://wral.com/13929347

More on this A full lineup for Raleigh Beer Week

— The Triangle comes alive with art and culture this weekend.

Food & Drink

Celebrate Labor Day weekend at Durham Central Park on Sunday at the Durham Food Truck Rodeo. Lots of great food trucks will be serving up tasty treats from noon to 4 p.m.

This weekend wraps up Raleigh Beer Week. There are still a ton of events to check out including Lonerider Brewing Company's Seven Shades of Betty event Sunday. From 2-7 p.m., check out variations of Shotgun Betty including Vanilla Betty, Watermelon Betty and Habanero Betty.

Art & Culture

African American culture will be celebrated for two days in downtown Raleigh during the fifth annual African American Cultural Festival. There will be live music, art, food and more. The event is free and runs from 11 a.m. to 9 p.m. Saturday and Sunday.

It is the final weekend to check out Bull City Summer at the NC Museum of Art in Raleigh. In this exhibit, 10 nationally and internationally known photographers documented the 2013 season at the Durham Bulls Athletic Park. Definitely a must see.

North Hills kicks off its Friday Night Tributes Music Series this week with Who's Bad, a Michael Jackson tribute band. The show is free and runs from 7-9 p.m. at Midtown Park.

The Monti Storytelling Series will be at Raleigh Little Theatre Sunday night. Storytellers will be recounting stories that fit the theme "Bridging Gaps." They have five minutes and do it all without any note cards. If you've never been to a Monti event before, these shows are powerful and funny.

Carlos Mencia plays Goodnight's Comedy Club in Raleigh this weekend. Tickets start at $35.

Sports & Recreation

It's the last weekend to see the Durham Bulls in regular season action at the DBAP. They will be closing out the regular season this weekend with a series against the Norfolk Tides. They are moving into the playoffs.

Walk, run, climb or crawl your way through two miles of 12 mud-soaked obstacles this Saturday at the Big Muddy Challenge at Hill Ridge Farms in Youngsville. Part of the proceeds of this family-friendly event will go to the Big Brothers Big Sisters organization. Parents can race for $40 and children for $37.

Check out vintage scooters and motorcycles in downtown Durham this weekend. The Bull City Rumble kicks off Friday night at the Lucky Strike Tobacco Warehouses in the Brightleaf District. Events continue Saturday and Sunday.