David Gardner For the Camera

If you've been reading the business pages, you may have heard the word "fiduciary" thrown around when it comes to people who give advice on retirement investments. The U.S. Department of Labor, of all agencies, is proposing significant new requirements for advisers that could have a dramatic effect on who can offer guidance on retirement plans and their duty to you. The proposed rules are being actively supported by President Obama, who has placed unprecedented focus on this issue.

Before we get into the rules, let's consider the definition of the word fiduciary and its impact on the investment advice you receive. Succinctly put, to be a fiduciary you must put your client's interest ahead of your own and disclose any real or potential conflict of interest. The fiduciary standard is in force in other fields such as accountants who are CPAs, attorneys, and trustees. But financial advisers, wealth managers, and financial planners have not all been subject to the fiduciary standard.

The issue is that financial advisers can be regulated many different ways and held to different standards of client care, although it's rarely apparent to the clients who receive service from them. The majority of people who offer financial advice to the public are currently not acting as fiduciaries with their clients all of the time. If you're like most investors, this may be a shock to you. A 2008 Rand Corporation study confirmed that most investors believe that advisers and brokers that offer similar services are subject to the same standards.

Advertisement

The argument from much of the broker and insurance world has been that their employees and agents should not be held to the same full-time fiduciary standard as investment advisers. While stockbrokers and insurance agents offer financial advice, an argument is made that the advice brokers and agents give is incidental to the sales service they offer. Under that rationale, it's all right for agents and brokers to receive commissions and other incentives that are often not disclosed to clients because they are compensation for performing financial transactions on behalf of clients.

To add to the confusion, there are many advisers out there who are dually registered who can deliver fiduciary adviser services and then also offer commission-based investment products. So in the same meeting with a client, a dually registered adviser can be operating as both a fiduciary and a broker. I've often joked that it would be handy if these advisers would wear a double-billed cap labeled "Fiduciary" and "Sales Assistant" that indicated when in the same conversation they were legally obligated to put the client's interest first and when they were merely serving as financial salesperson.

Now the Department of Labor intends to upend this confusing amalgam of sales and financial advice by applying a uniform standard of fiduciary care for everyone offering advice to retirement plans and IRAs. The proposed rule will be under review by the White House Office of Management and Budget for the next 30 to 90 days. By most accounts, the Obama administration is hellbent on putting this rule in force before the next election, so expect to see action sooner rather than later.

We'll cover more about the practical implications of the fiduciary rule once it's implemented, so for now we're left to speculate on its scope and importance. As it's proposed, any person getting paid for providing individual advice to retirement plans, and IRA and retirement plan investors would be held to the fiduciary standard. That includes insurance agents, stockbrokers, and other financial advisers. They must provide advice that's in the client's best interest and cannot accept any payments creating a conflict of interest unless an exemption is granted that assures the client is adequately protected. General education and order-taking (i.e. friendly stockbroker: please buy 400 shares of Apple) are still considered non-fiduciary duties. Hidden payments such as commissions and incentive must be disclosed.

This column may have you wondering whether your financial adviser is always acting as a fiduciary (which plenty of good advisers don't). In most cases the answer is no, whether they work as a broker for a national firm, an independent broker, an insurance agent, or an adviser in a bank or credit union. If you see disclosures from your adviser related to insurance licenses or selling securities, then you know they don't always act as fiduciary. If you're unsure, you can ask them whether they could send you an email confirming that they are acting as a fiduciary in their dealings with you.

David Gardner is a certified financial planner with a practice in Boulder County and can be reached with questions at dave@confluencefa.com and on Twitter @Dave_CFP