Topics: aol_on, Editor's Picks, News

All hail Satan and the Satanic Temple!

But first, some words of explanation.

The faith-deranged, day in and day out, in the current century and in those past, have furnished and continue to furnish us with examples of the inherent iniquity of their disorder, a disorder that has, especially in recent times, insinuated itself into and dangerously infected our already-ailing body politic, and all in the name of the (supposedly) Good Lord Almighty.

Last week, doomed Republican 2016 contender Jeb Bush announced that he would travel to Regent University, that miasmic fiefdom of faith fiends and darkness overseen by televangelist hatemonger Pat Robertson, to seek his blessing. Fat lot of good it will do him: Robertson, we recall, purveyed to the world intelligence he received from the Lord that Romney would win in 2012. Futile though it may be, Bush’s visit will nonetheless help return to relevance a fading crackpot pulpiteer whose litany of poppycock pronouncements include blaming (with Jerry Falwell) 9/11 on American gays and feminists, advocating exorcisms and denouncing leftists as “livid about killing babies” as part of their “culture of death.”

(Note to crackpot pulpiteer: look up the definition of livid, and use the word correctly in your hopefully few remaining years.)

The New York Times revealed that a gaggle of the Almighty’s henchmen hailing from the Word of Life Church in central New York chose to enact on Earth the wicked despotism mandated by Christianity for the hereafter. They reportedly used the Christian cult’s creed as justification for punching, kicking and whipping to death one of their dupes and severely injuring another. They also reportedly exploited their “flock” for physical labor, which included making little girls handle excrement and in general behaving nastily to minors.

(The article’s author neglects to mention the damage this church has inflicted on its young charges by warping their minds with bogus accounts of the origins of our species and our universe — a crime in and of itself. He also discusses “Bible study” as though such a determined effort by obscurantist metaphysical charlatans to inculcate macabre, misogynistic doctrines and servility to a phony celestial satrap were a benign phenomenon that under other circumstances would cause no harm. But being instructed in how to to kowtow to a supernatural entity that ordained genocide, human sacrifice, chattel slavery and second-class status for women can do nothing other than attrit the psyche and wither cognitive faculties.)

To reprise all the bloodshed, mayhem and violence carried out at the Lord’s behest in the Middle East and West Africa would be superfluous; just think ISIS, Al Qaida and Boko Haram. Wife-beating, beheadings and female genital mutilation. (Between 100-140 million women alive today, in twenty-nine mostly Muslim countries, have suffered this savagery.) Chopped-off hands, gays hurled from rooftops and kidnapped schoolgirls. Toss in, from bygone centuries, the Salem witch hunts, the Holy Inquisition, European religious wars, the Crusades and the Muslim Conquests, and you have a crimes-against-humanity record of rapine, massacre and barbarity that would land the Lord in the electric chair if he existed. Which, of course, he does not.

However, let’s suppose the Lord did exist. His ghastly roster of atrocities aside, He would be mankind’s sworn enemy, if only because He plans (per the Book of Revelation) to destroy the majority of us in an orgy of fire and brimstone, sparing only His toadies and sycophants. We would thus be entirely justified in fighting this purportedly omnipotent foe, and we would need all the help we could get.

Who might be up to the task? The only one with experience in combatting the Almighty, His archenemy, Satan.

Satan, at least according to the literature, has proved no slouch in fighting the Lord, thwarting His allegedly love-filled but in fact baleful designs on us, and enduring banishment from his ethereal homeland, all because he refused to submit to divine tyranny. You know the story: God supposedly booted Satan out of heaven for leading a revolt of his fellow angels outraged by God’s undemocratic, Hague-worthy governance and disdainful trampling over their rights.

(Some leader, the Lord. Fully a third of the angels under His command rose up against Him and fought alongside Satan. How would we regard General Petraeus if a third of his troops had mutinied in Iraq? Or General Patton if a third of the Seventh U.S. Army had not only surrendered to the Nazis, but started fighting on their side? Why does God get a pass on this? Why are Senators Rubio and Cruz not demanding a Benghazi-style investigation into this flagrant dereliction of heavenly duty?)

Satan, so the story goes, refused to accept the terms of his exile in hell and decided to get even. He ascended to the world and espied the Lord’s first two newly assembled naïfs ambling about in Eden, happy with what can only be termed a fool’s paradise, unaware of their unclothed state, so ignorant they could not tell the difference between Good and Evil.

(Think of it: Adam and Eve would have observed Hitler, Stalin’s purges, Josef Fritzl’s 24-year rape-riddled imprisonment of his daughter, the rise of ISIS, the birth of Jerry Falwell’s Moral Majority, the reign of Dubya and the rise of Sarah Palin, and found nothing at all wrong with any of it. What kind of Lord could have created such amoral beings?)

But then Satan turned himself into a serpent, managed to thwart the forewarned Angel Gabriel (Eden’s gatekeeper), and slithered up to Eve. Making the wholly reasonable argument that it would be better to be as God and know something rather than nothing, he persuaded her to bite a piece of fruit from the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. Which, again, leads to questions about the Almighty’s competence: given the stakes, couldn’t He have appointed a more reliable guardian for humanity? And has the Lord sanctioned Gabriel for his calamitous, inexplicable oversight, which ended up costing humanity its future?

Careful readers might have noticed I took the last instance of Our Heavenly Father’s malfeasance not from the Bible, but from Milton’s incomparable seventeenth-century literary masterpiece, “Paradise Lost.” (Read it for the wondrous language, second only to that of Shakespeare, and for the backstory on Satan, who makes ridiculously few appearances in the Bible.) Whether Milton intended it or not, his opus presents the story of Satan’s revolt against God in such a way that Satan comes out looking wickedly cool, admirable and heroic in fighting the “tyranny of heaven,” resisting “Free and to none accountable, preferring/Hard liberty before the easy yoke/Of servile pomp,” and gifted with “the courage never to submit or yield.” Satan comes across as, well, diabolically clever, not one you could slither past in some sort of reptile costume.