TO JUDGE by this week, the race to succeed François Hollande as president in 2017 has begun. One by one, rival politicians are carving out positions. On the left Manuel Valls, the Socialist prime minister, sounds ever more like a rival to his own boss. On the right, two former prime ministers are in the running, and a third contender is likely to declare: Nicolas Sarkozy. The former president is expected this weekend to announce his candidacy for the centre-right UMP party leadership, a prelude to a presidential bid.

The start of the week belonged to Mr Valls, who put his government on the line on September 16th in a parliamentary vote of confidence after his eviction of three anti-austerity rebels last month. He narrowly won, ensuring the government’s survival. But 31 of his own deputies abstained, up from 11 at a previous vote in April, in protest at what they consider to be a betrayal of the socialist policies which Mr Hollande was elected to put in place.

The ambitious Mr Valls is now treading a difficult line between loyalty to the unpopular Mr Hollande and a muscular desire to show that his more reformist, business-friendly politics can be an alternative to tax-and-spend socialism. It is a perilous strategy. Mr Valls’s poll ratings are tumbling as he becomes linked with Mr Hollande, whose popularity is at a record low of 13%. Damaging revelations by Valérie Trierweiler, Mr Hollande’s former partner, as well as the resignation after barely a week in the job of a junior minister who had confessed to not paying tax, are taking their toll on Mr Valls as well. His approval rating fell from 45% in May to 30% in September, with a loss of 13 points among Socialist voters in just one month.

Mr Hollande’s dismal standing has also shifted political calculations on the right. One sobering poll has suggested that, were he to face the National Front’s Marine Le Pen in a second-round run-off in 2017, she would win. The polls also suggest that Ms Le Pen would make it into the second round at Mr Hollande’s expense if he stood again—but that she would then lose to the centre-right candidate. This prospect has made the UMP’s nomination a real prize.

Hence, in part, the return of Mr Sarkozy. After losing in 2012, he vowed to withdraw from public life. But his promise never rang true. Stung by defeat and galvanised by the failure of a clear successor to emerge on the right, Mr Sarkozy has kept up the suspense. An opening came in May, when Jean-François Copé resigned as party leader because of campaign-financing irregularities. Mr Sarkozy is likely to run in the party leadership race in November, which he will almost certainly win.

He is not the only aspirant on the right. He faces two minor candidates for the UMP job (Bruno Le Maire and Hervé Mariton), although neither stands a chance against him. Two former prime ministers are also eyeing a presidential bid. One, Alain Juppé, has confirmed that he will run in the party’s presidential primary. The other, François Fillon, is mulling it over.

In many ways, it seems improbable that Mr Sarkozy should return. Mr Hollande was elected partly because voters had had enough of an exhausting, look-at-me president. His wife, Carla Bruni, a singer, has told the press she is not keen on a comeback. He is also in a judicial tangle, being put under formal investigation in July in another party-financing case. Yet if anything, this has stiffened his resolve. A return would certainly disrupt the political balance. At a time when the left is riven by internal discord, Mr Valls may relish the chance to take on a reinvigorated opposition on the right.