Republican presidential candidate, New Jersey Governor Chris Christie takes a photo with people gathered at Western Gateway Park for the Italian American Heritage Festival on July 25, 2015, in Des Moines, Iowa. SCOTT OLSON / Getty Images

Republican presidential candidate, New Jersey Governor Chris Christie takes a photo with people gathered at Western Gateway Park for the Italian American Heritage Festival on July 25, 2015, in Des Moines, Iowa. SCOTT OLSON / Getty Images

DES MOINES -- On Gov. Christie’s first trip to Iowa as a declared presidential candidate, he discussed the nuclear deal with Iran, his plan to keep Social Security and Medicare solvent, gun control, agriculture policy, and a number of other issues with voters in town-hall-style meetings.

As much as Christie thrives in the unscripted town-hall format, he also says he relishes the nitty gritty, walk-three-blocks-in-45-minutes part of the campaign, during which he shakes hands, takes pictures, and engages in small talk in the sweltering heat.

Much of the 2016 race, of course, will come down to policy ideas, fund-raising, etc. But to walk with Chris Christie in Davenport and downtown Des Moines is to see how voters respond to the candidate in real time. Do they go for a simple handshake? Offer a word of encouragement? Or ask, Please, Governor, what are you going to do about this Obamacare thing?

It also offers a glimpse into what Christie calls the “circus” that his life has become.

Here are a few scenes from Christie’s interactions with Iowans over the past two days: at once mundane (he’s only walking, after all) and fascinating (everyone wants to meet the presidential candidate, and time seems to move slowly).

--Christie’s inaugural stroll through Iowa as a presidential candidate came at a street festival in Davenport Friday afternoon. As he made his way through the crowd, introducing himself to everyone as “Chris,” one vendor made sure to get his attention.

“Chris, you best not pass me up,” she said. This is how Christie came to sample a bacon-wrapped fried Oreo.

Later, a passerby shaked the governor’s hand and said, “Thanks for the bipartisanship” -- a complement, to be sure, but still a decidedly odd thing to hear near a hot dog stand.

-Undeterred by the glaring sun, Christie followed up Saturday morning with a walk through a farmers market in Des Moines. “Run for president, and you’ll learn how to do a selfie really well,” he told some guy as the governor took their picture. (For more on the art of the selfie and 2016 presidential race, read this insightful New York Times story.)

He later autographed pictures of himself and found solidarity with a “suffering Mets fan.”

-Christie capped his weekend in Iowa with a stop by an Italian-American heritage festival in Des Moines early Saturday evening.

Key events: high-fiving a baby and admiring a cook’s preparation of lasagna on a grill -- an impressive feat, he said. “My mother would be very proud of you,” said Christie, whose mom was Sicilian.

He also snatched up two meatballs -- the “biggest at the festival,” a vendor assured me. But Christie wouldn't eat them until later, a campaign aide explained, because the governor was wearing a white shirt, which the sauce could ruin.

He then spoke with the press one last time before departing for New Hampshire on Monday.

“As you saw as I was walking around here, and the market this morning, I enjoy this,” Christie said. “This is not, like, a burden for me. I enjoy meeting people. They seem to enjoy meeting me.”