Polish media outlets have been abuzz this summer with the story of Bogdan Chazan, a prominent Warsaw doctor who refused to provide a woman with an abortion and was subsequently sacked. Chazan’s case illustrates Poland’s version of the battle between pro-life conscience rights and liberal values—a battle pro-life Americans are enduring in legal confrontations over Obamacare’s contraceptive mandate.

The Polish doctor’s troubles began in April, when a pregnant woman wrote to his maternity hospital in Warsaw, the Holy Family Hospital, asking for an abortion. She said her personal physician had detected severe developmental defects in the unborn baby. Chazan, a Roman Catholic who has served as director of the hospital for the past 10 years, wrote back, saying he could not provide an abortion due to a “conflict of conscience.” He provided an address to a hospice that could care for the baby after it was born.

For that exercise of conscience, Warsaw Mayor Hanna Gronkiewicz-Waltz announced in July she was dismissing Chazan from his position at the government-run hospital. She said Chazan did not have the right to refuse the abortion, and said Polish law obliged him to offer the woman an abortion referral. An investigation by the mayor’s office accused Chazan of ordering unnecessary tests that delayed the woman’s abortion request, prolonging her pregnancy beyond 24 weeks of gestation, the time when doctors generally consider an unborn baby “viable.” After viability, abortion of a handicapped baby in Poland is illegal. The hospital was also fined $23,000, and Chazan was given a three-month job termination notice and placed on leave.

We see you’ve been enjoying the content on our exclusive member website. Ready to get unlimited access to all of WORLD’s member content?

Get your risk-free, 30-Day FREE Trial Membership right now.

(Don’t worry. It only takes a sec—and you don’t have to give us payment information right now.) Absolutely! Sign Me Up! Forget the Trial … Make Me a Member! Already a Member? Login Now

Chazan told a Polish news station the dismissal was “the start of an attack on the conscience of doctors and people in management positions in the health service.” He has defended his actions as permissible under a conscience clause in Polish law that is supposed to excuse pro-life doctors from participating in abortions.

Commenting on the case in June, Poland’s prime minister, Donald Tusk, seemed little concerned about conscience rights. “Regardless of what his conscience is telling him, [a doctor] must carry out the law,” he said.

That attitude from Polish authorities could spell trouble for other pro-life doctors and nurses: 3,000 Polish medical professionals and students, including Chazan, have signed a “Declaration of Faith,” saying they will not provide services contrary to their beliefs, including as abortion, euthanasia, or in-vitro fertilization. Could they be dismissed next?

The woman ultimately gave birth to a baby boy at another Warsaw facility, the Bielanski hospital. A doctor there, Romuald Debski, tried to paint abortion as compassionate by describing the baby’s deformities in uncompassionate detail. “This child does not have half of its head, has a hanging eyeball, its face is split, it has no brain inside,” said Debski, according to Reuters. “If Professor Chazan saw the life that he saved, he would have a different attitude.” The baby died a few days after birth.

This isn’t the first time Chazan has made a costly stand on principle: Twelve years ago, he was dismissed as head of the obstetrics and gynecology clinic of another Warsaw hospital, the National Research Institute of Mother and Child, following a similar situation. “Lo and behold, lighting does strike twice!” said Robert Walley, the executive director of the Newfoundland-based MaterCare International, a Catholic ob-gyn charity where Chazan serves as a council member. “He has shown great courage.”

I reached 69-year-old Chazan—amid his bustle to clean out his hospital office—and asked about the recent controversy and his current situation.

Your dismissal from Holy Family Hospital came after you refused to provide an abortion. But did your hospital ever provide abortions? Before I become the director, abortions were carried out at the hospital—a dozen or more a year, mainly due to diagnosed diseases or developmental disorders in the fetus. During my term [as director], abortion was carried out once, in 2006, due to anencephaly in the fetus. I found out about that recently, and it probably took place while I was on vacation. We rarely had patients turn to our hospital with the intention of carrying out an abortion. I usually managed to make them change their intentions. Besides, patients knew that we did not perform abortions at this hospital, and I believe it was accepted. There were no complaints to the authorities, as in the present case.

I would like to add that the next day after I was dismissed and sent on a “compulsory” vacation, another abortion was performed in the hospital.

Some liberals complain about losing abortion access. There is no need for all hospitals in Poland to be forced to perform abortions. We have about 800 legal abortions a year, and about 400 ob-gyn wards: There are two abortions a year per hospital.