Banner Health offers new in-home sleep study to aids apnea diagnosis

Tracee Hackel, shown with her CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure) machine, admits it took some time to get used to the device, but her episodes of sleep apnea have declined dramatically since using it, and she is now able to sleep seven hours at night without waking. ( Jeannie Lancaster / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

Tracee Hackel has known something was going on during her sleep for a long time. "One night, my freshman year of college, my roommate and I had the window open because it was hot. We woke up and found this guy climbing in our window. He'd been out partying and couldn't find his key. As he went out of our room, he said, 'Boy, one of you really snores loud.'

"I think I've snored all my adult life and probably when I was a kid." But she didn't realize that excessive snoring can be a sign of sleep apnea.

When Hackel, now 46, lived in Alaska five years ago, her physician suggested she have a sleep study done, but she was saving for graduate school and put it off.

Things came to a head last summer, when she was on a boat trip with her parents. "They had to wake me up several times each night because of the noise," she said.

Her mother told her that she would just stop breathing. "I thought, I can't be totally stopping breathing," she said. "You know, you make excuses."

She began doing research, and things started coming together. "I couldn't stay awake in the afternoon. I'd nod off at the computer and fall asleep while on the phone. I'd also fall asleep in the bathroom at night."

Hackel's local physician referred her to Dr. David Kukafka, a pulmonologist and sleep specialist. He recommended that she have an in-home sleep study, which recently became available through Banner Health.

Advertisement

While other things can cause weariness and snoring, they may be signs that a person is suffering from sleep apnea. Difficulty remembering and paying attention, a low energy level and morning headaches can also be signs of the disorder.

Sleep apnea interrupts breathing during sleep, sometimes for longer than 10 seconds. In most cases, breathing stops because something is blocking the airway.

It's thought that 20 percent of all individuals have sleep apnea — 80 percent of them do not know that they have the disorder. Diagnosis and treatment are important because sleep apnea can also lead to other major health issues including heart disease, increased blood pressure, weight gain and in some cases, even stroke.

"If you treat it, you can decrease the effects of those disorders," said Kukafka, who serves as director of Banner Medical Group's Sleep Apnea Program and the new chief of staff at Banner Fort Collins Medical Center.

Kukafka works closely with Dr. Kelli Janata, a pulmonary sleep specialist and director of Banner's Greeley sleep lab and Mike Fitzgerald, nurse practitioner, who specializes in sleep apnea.

As in Hackel's case, some people may suspect they have sleep apnea, but hold off seeking help. The new in-home sleep study is much less expensive and can be done in the comfort of one's home.

"Right now, I'd say most patients are good candidates," said Kukafka. "The diagnosis and treatment is as effective as an in-lab study."

During the study, patients use three diagnostic tools. A nasal cannula is placed inside a person's nose. A pulse oximeter is fastened to the end of one finger and measures oxygen levels and pulse. Patients also wear a band around their chest, with a monitoring unit that measures respiratory effort.

In-home studies are not recommended for those with significant heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and neuromuscular problems, noted Kukafka.

Hackel had the in-home study in February of this year. She learned the results during a follow-up consultation with Kukafka. "He told me that when people have four to five episodes of apnea per hour, they're considered to have sleep apnea. I had 80 an hour," she said.

"I asked him how that was even possible. More than once a minute, I was stopping breathing?" In addition, she learned that her oxygen levels were dipping to 84 throughout the night. Normal ranges are in the 90s.

Together they developed a treatment plan that included Hackel's use of a CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure) machine. She has been using it for just over a month. She admits it took some time to get used to, but she now has only 1.4 episodes of apnea per hour, compared to her earlier 80.

"I stay awake better in the afternoon, but still get sleepy while reading," she said, "but they say it can take up to three months of consistent use to see all changes. And now I can sleep for seven hours."

"We're really excited to get the word out and tell the community that sleep apnea is a treatable condition," said Kukafka. "Treatment can improve one's quality of life and medical care."