WASHINGTON — A centrist Republican simply cannot win the White House in 2016 -- that’s the argument Sen. Ted Cruz has been peddling for two years, since the defeat of Mitt Romney.

Romney? A good man. John McCain? Bob Dole? Decent men. Patriots. But each, in the Cruz analysis — which just happens to tilt the playing field his way — was doomed. And the next in this line of certain failures would be the candidate to draw the most attention lately, Jeb Bush, brother and son of presidents and darling of the party’s establishment.

“We need to learn from history,” Cruz said.

That was two months ago, throwing an elbow when Bush was merely eyeing a run. Last week, Bush became the first candidate to announce he’ll explore a bid. And Cruz’s warning got more overt.

“The only way we win in 2016 is if we follow Reagan’s admonition — if we paint in bold colors and not pale pastels,” the senator told Sean Hannity on Fox News. “If we continue to run to the mushy middle … the same voters that stayed home in 2008 and 2012 will stay home again, and we will not win.”

Centrists can win, actually. Jeb Bush’s brother and father didn’t run as dogmatic right-wingers. And there’s that inconvenient data point from 1964: Barry Goldwater, the conservative senator from Arizona, crushed in a landslide.

“The public is clearly not looking for an ideological president. They are looking for a president who can get things done,” said Democratic pollster Celinda Lake, a self-described “Goldwater girl” in her younger days.

Bush allies reject depictions of him as anything but a true-blue conservative. In any case, even with showers of cash from his family’s robust donor network, there’s no easy path to the GOP nomination for him or anyone else.

He’ll need to get past New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, for one. And the eventual winner from that wing of the party will end up in a showdown with Cruz or whoever else emerges from the right — outgoing Texas Gov. Rick Perry, perhaps, or Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio or any of a half-dozen others.

“While people are nostalgic for the Clinton years, they are not nostalgic for the Bush years,” Lake said.

Jockeying for 2016 was already well underway when Bush made known his intentions on Facebook, a first for the Bush dynasty. President Barack Obama’s détente with Cuba exposed big differences in the GOP field, with Paul lauding the effort to set aside a Cold War remnant and Rubio, in particular, accusing Paul of being a dupe.

Cruz, like others, has been making preparations.

A few weeks ago, his Princeton University roommate and debate partner, Atlanta investor David Panton, started a super PAC devoted to promoting Cruz for president. Panton seeded the effort with $100,000, and two other donors kicked in $35,000, campaign filings show.

It’s not enough to go the distance, but it signals that Cruz has friends willing to pony up serious money.

But GOP pollster Ed Goeas sees obstacles for Cruz. One is the large and impressive class of Senate Republicans in the new majority.

“We did not nominate any crazies,” Goeas said, adding, “The more the country sees the quality of that class, the more people like Ted Cruz are going to fade into the background.”

The failings of the current president also hurt Cruz, he argued. They may have little in common politically. But the Texan is just as untested as the president was ahead of his 2008 campaign.

“One of the things we’ve always seen in polling is that people elect legislators based on are you smart enough to govern. They elect mayors, they elect governors, they elect presidents, on are you strong enough to lead,” Goeas said. “There is a lot of feeling, even on the left, that maybe we elected a president with not enough experience to get the job done. … That works against Ted Cruz.”

Cruz prefers to frame the choice through litmus tests. The next president, he argues, should be standing up and proclaiming that the economy is a mess, Obamacare is a “train wreck,” and the Constitution and American clout are under siege.

That, of course, would be a description of himself.

Follow Washington Bureau chief Todd J. Gillman on Twitter at @toddgillman.