MUSKEGON, MI – Staff at the Muskegon Community Health Project worked around the clock on Tuesday to assist a steady stream of clients looking to enroll in the Healthy Michigan Plan, the state’s Medicaid expansion effort.

The initiative, which launched on April 1, modified Medicaid requirement to provide comprehensive coverage to 477,000 low-income, uninsured Michigan residents who were previously ineligible. State officials expect the plan to cover about 320,000 people in 2014.

“It’s been crazy and really exciting,” said Stevi Riel, the community benefit operations manager at the Mercy Health-owned nonprofit. The Health Project maintains a storefront location downtown on Western Avenue and a new office in Shelby where it reaches rural Lakeshore-area residents.

As part of the Affordable Care Act, the federal government afforded states the option to expand Medicaid to help reach more low-income Americans.

Gov. Rick Snyder and state lawmakers approved the provision for Michigan in September, but the state senators delayed its implementation for a spring launch. Michigan’s Medicaid program diverges from expansions instituted in other states because it requires premiums and co-pays from plan participants.

State officials also said the plan “emphasizes personal responsibility” and offers incentives to encourage enrollees to make healthy lifestyle choices. The plan offers federal and state-mandated benefits for emergency services, hospitalization, mental health, substance abuse, prescription drugs, preventative care and other wellness-related needs.

Eligible residents must be between 19 to 64 years and must be unemployed or have incomes no more than 133 percent of the federal poverty level, which is about $16,000 for a single adult and $33,000 for a four-person family.

On Monday, Riel said Health Project community health workers saw about 60 residents who wanted to enroll in the program. Fifty-six people received instant approvals out of the 58 people who submitted applications, she said.

The digital application, based on the MiBridges website, gives enrollees an immediate eligibility decision. Riel said residents who need to submit additional documentation, receive a pending message.

“People leave in the affirmative,” Riel said.

The Medicaid coverage will be retroactive to the first day of the month in which they applied.

Last week, Snyder told reporters that he even tested the Healthy Michigan Plan website so that it he could “actually see what that experience is like.”

Several state officials said the site underwent rigorous testing to ensure it would avoid the glitches that plagued healthcare.gov in October when thousands jumped to select an insurance plan through the federal marketplace.

Michigan Department of Community Health spokeswoman Angela Minicuci told MLive.com earlier this week that the system was strong enough to handle the volume that would mount if every eligible person applied on the same day.

Riel said the client volume was so high on Monday, Health Project staff added chairs in the office’s waiting area and served fresh fruit and cake to congratulate clients on successful enrollment.

The Health Project also offered and continues to offer free bus passes to clients who want to go to the Mercy Health Enrollment Center, where they can also apply, she said.

The enrollment center is among several community partners that make up the Enroll West Michigan collective, which convened in August to help residents with Affordable Care Act-related enrollment efforts.

Other members include the county’s two Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs), Hackley Community Care Center and Muskegon Family Care, Community Mental Health Services of Muskegon County and the local health department.

While the collaborative has shifted its attention on Medicaid expansion, Riel said some clients have not yet grasped that the federal marketplace has closed. On Tuesday, the White House announced that more than 7 million Americans had successfully enrolled in the program.

On Monday, March 31, the Health Project held extended operation hours to help with healthcare.gov enrollment, but the turnout wasn’t as large as Riel expected, she said.

On Wednesday, Health Project office assistant Helen Sherman took a phone call from a prospective client who needed help selecting an insurance plan on healthcare.gov, and for the first time, had to deliver the news that the March 31 deadline had passed.

Riel said clients who missed that deadline are not doomed because the Health Project’s mission helps residents secure healthcare services year-round.

“It’s really rooted in making sure they have access,” Riel said.

Riel said the community health workers first check to see if they are eligible for Medicaid. Staff members can also help them find benefits or services for Medicare, the Bridge Card food assistance program, MiChild/Healthy Kids and eye care through the Lions Club Vision Services, among other social welfare programs.

Riel expects Medicaid expansion to be more active than insurance plan selection because the program reaches a demographic that could not afford the plans offered through the federal exchange.

Riel said clients seeking help with Healthy Michigan Plan enrollment should bring standard credentials for social assistance programs. That includes a Michigan-issued identification card, social security numbers or a document for legal immigrants, and employer and income information for every member of the house, such as a W-2 form.

Clients and household members should also bring completed employer coverage information for every job-based insurance plan for which they are eligible. If the client has insurance, they should bring policy numbers for any current plans covering household members.

Eligible residents can apply without help online at www.michigan.gov/mibridges or by phone at (855) 789-5610 from 8 a.m. to 7 p.m. on weekdays. They can also apply in person at a Michigan Department of Human Services office.

For more information visit: healthymichiganplan.org