Corneal inlay procedure provides new option for individuals facing near-vision problems

Ophthalmologist Dr. Gary Foster sits beside one of two femtosecond lasers he uses when placing a Kamra corneal inlay. Foster was involved in a national trial of the inlay, which was approved by the Food and Drug Administration last April. (Jeannie Lancaster / For the Reporter-Herald)

The digital age has brought with it amazing devices that have increased our ability to communicate and share. But it has also brought with it growing challenges, not only for our ever-busy hands, but for our eyes.

"A very large part of our work and our social and personal lives are now involved interacting with digital devices that require near vision," shared Dr. Gary Foster, an ophthalmologist with the Eye Center of Northern Colorado. "Near vision has become more important."

Nicole Jacques, of Denver, had never had any problems with her eyes in the past, having 20/20 vision and not needing glasses. But over the last two years, Jacques, now 45, started noticing changes in her near vision.

Her work required that she do research on her computer throughout the day. "I was having problems using my computer," she shared. "I was seeing my reading vision go."

Jacques began noticing problems with reading at home too. "I have three small children. Reading medicine bottles was so difficult. After a while you do things to compensate."

She began doing research on possible solutions. One option was to have a monovision procedure, where one eye is set for far vision and one eye for near vision, whether through LASIK or the use of contacts. Jacques didn't feel this was the answer for her.

She could have started using reading glasses, but felt that wasn't a positive option either, with her young children and the frequent back and forth on the computer screen at work. She also did not want, "to keep track of one more thing."

Advertisement

Jacques then learned about an eye procedure, the KAMRA corneal inlay, which had just been approved by the FDA in April 2015 for use in the United States. She also learned that the Eye Center of Northern Colorado was the only practice in Colorado offering the procedure, beginning in October.

The center was one of 13 sites in the United States that participated in national trials surrounding the inlay. During the trials, Foster placed the KAMRA in 14 individuals and followed them for four years. Their progress was tracked at regular intervals. The results from all of the sites were then evaluated by the FDA.

The KAMRA inlay is a mini ring that is smaller than a contact lens. It has a 3.8-mm outer diameter and is 5 microns thick (one micron=0.00l mm). It is made of polyvinylidene fluoride and nanoparticles of carbon, with 8,400 laser-etched holes for corneal health.

The inlay is placed in the patient's nondominant eye in the first few layers of the eye — the cornea. "Using a femtosecond laser, we make a little pocket in the cornea and put the mini-ring into it," said Foster. "That creates a bigger depth of focus, so the patient can see far and near."

Foster noted that the KAMRA uses principles one sees in photography. Just as the amount of light that enters a camera can be adjusted using the F-stop setting, the KAMRA creates a smaller opening that increases the depth of focus. "Our pupil is quite large and has a narrow depth of focus. If it comes down smaller, then it's easier to see both the far and read at the same time," explained Foster.

"I'm still amazed how quick the procedure was," said Jacques. "Only 15 minutes. To me it was hassle free." She can now read normally.

The decline of near vision, presbyopia, is a natural occurrence as one grows older. "It is difficult to have your reading vision slowly disappear," shared Foster. "It is a heavy blow for some people. Those that are the most troubled by it look for a reasonable and a safe solution to retain their freedom from glasses.

"The KAMRA fills the void, for those who still have a healthy lens, so they don't require cataract surgery, but have lost the ability to read," said Foster. "Every year that we're alive, our lens loses a little bit of its flexibility. But we don't notice it until around age 43, when it reaches the book reading distance or it hits where the computer lives."

The KAMRA inlay is for individuals 43 to about 58 years of age, who are facing decreased near vision, but it may not be the answer for everyone.

Insurance does not cover the procedure, so the approximately $3,900 cost may be prohibitive for some.

As with any surgery, there can be complications such as infection and inflammation. Some individuals also experience dry eyes and nighttime glare.

During the national trials, approximately 8 percent of original participants chose to have the inlay removed, although none in the local study group did so.

As the use of technology increases, demanding repeated back and forth movement between near and distance vision, the KAMRA provides an exciting option for those wanting to improve their near vision and avoid the use of glasses.