Escandalo! From celebrity meltdowns and shocking deaths to political struggles and international gaffes, 2013 had plenty of “Oh no she better don’t!” moments.

Below, check out the Top 10 shockers, scoundrels and hot messes of 2013.

SHOCKERS

Cory Monteith Dies Of An Overdose

Gleeks the world over were speechless when Monteith was found dead in a Vancouver hotel room on July 13. The coroner’s report eventually pinned his death on an overdose of heroin and alcohol.

At the Teen Choice Awards in August, Lea Michele offered her co-star boyfriend a touching tribute, saying “Whether you knew him personally or just as Finn Hudson, Cory reached out and became a part of all of our hearts — and that’s where he’ll stay forever.”

The Supreme Court Overturns DOMA and Prop 8

All of gay America and her allies were freaking out as the Supreme Court took its damn sweet time issuing verdicts in Hollingsworth vs. Perry and United States vs. Windsor, two cases with profound implications for marriage equality in America. On June 26, our prayers were answered and the highest court in the land ruled that DOMA and Prop 8 were unconstitutional.

Of course we still need to find a man to marry.



Wentworth Miller Comes Out As A Gay

He’d been off the scene for a few years, but when Prison Break was on the air, Wentworth Miller was something of a household name (and the subject of our fantasies). The actor-director decided to come out this year after being invited to attend a film festival in St. Petersburg, Russia, which recently passed a gay-propaganda ban. “As a gay man, I must decline,” he told organizers.

CEO of Barilla Pasta Burns Gays

In September Guido Barilla, CEO of Barilla Pasta, said he’d never cast a gay person in his commercials, adding “If the gays don’t like it they can go and eat another brand”.

Any gays who still ate carbs dumped their Barilla and a series of clever advertisements by other, less hateful pasta companies emerged to stick it to the prejudiced pasta company. Eventually the CEO issued an apology, but we’re sticking with Chef Boyardee.

Shangela Breaks A Leg

Hallelu! Everyone’s favorite post-modern pimp-ho smashed up her leg something fierce while attempting a death-drop at the RuPaul’s Drag Race Halloween party. All queens on hand swore on a stack of RuPaul CDs that they hadn’t sabotaged Shangie, who is recovering at home in Texas after several weeks in a New York hospital.

Miley Cyrus Twerks Like Lolita

The twerk that launched a thousand think pieces: Miley’s inmfamous VMA performance instantly became one of the biggest shockers of 2013, with responses ranging from applause to concern-trolling to outright anger. Scandalizing America when she got up on Robyn Thicke, Miley enabled both of them to become the most popular Halloween costumes of the year.

Paul Walker Dies In Fiery Car Crash

On November 30, fans were shocked to learn Walker had perished in a fiery automobile crash alongside friend Roger Rodas. The fact that he was most famous for the successful Fast and Furious action-flick franchise only added to the senseless tragedy.

Tom Daley Starts Dating A Guy

The dreamiest of dreamboats, Tom Daley, came out in a simple but touching YouTube video this December. Soon enough, rumors began to surface that the boyfriend whose love encouraged Daley to share his story was none other than Milk screenwriter Dustin Lance Black. In recent days pictures have surfaced that seem to confirm the gossip. Get it, girl!

Kinky Boots Ruins Thanksgiving

Conservatives were livid that the Kinky Boots cast performed during the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day parade, complaining that drag queens ruined the wholesome and spiritual nature of what is essentially a five-hour commercial for Mr. Peanut, Disney and Ocean Spray. Fortunately, Billy Porter and the Boots cast responded in the best way possible: with a Macy’s shopping spree in drag.

India Re-criminalizes Homosexuality

While international attention was focused on Russia’s abysmal record on LGBT rights and the passage of a “gay-propaganda” ban, India surprised us when the country’s highest court reversed an earlier decision decriminalizing homosexuality. The judges’ ruled that it was up to the legislature to repeal Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, but the end result is that it’s now a crime to be gay in the world’s largest democracy.

SCOUNDRELS

Vladimir Putin

In case you don’t, y’know, read, Vladimir Putin is the Russian president who’s overseen the passage of a nationwide ban on gay propaganda (in essence any public mention or demonstration of homosexuality). What stunned us even more was that he was nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize this year. What the what?!?

Alec Baldwin

In 2013, the 30 Rock star lashed out at paparazzi with homophobic slurs—twice!—and saw stalwarts of public decency Anne Coulter and Joan Rivers rush to his defense. MSNBC, meanwhile, canceled his low-rated talk show.

Chris Brown

After a lengthy history of violence, abuse and illegal acts, it almost seemed like Chris Brown was on the road to recovery. We even took note of his attempts at pro-LGBT advocacy. But then Brown ruined it all by getting in another slur-laden brawl. Way to drop the ball, Breezy.

Dayna Morales

Hey, gay people can be scumbags, too: Dayna Morales, a waitress in Bridgewater, New Jersey, told reporters that instead of a tip, a customer left her a nasty note informing her that “I don’t agree with your lifestyle & how you live your life.”

Members of the public sent in thousands of dollars to Morales, a former Marine who claimed she was donating the money to the Wounded Warrior Project. But within a few days it became apparent she forged the note and had invented the whole incident.

Since that revelation, Morales has been fired. She probably can’t set foot inside her local lesbian bookstore, either.

Eminem

We thought we were done with Eminem’s homophobic lyrics—mainly because we thought we were done with Eminem. But Slim Shady emerged in October 2013 to drop a new album, The Marshall Mathers LP 2, and a new anti-gay track, “Rap God.” With Em stating that “all you faggots think the same” and his desire to “break a motherfuckin’ table over the back of a couple of faggots,” it’s clearly the heartwarming love ballad of the year.

Scott Lively

This Massachusetts minister doesn’t just preach against the gays—he helped Uganda draft it’s “Kill the Gays” bill. This year, he bragged about having inspired Russia’s ban on gay propaganda. “I believe I did have something to do with that,” Lively told fellow scoundrel Bryan Fisher. “I included [these suggestions] in my letter to the Russian people that I published in the very last city of the tour, which was St. Petersburg, and of course, St. Petersburg turns out to be the first city that adopted this law.”

Lively called his influence on the legislation “one of the proudest achievements of my career.” Well that’s not setting the bar very high, is it?

Paula Deen

Testifying in a racial-discrimination suit filed by a former staffer, Paula Deen shocked America when she admitted she used the N-word and dreamed of hosting a plantation wedding with black servants in “crisp, white tuxedos”.

The butter queen offered a few teary-eyed apologies, but that ish was not easily forgotten. Especially when she tried to use the Supreme Court’s Prop 8 ruling to say that, because they were both white, Deen’s accuser wasn’t personally affected by her racism.

Orson Scott Card

Orson Scott Card is the author of Ender’s Game a wildly popular sci-fi novel that was poised to become a wildly successful movie. But Card is also a lunatic homophobe—a board member of the National Organization for Marriage who has written that homosexuality is caused by a “disturbing seduction or rape or molestation or abuse” and that gays prey on children.

He’s also said that if gays were allowed to marry he would “destroy that government.”

Since Card would directly profit from Ender’s Game ticket sales, a boycott was led by GeeksOut. It didn’t destroy the film’s box office, but it forced Lionsgate and the Ender’s cast to address the issue. Card also stepped forward, telling EW everyone should just forget what he has said over the years:

Ender’s Game is set more than a century in the future and has nothing to do with political issues that did not exist when the book was written in 1984. With the recent Supreme Court ruling, the gay marriage issue becomes moot… Now it will be interesting to see whether the victorious proponents of gay marriage will show tolerance toward those who disagreed with them when the issue was still in dispute.”

Dude is twisted.

Pat Robertson

Naming Pat Robertson a scoundrel is almost too easy. But the heartless televangelist really outdid himself in August 2013, declaring gay men in San Francisco wore sharp rings in order to cut people and give them HIV. Just a month prior, he revealed he wished there was a “Vomit” button on Facebook for whenever he saw a photo of a same-sex couple kissing.

You can just feel Christ’s love oozing out of this man.

Congressional Republicans

Okay, GOP, we get it: You don’t like the Affordable Care Act. That doesn’t mean you can just shut down the government until you have your way. Grow up or sashay away.

HOT MESSES

Miley Cyrus

We weren’t going to put Miley on this list, but the girl declared herself a hot mess: In her documentary, The Movement, Cyrus described her twerktastic VMAs performance as “a strategic hot mess.” Showing wisdom beyond her years, she added “You’re always going to make people talk. You might as well make them talk for like two weeks, rather than two seconds.”

She’s a hot mess like a fox!

Lindsay Lohan

Oprah interviews, rehab, alcoholic parents, disastrous Lifetime movies: Almost everything Lilo did in 2013 was touched by scandal. Her on-set behavior was even examined by the New York Times, while her post-rehab partying continues to be tabloid fodder. But she did give us one undeniably great thing this year: this gif.

Amanda Bynes

We had some fun playing with Amanda’s bad hair-dids, but the schizophrenic sweetie went from humorously disastrous to straight-up sad when she started calling random celebrities ugly and revealing she wants Drake to “murder” her vagina. (Well, we’re with you on that last one, Mandy.)

Tila Tequila

Now that it seems Bynes has settled down, Tequila has snatched her cray-cray crown: The bisexual reality star started posting anti-Semitic screeds and declaring Paul Walker’s death was a ritual murder. Has anyone seen her wearing bad wigs lately?

Rob Ford

We didn’t think Canada even had hot messes, but between Justin Bieber and Toronto Mayor Rob Ford, our neighbor to the north seems to be making up for lost time. In October a video surfaced of Ford smoking crack, though he claimed he had never touched the stuff. Days later, another video showed him ranting about wanting to kill someone. Ford then made a lewd reference to a sexual act with his wife during a press conference. And the guy still refused to step down!

James Franco

Don’t get us wrong, we still totally would. But James Franco’s public behavior in 2013 has just been one big, homoerotic hot mess: Making out with himself, kissing a guy on the streets of L.A, taking his first shirtless selfie, doing a “Bound 2″ parody with Seth Rogen, designing a fuck pad and, of course, posting those “50 Shades Of Batman” photos (above).

Keep it coming in 2014, Mr. Franco.

Kim Kardashian

Kanye West’s babymama didn’t quite reach Lohan or Bynes level of hot-messiness. But she was clearly out of her mind when she wore a sofa to the Met Costume Institute Gala. And when she appeared in Yeezy’s music video for “Bound 2,” riding a motorcycle while Kanye rode her. (It did, however, give us this amazing parody.)

Justin Bieber

Monkey-abandoning, graffiti-loving, fan-spitting, fat-shaming, bucket-peeing narcisisstic brat Justin Bieber went on quite the tear in 2013: Perhaps the Beeb’s most egregious Hot Mess Moment was when he visited Anne Frank’s house in Amsterdam and wrote in the guest book that “hopefully she would have been a Belieber.”

Get real—Anne was a total One Directioner.

Lady Gaga

She didn’t quite reach Miley or Amanda level hot-messery, but Mother Monster was a bit all over the place as she cranked up the publicity machine for ARTPOP.

Highlights include a bizarre Wizard of Oz-inspired performance on Good Morning America, wearing a huge ratty wig everywhere (above), wearing a Hovercraft dress at her artRave in Brooklyn, the brown condom dress she wore during her Thanksgiving special, channeling Marilyn Monroe in a JFK-inspired performance of “Do What U Want” with R Kelly at the AMAs and essentially becoming Donatella Versace in the new Versace ad campaign.

Oh, and lets not forget her decision to perform in space.

Prince George of Cambridge

We just can’t anymore with this baby. Ever since the bonny wee prince arrived in July, it’s been a nonstop parade of pooping, belching, teething and spitting up. What is this, Untucked?

Georgie Girl, you better get it together in 2014!