Charitable Run/walk events Here is a sampling of some charitable run/walks taking place in the first few months of 2014. Choose one and get moving. The Super Kids 5K and Fun Run: Feb. 1, sponsored by the University of California, Irvine/Children’s Hospital of Orange County Pediatrics Residents and the Miller Children’s Hospital Long Beach; accompanying health fair, all to raise awareness about childhood obesity; free registration for children participating in the fun run; registration ends Jan. 31; Shoreline Park, 100 Aquarium Way, Long Beach; www.millerchildrenshospitallb.com/5K. Westlake Village Pancreatic Cancer Research Walk and Run: 7 a.m. Feb. 8; Westlake Village City Hall, 31200 Oak Crest Drive, Westlake Village; www.2014westlakewalkrun.kintera.org. Paws Fur Pink 5K: timed run, 5K run/walk, 1-mile walk and kid’s dash, 8 a.m. Feb. 14; Irvine Regional Park, 1 Irvine Park Road, Orange; benefits Orange County affiliate of the Susan G. Komen for the Cure; www.bookthatevent.com/pawsfurpink. Run 4 Homeless Children’s 11th annual 5K, 10K and one-mile walkathon: 8 a.m. March 1; Miles Square Regional Park Forest Shelter, 16801 Euclid St., Fountain Valley; www.Run4HomelessChildren.com. 12th Annual Diamond Valley Lake Marathon: Half Marathon, 1K and 5K; 8 a.m. March 1; Diamond Valley Lake, 2615 Angler Ave., Hemet; benefits Habitat for Humanity; www.dvlrun.com. 4th Annual DairyAire 5K Fun Run: 8 a.m. March 1; Ayala Park, 5575 Edison Ave., Chino; proceeds benefit the Chino Youth Museum; www.chinoyouthmuseum.com. 2014 ASICS Los Angeles Marathon and Charity Relay Rover Rescue Run for the Life of a Dog: March 9; Dodger Stadium to Santa Monica; www.roverrescue.com. Catalina Island Conservancy Marathon, 10K, 5K, Kids Run: 7 a.m. March 15; Catalina Island, Avalon; benefits the work of the Catalina Island Conservancy; www.runcatalina.com. 5th Annual Natasha Watley Foundation 5K Run/Walk, 10K and Kiddie Run: 8 a.m. March 15 ; Woodley Park, 6335 Woodley Ave., Van Nuys; benefits inner city softball programs for young girls; info@natashawatley.com. 2nd Annual Hope4Kids Festival and Run (5K, 10K and kids mile run): 8 a.m. March 15; California Lutheran University Kingsmen Park, Thousand Oaks; proceeds benefit foster youth in Ventura County; www.hope4kids.myevent.com. El Segundo 23rd Annual Run for Education 5K, 10K and 1K kids runs: 8 a.m. March 22 ; Library Park, 640 Main St., El Segundo; benefits El Segundo schools; www.esrun4education.com. Every Child Matters 5K Run/Walk: 8:30 a.m. March 23; CBS Studio, 4024 Radford Ave., Studio City; helps provide access to education and school supplies for Caribbean children; www.caribbeanchild.com. Run for Ike: April 5; Mizell Senior Center, 480 Sunrise Way, Palm Springs; in memory of K-9 Officer Ike and benefits the Palm Springs Police Department K-9 Fund; psmarathonrunners.@gmail.com. 12th Annual Victory for Victims 10K River Run, 5K walk/run and kid’s fun run: 7 a.m. April 13; Lake Balboa Park, 6330 Woodley Ave., Lake Balboa; proceeds to Northridge Hospital Assault Treatment Services; www.abuse-assaultservices.org. Run For Their Lives 1K and 5K walk/run: 8 a.m. April 19; Azusa Pacific University football stadium, 901 E. Alosta Ave., Azusa; proceeds benefit victims of sex trafficking. 13th Annual Donate Life 5K/1K Run/Walk: 9 a.m. April 26; California State University Fullerton, 800 N. State College Blvd., Fullerton; benefits Donate Life California Organ and Tissue Donor Registry; www.donatelifeoc.org. 18th Annual Shelter’s Right Hand Stepping Out Against Domestic Violence 5K Fitness Walk: 8 a.m. April 26; Uptown Whittier Center Park, 6532 Friends Ave., Whittier; benefits Women’s & Children’s Crisis Shelter; www.sheltersrighthand.org. 9th Annual Kids 4 Kids 5K, 10K run/walk: 8:30 a.m. April 27; L.A. Live, 1005 West Chick Hearn Ct., Los Angeles; benefits Children’s Cancer Research Fund; www.ccrf-kids.org.

Running for a charitable purpose is not new, but it’s become a popular way to get fit and feel good at the same time. It’s fitness that is good for your heart, literally and figuratively.

Nonprofits use a variety of events to raise money and awareness. During the years, those have gone from fashion shows and luncheons to formal galas or wine tastings. And now it seems to be charity runs/walks that have people motivated and donors lining up with an event taking place almost every weekend throughout Southern California, especially as the days get warmer.

“The idea of people working up a sweat for a cause they believe in has been around for 40 years. The new thing, however, is there are more do-your-own events with the advent of inexpensive online methods to publicize them and to fund them,” said David Hessekiel, president of the Run Walk Ride Fundraising Council in New York.

Southern California is a hot bed of activity because of residents’ strong bents toward leading healthy lifestyles and a favorable climate.

“Charity events tend to be more spring- and fall-related here where I live, but in Southern California it can be year round. What we’re seeing now is a huge interest in fun runs, too, such as color runs or obstacle course runs,” Hessekiel said. “People get involved in athletic events for different reasons and I think it can be a case of icing on the cake if a charity benefits, too.”

Organized 5Ks, half marathons and marathons attract thousands, particularly ones like the upcoming Los Angeles Marathon in March. These attract dedicated athletes intent on conquering their races, bettering their times or simply finishing. These newer fun runs are increasingly popular and some also have a charity connections.

The increased interest in charity runs is not an either/or issue, though, when it comes to running, Hessekiel said.

“There has been a democratization of fundraising, of peer-to-peer fundraising events. Those out there range from very grassroots to enormous ones. Whatever the event, you have the power to decide about your charitable giving,” he said.

Ryan Lamppa, media director of Running USA, couldn’t agree more.

“Charity fundraising has been part of our sport since the first running boom (circa 1972) and during the second running boom (circa 1994 to the present),” Lamppa said. “The sport has helped raise billions of dollars for charity – big and small. In 2013, approximately $1.2 billon was raised from U.S. running events.”

Lamppa was citing Run Walk Ride Fundraising Council statistics included in Running USA’s state-of-sport 2013 report.

Most of the charities that made the Run Walk Ride Fundraising Council’s Top 10 Events (by total revenue in 2012) are familiar names and many are walks, although participants are free to take on the challenges anyway they choose within the event’s parameters.

Advertisement

Top revenue producers are Relay for Life (American Cancer Society); Race for the Cure (Susan G. Komen for the Cure); March for Babies (March of Dimes); Heart Walk (American Heart Association); Bike MS (National Multiple Sclerosis Society): Walk to Cure Diabetes (Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation); Team in Training (Leukemia & Lymphoma Society); Making Strides Against Breast Cancer (American Cancer Society); Jump Rope for Heart (American Heart Association); and Susan G. Komen 3-Day (Susan G. Komen for the Cure).

However they’re doing it, people are walking and running their way to increased fitness and many charities are riding the financial wave to success.

Erin Easterday ran sprints in high school, but her days on the track pretty much ended there until after she had her son.

“When I had my son I decided I wanted to get back into shape, so I starting running. I ran my first half marathon (a few years ago) without much proper training and all I can say is it was the most shocking experience of my life. My running stopped after that,” said Easterday with a laugh.

But when some Pomona Valley Hospital Medical Center personnel decided to train together and tackle the recent hometown Holiday Half Marathon and 5K fundraiser, Easterday, the contracts manager for the medical center. decided it was time to run again. This time, however, she said she trained for the half marathon portion of the fundraiser. It still was tough but she finished, and she and her X Team running mates raised more than $1,500 for the medical center’s foundation.

“It really does make a difference when a charity is involved. Before coming to Pomona Valley, I worked for a Visiting Nurses Association, which is a nonprofit. Believe me, it is extremely rewarding to run for a cause,” she said. “You want to push yourself to a point where you didn’t think you could go, but knowing you’re doing it for a charity helps make each step somehow easier.”

The wife and mother continues to run three times a week. Next on her list is the 5K Revlon walk/run in Los Angeles on May 10 that benefits those affected by cancer.

“I run it and it isn’t anything like a half marathon, but it doesn’t matter. It is a huge event and I’m looking forward to next year’s Holiday Half Marathon and hope it, too, attracts even more people because that means more money for charities. But whether the run/race is big or small makes no difference. There is the same enthusiasm and camaraderie of being there to help others,” she said.

Molly Thorpe is an experienced runner who has 13 marathons, including the Los Angeles Marathon, under her belt. She also is involved with the nonprofit Palm Springs Marathon Runners, which helps at-risk young people find a path through running.

“Running just has that stick-to-it attitude. You have to commit and be focused,” said Thorpe.

She came up with an idea four years ago to have her group create a small run in memory of a Palm Springs Police Department dog named Ike who was killed on duty. She said the Run for Ike was meant as a small token of respect for the animal who saved its handler’s life.

“It was just going to be our little group trying to get pledges and once we publicized it, in three weeks, we had 200 people signed up,” Thorpe said.

The 4th Annual Run for Ike is set for April 5 and proceeds go to the Palm Springs Police Department’s Canine division, including Max, a new dog in training.

Dr. Yolanda Quam is a vocal advocate of exercise, encouraging people of all ages to get up and move. She decided to walk the walk, or in this case, run the run. Quam starting hitting the pavement in order to bring home the message of the importance of exercise and good health. She began participating in the yearly Huntington Beach half-marathon, to raise money for Kids Come First Community Clinic in Ontario, but she also starting running to show that an active lifestyle is important and will add years to your life.

“Run/walk activities are a way to promote health, stress the importance of physical activity (especially outdoor activities) and encourages the community to get involved. The excitement witnessed from those who may have participated in an event for the first time and the support received from others is so awe-inspiring,” said Quam, who is the medical director of the nonprofit Kids Come First Community Clinic.

“The day I ran the Surf City Half-Marathon, my first official race with the word ‘marathon’ in it, was exhilarating. I felt the love and the support from the participants and those cheering along the streets, and at the 10th mile when I hit the wall, seeing the smiling face and listening to the words of encouragement, I knew that I could finish the race because so many believed that I could. And I did.”

Nonprofits always need donations, but the added benefit of public exposure is priceless, according to Jose Luis Zavala. He ran when he was in college at California State University Los Angeles. He got involved in a mentoring program trying to show young people the benefits of exercise and healthy lifestyles. He has a degree in child psychology and a master’s degree in marriage and family therapy. He provides supervision for Los Angeles County and its Skid Row Family Assessment Team and he is the president and chief executive officer of Aztlan Athletics, which owns and operates eight SoCal events that help more than 10 nonprofits.

The mission of Aztlan Athletics, which maintains offices in South Pasadena and East Los Angeles, is to support nonprofit groups that help preserve families and the environment. Its client list includes Homeboy Industries and the Aquarium of the Pacific. Two of its upcoming charity runs are Help2HealAHeart on Feb. 15 in Downey to benefit the Always a Mom Foundation for bereaved mothers, and the 4-Mile Hill Challenge Walk on March 22 in Debs Park in Los Angeles, supporting the Audubon Center.

“The idea behind Aztlan Athletics is to encourage people to run for their health but also to run for their communities. Yes, you’re paying to participate but you’re giving something back. We rely heavily on volunteers and try to keep events as grassroots as possible because we want the benefits to go directly to the people the programs help,” Zavala said.

“We want to take running to another level like it was in the 1990s. Many big companies have bought the big runs and those events are huge. The challenge is to help the smaller runs who have trouble coming up with the $20,000 to $25,000 it can cost to get one started along with permits and things like that. That’s where we come in. We have the infrastructure in-house to have a co-venture. The goal is to make as much money for the nonprofits as possible.”

Zavala said the increased number of charity runs is because they work in raising money while being able to put their particular cause in the public’s eye. And the Affordable Care Act provides financial incentives to businesses willing to set up employee wellness programs, who then, if they choose to, can pass on donation money and goodwill to nonprofits.

Pomona Valley Hospital Medical Center has a wellness program in place. The idea is to promote healthy lifestyles to its employees with the benefit of helping others, too. The hospital foundation benefited from the recent Holiday Half Marathon and 5K in Pomona, as did other local charities including Steven’s Hope in Upland and Bright Prospect in Pomona.

Rick Rossman is the associate director of physical therapy in the hospital’s Sports Medicine Center. He and Dr. Duane Styles, center medical director, were on hand during the race to help runners if needed.

“We as a hospital have a medical role in promoting healthy lifestyles, but when you can combine it with helping a worthwhile cause, it’s a success for everyone,” Rossman said. “Employees who wanted to participate in the Holiday Half Marathon could pledge to help the foundation and that’s a double benefit. I think altruism is not a bad thing and should be encouraged.”