This Week in Crain's: February 24, 2014 Listen to the Podcast or Download

Obamacare has been a boon to freelancers, giving them more affordable health insurance options than ever before. But it's a threat to the Freelancers Union and its insurance company, which offers the self-employed the kind of health insurance normally reserved for professionals tethered to big employers.



To compete, the Brooklyn-based organization with 225,000 members and founded more than 20 years ago is hoping its upgraded services will compete with the health care plans offered on the state insurance exchanges.



"The next wave of thinking about health insurance has been transformed," said Freelancers Union founder Sara Horowitz. "But we have an expertise. We know the lay of the land."



The clock, however, is ticking. Last year, the Freelancers Union got a one-year state-issued exemption from an Affordable Care Act requirement that insurers, such as the organization's Freelancers Insurance Co., offer their plans generally rather than restrict them to members of groups.



Ms. Horowitz worried that complying with the exchange's rules would have increased annual premiums by an average of nearly $2,000. That would have effectively priced Freelancers Union out of the new marketplace and put it out of business.



The past year has given it a chance to retool while keeping premiums low for existing members who might otherwise have fled to the exchange.



If the organization decides to make its plan available on the exchange next year, it hopes it will win new business by offering services that other plans don't. Its upgraded health plan, Freelancers Medical, now includes primary care at two private clinics in downtown Brooklyn and lower Manhattan, plus wellness consultations with a nutritionist, acupuncture sessions and yoga classes. Freelancers Medical is essentially a health care product designed to appeal to a specific membership: creative types bent on healthy living.

Possible exodus

$2K—Average increase in annual premiums that Freelancers Union members faced on the state exchange before one-year waiver was issued



Retaining those members is essential to the future of Ms. Horowitz's Freelancers Insurance Co., which had revenue of $112 million in 2013. With months left on the waiver, the possible exodus of members looms ever closer.



"I've had private coverage as a full-time employee at corporations, but I've never had the kind of care I get on this plan," said Megan Mardiney, a Brooklyn-based freelance graphic designer who, along with her husband and two children, has been on Freelancers insurance since 2002. "There is a detailed care relationship; it's been wonderful."



The challenge for Ms. Horowitz will be to persuade members who have seen rates stay steady to pay more to maintain that relationship. The average midlevel plan on the state exchange goes for about $350 a month. The insurance rates of the Freelancers Union's 26,000 plan members who signed up before Nov. 30 are holding steady around $225 - for now. But the rates for the company's Obamacare-compliant plans have gone up by comparison. They range from $471 a month for a plan that has a $6,350 annual deductible (corresponding to bronze-level plans on the exchange), to $799 for one with no deductible.

'Curating care'

"If there was something cheaper, I'd have to consider it," said Ms. Mardiney. "I wouldn't expect the same level of care, but the idea of a cheaper option is a conundrum for anyone in the union."



Ms. Horowitz believes she can win business by offering more personalized care to a relatively small membership.



"I think we are offering something unique in this shifting environment," she said. "What we can do as a smaller provider is something we're referring to as 'curating care.' "



Ms. Horowitz said that means steering Freelancers Medical members through a mazelike health care system so they avoid hidden fees and extra costs that could hit patients on other exchange plans that do not cover out-of-network care.



"On our plan, premiums will go up, but out-of-pocket will be where savings are realized," she said.



So far, the exchange has not yet lured away her members.



"There is going to be natural attrition," Ms. Horowitz said. "Members get full-time jobs or married, but we don't see anyone leaving specifically for the ACA."

Correction: The Affordable Care Act restricts insurers from limiting membership to certain groups but doesn't require all insurers to offer their products on state exchanges. Freelancers has not yet decided whether to offer its product on the state exchange. Freelancers Insurance Co. had revenue of $112 million in 2013. And insurance rates are holding steady for the 26,000 members who signed up before Nov. 30. Those facts were misstated in an earlier version of this article originally published Feb. 24, 2014.

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments