insurance

Employers get ACA reporting extension

The U.S. Treasury and Internal Revenue Service said they are extending some Affordable Care Act reporting deadlines to help companies meet the requirements.

Employers will have two more months past Feb. 1 to give individuals forms for reporting on offers of health coverage and the coverage provided. The deadlines to report this information to the IRS are extended by three months past the previous Feb. 29 due date for paper filings and the March 31 date for electronic returns, the Treasury said Monday.

The Obama administration has repeatedly extended deadlines for implementation and insurance enrollment under the ACA, sometimes drawing criticism from opponents.

Last year, Republicans sued the administration, saying President Obama exceeded his authority by delaying a requirement that most employers provide insurance to workers.

Obama said in 2013 that employers wouldn’t have to comply with the requirement until 2015. Then in 2014 the president further delayed the rule until 2016 for companies with fewer than 100 workers.

A federal judge in Washington declined in September to dismiss the lawsuit.

— Bloomberg News

LEGAL

Cisco wins appeal of patent judgment

A U.S. appeals court cleared Cisco Systems of infringing another company’s WiFi technology, reversing a nearly $64 million judgment against the networking equipment maker in the long-running patent dispute.

After eight years of litigation that also included a trip to the U.S. Supreme Court, the decision from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit said Cisco was not liable for directly infringing or inducing others to infringe a patent held by Commil USA on a way to help spread wireless signals over a large area, where multiple access points are needed.

Commil sued Cisco in 2007. In 2011, a federal jury in Texas found that Cisco induced infringement by encouraging its customers to use Cisco products that infringe Commil’s patent. The jury awarded Commil almost $63.8 million in damages. A judge subsequently added $10.3 million in interest.

— Reuters

Also in Business

— From news services

Coming Today