Buy Photo UAW President Dennis Williams has toned down his sales pitch for a health care co-op, but without cost cuts veteran UAW workers could face their first deductibles in 2018. (Photo: Regina Boone/ Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

Veteran workers at Fiat Chrysler could pay deductibles for the first time if the cost of their coverage triggers a politically sensitive tax that takes effect in 2018.

In the "Explanation of Benefits" document in the proposed contract between the UAW and Fiat Chrysler is a letter from FCA health care executive Kathleen Neal to UAW Vice President Norwood Jewell. The two acknowledge in writing that the company and union discussed the "Cadillac tax" on high-cost health care plans that is a provision of the Affordable Care Act.

Slated to take effect in 2018, the tax would be levied on insurance companies if the annual cost of an individual plan exceeds $10,200 or a family plan costs more than $27,500. It was one of the reasons UAW President Dennis Williams pushed hard in contract talks for a health-care co-op that would look for ways to bring the cost of members' plans below the tax threshold.

Those UAW members hired after 2007 already pay deductibles of $300 annually for individual coverage and $600 for family plans. In addition, Tier 2 individual plans carry a 10% co-insurance contribution up to $700 a year, with family plans incurring co-insurance of up to $1,400 a year.

Neal's letter states that if the cost of the Tier 1 workers' plans remain above the level that is subject to such a tax would be subject to maximum annual deductibles of $400 for single and $800 for family coverage. FCA and the UAW will work together to minimize the amount of the tax.

This time the UAW is not evading the issue. Included in a 20-page highlights of the revised agreement is language nearly identical to Neal's letter. Both parties will seek ways to avoid the tax, including giving workers the chance to switch to lower-cost coverage that could limit their choice of doctors to those in a designated network. Those who chose to stay with the high-cost plans will pay more for it.

Unions and companies that could be exposed to the tax are expected to lobby Congress and the next administration to revise or eliminate the tax.

In another significant detail tucked more than 130 pages into the full agreement, FCA agrees not to "close, nor partially or wholly sell, spin-off, split-off or consolidate or otherwise dispose in any form, any plant, asset or business unit of any time constituting a bargaining unit."

FCA CEO Sergio Marchionne has talked for months about his company's need to be acquired by or partner with another global automaker to afford the expensive capital expenditures needed to compete in a rapidly changing industry. He sought talks with General Motors, whose CEO Mary Barra and its board of directors said no thanks.

So the letter should not be interpreted as a reversal of Marchionne's strategy.

The letter concludes with this escape clause: "It is understood that conditions may arise that are beyond the control of the company such as acts of God, catastrophic circumstances, market-related volume declines or significant economic decline... Should these conditions occur, the company will discuss conditions with the union."

Contact Greg Gardner: 313-222-8762 or ggardner@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter @GregGardner12

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1RD5g6g