The House voted along party lines Tuesday to approve legislation to loosen pesticide regulations in the name of fighting the Zika virus.

All but 23 Democrats opposed the bill, which was recently retooled by House GOP leaders as an effort to loosen rules on pesticides to prevent the spread of Zika. The bill was called the Reducing Regulatory Burdens Act until earlier this month.

ADVERTISEMENT

In a statement opposing the bill on Monday, the White House said nearly all state and local officials spraying for mosquitoes are already allowed to use chemicals "as needed to respond to Zika virus concerns and do not require any additional authorization." http://bit.ly/1XuU1kU

Premium hikes of 16 percent on average

An analysis from Avalere Health shows proposed ObamaCare premiums for silver-level plans are increasing an average of 16 percent in nine states that so far have complete data.

The proposed increases vary widely – from a 44 percent average increase in Vermont to a 5 percent increase in Washington state – but appear to be much higher than last year on average. An Avalere analysis at a similar point in the process last year found an average increase of about 6 percent.

There are important caveats. First, these increases are not final yet, and state regulators can reject them. Still, final rates are expected to see widespread increases as well. http://bit.ly/1TUU2JJ

Dems making clear they want $1.9B for Zika

Another House Democrat – this time, the head of the House Democratic Caucus – says he'll oppose anything less than the president's full $1.9 billion ZIka funding request.

Rep. Xavier Becerra (D-Calif.) said both the House's $622 million bill and the Senate's $1.1 billion proposal are insufficient to address the escalating crisis.

"I would not support inadequate funding to deal with the healthcare catastrophe that could develop if we do not tackle the Zika virus in the right way," Becerra told reporters in the Capitol.

Rep. Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), the House minority leader, has sounded a similar warning in recent weeks, saying she also opposes both chambers' bills. Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid Harry ReidPuerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate McCain files B amendment to boost defense spending Dems to GOP: Cancel Memorial Day break MORE (D-Nev.) made similar comments to reporters on Tuesday. http://bit.ly/1TxV3rx

What's next for that Zika funding?

Still unclear. Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Mitch McConnellPuerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate Overnight Healthcare: Momentum on mental health? | Zika bills head to conference | Only 10 ObamaCare co-ops left Trump outlines ‘America First’ energy plan MORE (R-Ky.) told reporters Tuesday that his staff is working on merging the packages "as we speak" but offered no details. More on that gridlock here: http://bit.ly/22o838J

A GOP healthcare bill that keeps some of ObamaCare

Much of ObamaCare would remain, including its safeguards against insurers discriminating based on pre-existing conditions. It would also keep the law's tax increases.

What's new is a $2,500 tax credit that any U.S. citizen could use to purchase health insurance. http://bit.ly/22o4dMU

Barrasso to lead GOP platform committee

Sen. John Barrasso John BarrassoOvernight Healthcare: House loosens pesticide rules to fight Zika | A GOP bill that keeps some of ObamaCare | More proof of pending premium hikes GOP senator: Obama used Zika money for climate fund Member of Senate GOP leadership to lead platform committee MORE (R-Wyo.), a doctor who has become one of the Senate's top critics of ObamaCare, will lead the party's efforts to reshape its platform in 2016.

ON TAP TOMORROW

National Quality Forum is hosting a briefing on new guidelines for antibiotic use at 12:15 p.m.

WHAT WE'RE READING

How ObamaCare town halls went from chaotic to downright frightening (Huffington Post)

Seeds company Monsanto Co. will reject the $62 billion takeover offer from the German drugs and crop chemical group, Bayer (Reuters)

Fewer than 5 percent of terminally ill patients say they fully understand their diagnosis (ABC News)

The nation's historic drop in smoking rates could be aligned with the historic rise in obesity rates (Washington Post)

Investors are increasingly skittish about the chances of an Anthem-Cigna merger, and both companies saw stocks plunge on Tuesday (Reuters)

IN THE STATES

Federal judge blocks Ohio's move to defund Planned Parenthood (Cleveland.com)

South Carolina lawmakers briefed on Zika (Post-Courier)

ICYMI FROM THE HILL:

All but 20 House Republicans voted Tuesday for the biggest changes to chemical safety rules in decades.

Victims allege Planned Parenthood could have prevented Colorado shooting.

Nearly 180 House Democrats are demanding the end of the Planned Parenthood investigative panel.

Send tips and comments to Sarah Ferris, sferris@thehill.com, and Peter Sullivan, psullivan@thehill.com. Follow us on Twitter: @thehill, @sarahnferris, @PeterSullivan4