Belmont University students are covering Nashville mayoral candidates with The Tennessean.

Buy Photo Belmont student McLean Pillon (Photo: The Tennessean)Buy Photo





Editor's note: Belmont University students have collaborated with The Tennessean to cover the 2015 Nashville mayoral race. Seven students profiled the seven major candidates with a focus on engaging younger voters and asking questions pertaining to them and their peers. This coverage leads up to the mayoral debates in May and June sponsored by The Tennessean and Belmont with broadcast partner WSMV-TV.

A Music City love story

Megan Barry first arrived in Nashville in the 1990s to study at Vanderbilt University. Her plan was to stay 18 months and then leave, but something happened. She fell in love with Nashville, stuck around, and soon met her husband and started her family and her corporate life here. Politics soon entered her life as she began to get involved in her neighborhood association that led her to join the parent teacher organization at her child's school. In the '90s then-mayor of Nashville Bill Purcell appointed her to the ethics conduct board and this gave Barry her first taste of public service. In 2007, she ran for council member at-large and won. She ran again in 2011, emerging victorious for a second time. She has spent the last seven and half years in both business and government.

Scroll down past the photo to keep reading the article.

Megan Barry, candidate for mayor of Nashville. (Photo: Submitted)

Platform in one line: "Keep Nashville moving forward"

Nashville is a growing city that has seen much economic development, so what does Megan Barry bring to the table? She wants to keep economic development moving forward by investing in transit, public education, and addressing the issue of affordable housing. To begin with transit is to be multi-faceted including more and expanded bus routes, real-time bus information, more sidewalks and bike lanes, and future improvements to ease the flow of traffic in and out of the city.

In the area of education, she believes investment in pre-K programs to be paramount to increase graduation rates and lower crime rates, and investment in public school infrastructure to be a priority. Affordable housing needs to be funded, retained and built using incentives to encourage contractors to construct affordable units.

Great, but what else?

Expanding bus routes is great and the prospect of real-time bus information is wonderful, although slightly overdue. But my question is where is the innovation? Will we see more expansion of rail, or other transit options? Affordable housing is great and needs to be available to fight homelessness and poverty in the city. But, where does this leave college-aged, young professionals looking for a place to live? Without a plan for middle-income housing there is a large group of young men and women who will be priced out of areas of the city. Lastly, how will Barry continue to ensure that the police are properly equipped to deal with the modern and evolving security challenges that threaten a developing city?

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1z9nE1X