Today is the last HuffPost Hill before Christmas, the day when Mary and Joseph did the most Brooklyn thing ever and had their child sleep in a manger. Israel’s U.S. ambassador is distributing holiday gifts crafted by Israeli settlers in disputed areas, a move that will really shake up the War on Christmas. And Donald Trump said Hillary Clinton got “schlonged” in her 2008 presidential campaign. He then fiddled with the ruffles of his powder blue tux and asked that everyone give a big Catskills welcome to Jack Benny. This is HUFFPOST HILL for Tuesday, December 22nd, 2015:

PROGRAMMING NOTE: No more HuffPost Hill this week. Schleason's greetings!

CAMPAIGN TAKES SCHLONG HIT - A Freudian might suggest that we're all currently being schlonged by Donald Trump. Doina Chiacu: "Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump used a vulgarity to describe Hillary Clinton's loss to Barack Obama for the 2008 Democratic presidential nomination and then poked fun at her taking a bathroom break during a debate. Trump's off-color comments about the Democratic front-runner at a campaign appearance on Monday night came a day after he called Clinton a liar for saying his proposal to ban entry of all foreign Muslims to the United States has aided Islamic State's propaganda efforts. 'She was going to beat Obama,' Trump said of Clinton in Grand Rapids, Michigan. '... She was going to beat - she was favored to win - and she got schlonged. She lost. She lost.' 'Schlong' is a Yiddish slang term for a man's genitals." [Reuters]

Palmieri takes the high road by not responding, but, y'know, actually responding: "We are not responding to Trump but everyone who understands the humiliation this degrading language inflicts on all women should.” [@jmpalmieri]

For more information on the term "schlonged," including Donald Trump's past use of the word, please click HERE.

FEWER PEOPLE BEING SENT FROM LAWN - American Dream upgraded from "dead" to "critical condition," though teeming masses still not welcomed past golden threshold. Roque Planas: "The number of immigrants deported by Immigration and Customs Enforcement dropped for the third consecutive year in 2015, according to figures the Department of Homeland Security released Tuesday. The data also shows a decline in the number of people attempting to cross the border illegally into the United States, even as talk of cracking down on illegal entries from Mexico has played an outsized role in the 2016 Republican presidential debates. ICE deported some 235,413 undocumented immigrants in 2015, down from 315,934 last year." [HuffPost]



(via Americans United)

Haircuts: Nick Baumann, Sara Bondioli (h/ts Arthur Delaney)

DELANEY DOWNER - Michigan state officials insisted that the water supply in Flint was safe even though they knew an unusual number of children had suffered lead poisoning, according to a scientist who helped blow the whistle on Flint's water crisis. Through a public records request, Marc Edwards, a civil engineering professor at Virginia Tech, uncovered a July 2015 memo warning of elevated lead levels in Flint kids' blood. An internal report from the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services warned that lead poisoning rates "were higher than usual for children under age 16 living in the City of Flint during the months of July, August and September, 2014." They did nothing until they got called out by an outside pediatrician who'd independently discovered the poisoning. [HuffPost]

Does somebody keep forwarding you this newsletter? Get your own copy. It's free! Sign up here. Send tips/stories/photos/events/fundraisers/job movement/juicy miscellanea to huffposthill@huffingtonpost.com. Follow us on Twitter - @HuffPostHill

JEB BUSH NOT RESONATING - He makes Mitt Romney come off like Billy Mays (RIP). Ed O'Keefe: "For nearly a month, Jeb Bush has established himself as the leading Donald Trump attacker, convinced that relentlessly criticizing the Republican front-

runner’s temperament and rhetoric will draw fresh support. So far, it hasn’t worked very well. Bush remains stranded at the back of the GOP pack, polling at around 4 percent nationally and little better in the early states of Iowa and New Hampshire. Trump, meanwhile, has actually gained ground over that time -- and has only intensified the barrage of insults he routinely lobs at Bush. In the past week, Bush has called Trump a “jerk” who is “not serious” and is running a “chaos campaign.” The former Florida governor has also run ads calling Trump “unhinged” and also torn into the front-runner for praising the leadership qualities of Russian President Vladi­mir Putin and for talking about deporting Latinos and barring Muslims." [WaPot]

Today's Big Question: Why isn't Marco Rubio winning? He is the handsomest candidate, after all.

OBAMACARE SIGN UPS REACH EIGHT MILLION - Jeff Young: "More than 8 million people signed up for coverage via the federal HealthCare.gov health insurance exchange marketplace as of Saturday, Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said Tuesday. On Friday, President Barack Obama announced that enrollment had reached 6 million after this month's deadline for policies that will be in force on New Year's Day. Burwell's revised tally, delivered during a conference call with enrollment workers, includes millions of people whose current plans have been automatically renewed. The final deadline for obtaining 2016 coverage is Jan. 31. The Department of Health and Human Services predicted modest growth in the health insurance exchanges during this, the third Obamacare open enrollment campaign, but appear to be on track with or even surpassing their own internalprojections of 10 million exchange customers in 2016. According to figures from Burwell and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, sign-ups are outpacing 2015's so far, and more young people are participating." [HuffPost]



Could anything be more Dianne Feinstein-y than Dianne Feinstein's holiday card? (via NYT)

CHUCKLEHEAD UPDATE - The lawn is mowed, the merlot is poured, the presentation bowl in the finished basement is filled with mixed nuts, but the Chuckleheads keep on Chuckleheading. Warren Rojas: "Butler County Auditor Roger Reynolds’ abrupt withdrawal last week from the 16-way contest to fill the vacancy created by Speaker John A. Boehner’s retirement is another sign of how little conservatives think of the former speaker. Reynolds was seen as a favorite among the 14 Republicans in the race and was believed to have Boehner’s backing. But that didn’t work in Reynolds’ favor among some conservatives. 'It is pretty clear that Boehner is behind Roger Reynolds,' Lori Viars, a board member of the Conservative Republican Leadership Committee, told Cincinnati.com in October. And that, she hinted, might not be such a good thing. 'While Boehner is a big fish in Butler County, a lot of conservatives who vote in primaries have not been happy with him,' she warned." [Roll Call]

DISPATCHES FROM OUR HIGHLY FUNCTIONAL FOREIGN POLICY - Call in the Dyson repairman because the whole Middle East is one big power vacuum. Josh Rogin: "There have been at least two camps inside the top levels of the Obama administration who vigorously disagree on the goals of U.S. Syria policy. [Former National Security Council senior director for Middle Eastern and North African affairs Steven] Simon, along with his two successors, Philip Gordon and now Robert Malley, have argued internally that the U.S. should make the fight against the Islamic State its first priority and delay the drive to oust Assad. The fear is that pushing Assad out too soon would create a power vacuum that the terrorists would fill, gaining territory. The other camp, led by UN Ambassador Samantha Power, insists that Assad’s removal is a necessary step toward ending the war. The thinking is that unless he steps down or is removed, there is no way to defeat the Islamic State. By this logic, the best policy is to work with the opposition and ramp up U.S. support for the rebels fighting the regime. This camp is losing ground as the Islamic State appears to be a bigger threat and as the war drags on." [Bloomberg ]

How's that relationship repair going? "This year’s holiday gifts from the Israeli embassy come with a politically charged message: the occupied Palestinian territories are part of Israel. Israel's ambassador to the U.S., Ron Dermer, tweeted on Monday that all of the presents he is sending this holiday season will be products produced in the occupied West Bank and Golan Heights. The gifts will include wine, olive oil, body cream, and halva, the Israeli embassy told The Huffington Post." [HuffPost's Jessica Schulberg ]

BECAUSE YOU'VE READ THIS FAR - Here's a child who is bewildered by automatic doors

THE FIRST STEP IS ACCEPTANCE - Almost as sad as the LC who got addicted to oil industry informational briefing hors d'oeuvres quiches. Cady Zuvich: "A Florida man has so far this month created more than 350 political groups -- including hundreds of federal super PACs that claim to represent interests ranging from racquetball to the petroleum industry. And no, the super PACs’ creator is not a seasoned campaign fundraiser. Nor is he a billionaire primed to dole out cash to his favored presidential candidates. He’s “Josh Larose,” usually known to exasperated election regulators as Josue Larose, and by any name, a political fetishist quite unlike any other. His obsession: super PACs. Since 2010, Larose has registered hundreds upon hundreds of these and other political groups under his name. Although super PACs may legally raise and spend unlimited money, almost none of Larose’s groups ever generate a dime." [CPI]

COMFORT FOOD

- Donut and ice cream sushi.

- The Onion reviews "The Force Awakens."

- A brief explanation of … um … waddya call 'em … ellipses!

TWITTERAMA

@SenileDonDraper: Ford: Tough enough for a schlong. Delicate handling for a hoo-hah.

@mileskahn: Positive political ad voice: "Vote for a leader who DOESN'T need to pee - because he's all smooth like a genital-less Ken doll. Trump 2016."

@mollyesque: PSA: It’s “cojones,” not “cajones.” The latter means “drawers,” like a dresser, which is almost certainly not what you mean.

Got something to add? Send tips/quotes/stories/photos/events/fundraisers/job movement/juicy miscellanea to Eliot Nelson (eliot@huffingtonpost.com) or Arthur Delaney (arthur@huffingtonpost.com). Follow us on Twitter @HuffPostHill (twitter.com/HuffPostHill). Sign up here: http://huff.to/an2k2e

More: Huffpost Hill