SIMILARITIES BETWEEN CUBA’S CASTRO AND BARACK OBAMA

By Betty Freauf

April 5, 2014

NewsWithViews.com

Anthony Kubek in the 1963 October AMERICAN OPINION writes Fidel Castro’s visit to the United States in April, 1959, was an almost incredible episode in Cuban-American relations. The image he created in the eyes of some American officials and the American people in general contributed to his rise as a dictator of that soviet Satellite in the Americas.

Although the Department of State reported it had no official information that Castro would be welcomed, Assistant Secretary of State Roy Rubottom testified before a closed session of the Senate Subcommittee on Latin-American Affairs that he was concerned about the method of invitation. Later, however, when this was reported, he remarked that he meant he was concerned about “proper and adequate courtesies to be extended this distinguished visitor” – a bearded despot 90 miles from our shore.

The invitation was extended by George W. Healy Jr., Editor of the TIMES-PICAYUNE (New Orleans) and President of the American Association of Newspaper Editors. One of the most ardent supporters of Castro’s “July 26th Movement” was Congressman Charles Porter, Democrat from Oregon. In a speech on the floor of the House of Representatives he paid a glowing tribute to Castro’s coming visit. He said, “Fidel Castro arrives in Washington tomorrow evening from Havana… He has restored civil liberties, and promised free elections, he has given Cuba honesty in government… I believe in Castro’s good faith. I believe he is a man who sincerely desires democracy and a better life for Cubans and for other citizens of Latin America…” A 1962 book, CUBA, CASTRO, AND COMMUNISM by Edwin C. Stein tells in additional detail the good time Castro had visiting Washington, D.C., Boston and said the New York police were “wonderful.”

The announcement of Castro’s invitation promptly brought a burst of criticism from a variety of members of the newspaper society. He arrived in Washington amid cheers and an occasional cat call. Waiting at the military air transport terminal was a crowd of about fifteen hundred people, most of who were Cuban supporters anxiously ready to receive the man whose forces overthrew the regime of President Batista. One of Castro’s first appointments was a scheduled luncheon meeting with Acting Secretary of state Christian Herter. As he left the Cuban Embassy, a reporter asked him whether or not newspapers in Cuba were free to criticize his regime. In an angry tone he replied: Every newspaperman in the United States is invited to come to Cuba and see for himself. What puzzles me is that in this country such a question should be asked.” President Obama’s Department of Justice shreds the First Amendment

AND THEN THERE IS OREGON’S INVITATION OF COMMUNISTS

Oregon’s Governor John Kitzhaber, currently in his third term as governor (and hopefully last) and a former Emergency Room doctor, has long been an advocate of socialized medicine and a strong supporter of President Barack Obama’s Affordable Health Care act. Kitzhaber’s “Cover Oregon” was supposed to be the poster child for Obamacare. Kitzhaber began his political career in the legislature where he was always eager to promote the Communist agenda. Oregon was granted $304.2 million from the federal government for the Cover Oregon project and the governor doesn’t foresee the state having to pay it back after its failure to launch and he’s hoping the federal government would grant Oregon a couple of waivers that would allow its residents more time to apply and sign up for health insurance through the exchange IF they ever get it up and running.

It is now being reported that Cover Oregon officials kept meetings of its Legislative Oversight committee a secret for nearly two years, in apparent violation of Oregon’s public meetings law. Confusion is the result. There was little press coverage due to this secrecy. The top manager has suddenly developed a health problem and resigned. The governor is asking the Cover Oregon board to fire its chief information officer and chief operating officer. If the board complies, that would make five leadership positions vacated after Cover Oregon has failed to deliver a website to allow Oregonians to apply and sign up for health insurance.

Castro complained that people in this country have not been informed “of the complete truth of what is going on in Cuba.” He said public opinion in the United States would back his regime overwhelmingly if he could talk on television very week. He said it is important for an American audience to hear him assert that his movement was not Communist and that the fundamental goals he seeks are full political rights and “social justice.” (aka Communism) Laurie Roth in her recent NWV article about the total take over of America said tyrants and dictators are predictably similar in how they take over. They ride in as the savior of change and hope. Does that sound familiar?

OBAMA’S CONNECTICUT SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER EXPOSED

Isn’t that what our Kenyan-born Barack promised us? Since Alan Stang wrote about Obama’s birthplace, it has since come to my attention from the Law Offices of Aissa Wayne (one of John Wayne’s daughters) in Malibu, California that Obama’s Connecticut Social Security number belonged to Jean Paul Ludwig, who was born in France in 1890 and when he immigrated to the U.S. in 1924, he was assigned SSN 042-68-4425 which Obama received on or about March 1977. Mr. Ludwig lived most of his adult life in Connecticut whereas Barack Obama never lived or worked in that state; however, Ludwig spent the final months of his life in Hawaii, where he died.

Conveniently, Obama’s grandmother Madelyn Payne Dunham, worked part-time in the Probate Office in the Honolulu Hawaii courthouse, and therefore had access to the SSNs of deceased individuals. The Social Security Administration was never informed of Ludwig’s death, and because he never received Social Security benefits there were no benefits to stop and therefore, no questions were ever raised. The suspicion, of course, is that Dunham, knowing her grandson was not a U.S. citizen, either because he was born in Kenya or became a citizen of Indonesia upon his adoption by Lolo Soetoro, simply scoured the probate records, until she found someone, who died who was not receiving social Security benefits.

ENCIRCLEMENT IS THE NAME OF THE GAME

When Castro appeared before Senate Foreign Relations Committee Senator Alexander Wiley asked Castro what was his connection with the Communist Party. Castro replied, “None.” However, he and his brother worked with the KGB spy agency five years before taking power in the 1959 revolution. When asked about Cuba’s future plans in the Carribbean, the Cuban leader was very evasive and said that he was against all dictators and that he would set a good example. Speaking about evasive, what about Obama’s recent conversation with the Pope?

March 2006 NEWSWATCH MAGAZINE reported that V.I. Lenin, first ruthless dictator of Communism, laid down a plan in 1921 that is the final program to conquest America for world government. First, he said, “We will take Eastern Europe, second we will take the masses of Asia; then we will surround the U.S. and it will fall like a ripe fruit into our hands.” The question is: Have they surrounded the U.S.?

Mexico has been Socialist for years. All of the Central and South America now have socialist presidents or leaders. The Communist formula of the Soviet Union was “Eternal encirclement plus internal demoralization, plus thermonuclear blackmail, would lead to progressive surrender.” As readers will recall, Democrat President Carter gave away the Panama Canal. He ramrodded the illegal and invalid 1977 Carter-Torrijos treaties through the Senate, but in an attempt to downplay the strategic significance of the Panama Canal handover and distance his administration and the Democrat Party from the political fallout that would come from this disastrous move, President Clinton did not attend the December 14th 1999 transferral ceremony in Panama. Neither did Vice President Al Gore nor Secretary of State Madeleine Albright but instead he sent Commerce Secretary William Daley and Transportation secretary Rodney Slater along with former President Jimmy Carter to Represent the U.S. Carter apologized to Panama for nearly 100 years of “colonialism” and abuse by the U.S.

One Congressman summed up the 1959 meeting with the following observation: “Castro feels much better towards the U.S. as a result of his visit. I don’t think that in the future he will attack the U.S. with such ferver and irresponsibility. But you must remember he is young and inexperienced.” That remark reminds me of the little fat guy Kim Jong who is now in charge of North Korea since daddy’s death. In another article by Alan Stang, “A warning for America from South Africa” Alan Stang has since become deceased.

Senator Russell Long, Democrat of Louisiana, remarked: “I feel reassured about a number of matters I’ve been concerned about in Cuba.” Representative James G. Fulton, Republican of Pennsylvania, commented: “I was neutral and suspicious before but today I was very favorably impressed. I think we should help him.” Later a February 1962 AMERICAN OPINION indicated maybe our Congressman should have taken a longer look at Castro while he was still a guerilla in the hills and how he insisted on carrying out executions of his captured enemies by bullets fired into the back of the brain – a recognized trademark among Communists everywhere! Why? He wanted fellow Communists, especially in the U.S. to know he was one of the clan.

Just as Ukraine is in the news now, I am reminded of a cartoon in our local newspaper showing Russian leader Putin, also KGB, in a boat off shore from Alaska. Used like a hook, he’s thrown his anchor in his boat up on Alaska soil and mentions something about the U.S. buying Alaska from Russia but he plans to take it back. In Cliff Kincaid’s article: Mother Russia, Alaska and the Ron Paul Revolution he says as amazing as it sounds, residents of Alaska are raising the alarm about Russian designs on the 49th state. In the last five years hundreds of Russians “have migrated” to Alaska and as a weak America gets weaker, will we become a tempting target? Maybe the “crock” began winding down when the fools voted President Obama into office not once but twice.

And writing about hooks, reminds me of how God put a hook in Russia and is pulling it towards Israel. (Ezek. 38:3-4) I am against thee, O Gog (Russia). Many expositors disagree about when this will happen but eventually divine intervention and the destruction of Russia will take place and Israel will finally become believers. Renowned radio worldwide minister, Dr. J. Vernon McGee, who died in 1988, explains while many other nations were polytheist and believed in more than one god or in many gods, Russia was the ONLY atheist country. He said when Russia launched the world’s first man-made orbital satellite on October 4, 1957, Sputnick, the following was heard on the radio in Russia. “Our rocket has bypassed the moon. It is nearing the sun. We have not discovered God. We have turned out lights in Heaven that no man will be able to put on again. We are breaking the yoke of the gospel, the opiate of the masses. Let us go forth and Christ shall be relegated to mythology.” Because they got a glimpse of the other side of the moon and did not see God, did that prove He did not exist? However, before Russia even came into existence, God said, “I am against thee.”

The Cuban leader Castro mentioned the need for a free Press, telling the editors: “The first thing dictators do is to finish the free press and establish censorship. There is no doubt that the free press is the first enemy of dictatorship,” which of course brings us to President Obama and his using the Internal Revenue Service to shut down conservative organizations by refusing to grant them tax-exempt status and snooping into what reporters were going to write. Goal Number 20 of the Communist Takeover of America is to infiltrate the press. Get control of book-review assignments, editorial writing, policy-making positions. And Obama’s latest effort is to shut down individual free lance journalists.



Subscribe to NewsWithViews Daily E-Mail Alerts!





DEPRAVED ELECTORATE

Former Premier of the Czech Republic, Vaclav Klaus made an interesting observation: “The danger to America is not Barack Obama but a citizenry capable of entrusting a man like him with the Presidency. It will be far easier to limit and undo the follies of an Obama presidency than to restore the necessary common sense and good judgment to a depraved electorate willing to have such a man for their president. The problem is much deeper and far more serious than Mr. Obama, who is a mere symptom of what ails America. Blaming the prince of the fools should not blind anyone to the vast confederacy of fools that made him their prince. The Republic can survive a Barack Obama, who is, after all, merely a fool. It is less likely to survive a multitude of fools such as those who made him their president.”