ALBANY—New York’s top financial regulator wants the state to be an "incubator" for improving cybersecurity and identifying money-laundering at financial institutions, and said he is considering using the authority of his office to change how insurers pay for health care services.

Ben Lawsky, the superintendent of New York’s Department of Financial Services, was in Albany to deliver a wide-ranging lecture to a group of students and other guests at SUNY Albany.

“We think that New York state can become a real laboratory of democracy when it comes to financial regulation,” Lawsky said, citing as an example Massachusetts’ statewide universal health care system and that program’s influence on the development of the national Affordable Care Act.

Lawsky said his office has encountered problems at financial institutions with internal compliance systems set up to catch illegal or risky financial transactions. Those systems are designed to flag money-laundering schemes—possible sources of terrorism financing—and prevent banks from doing business with countries that are under sanction by the U.S., such as Iran and Sudan. But some banks have set up compliance systems that are too weak, or deliberately ineffective, Lawsky said.

His department is planning to conduct random audits of those compliance systems.

“Since we can’t go in and audit every institution,” Lawsky said, the office is weighing “making some senior responsible executives personally attest to the adequacy and robustness of the compliance systems they have."

But Lawsky also said his office’s biggest daily concern now is cybersecurity, and the possibility of a major attack on financial institutions that could wreak major havoc on world financial markets.

“A question I often get is ‘What keeps you up at night?,’" Lawsky said. “The answer is a lot of things, but right at the top of the list is the cybersecurity at the firms we regulate. ... We worry that when that major cyber event happens we'll all look back and say how did we not do more to prevent it?”

D.F.S. is weighing requiring financial institutions to develop multi-step security systems for all of their employees, instead of the simple username and password access systems many companies employ now, which are too easy to hack.

“The password system should have been dead years ago,” Lawsky said.

The last experimental idea Lawsky announced could prove the most controversial in New York State.

Lawsky said his department, in coordination with the rest of Governor Andrew Cuomo’s administration, is considering ways to use its regulatory authority to change how insurers pay doctors and health care providers.

New Yorker’s health care costs are rising overall, in part because of a fee-for-service payment system in place that pays doctors more for more care, not necessarily better care, Lawsky said.

D.F.S. is working with groups of “stakeholders” in the health care industry to determine possible alternate-payment methods that could move the state away from the fee-for-service model.

In short, Lawsky said his office, which regulates commercial health insurers, could require insurers to make payment reforms, changing how they reimburse providers, as part of D.F.S.’s annual review of insurers requests for insurance premium rate increases. New York state has a “prior approval” policy which requires any increase in premium rates by insurers to be approved by D.F.S.

Cuomo’s executive budget this year and the state’s broader Medicaid reform program are aiming to move away from fee-for-service health care reimbursement toward a value-based payment system.

But both houses of the Legislature have signaled unwillingness to consider initiatives inside Cuomo’s budget which would have given the state health department broad authority to negotiate how a “value-based payment” methodology would work here in New York. Both the Senate and Assembly removed Cuomo’s value-based payment proposal from their one-house budget proposals.

Lawsky said any departmental action incentivizing payment reform would be at least a year away, and said his office would pursue alternative payment reform no matter what happens in this budget cycle.

“We’ll see what happens and what the Legislature does but ... I think at D.F.S., because it all flows down from the governor, we’re committed to trying to move towards alternative payment systems of payment reform, because thats how you're going to bend this cost curve,” he said.

“I think we’re pretty creative and the governor’s pretty creative, and if the Legislature doesn't want to go a certain direction, we’ll figure out what we can do within the law and within our regulatory authority," he said. "And we have a lot of authority through the prior approval process."