By

This community has undergone heartbreak and been subjected to more violence than necessary. While we tend our wounds and fight for social justice in our city and state, we need to keep the topic of mental health reform on the front lines. We need to remember that one in five adults experiences a mental illness within a given year, and these illnesses sometimes strike innocent people without warning.

These individuals need our help; they need our voice. Riding in the wake of the Affordable Care Act, H.R. 2646 The Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Act of 2015, led by U.S. Rep. Tim Murphy (R-Penn.), provides a solution to this problem. This bipartisan bill is gaining momentum on its journey in the House of Representatives and focuses on comprehensive mental health reform and on individuals with mental health and substance abuse disorders.

We live in a city where one of the most recent national tragedies against an individual with a mental illness took place. On April 30, 2014, in Red Arrow Park downtown, Dontre Hamilton was suffering from a mental health crisis when he was confronted by a police officer who was required to respond to the disturbance. The police officer, who was not trained to respond to the needs of an individual in a severe mental health crisis, shot and killed Hamilton. The glaring and obvious issue is that of an individual in the midst of a mental health crisis who needed help, but instead was confronted by an officer not properly trained to handle the situation.

Given the nature of Milwaukee County's requirement for law enforcement officers to serve as first responders for mental health crisis situations, it is important that these professionals are given adequate training to respond appropriately during an encounter. One popular method of training among major metropolitan areas, including Milwaukee, is through Crisis Intervention Training. CIT is an evidence-based program for first responders to bring sensitivity, awareness and knowledge about mental illnesses to law enforcement officials. Studies have found that after CIT, there was significant improvement in police officers' perception, knowledge and attitude toward individuals with severe mental illnesses.

Reshaping attitudes and practices among police officers who are caught up in this role is necessary if we want to avoid future tragedies similar to that of Dontre Hamilton. If the Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Act is implemented, more funding will be channeled toward programs such as CIT in the form of block grants. The language of the bill is encouraging in its ability to provide funding for programs that provide training staff in effective evidence-based treatment, such as CIT.

Millions of Americans are experiencing the patchwork of mental health treatment currently available, and here in Wisconsin these individuals are confronted by law enforcement rather than being treated immediately. This is a situation unfair for all involved, and the prospect of comprehensive mental health reform is a long overdue basic human right. Bureaucracy should not prevent progression; instead it should be a call to arms to further support key pieces of legislation that would improve the lives for people suffering from mental illnesses. There should be no fear of discussing how the system we currently have in place harms these individuals.

An awakening needs to occur, in which we continue to bring awareness to the everyday issues faced by individuals needing a stronger mental health system.

Suzanne Udehn lives in Pleasant Prairie.