Despite being told by his party’s establishment wing he was too young or not ready to run for president, Republican hopeful Sen. Marco Rubio said Saturday he couldn’t afford to be patient.

Talking to a crowd of around 1,500 people at the Hilton Head Island High School gymnasium, Rubio, 44, said he bucked the GOP establishment in 2010 when he decided to run for the U.S. Senate and again last year when he opted to dive into the presidential race.

“They told me ‘You have to wait,’ and my answer is ‘Wait for what?’” the Florida senator said. “After seven years of (President) Barack Obama, this is no time for patience. If we get this election wrong, there will be no turning back for America.

“This nation cannot afford four years of Hillary Clinton.”

Rubio was kicking off 2016 with several stops through South Carolina, the first southern state where votes will be cast in the presidential primaries and caucuses starting next month.

He spoke on the island after plane troubles forced postponement of an event planned Saturday morning in Easley, and he was scheduled to wrap up the day with a trip to Lexington.

Making his second appearance in Beaufort County since he announced his candidacy, Rubio spent most of his time lamenting that America has become “a great nation in decline” under the Obama administration.

He joined the other 10 Republicans still in the race in calling for a repeal of the Affordable Care Act and said Obama has been reckless on national defense and belittled financial success.

“In 2008, this country unfortunately elected a president who wasn’t interested in fixing the things going wrong; it elected a president who was interested in changing America,” Rubio said. “Now, we are told free enterprise is bad, that if you’re successful financially, you must have cheated your workers. You must have cheated your customers.”

Focusing the bulk of his speech on national security, Rubio said “grotesque” cuts to the U.S. military and intelligence agencies have weakened the nation’s ability to fight terrorist groups such as the Islamic State.

“These defense cuts are doing zero, nothing, to balance our budget,” he said. “You can’t carpet bomb ISIS if you don’t have bombs and airplanes. We have a president who, instead of fighting to fund our military, would rather spend time fighting to fund Planned Parenthood. ISIS is killing people, burning people in cages, and we have a president who says the greatest risk we face in the world is climate change.”

Rubio said America’s security also depends how the country begins to address illegal immigration, an issue on which he has moved to the right after receiving criticism from fellow Republicans who have accused him of being in favor of amnesty.

Rubio’s first trip to Hilton Head in November came shortly after Republican candidate Sen. Ted Cruz noted Rubio’s involvement in the 2013 “Gang of Eight” bill that sought immigration reform and included a path to citizenship.

At the time, Rubio shot back, pointing out that Cruz proposed a legalization amendment and a massive expansion of the federal green card program.

A son of Cuban immigrants, Rubio said he has a better understanding of the issue than any other candidate. He added he would not support amnesty and is now in favor of building 700 miles of fencing along the Mexican border.

“Immigration is no longer about simply people coming here for a better job and life; it has become a national security issue, where terrorists are utilizing the loopholes in our system,” Rubio said. “When things in our lives change, we need to change the way we react. We need to change the way we treat even legal immigration now, too.”

Rubio drew a comparison to “a time when nobody ever locked their doors.”

“Now everybody locks their doors because society has changed,” he said. “We don’t lock our doors because we hate the people outside of our home. We lock our doors because we love the people inside of our home.

“When I’m president, we’re going to be guided by a very simple principle. If we’re not 100 percent certain of who you are and why you’re coming, you cannot come into the United States.”