Medical Robotics Market Analysis – By Surgical Robots (Neurosurgical, Orthopedic, Laparoscopy); Rehabilitation (Exoskeleton, Prosthetic, Assistive); Telemedicine and Hospital Robots – With Forecast (2015 – 2020)

Medical Robotics is the science which combines robotics with healthcare. With the help of medical robotics patient population can be treated with utmost accuracy. Various surgical procedures are conducted with the assistance of robots such as urological procedures, gynecological procedures, general surgical procedures, cardiothoracic procedures and many more. Robotics has helped in easing the complexity involved in performing such surgeries which has aided medical robotics to become more widely disseminated.

Browse 88 Market Tables, 33 Figures spread through 148 Pages and an in-depth TOC on “Medical Robotics Market”

http://industryarc.com/Report/2331/Medical-Robotics-Market-Research-Report.html

Early Buyers will receive 10% Customization on this Report.

According to a recent study from IndustryARC, the global Medical Robotics Market size was $2.67 Billion in 2014 and is growing at a CAGR of 19% from 2015 to 2020. Technological advancements coupled with intensive research is driving the growth of the medical robotics market. Due to this factor, since the past decade, the medical robotics industry has witnessed introduction of various new products such as da Vinci Robot and radio surgery robots. In the span of five years, medical robotics market has also seen the launch of products such as robotic exoskeletons in the rehabilitation robotics segment, cleaning and disinfectant robots and telemedicine robots.

Global Medical Robotics Market currently has been led by the U.S. which is followed by Europe and with a market share of 62% and 24% respectively.

Since the inception of medical robotics, the cost of equipment (Robot) has been a critical aspect. The cost of equipment remains to be high currently, as the robot consists of the combination of various sophisticated tools and techniques. Hence, the high cost of equipment persists as the major challenge for the manufacturers of medical robots in increasing their penetration across different geographic regions. Despite of the cost barrier, the market has observed steady growth in few parts of the world. Globally the prices of medical robots are estimated to reduce as the demand is for more specialized and versatile robots at lower costs as compared to the current prices. The reduction in cost will also be favored by the increasing competition in the medical robotics market space as competition aids in driving the cost down.

The Major Players in this Market Include

Intuitive Surgical (U.S.)

Stryker corporation

Accuray Inc.

Mazor Robotics

Hocoma AG

All the 5 companies hold a significant market share in the industry globally with a few small players showing presence regionally. Also, all the major companies are focusing on making the robotic equipment clinically and operationally cost-effective.

Request a Sample @ http://industryarc.com/pdfdownload.aspx?id=2331

Rehabilitation robotics has emerged as one of the growing segments in the medical robotics market currently. The factor driving the growth of this segment are the prosthetics and exoskeleton robots which have been assessed as the most effective alternative method of treatment for the physically handicapped people, disabled people and also the traumatized individuals for helping conduct activities of daily living (ADLs). Hocoma and ReWalk Robotics are companies who manufacture exoskeleton robotics. The companies also provide these devices in combination with therapies which has further fostered the adoption of these devices amongst people.

Minimally invasive surgery with the use of robots has evolved as the safer and convenient method of treatment by the surgeons as well as the patients in various parts of the world.

Over the years, a steady increase in the healthcare spending in developed countries like the U.S. has been observed. The introduction of Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA or ACA) in the U.S. has enabled healthcare service providers to adopt advanced treatment methods as the act provide hospitals with incentives that promote technology adoption leading to improved quality of healthcare services and facilities provided. Similarly in Europe, the government has introduced a policy framework Health 2020, for the improvement of the quality of the healthcare services provided in the region and also supports the actions taken by the Government for health and well-being of the region. Such policies will help in driving the focus of investors in the Medical Robotics Market which will lead to more number of entrants in the market. Hence, implementation of these policies will act as a major driver for the growth of the Medical Robotics market.

Inquiry before buying @ http://industryarc.com/inquiry-before-buying.aspx?id=2331

Related Reports:

3D Sensors Market Analysis – Sensing Technology (Interactive Displays, Capacitive, Infrared, Ultrasonic, Electric Field, Image Sensor, MEMS); Verticals (Consumer Electronics, Automotive, Robotics, Industrial Automation) – Forecast (2015 – 2020) http://industryarc.com/Report/244/global-3D-sensor-market-analysis-report.html

– Sensing Technology (Interactive Displays, Capacitive, Infrared, Ultrasonic, Electric Field, Image Sensor, MEMS); Verticals (Consumer Electronics, Automotive, Robotics, Industrial Automation) – Forecast (2015 – 2020) http://industryarc.com/Report/244/global-3D-sensor-market-analysis-report.html Mobility Aids & Transportation Equipment Market Analysis – By Type (Wheelchairs, Walking Aids, Mobility Scooters, Stair lifts); By Age Group (Children, Elderly) – Forecast (2015 – 2020) http://industryarc.com/Report/7378/Mobility-Aids-and-Transportation-Equipment-Market-Research-Report.html

About IndustryARC:

IndustryARC is a Research and consulting firm that publishes more than 500 Reports Annually in various industries, such as Agriculture, Automotive, Automation & Instrumentation, Chemicals and Materials, Energy and Power, Electronics, Food & Beverages, Information Technology, Life sciences & Healthcare.

IndustryARC primarily focuses on Cutting Edge Technologies and Newer Applications of the Market. Our Custom Research Services are designed to provide insights on the constant flux in the global demand-supply gap of markets. Our strong analyst team enables us to meet the client research needs at a very quick speed with a variety of options for your business.

We look forward to support the client to be able to better address customer needs; stay ahead in the market; become the top competitor and get real-time recommendations on business strategies and deals. Contact us to find out how we can help you today.

U.S. Sales Support

Mr. Sanjay Matthews

Sales Manager

Email: sales@industryarc.com

Contact Sales: 1-614-588-8538 (Ext-101)