WASHINGTON — U.S. Rep. Mark Sanford still sleeps on his Capitol Hill office couch when Congress is in session.

The South Carolina Republican is still on a mission to cut government spending, and he still votes for or against bills according to their price tags.

Some things are different. He no longer rejects campaign contributions from political action committees, explaining he “crossed that Rubicon” when he took corporate money as governor. While he has his own leadership PAC now, he claims to have forgotten it even existed. It boasts a single $5,000 contribution from the American Resort Development Association.

And instead of taking a pledge to leave Congress after six years, he’s now setting the goalpost at 12.

“By then,” Sanford said, “either I will have had an impact on the trajectory of our nation’s finances, or I won’t.”

Nearly 15 years after he left Washington in pursuit of the governor’s mansion in Columbia — and almost seven years since revelations of an extramarital affair that unraveled his personal and professional life — Sanford is serving his second stint as a rank-and-file member of Congress.

In many ways, Sanford is very much the man he’s always been.

“He has always been about ideas and policies,” said S.C. GOP Chairman Matt Moore, who got his start in state politics working for Sanford in the governor’s office.

In just as many ways, however, Sanford is undeniably changed.

“I think Mark looks at his second entry to politics as a bit of redemption,” said U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C. “I see a Mark Sanford who is more self-aware.” Graham added “the personal problems Mark was going through, he has learned from them. He’s trying to be a stronger person.”

In an interview with The Post and Courier, Sanford volunteered a self-assessment that touched on both themes. “I would say in terms of ideology I continue to be a person who believes very strongly in the importance of limited government ... and liberty,” he said. “But I’ve been through certainly some experiences in life that would cause you to think a whole lot. It’s not the mountaintops but rather the valleys of life that really give you time to reflect.”

This could be Sanford’s pitch to voters over the next few months. Versus state Rep. Jenny Horne, R-Summerville, he’s facing the first primary challenge of this most recent congressional tenure.

‘Two schools of thought’

Sanford returned to Washington, D.C., with some degree of caution after winning his seat in the 2013 special election.

“It was very important initially not to come in as a know-it-all and a former governor,” said Sanford, who is quick to note he is currently the only former governor serving in the U.S. House.

“Given the events of (2009), given the media aftermath, the only thing many of those members knew about me was that. I thought it was very important for me to come in and respectfully take my place in the membership and get to know the members.”

The 2009 events collectively is the now-infamous episode in which the sitting governor disappeared from the state for days, ostensibly while “hiking the Appalachian Trail.” In reality, Sanford was out of the country having an affair with his mistress in Argentina. Sanford survived the political fallout but assuredly will never be able to disassociate from the story.

So he chose to settle back into his old role quietly, taking positions on issues consistent with his record. He voted against reopening government after a 17-day shutdown over funding the Affordable Care Act, arguing it did nothing to drive down the debt. He opposed the 2013 farm bill because it spent too much money, despite the South Carolina economy’s ties to agriculture. He supported the austere spending levels of sequestration even though it cut into the defense funding vital to his 1st District’s military bases.

“There are two schools of thought about legislative involvement,” Sanford said. “One is transactional politics and the other is advocacy politics built around ideas. I have always been of the second camp — to be an advocate for ideas that I believe the people in the 1st District sent me to try to advance.”

Sanford’s involvement with the House Freedom Caucus embodies this philosophy most of all. The invitation-only coalition of roughly 40 congressional conservatives derives its power and influence through a reputation of saying “no.” When the group formed in early 2015, Sanford was asked to be a founding member. By September, the HFC had driven out Speaker John Boehner and prevented Boehner’s No. 2, Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, from ascending to the post.

Sanford said he’s made friends and allies among this group of like-minded conservatives who came to Congress in the most recent antiestablishment waves.

“Back in the early, mid-1990s, it was me and Ron Paul,” Sanford said of the former libertarian-minded congressman from Texas. “There was a certain degree of isolation that goes with being one of two or one of three. And then you’re governor for eight years of your life and a certain degree of isolation goes with that. While you might work with legislative teams, they don’t feel your pain, they have a different level of experience.”

Sanford has found he can even be something of an elder statesman inside the group. Last fall, he was one of a few voices urging fellow HFC members to endorse Wisconsin Republican Paul Ryan as the next Speaker. With Boehner out, and McCarthy no longer in contention, Ryan was the last viable alternative to lead the House GOP.

“One of the things I brought up at Freedom Caucus is, ‘Guys, you gotta know when to fold ‘em,’ ” Sanford recalled saying. “My point was, ‘Guys, don’t overplay your hand here. If you’re the reason he doesn’t become speaker, then, given the way the train has already left the station, this group is going to be marginalized within the conference and you can’t fight every fight.’ ”

Sanford wasn’t sure he would have had that range of foresight in 1997, when he was part of a coup to take out then-Speaker Newt Gingrich, R-Ga.

“When I was there last, I would charge after every rainbow,” he said. “You name a crazy vote and I was there pretty close to it. I guess in the years past I might have looked for a fight even if it were only for effect and it would just highlight an issue.

“Nowadays, on occasion I’m open for a fight,” Sanford said, “but I’d rather have effect as well.”

‘Nobody wants to go first’

If Horne wants to come after Sanford during the primary campaign — and she’ll have to if she wants to win — she can hit him on some different fronts. She can poke him for always saying “no” as a member of the HFC. Sanford says he’d counter there are plenty of times he said “yes,” even when it’s not always popular.

“I was the first person to come out in the delegation against offshore drilling,” Sanford said. He mentioned U.S. Rep. Tom Rice, R-Myrtle Beach, is now on his side on the issue. “Would he have gotten on to that particular push without somebody else going before him? I don’t know.”

“Guantanamo Bay,” he continued. “I was the first guy in the delegation saying what (Obama) is proposing to do here is unlawful. Nobody wants to go first in politics.”

Horne can question whether Sanford is staying accountable to his constituents, notwithstanding the frequent Facebook posts composed in painstaking detail. Sanford says he reviews all of them and writes many himself. He can reply with a nod to his membership on the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, where he can keep an eye on the Port of Charleston and Charleston Harbor. On the Budget Committee, he can say he’s in the first line of defense in keeping Republican leaders from advancing spending bills that fiscal hawks fear will lead the country to financial ruin.

Finally, Horne can criticize him for his past, that time he disappeared for days on his secret romantic tryst in Argentina. Even in this respect, Sanford appears to have found some peace with how to talk about the whole disastrous ordeal.

“As we age we end up with the scars, bruises and bumps of life, either of our own making or of life and its makings,” Sanford said. “Now I’d say I’m a more mature and measured human being than I was 15 years ago. That there is no substitute for life, both good and bad, and the perspective that comes with it.”

Emma Dumain is The Post and Courier’s Washington, D.C., correspondent.