Buy Photo Influential commentator Charles Krauthammer speaks during the Desert Town Hall Speaker Series presented by the Berger Foundation at the Renaissance Esmeralda Resort and Spa in Indian Wells Wednesday. (Photo: Jay Calderon/The Desert Sun)Buy Photo

If there's a bright side to President Barack Obama's tenure, according to conservative author and pundit Charles Krauthammer, it's the national debate that his policies have started.

And the central question that must be asked of all Americans, across the political spectrum, is this: What's the proper size and scope of a democratic government?

At stake, after all, is the very nature of the social contract between citizen and state.

"Obama has done more to damage the Democratic Party than anyone in 50 years," Krauthammer said, on domestic as well as foreign affairs.

Just look at the results of the last election. The president had not been on the ballot, but his policies certainly were. And despite the best efforts of Democrats to distance themselves from the White House, the American electorate resoundingly disapproved (Californians being the exception).

Krauthammer spoke Wednesday night at the H.N. and Frances C. Berger Foundation's Desert Town Hall series at the Renaissance Indian Wells Resort & Spa.

His speech was an hour-long reflection on American politics, complete with wry jokes about Downton Abbey, lactation services funded by Obamacare, and the size of Winston Churchill's — let's just say — appendage.

The man casts a wide net — which, for anyone who follows his work, should come as no surprise.

In his early years, Krauthammer was a New Deal-type Democrat who wrote speeches for then-Vice President Walter Mondale. In the mid-1980s, though, after becoming disillusioned with the flock, he joined the opposition and even went on to coin the term "Reagan Doctrine."

In 1987, he won a Pulitzer Prize for his commentary in the Washington Post, where he still writes. No doubt the crowd in Indian Wells knows him better for his nightly appearances on Fox News.

You wouldn't have known it Wednesday by listening to his comments about the entitlement state, but Krauthammer has retained certain liberal sympathies over the years. He supports abortion and embryonic stem cell research and higher energy taxes. He opposes capital punishment and believes the debate over evolution is a waste of time.

He began his professional life as a psychiatrist, but has focused his attention from the beginning on politics, "the crooked timber of our communal lives," he once wrote, upon which all fires burn. Everything else is melted to it — art, science, poetry, sports, whatever. All the things that matter.

But it could also be argued that the politicization of everything in our lives — in other words, the culture war — is part of the problem.

Maybe so, Krauthammer told The Desert Sun in a separate interview, but the purpose of his work has been to show how politics precipitates the sublime. He went on to quote John Adams, who said, more or less, that his own generation needed to get the politics right before the next could become architects and artists.

"If you don't," Krauthammer said, "you can ruin everything, even the beautiful non-political things."

Consider North and South Korea. Same people, language, same history. But while one encourages enterprise, the other knows only decimation.

There is, however, an irony in this example. Low voter turnout, which is an increasing problem in the United States, is actually a sign of stability in a democracy.

"If you live in a society where your life, your livelihood, and everything hangs on politics — say, totalitarian societies — you fear that if the wrong people get in office then you're done for."

Wednesday's was the fourth and last of this year's speaker series appearances, which included science educator Neil deGrasse Tyson, photographer Platon, and former Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney — whom Krauthammer felt the urge to address.

At the end of the day, Krauthammer believes that America, at its core, is a center-right nation and that Obama was merely a meteor, a fluke, a European-type social Democrat who wowed his way into office on the strength of his personality.

Krauthammer went on to explain that Obama's weakest point in the 2012 election was his signature health care plan. And what did Republicans do? They nominated Romney, the man who invented Obamacare.

"I grossly underestimated the Republican genius for losing unlosable elections," Krauthammer said — a comment that drew hearty laughs.

All night, he held nothing back. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie ruined his presidential chances in 2012 by practically giving Obama a lap dance in public. Another Clinton/Bush presidential election is "an act of cruelty to the children of the future."

In fact, the teens who turned up for a pre-lecture Q&A were treated to some of his best lines, regardless of partisanship. He told one student that there's only one way to make sure you're not contradicting yourself in this life:

"Say what you believe and you will not only be consistent," he offered. "You will be doing the country a true service."

Jesse Marx is the Desert Sun political reporter. Reach him at 760-778-4620, jesse.marx@desertsun.com, or @marxjesse on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1CcokRY