The House passed yet another of Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan's budgets this week, and, again, it won't move in the Senate. That's not because of what is in it, but because of what is not.

Although the budget is lacking in many areas, there is one in particular that this, and so many budgets that have come before it, continue to neglect: our infrastructure.

Now, I know many on the right roll their eyes when they hear the president speak of our failing infrastructure and how we must invest in it not only for our own safety, but for job creation and economic growth. But now is the time for this message to stop falling on deaf ears in Washington.

[Read blogger Carrie Wofford on how Ryan's budget guts domestic spending.]

Recently, someone asked my opinion on raising the gas tax. Am I for it or against it? I had to think. I live in California, where gas prices are high, but I am open to almost anything that will create jobs, and certainly I know the reality regarding our infrastructure, which is that things are falling apart. So after that meeting, the next time I pulled up to the pump, already paying more than $4 a gallon, I thought to myself, what's a bit more, to repair our infrastructure, bring it up to code, keep my family safe and create jobs? I decided, as you should too, that it's worth it to pay more. It's not only the right thing to do, it's the safe thing to do.

There are surely those of you thinking I'm nuts because we already pay a lot for gas. Well, that's true, but you're also paying for those constant repairs on bridges and other areas of our infrastructure; as a taxpayer, you're paying more than you would if they were brought up to code and maintained.

We are a knee jerk reaction society and that hurts us. My husband, an orthopedic surgeon, gives talks on how not to break bones. I asked him if doing so would hurt his businesses. No, he said, because people don't listen.

[See a collection of political cartoons on gas prices.]

Our infrastructure is like that. They are the bones that hold us together on our highways, bridges and more. Repairing a bridge now is preventing a catastrophe later.

Back in the fall of 1993, the Laborers International Union of North America gave Congress duct tape since, in theory, it is all that is holding our bridges together. It has been decades since our infrastructure has been addressed and repaired. And since that time, businesses, unions and taxpayers have proposed that Congress adjust the Highway Trust Fund; politicians continue to ignore this request.

The reality, which Ryan and his colleagues ignore, is that we need more money in our budget for infrastructure, not less. Even one of Ryan and the Republican party's heroes, Ronald Reagan, fought for this; shouldn't today's GOP follow suit?

[Read blogger Stephanie Slade on the left's attack on the Ryan budget.]

Although months away from the midterm election in November, poll after poll shows what Americans want: jobs. Addressing our infrastructure would address that concern and speak to the plight of so many unemployed Americans. You must ask yourself: isn't a few cents more at the gas tank worth that?