WASHINGTON -- Gov. Bobby Jindal defended his decision not to use federal funds to expand Medicaid coverage and said he's proud of his record as governor despite low poll numbers during an appearance Sunday on NBC's "Meet the Press."

Moderator Chuck Todd asked Jindal why he's considering a run for president when "a majority in Louisiana disapprove of your job as governor. Why is that a launching pad to Iowa and New Hampshire?"

"Chuck, I don't care at all about poll numbers," Jindal responded. "I never have. The reality is I was elected in Louisiana to make generational changes. Look at what we've done in Louisiana. So now, we've cut our state budget 26 percent, cut the number of state employees 34 percent."

You can watch Jindal's Meet the Press appearance here.

He also said that the state has "the best private-sector economy in a generation," transformed the state's Charity Hospitals and implemented statewide school-choice programs so parents can choose the best school for their children, including private and religious institutions.

Todd also asked Jindal about the state's fiscal problems, including "a nearly $1 billion hole your budget. Every midyear review, your deficit has grown. You did a big tax cut at the beginning of your term as governor. Revenues haven't followed."

"That's not actually true, Chuck," Jindal responded. "The $1 billion is if you assume we grow government next year. Our budgets have been balanced every year."

Todd asked Jindal why he has declined to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, an expansion entirely funded by the federal government for the first three years and no less than 90 percent after that, when it would have provided coverage to 265,000 people.

It's not free money, Jindal responded.

"Medicaid is not the right way to do it," he said. "The problem with expanding Medicaid, the problem with the Affordable Care Act, the problem with Obamacare, is that it chooses a top-down, closed approach, where the government is running your health care."

Some states, though, have gotten waivers from the Obama administration to expand Medicaid using private health insurance models.

One is Arkansas, which, according to a recent Gallup report, used the Medicaid expansion to help lower its uninsured rate from 22.5 percent in 2013 to 12.4 percent in the middle of this year. By comparison, Louisiana's uninsured rate dropped only from 21.4 percent in 2013 to 18.4 percent in the middle of the year, Gallup said.

On "Meet the Press," Jindal again said he hasn't decided whether to run for president.

"First half of next year," he said of his time table for a decision. "We are praying about this. But bottom line is let's restore the American dream for our children and grandchildren."

Jindal also called on Congress, which for the first time in the Obama presidency will have Republican majorities in the House and the Senate next year, to resist President Barack Obama's promised executive action to help parents of children legally in the United States to remain and get work permits.

He said Republicans "should do everything we can do force the president to follow the law," including its power to set budgets. Any government shutdown that resulted, he said, would be the fault of the president.

"We had an election," Jindal said. "He said his policies were on the ballot. He lost in red states, purple states, blue states. The American people overwhelmingly rejected and rejected his polices. Now, he's saying, 'I'm still going to break the law.' Talk about arrogance."

On Friday, the president explained his reasons for moving via executive action.

"Everybody agrees that the system is broken," Obama said. "There has been ample opportunity for Congress to pass a bipartisan immigration bill that would strengthen our borders, improve the legal immigration system, lift millions of people out of the shadows so they are paying taxes and getting right by the law. It passed out of the Senate. I gave the House over a year to go ahead and at least give a vote to the Senate bilaterally; they failed to do so.

"And I indicated to Speaker (John) Boehner several months ago that if, in fact, Congress failed to act, I would use all the lawful authority that I possess to try to make the system work better. And that's going to happen."