NSA leader Edward Snowden delivered a Christmas message on British TV. (Photo: Channel 4 via AFP/Getty Images)

NSA leaker Edward Snowden delivered a Christmas message on British television urging viewers to question government surveillance programs. Comments from Facebook are edited for clarity and grammar:

I find it unbelievable that USA TODAY would put the pope, the queen and Edward Snowden in the same headline ("Pope, queen and Snowden deliver holiday messages," News, Dec. 26). Snowden is a traitor, not a whistle-blower. He is not a good person like the pope and the queen.

Whistle-blowers don't flee the country with secrets in tow. Whistle-blowers don't hide in China then Russia. Whistle-blowers don't offer to sell themselves to another foreign country or take a victory lap on a media site. He should be brought to justice.

— Jim Steckel

Snowden is my hero! Love him or hate him, he showed the world just how vulnerable people are to snooping by the Americans.

— Heather Ann Czerniak

He is a traitor. It is despicable that his actions are celebrated.

— Tricia Beals

A patriot would have found a reputable source in his own country to work with him in revealing perceived transgressions on domestic liberties . Then he would have shown the courage of his convictions by standing up to those he had accused.

— David Hoeltje

Letter to the editor:

While I agree National Security Agency intelligence gathering needs more oversight, I also think it's important to national security for the NSA to keep and have immediate access to national phone metadata. These data cover only who called whom, and when, and do not include call content. It's important in connecting the dots when a suspected foreign terrorist calls someone in the United States.

I don't want the NSA delayed in uncovering a threatening plot. I consider it a minor and worthwhile sacrifice of my personal privacy for my safety and that of my fellow citizens.

Jack James; Vilas, N.C.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1cmIWqh