with reporting from Aubree Abril. Updated at 2pm with comment from Cruz adviser and IAFF spokesman.

WASHINGTON – Turns out, union firefighters may not be core supporters of Sen. Ted Cruz.

One applause line after another – when he’s addressing a friendly group of conservatives – drew dead silence Tuesday morning at the International Association of Firefighters Legislative Conference and Presidential Forum.

Repeal “executive amnesty.” The joke about the Texas definition of gun control (“hitting what you aim at”). Silence.

Abolish the IRS? Crickets. Though the follow-up– a joke about sending all those IRS agents to the U.S.-Mexico border — drew scattered chuckles.

With a friendly audience like the one Cruz enjoyed at the Conservative Political Action Conference earlier this month, those lines are surefire winners.

The senator’s effort to tailor his broadside on Obamacare for the union audience – IAFF is part of the AFL-CIO — didn’t pay off, either.

“I know that unions across this country are hurting under Obamacare. The Cadillac tax is coming. It was sold to you and everybody else in this country under false pretenses,” Cruz said. “Five years ago reasonable minds could have differed on whether this was a good idea. But today, seeing millions of American who’ve lost their jobs, who’ve been forced into part time work, who’ve lost their heatlh care, who’ve lost their doctor – it is the essence of reasonableness, it is essence of pragmatism to acknowledge this thing isn’t working. We need to repeal it and start over.”

This too, left the audience unmoved.

“Although we can’t agree on a lot of what he said, he’s certainly entitled to his point of view,” Guy Turner of Abilene, president of the Texas State Association of Fire Fighters, said afterward. “It is time to focus your efforts on another argument, not the Affordable Care Act. The American people are going to pay for healthcare one way or another. Either through the Affordable Care Act or for those individuals who go uninsured and still receive treatment and don’t pay anything.”

Cruz did get a polite reception, and applause at the start and end of his half-hour appearance.

Cruz adviser Rick Tyler said the senator deserves credit for appearing before a labor union. And he asserted that the IAFF opposed the Affordable Care Act.

“Whether they reacted or not, Ted Cruz and the firefighters are in sync” on that issue, he said.

IAFF officials took issue with that.

“It’s not true,” said spokesman Scott Treibitz. “We did support the legislation. We had some issues with the legislation, continue to have some issues with the law. But in general we did support it.”

The IAFF objects to the “Cadillac tax” that Cruz mentioned, which hits union members with high-end insurance, and has been working to get that changed. “But the whole idea of repealing the entire program is not something this organization supports,” Treibitz said.

Like other speakers, Cruz paid homage to firefighters. He cited the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, the Boston Marathon bombing, and the fertilizer explosion in West, Texas, that killed a dozen first responders.

He keeps a West fire helmet in his office, he said, “to remind me of the incredible bravery shown every day. Every day in a crisis situation, the men and women here risk everything.”

He blamed budget problems in fire departments across the country on six years of economic stagnation and anemic growth, which he blamed on federal policies that have hurt small business.

Cruz made no mention of the recently settled impasse over Department of Homeland Security funding. Democratic speakers, including former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley, derided Republicans for delaying a DHS budget to protest President Obama’s immigration policies.

Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y. — a frequent Cruz critic – alluded to him and other potential 2016 contenders on that issue: “I find it really hypocritical to have people come before you, say, ‘I stand with the firefighters, We have to be with you,’ and then they don’t vote to fund the Department of Homeland Security,” King said.

Steve Moody of the San Antonio Professional Fire Fighters Association agreed with Cruz’s views on border security and not much else.

“He had a hard audience,” he said.