SANTA CRUZ &GT;&GT; More county jail inmates in California are getting signed up for health insurance, and Santa Cruz County Jail and county probation leaders are in step with the rest of the state in facilitating more mental health care and drug and alcohol treatment, a new state survey shows.

A survey released Monday by Oakland-based Californians for Safety and Justice showed that 70 percent of county jail leaders and 70 percent of probation departments that responded are providing assistance for health insurance enrollment.

The federal Affordable Care Act enacted in January requires Americans to get health insurance coverage, yet about 3 out of 4 people on probation in the country do not have health insurance, the group found. The percentage of those without health insurance could be higher among county jail inmates.

Some reasons to encourage county jail inmates to get health insurance are to address mental health and drug abuse problems that can lead to crime, as well as lift some of the financial burden of care from cash-strapped counties to the federal government.

"This is an exciting opportunity to leverage new funds and new local partners to fight the factors behind repeat crimes, including unaddressed mental health and substance use disorder problems," said Jenny Montoya Tansey, a spokeswoman for Californians for Safety and Justice.

The nonprofit group advocates for justice system reforms. The survey is its first related to inmate health care.

In Santa Cruz County, sheriff's Lt. Steve Carney said that asking inmates about health insurance coverage is expected to become part of the standard intake questions at the jail in the next few weeks. Already at the jail's medium-security Rountree Detention Center, inmates are asked whether they have health insurance by leaders of Friends Outside, an inmate support group, he said. They help explain health insurance benefits.

"Inmates will leave custody and they have to pick up life where they left off, even though things (like health insurance) lapse. Doing outreach while they're in custody helps them line up the pieces so when they walk out the door and they're set up better for success," said Carney.

More than 10,000 people are booked into Santa Cruz County Jail each year, authorities said.

For inmates who require surgery and are sent to a hospital, Santa Cruz County taxpayers typically foot the bill, authorities said. If an inmate is covered by MediCal — California's version of federal Medicaid for low-income people — then MediCal pays for it.

The health costs are still taxpayer funded, but it allows more taxpayer money to stay in the county.

In the state survey conducted in June and July, organizers received responses from jail and probation leaders from 44 of California's 58 counties. Montoya Tansey said many counties used state money from AB109, the state prison overhaul act, and AB82, a MediCal outreach and enrollment fund, to hire people to help inmates buy their own health insurance.

In Santa Cruz County, money tied to both those laws has been used to pay for Friends Outside, Carney said.

Across the state, Montoya Tansey said, inmates who are released are likely to visit an hospital emergency room in the two months that follow. It's not clear how prevalent that is in Santa Cruz County, but the trend is familiar, said sheriff's Chief Deputy Jeremy Verinsky, who is in charge of the jail.

"When they're released from custody, that's when the breakdown occurs," said Verinsky.

Montoya Tansey said the state trend is positive.

"Overwhelmingly it seems to show that counties are enrolling more people for health care," she said.