TALLAHASSEE - Florida’s children are missing out on insurance coverage, often because their parents don’t know that they are eligible, advocates said Wednesday.

“We have near universal coverage for eligible seniors through Medicare, but not for eligible kids through Medicaid,” said Joan Alker, executive director of the Center for Children and Families at Georgetown University, and an expert on Florida’s Medicaid system.

Alker, who conducted a 10-year study of Florida’s Medicaid system, spoke at a briefing here on children’s policy issues sponsored by the Florida Philanthropic Network, a statewide group of philanthropic organizations committed to public policy, research and education. The meeting was held as part of the children’s advocacy week during the Florida legislative session to bring together the state’s child advocacy community and draw attention to the policy needs of children.

Florida had 445,035 uninsured children in 2013, according to the most recent available data from the U.S. Census. Florida’s rate of uninsured children — 11.1 percent — is the highest in the Southeast and ranks 47th out of 50 states and Washington, D.C. The national average for the percentage of uninsured children was 7.1 percent in 2013.

Florida’s high rate of uninsured children is an outreach problem, Alker said. Many of the uninsured children are eligible for coverage under Florida’s Medicaid or children’s health insurance program, known as Florida HealthyKids, which offers subsidized coverage for low-income families earning less than about $40,000 per year.

But many families don’t know they are eligible for coverage, or think they are better off without any insurance than participating in the Medicaid program, which has noted problems with doctor participation and administrative headaches.

Still, having Medicaid or HealthyKids coverage is much better for long-term health outcomes and economic mobility than going uninsured, Alker noted.

Cover the parents

Children who were covered by Medicaid insurance from birth to 18 paid more in cumulative taxes by the time they were 28 than their uninsured peers, and the government will recoup 56 cents of every dollar spent on childhood Medicaid coverage for children by the time those children turn 60, according to a new research paper published by the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Recent scholarship also points to the best way to drop the rate of uninsured children: cover their parents. In Massachusetts, when the state expanded insurance coverage to most adults in 2006, the state’s rate of uninsured children dropped in half.

The parental coverage brings the parent into the system and often motivates parents to seek information about coverage for their children, in addition to themselves, according to the report.

Alker also noted that Florida ranks 49th nationally in the number of uninsured parents. Most uninsured Florida parents are white, between the ages of 26 to 49, have one or two children, and work in the service, tourism or retail industry, according to a recent report from the Center for Children and Families at Georgetown University.

Even if Florida does not expand insurance coverage eligibility to adults — parents included — by accepting federal money from the Affordable Care Act, there are steps Florida can take to reduce the number of uninsured children, including eligibility screenings when patients come to the hospital or the emergency room.

On a more positive note, advocates praised Congress for renewing the children’s health insurance program, or CHIP, on Tuesday night. It is a large federal grant to states to help pay for health coverage for millions of children, including more than 400,000 in Florida through the HealthyKids program. The federal money helps cover children in families which earn 133 percent to 210 percent of the federal poverty level, or $2,643 to $4,174 per month for a family of four.

Expanding coverage to children is also a way for all Floridians to save money, Alker noted.

“We all pay the bill when kids end up in the emergency room with complications of preventable illnesses,” she said.