The new year always brings a slew of New Year's resolutions that people quickly forget about. So we are dumping the resolutions and making some goals.

Efficiency and management consultants say goals should be SMART. That's specific, measurable, attainable, realistic and timely.

To that end, the Daily Press Features Department decided to set some smart goals for 2015.

We're putting our goals out there for all the world to see — and to make each of us a bit more accountable in working on them. So what are you planning to do this new year?

Tell us what your goals are for 2015. Do you plan to save more money? Go on a nice vacation? Land a new job? Write a novel? Learn to cook? Whatever you have in mind, be sure to keep them SMART. Share with us your big 2015 goal or goals. We'll include them in a follow-up story.

Email your responses to share@dailypress.com by Friday, Jan. 23. Be sure to include your name and the city or county where you live.

Team Features

Shine my shoes more often, and iron my non-wrinkle free shirts. They both look better when they get a little attention. — Mark St. John Erickson, history and arts staff writer.

In his famous speech on ESPN, basketball coach Jim Valvano said there are three things we should all try to do every day in order to be well rounded people: laugh, cry and spend some time in thought. My goal for 2015 is to do each of those things, and to appreciate the people in my life who inspire them. That, and to drink more CranApple. – Mike Holtzclaw, staff writer and Popcorn blogger.

"Let it Go" may have been the mantra for Disney lovers in 2014, but I'm carrying it over into the new year. With more professional responsibilities this year and a young family to care for, some of those unimportant extras — like putting together personalized treats for school parties or baking J-shaped cookies to celebrate the letter of the week — will just have to fall by the wayside. Dropping those imagined duties is the easy part, letting go of the twinge of guilt is not so easy. So while my little girl sings along to her "Frozen" DVD, I'll be singing "Let it Go" with her. — Nicole Paitsel, Savvy Shopper.

I learned a lot about native plants in 2014. So my goal for the new year is to create a mostly native plant garden. I make the hedge because, well, it's January. Come spring planting time and the plant sales, who knows what I'll be thinking. But the front yard will have a new flower bed planted to join the bed of irises. — Felicia L. Mason, features editor.

Juggling work, family and friends can be stressful, so in the coming year my goal is to practice meditating. It's not as easy as it sounds, especially with my "monkey mind" that never seems to rest. But 10 minutes of sitting quietly once or twice a day, listening to a relaxing piece of music, or taking a walking meditating alone in the woods seems like a step in the right direction. We all need a little peace and quiet in our lives. — David Nicholson, arts and food writer.

My goals for 2015 include practicing what I preach as a health writer. I will avail myself of all the appropriate free preventive care allowed by the Affordable Care Act, from physicals to flu shots and cancer screenings. It's easy to take good health for granted, but to maintain optimal wellness requires a conscious, proactive effort. — Prue Salasky, staff writer.

As a recent graduate of Old Dominion University, and a new reporter at the Tidewater Review, my goals for 2015, and the next phase of my life, are to continue my growth and education. I'll do this by reading, studying and investigating Virginia and the world, and through self-examination and forming relationships with people who think critically and challenge my perceptions. — Adrienne Mayfield, former Daily Press intern/New Kent County reporter the DP's sister paper, the Tidewater Review.

What are your goals?

Tell us what your goals are for 2015. We'll include them in a follow-up story. Email your responses to share@dailypress.com by Friday, Jan. 23. Your message should include your name and your city/county of residence.