TALLAHASSEE — Since Gov. Rick Scott took office in 2011, things have gone his way.

An improving economy brought more state revenue, making it easier to craft an annual budget. With a friendly and solid Republican majority in the Legislature, Scott got pretty much what he wanted, including tax cuts and efforts to reduce government regulation.

His greatest challenge was winning re-election in 2014 — which he did with a narrow but decisive victory over a well-funded, well-known opponent, former Gov. Charlie Crist.

But less than five months into his second term, Scott faces his biggest test as Florida’s chief executive.

A House-Senate gridlock over a $4 billion difference in budget proposals and health care funding has shut down the Florida Legislature. Over the next two months, as the Legislature heads to a June special session, Scott will have to navigate a number of issues to keep his administration on a positive course.

At the heart of Scott’s challenge is Medicaid, the federal-state health care program for the poor and disabled.

Scott, a former private hospital executive, opposed Medicaid expansion under the federal Affordable Care Act when he took office in 2011. But in 2013, he reversed himself and announced he would support expansion as long as the federal government paid the full cost, although the Legislature failed to act because of opposition in the House and Scott’s tepid support.

During the 2015 session, Scott again reversed himself, announcing his opposition to Medicaid expansion, which he strongly re-affirmed this past week. “I’m not going to support it. It’s not a program that has worked,” he said.

But the Senate has advanced a Medicaid expansion plan, called the Florida Health Insurance Affordability Exchange (FHIX) that would provide health care coverage to some 800,000 low-income Floridians. The Senate plan is designed to help offset the reduction or elimination of a federal program, known as the low-income pool (LIP), that pays Florida hospitals some $2.2 billion to cover uncompensated care they provide.

The House strongly opposed the Senate’s FHIX plan, arguing that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services HHS would approve some type of LIP funding going forward. The House abruptly ended its 2015 session three days early because of the dispute.

Scott met with HHS officials last week trying to get some idea of the fate of LIP. At the same time, he is suing HHS, alleging the federal agency is trying to “coerce” Florida into expanding Medicaid. He stepped up the legal action May 7 by asking for an injunction in the case.

Scott said Florida needs “federal action right now” on the hospital funding. “The low-income families in our state cannot wait on the federal government any longer.”

But senators and others say HHS told the state last summer that LIP would not be continuing in its current form after this June. They say Scott should have prepared some type of replacement plan for the hospital funding.

“It was your administration that signed off on the agreement to end LIP in its current form next month,” said Sen. Arthenia Joyner, D-Tampa, leader of the Senate Democrats. “It was your administration that sat on its hands instead of crafting an alternative solution that the feds notified you would be needed.

“And it was you who fought against Obamacare before you supported it before you opposed it again, precipitating the House’s unconstitutional departure and the session to crash and burn.”

In a meeting with Scott this week, HHS officials told him that Florida’s latest request for LIP funding falls short of the agency’s goals, which are emphasizing coverage plans, like the Senate FHIX proposal, rather simply advancing federal funding to pay for uncompensated care at the hospitals.

Scott said state officials would try to continue to work with the federal agency, while adding “for them to be now just saying what we are proposing does not make sense is a little disappointing.”

The state must have a budget by July 1 or Florida government would grind to a halt. It last happened briefly in 1992, for about 18 hours, when lawmakers belatedly got a budget to Gov. Lawton Chiles, who had vetoed two previous versions.

The failure to reach an agreement on a budget — which is possible but not probable — would leave Scott with a devastating legacy.

To avoid that, lawmakers must bridge a $4 billion gap in the Senate and House budget bills, which is largely the result of their differences over health care funding.

Despite a $1 billion budget surplus this year, most of Scott’s major spending initiatives are in jeopardy. Scott wanted $673 million in tax cuts. The House backed $490 million in tax cuts but the Senate refused, arguing that tax cuts were not possible until Florida resolved the uncertainty over the $2.2 billion LIP program.

Scott also wants to boost per-student funding in Florida’s public schools to a record level — but it, too, remains in doubt because of the funding uncertainty.

Further complicating the budget debate are additional cost factors that lawmakers will now have to deal with, including a projected 15,000-student increase in the K-12 system and more than $200 million in unanticipated pharmacy costs in the state’s Medicaid managed-care system.

Scott said he is now prepared to go forward with a bare-bones budget to keep Florida running if lawmakers cannot determine how much federal LIP funding will be available in the coming year.

“It’s hard to get a budget done not knowing exactly their decision,” Scott said about the HHS officials. “Right now I’m focused on a continuation budget, a base budget — whatever you want to call it — because of their decision.”

Scott has said if lawmakers cannot agree on tax cuts this year, he will push for a $1 billion tax-cutting package next year.

Late in the session, Sen. Jack Latvala, R-Clearwater, a veteran lawmaker with more than a dozen years of experience, said he advised Scott to take a role as mediator in the dispute between the House and Senate “as opposed to taking one side or the other.”

But Scott has clearly come down on the House side in his strident opposition to Medicaid expansion. It’s not unusual for a governor to favor the policies of one chamber over the other, but in this divisive atmosphere his alliance may complicate his role.

Scott has already threatened a handful of senators with his veto power, which is an interesting move given that he only vetoed one bill last year — an extraordinarily low total for a governor in a regular session.

Scott’s willingness to veto legislation will be tested early as the Senate sent Scott a bill (SB 228) on Thursday calling for online voter registration in Florida by 2017. The bill, which had strong bipartisan support and was backed by Florida’s elections supervisors, drew criticism from Secretary of State Ken Detzner, a Scott appointee. Scott will have to act on the bill before lawmakers return in their special session on June 1.

Scott, the Senate and the House all agree that Florida needs a new budget by July 1. But that is pretty much where the unity ends.

Late in the session, House leaders made it clear that they did not think Medicaid expansion should be part of the special session agenda. Senate leaders said since Medicaid accounts for roughly $23 billion out of the state’s $77 billion budget, its future would be part of any budget negotiations.

While the budget will be paramount in the June 1-20 session, there will be pressure to add other items to the agenda.

The conventional wisdom is the fewer the issues on a special session agenda, the higher the prospects for success. And the budget alone is the largest and most complicated issue that lawmakers deal with each year.

Nonetheless, some will call for lawmakers to try to revive some of the major bills that died in the session, ranging from a comprehensive state water policy to a potential gambling agreement with the Seminole Tribe.

And the health care debate could be further amplified in the middle of the special session if the U.S. Supreme Court invalidates the federal health insurance exchanges that were set up in states like Florida under the Affordable Care Act.

The nation’s highest court will rule sometime in June. An adverse ruling against the federal exchange in Florida could leave some 1.6 million Floridians without health care coverage.