Doctors' fears over statins are 'putting lives at risk': Professor says unjustified concerns over side effects mean the drugs are not prescribed enough

Sir Rory Collins said studies had created 'misleading uncertainty'

He claimed concerns could cause more deaths than MMR scandal

More than seven million Britons with high cholesterol take statins

Professor Sir Rory Collins said studies had created 'misleading uncertainty' over statins

Doctors are putting lives at risk by exaggerating the side effects of statins, an expert warns.

Professor Sir Rory Collins said recent studies had created 'misleading uncertainty' about the drugs.

He claimed unjustified concerns about side effects meant statins were not being prescribed enough, possibly causing more deaths than the MMR scandal.

But critics accused him of 'fear-mongering', and said it was important for patients to be warned about the potential dangers.

More than seven million Britons with high cholesterol take statins to cut the risk of heart attacks and strokes. The NHS says the drugs save 7,000 lives a year.

Proposed changes to prescription guidelines mean they could soon be prescribed to 12million patients.

But two recent articles in the British Medical Journal have claimed statins cause harmful side effects, and do not necessarily reduce mortality.

Professor Collins, of Oxford University, said the papers by John Abramson, from Harvard Medical School, and British cardiologist Aseem Malhotra were misleading.

He added: 'Statins are given to people at elevated risk of heart attacks and strokes.

'If people at elevated risk stop taking their statins – or don't start taking their statins – then they will have unnecessary heart attacks and strokes, there will be unnecessary deaths from vascular causes. This is a serious disservice to medicine.'



He said the uncertainty over statins was more serious than the MMR scare, when a researcher claimed the jabs could cause autism, leading to many parents refusing to have their children vaccinated.

He added: 'The papers are far worse in terms of the harm they have done, and [the uncertainty] is probably killing more people... than that on the MMR vaccine.'

BMJ editor Dr Fiona Godlee said the articles were well referenced and peer reviewed, and insisted that significant medical issues deserved to be debated openly.

(Stock picture) More than seven million Britons with high cholesterol take statins to cut the risk of heart attacks and strokes She added: 'It's important that the public understand when we're talking about extending statins to people at low risk, that the balance between benefits and harms becomes much more important.'

Statins are offered to those with a 20 per cent risk of a heart attack or stroke in the next ten years.

But following a study by Professor Collins, health chiefs recommended in February that they should be given to those with a 10 per cent risk.

But critics say over-prescribing to low-risk patients could lead to muscle weakness, kidney problems, diabetes and depression.

Dr Abramson said his study showed statins did not cut deaths by much, adding: 'Dr Collins is fear-mongering when he says lives will be lost as a result of our calculations.'

Aseem Malhotra, of Croydon University Hospital in South London, said pills were a poor substitute for a good diet and more exercise.

But analysis at Imperial College London of 29 trials of statins involving more than 80,000 people said the drugs had almost no side effects.