As health care demand increases, so does the need for professionals

Just a year after getting its internal medicine residency program off the ground, Ocala Health has announced that it will expand the program to include residency programs in emergency medicine and general surgery.

Hundreds of medical school graduates applied for the internal medicine residency program when it opened a year ago at Ocala Health's two hospitals: Ocala Regional Medical Center and West Marion Community Hospital.

West Marion CEO Ginger Carroll oversaw the creation of the initial residency program and the expansion plan. She said the decision was based on predicted future needs.

“Emergency medicine physicians are in great demand," she said, "and difficult to recruit.”

Florida will be short nearly 7,000 doctors by 2025 if more residency programs are not created throughout the state to keep up with demand, according to a recent study by teaching and safety-net hospitals.

Florida ranks 42nd out of the 50 states in the number of residency positions per capita. That has led many Florida medical school graduates to complete their training in other states. Once done, they often decline to return to Florida — where they are badly needed.

The Affordable Care Act was meant to enroll more people into healthcare plans so they wouldn’t end up in the emergency rooms for primary care, Carroll said. But there is a rise in the number of elderly patients presenting at emergency rooms with heart attacks, strokes and age-related illnesses.

The new residency programs will start in 2017. The expansion is part of an effort by the Hospital Corporation of America’s North Florida Division, parent company of Ocala Health, and the University of Central Florida College of Medicine to increase the number of residencies and fellowships in Florida.

There is a gap between what healthcare is offering patients and what patients will need in the coming years, Carroll said, “and it’s that gap we’re trying to fill.”

The expansion is just the latest change in Marion's ever-changing healthcare industry. Local experts say the changes create a perpetual race to adapt to market forces.

In the economic marketplace, Marion County’s healthcare industry is the 800-pound gorilla sitting in the room. Marion’s three hospitals — Munroe Regional Medical Center, Ocala Regional and West Marion — combined employ more than 4,600 people. That does not include peripheral businesses and workers who benefit financially because of those large institutions.

Munroe, with 421 beds, provides more than 5,000 jobs and has a countywide economic impact of more than $500 million, one 2010 University of Florida study showed.

Ocala Regional and West Marion have a combined annual economic impact of more than $220 million and relationships with nearly 500 physicians.

On the periphery of the hospitals are dozens of medical offices, imaging centers, specialized care facilities and doctor offices.

In Marion, 27 percent of the 340,000 or so residents are 65 or older. Hundreds of millions of Medicare dollars flow through the county each year.

The medical industry in the area is such an economic heavyweight that the Florida Department of Economic Opportunity predicts a 21 percent increase in healthcare job growth between 2014 and 2022 in Marion, Levy and Citrus counties.

There are nearly 2,000 registered nurses in Marion County alone, with an expected demand of 360 more in the next five years, according to Chmura Economics and Analytics.

The demand for nursing assistants will be similar, with that field expected to see an average annual growth of 1.7 percent. The medical assistant field will grow 2.7 percent; vocational nurses will grow 2.0 percent per year; and personal care aides 3.5 percent.

The growth is happening over a broad spectrum of the industry and the spectrum will continue to change as hospitals grow. Some of that change is happening as hospitals create partnerships or buy doctor’s clinics, build stand-alone emergency facilities, and buy or partner with imaging and treatment centers. The number of walk-in clinics also is on the rise.

And they are all competing for market share.

Some of the changes have been happening for years and the result of economic pressures. Ocala Health CEO Randy McVay said hospitals have been aligning themselves with primary care offices for years, taking over the business side of those operations. Those relationships have become so common that hospitals have staff just to oversee those partnerships, he said.

The hospitals provide office staff with financial and retirement benefits, clerical help and insurance. And in return, the hospital gains “another access point to the community,” McVay said.

It’s happening across the country as well as in Marion County. And there is still potential for growth with similar partnerships, McVay said. Hospitals also are looking to partner with other specialized service centers such as catheterization labs and imaging centers.

The medical industry is also changing in that hospitals are building stand-alone emergency centers, McVay said. But the facilities don’t come cheap, costing about $10 million. Ocala Health is building an emergency center in Summerfield. It will be operational in early 2016. Munroe already operates Timber Ridge Medical Center.

McVay said that, if placed at convenient locations, stand-alone emergency facilities will be popular, especially for seniors who may have driving limits.

Many people who don’t have primary care doctors still use emergency rooms to get access to medical care, McVay said. Some of them wind up in stand-alone emergency facilities.

Another change in the medical industry is the growing popularity of walk-in clinics. There are 20 in Marion County, including two affiliated with Ocala Health.

Dr. Larry Popeil, an Ocala family practitioner, said walk-in clinics are popular with patients who need medical care after their doctor’s offices have closed, especially during evenings and weekends.

Popeil said walk-in clinics are good for treating minor ailments that warrant medical care but aren't bad enough to require an emergency room visit. The problem is that while these clinics are staffed with qualified medical personnel, there is no follow-up care comparable to what a primary care physician would provide, Popeil said.

He predicts walk-in clinics will become more popular with patients and eventually take some business away from traditional primary care offices that are staffed with one or two doctors.

The long-term result of all this? McVay said hospitals in the next 30 years will be left treating the acutely ill. Everyone else will be going to clinics, doctor’s office, stand-alone facilities offering specialized care, stand-alone emergency rooms, and walk-in clinics.

“That’s what we’re evolving to,” he said.

Popeil predicts that in time that many doctor’s offices will be replaced with multi-functional clinics staffed with fewer doctors and more nurse practitioners and physician assistants. It will mean patients will not always get to see the same healthcare provider or doctors, and thus won't be able to create strong caregiver-patient relationships.

But regardless of how and where health care is provided, the industry will need qualified staff to do it. Faye Peraza, vice president of human resources at Munroe Regional Medical Center, said there is a constant search for skilled healthcare providers to staff hospitals and satellite facilities. Especially needed are nurses.

The demand is so great that she has to recruit nurses from outside the area. “It’s very tough. We’ve exhausted our market here,” Peraza said.

The medical community is also encouraging healthcare professionals to be as efficient as possible in their work, Peraza said.

She doesn’t see the healthcare industry, locally at least, waning anytime soon.

“In healthcare I think we’re still into growth. We will always need registrars. We will always need case managers,” she said.

Many people are leaving other industries, getting healthcare training, and joining this profession, she said. The problem is that many do it because their former career fields have shrunk and because of the potential financial rewards that the health profession offers.

As a result, Peraza said, there is a “skills gap,” with some nurses, for example, maybe less dedicated than in previous years.

“You have people who became nurses because it made (financial) sense,” she said.

Laura Byrnes, CareerSource Citrus levy Marion communications manager, said healthcare “is one of our targeted industries.”

Employers also post job openings with CareerSource.

Seven of the 10 top employers by job opening advertisements are in the healthcare industry, she said. Community Health System (which leases Munroe) posts the most healthcare company jobs, followed by HCA (which owns Ocala Regional and West Marion) and Citrus Memorial Hospital in Inverness.

In Marion County alone there are 56 healthcare employers listed with 941 open positions in CareerSource’s jobs listing system, Byrnes said earlier this month.

CareerSource works closely with the local hospitals in helping job seekers get the certifications they need to find work, she said. Of the 164 CareerSource clients enrolled in the organization’s education/training programs during August, 78 percent were getting medical training, she said.

CareerSource also provides employees in target fields, such as healthcare, generous financial packages to continue their training or obtain licenses.

“Moreover, we work with scores of employers with hundreds and hundreds of jobs in the healthcare industry,” she said. “Healthcare … remained robust here during and in the wake of the Great Recession, and as recently as January and February, the industry reported 24-25 percent job growth gains.”

“For the healthcare (market),” Byrnes said, “it’s been very, very solid.”

Reach Fred Hiers at fred.hiers@starbanner.com and 352-867-4157.