A federal judge in Philadelphia has taken to task Littler Mendelson PC for seeking slightly more than $125,000 in attorneys’ fees and sanctions after the conclusion of a discrimination lawsuit.

U.S. District Judge Stewart Dalzell criticized the 126-page motion because it relied on 105 pages of invoices “in which every line describing the legal services rendered was redacted.” Similarly, a motion filed against the plaintiff’s counsel for sanctions also included seven pages of redacted bills.

The case centered on a woman who was fired as a clerk in a Fox Chase Cancer Center lab before the end of her orientation. She sued for discrimination under the Americans with Disabilities Act while also pursuing a claim for disability with the Social Security Administration. In September, Dalzell found for Fox Chase and threw out the suit.

Although Fox Chase prevailed, the judge rejected its motion for fees, finding that the suit wasn’t frivolous.

In so holding, Dalzell said the “redacted fee submission is insufficient to support any claim for attorney’s fees.”

Richard Harris, a Littler Mendelson shareholder who worked on the case, said in an e-mailed statement that the court “ruled on the motion for sanctions before Littler filed a response and Littler is considering an appeal of the judge’s ruling.” The firm had no further comment.

The case is Barley v. Fox Chase Cancer Center, 13-6269, U.S. District Court, Eastern District of Pennsylvania (Philadelphia).

Lawsuit News

Former GE Labor Chief Escalates Retiree-Care Fight with Lawsuit

General Electric Co.’s one-time chief labor negotiator sued his former employer over its decision to cancel supplemental health insurance benefits for tens of thousands of retirees.

Dennis Rocheleau, a 36-year GE employee who retired in 2004, filed the lawsuit in Milwaukee federal court in an attempt to maintain coverage for former salaried workers who are set to lose access to company-sponsored Medicare benefit plans on Jan. 1. The move boosts the stakes in his battle with GE after Rocheleau lobbied top executives publicly and privately for more than a year.

“I see this as a gross departure from their traditional conduct,” Rocheleau, 72, said in an interview. “What GE is doing is unjustified by the facts of their health-care costs, and it is unjustified against the standards of what should be their proper behavior.”

GE joined a growing list of companies ending employer-sponsored health-care benefits for ex-workers in favor of private-market insurance as the Affordable Care Act accelerates a trend of shrinking retiree coverage. AT&T Inc. said it would create a private exchange after similar moves by companies such as International Business Machines Corp.

“The change in our program is consistent with trends among large companies,” Seth Martin, a GE spokesman, said in an e-mailed statement. “It allows GE to offer greater choice in coverage while striking a balance among our obligations to employees, retirees and shareowners.”

About 65,000 people might be affected under the change, Martin said, declining to comment on the lawsuit.

The filing on behalf of Rocheleau and former GE employee Evelyn Kauffman claims the company violated federal retirement law by ending the program without offering any explanation and breached its fiduciary duty by terminating the benefits shortly after saying in a handbook that GE “expects and intends” to continue the plans indefinitely.

The plaintiffs acknowledge that GE also stated it “reserves the right to terminate, amend or replace the program” at any time and for any reason.

The case is Kauffman v. General Electric Co. 2:14-cv-01358. U.S. District Court, Eastern District of Wisconsin (Milwaukee).

Law Firm Moves

Tom Daschle Will Affiliate with Baker Donelson in Washington

Former U.S. Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle and Baker, Donelson, Bearman, Caldwell & Berkowitz, PC yesterday announced the formation of the Daschle Group, a public-policy affiliate of the firm. According to a statement, the group will advise clients on economic, policy and political issues.

The Daschle Group, which will be located in Baker Donelson’s Washington office, will work with the firm’s government-relations and public-policy group to advise on issues including health care, energy, the environment and transportation.

Daschle was elected in 1978 to the U.S. House of Representatives, where he served for eight years. He was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1986 and chosen as Senate Democratic Leader in 1994. Most recently, he was a senior policy adviser at DLA Piper LLP.

Separately, Daniel Cohen joined Baker Donelson as a shareholder in the firm’s Atlanta office. As chair of the firm’s higher-education group, Cohen will focus on representing colleges and universities. His work includes defending colleges and universities against federal Title IX investigations, providing proactive Title IX audits and compliance reviews, and developing litigation-avoidance strategies.

Cohen also advises on legal aspects of schools’ strategic planning initiatives and NCAA issues. Cohen has litigated cases in the areas of labor and employment, intellectual-property and product liability. He was previously special counsel with Kasowitz Benson Torres & Friedman LLP.

Law Schools

Almost Half of Law Schools Expect an Increase in Applications

According to a new survey, 46 percent of law school admissions officers think their schools will have an increase in applications in the 2015-2016 “application cycle,” according to a study by Kaplan Test Prep, which offers test preparation for the LSAT and other professional school exams.

While many law schools, in response to the contracting legal market, have reduced the number of students in their classes, the survey found that only 22 percent plan to cut their headcount next year. In contrast, last year 54 percent of admissions officers expected a decline.

The optimism stands in contrast to a recent report from the Law School Admission Council, the administrator of the LSAT, finding that 8.1 percent fewer people took the LSAT in September than at the same time in 2013.

For the 2014 survey, 126 of the 204 American Bar Association-accredited law schools were polled by telephone between August and September 2014.