Milwaukee County Board Chair Marina Dimitrijevic, seen here earlier this week at the Milwaukee County War Memorial, is proposing $1.1 million in county spending to support the launch of Obamacare. Credit: Mike De Sisti

By of the

County Board Chairwoman Marina Dimitrijevic on Thursday called for spending $1.1 million in taxpayer money to help inform residents of next month's launch of the federal Affordable Care Act.

But her outreach program is unnecessary and may duplicate efforts already being made by several county departments, County Executive Chris Abele said.

A similar but cheaper outreach effort being implemented by Abele's administration will cost up to $224,000, said Héctor Colón, who heads the county's Health and Human Services Department.

A County Board panel delayed action on Dimitrijevic's plan Thursday, with some supervisors urging her and Abele to forge a compromise on the issue before next week's board meeting.

Dimitrijevic's plan calls for spending $400,000 with Impact 2-1-1, a local hotline; $500,000 with Covering Kids and Families of Wisconsin, a group created to help educate families about the care act; and $240,000 with Community Health Access Program to increase the number of counselors to help enroll county clients in Medicaid or private health insurance.

Abele's administration has agreed to increase funding to 2-1-1 by $99,000 for Obamacare outreach, Colón said. Winged Victory, another county vendor that provides mental health services, is getting $25,000 this year and may get $100,000 next year for promoting the federal health law.

The Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare, begins enrollments in health insurance plans through an online marketplace, or exchange, on Oct. 1. Under the new law, everyone must have health insurance by Jan. 1 or pay a penalty.

Abele said the county already is participating in a wide array of efforts to publicize the health law and help people enroll in health insurance.

"Taxpayers should be assured that our efforts are focused on leveraging resources to benefit the community," Abele said in a statement. "We're using our existing services and the cooperative relationships I've been building since taking office as a platform to expand enrollment."

The federal health care changes are so significant that a major effort by the county is warranted, Dimitrijevic said at a hearing of the County Board's finance committee.

Her plan won't duplicate any efforts the county may already be planning, she said. Funding for the effort would come from the county's projected $6 million surplus for this year, under her plan.

Raisa Koltun, an aide to Abele, said tapping the anticipated surplus would pose some risk if it doesn't actually materialize.

She said it made more sense to hold off on a more expensive outreach plan on health insurance changes for now. The county could revisit the issue later, if it turns out more resources are needed, Colón said.

Joy Tapper, director of the Milwaukee Health Care Partnership, backed the larger effort. She said at least 120,000 county residents are expected to need help in navigating the health care changes, and that doesn't count people who may be switching from health insurance provided by their employer to coverage offered through the insurance exchange.

Facebook: fb.com/steve.schultze3

Twitter: twitter.com/SteveSchultzeJS