x of x Rain douses the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge on Thursday in San Francisco. A storm front dubbed the "Pineapple Express" hammered the West Coast this week, causing flooding, power outages and wind damage.

Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

x of x A toppled tree nearly hits a statue in front of St. Theresa Catholic Church on Thursday in South Lake Tahoe, Calif.

Capt. Chris Lucas/Tahoe Douglas Fire Protection District/AP

x of x A van navigates a flooded roadway on Thursday in Berkeley, Calif. A powerful storm churned through Northern and Central California Thursday, knocking out power to tens of thousands of people.

Noah Berger/AP

x of x Two boys use a shopping cart to navigate the flooded parking lot of a shopping center on Thursday in Healdsburg, Calif.

Eric Risberg/AP

x of x A group of state maintenance workers attempts to clear a flooded underpass on Thursday in Berkeley, Calif. Berkeley was one of multiple California cities plagued by heavy flooding this week.

Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

x of x A manhole cover is blown out by water rushing under a street Thursday in San Francisco. Robert Gower/AP

x of x A girl wades through a flooded parking lot at a shopping center Thursday in Healdsburg, Calif.

Eric Risberg/AP

x of x Water covers one of several vehicles stranded in an underpass on Thursday in Berkeley, Calif. Though much of California has been suffering through a severe drought, this week's rain came in buckets. Noah Berger/AP

x of x A sign is posted on the door of a restaurant alerting customers of a power outage on Thursday in San Francisco. High winds and heavy rain toppled trees and power lines in California.

Justic Sullivan/Getty Images

x of x A man walks in the rain on Thursday in San Francisco. The "Pineapple Express" storm front has been hailed as one of the strongest storms to hit parts of California in years. Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

x of x A group of workers from the California Department of Transportation attempts to clear a drain along a section of flooded highway on Thursday in South San Francisco, Calif.

Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

x of x A man hoists a sandbag in preparation for the "Pineapple Express" storm front on Wednesday in San Francisco. Many used sandbags to plug vents that could otherwise become waterlogged in the event of heavy flooding. Justin Sullivan/Getty Images