[Editor’s note: We will continue to provide up-to-date information from the storm. But this much is certain: Temperatures will climb above freezing, briefly, but iced-over roads will refreeze tonight. Authorities are asking people to continue to stay off the roads, especially in Fort Worth and points west, where Texas Department of Transportation crews are trying to clear the most treacherous and troublesome areas. And the weather is being blamed for at least three deaths in Dallas since Saturday afternoon alone, including a 75-year-old woman in Bluffview who slipped on the ice in her front yard yesterday, and a 26-year-old man who crashed his car near Preston Royal just past midnight Sunday.]

Update at 9:36 p.m.: Oncor says there are 20,000 outages remaining in the D/FW area.

An Oncor spokesperson said 9,000 of those outages are from the original storm, while 11,000 are new outages from Saturday and Sunday.

They hope to restore power to nearly all the 9,000 original outages by late Sunday night and the rest by Monday afternoon.

Update at 8:55 p.m.: The list of school closures and delays has continued to change throughout the night. Click here to see the latest.

Update at 8:43 p.m.: Fort Worth police are strongly urging drivers to stay off I-20 and I-30 as roads, that have been plagued with stranded vehicles and ice, are beginning to refreeze.

Task Forces are currently out attempting to de-ice the roads. TxDOT’s Dallas office spokeswoman Lisa Wazl said TxDOT will continue their operations throughout the night.

In addition to plowing roads, they will salt bridges and overpasses as temperatures are expected to drop below freezing Sunday night and black ice is expected to form.

“We are very concerned about black ice in the morning,” Wazl said. “We are sending out the message to drivers to be very cautious.

Drivers should be wary of black ice as Wazl says it is very difficult to see.

“Slow down and give distance between cars because in some cases you don’t see it before you hit it,” she said.

Update at 6:39: The National Weather Service has announced there is a freezing fog advisory until Monday at 10 a.m..

Most districts have announced they are cancelling classes and activities tomorrow as roads are still too dangerous. You can check out the list of closures and delays here.

Update at 5:30 p.m. by Julie Fancher: Oncor is reporting that about 30,000 people are still without power.

Oncor spokeswoman Anna Kurian said 15,000 of those power outages are new because of ice and trees falling on power lines.

She said workers still hope to have power restored to almost everyone by late Sunday.

Traffic wise, I-30 in Tarrant County continues to be treacherous. Fort Worth police say I-30 eastbound is partially blocked by a stranded 18-wheeler and I-30 westbound past Summit is at a standstill due to slow traffic and ice.

Update at 5:00 p.m. by Michael Lindenberger: DART spokesman Morgan Lyons says the agency expects its light rail service to be up and running in time for Monday’s commute — but isn’t making any guarantees.

“Our tests have been encouraging,” said Lyons, noting that crews have been busy testing segments of the sprawling light rail system — the largest in America at the time of its last expansion. Not everywhere is a go, yet.

He said the agency expects the system to be working in full, but just in case will have buses ready to operate at every station as a backup.

Trains haven’t been able to make it all the way to northern end of the Red and Green Lines, but Lyons said crews are optimistic that everything will be running by about midnight. Crews will continue to work to bring back trains that were stranded when the ice story made it impossible for the system to work.

We’ll have more on what to expect with DART later.

Update at 4:15 p.m.: Some schools will remain closed tomorrow due to lingering ice on roadways, among them the University of North Texas. Others will open at 10 a.m., including Highland Park. But the Dallas Independent School District has not yet decided. District officials ask you check its Twitter account for updates.

Update at 3:43 p.m. by Michael Lindenberger: Careful with the ice today. As the temps rise a bit, pipes and other items may start springing leaks. Or, as the video below shows, the ice itself might start dropping from dangerous heights. Taken by Amanda Christian at the Parkside at Legacy Apartments in Plano.

Update at 2:36 p.m.: This bit of bright news just in from reporter Melissa Repko. She says that despite the ice storm. The UT Southwestern School of Health Professions commencement ceremony is proceeding as planned.

Update at 2:12 p.m. from Melissa Repko and Michael Lindenberger: Dallas-area residents ought to check on elderly neighbors, emergency response officials said Sunday.

Meanwhile, emergency responders have been busy over the past few days. Turns out, nothing stops a baby from coming, not even an ice storm. Dozens of mothers about to deliver have called for emergency rides to the hospital, officials said.

Emergency responders continue to field calls from people injured in car accidents and slips on the ice. Over the weekend, MedStar fielded twice as many 911 calls as usual in Fort Worth and most of Tarrant County, said Matt Zavadsky, spokesman for MedStar Mobile Healthcare. The emergency provider had four to eight extra crews for each shift during the storm.

About 88 percent of calls reported falls or traumatic injuries from slips, Zavadsky said. Dispatchers also saw a surge in pregnancy and labor calls from people who were nervous to drive themselves to the hospital. There’s usually an average of four pregnancy calls per day. From Friday to Sunday morning, there were 40, he said.

Icy conditions also increased the length of responses. Each call took an average of 90 minutes to complete, instead of the typical 60 minutes, he said.

Some churches cancelled services Sunday to encourage congregants to stay inside and off the roads. That included Zavadsky’s own church, Marine Creek Community Church, which cancelled all three Sunday services.

“Thankfully, most of the churches in our service area did cancel church,” he said. “It helped keep the call volume down this morning.”

But Zavadsky urged drivers to stay off the road, if possible, and remain cautious. Roads may appear wet and slushy as temperatures briefly rise, but they may become slick again tonight and tomorrow, he said.

“As soon as this starts to freeze again, all of this water is going to become black ice,” he said. “We are very concerned about the afternoon, evening and especially morning commute. … Although a lot of the streets are slush and water right now, as soon as the temperatures get below freezing, they are going to become even worse.”

“If you’re driving along and some areas of the road look dry and you can’t see some of the ice, you’re not going to realize it until too late. People need to be even more hyper-vigilant than they have been tonight and tomorrow morning.”

So far, insurance claims for property damage has not been unusual for a winter storm, said Mark Hanna, of the Insurance Council of Texas. But that could change tomorrow. Usually, he said, it’s when the temperatures start rising — as they are expected to do this afternoon, if only briefly — when residents realize their water pipes have frozen. That usually requires several days of sub-freezing temps.

He said most auto accidents on a weekend like this one are minor, and total damages are therefore not as much as they would be in other kinds of events, like tornadoes or even a bad hail storm.

That doesn’t make dealing with a minor crash any less of a horrendous pain in the neck, however, especially since most police agencies are reserving responses to critical situations.

Update at 12:52 p.m. from Michael Lindenberger:Ten people sheltered overnight in the Dallas city emergency shelter, spokesman Frank Librio said in a statement just moments ago.

He said that with 25,000 or more Dallas residents without power, the shelter will stay open as long as it is needed — at until 9 a..m. anyway.

He said city sanding efforts have dropped off significantly, as temperatures are expected to go over freezing later this afternoon. (At noon, though, it was still just 28 degrees.) That’s good news, except that when temperatures drop against tonight, there’ll be fresh slush to freeze all over again.

“Because of a potential thaw / re-freeze occurrence, Street Services will continue to monitor the roads for ice and debris hazards throughout the rest of the day and overnight,” the statement said. “In addition to its sanding operations, Street Services has also continued to respond to service requests for down trees throughout the weekend. Staff has received approximately 400 service calls for downed trees during this winter weather event.”

Most of those have been cleared, the statement said, though more could be needed as the new week begins. “We anticipate more calls to continue throughout the week-end and the first part of next week,” the statement said. “The chainsaw crews continue to mobilize throughout the City to clear the roadways to ensure mobility. Immediately following the thawing of roadways, Street Services stands ready to begin its sand removal operations.”

Update at 12:04 p.m. from Michael Lindenberger: Reporter Melissa Repko has been out this morning talking to folks dealing with another day of ice and cold. Her report on what’s shaking at the local grocery stores below, but first a word from DFW International Airport.

The airport has opened its third runway, and has crews working round the clock to open as many as two more by tomorrow, spokesman David Magana. DFW airport has seven runways total, though it uses just five on a typical day at full-scale operations.

Magana said the ice storm has been among the worst disruptions for the airport in years, on par with the super ice-out of 2011, which came during Super Bowl week. Some 1,800 workers are employed by the airport — with more than 50,000 working for vendors, airlines and others within the massive facility — and many of them have been on call around the clock, he said.

Still, there’s only so much the airport can do to keep its runways open — or for airlines to keep clear the taxiways and ramps for which they are responsible. “When Mother Nature drops an hockey rink on your airport, there’s only so much you can do,” Magana said.

The five-hour window with warmer temps later today may be enough to get a lot of additional planes moving, he said. and meanwhile, a bright spot: Hundreds of rental cars are still available. And for those stuck in the airport, free sandwiches and entertainment is being offered.

As for the grocery scene, Melissa Repko’s post follows:

Customers trickled into grocery stores Sunday morning to begin restocking their pantries and trying to return to normal after being stuck indoors.

But at the Kroger in Oak Lawn, some grocery items were still missing from the shelves. Onions, carrots and other soup ingredients in the produce section were picked over or out of stock. There were no bananas and few loaves of sliced bread.

Israel Gonzales, the store’s produce manager, said the Kroger sold a record of about $15,000 in produce alone Thursday when a rush of customers prepared for the ice storm. Since then, few daily delivery trucks have managed to make it from a warehouse in Keller. On Saturday, only a truck with sacks of potatoes arrived, he said.

“They say they’re going to come in to deliver, but we don’t know when,” he said.

Gonzales said it’s been more challenging to stay in stock than during the Super Bowl ice storm. Back then, he said, trucks showed up late, but could make it on the roadways.

In the dairy aisle, Steve White of Dallas said he was eager to get out of the house after a weekend of watching TV — even if only for a grocery trip. He said he was glad the roads were starting to clear and above-freezing temperatures were in the forecast.

“It’s too cold,” White said. “I moved here to get away from the cold.”

At the Whole Foods in Highland Park, Kevin Neave of Dallas filled up his cart with vegetables, milk and bread. He walked a few blocks to the store because he said he didn’t want to dig out his ice-covered car.

Update at 10:46 a.m. from Michael Lindenberger: I can see a new advertising campaign in the works: NTTA’s roads aren’t free, but they do work — even in the ice.

That’s more than TxDOT can say, though that’s probably not fair to the state since it has so many more miles of highway to worry about. And it’s sure as shooting more than mass transit can say, now that DART trains remain idle for another and bus service is iffy in Denton in the morning.

Over at NTTA, all its roads and ramps are open. Most accidents have been minor, though spokesman Michael Rey said the authority hasn’t tracked the number of crashes throughout its system. Lower-than-usual speeds have helped keep the accidents that have occurred from being more serious, he said.

The Super Bowl storm of 2011 iced over NTTA’s roads, despite the fact that hundreds of workers had been called out the night before trying to avoid the kind of publicity nightmare that ensured the week of the big game. One problem that year was that NTTA didn’t have any snow plows. All it could do is sand and salt its roads over and over again. It wasn’t enough, though it did manage to keep its roads passable.

This year, NTTA is using nine snowplow blades that it attached to existing trucks, bought after the big storm nearly three years ago. I didn’t ask Rey what the investment cost, but it’s paying plenty of dividends, whatever it was. “They were used last year during the Christmas storm and, of course, are being used extensively through this extraordinary event,” Rey said this morning.

Update at 10:30 a.m.: According to Dallas police reports, the icy, frigid weather appears to have played a factor in at least three deaths in the last 24 hours.

Police say that just after midnight Sunday, 26-year-old Sergio Diaz Jr. of Rockwall lost control of his 2006 Nissan Maxima on a patch of ice on Royal Lane near Preston Road. According to a police report, his car went into a spin, traveled some 83 feet, struck a curb on the south side of the street and hit a tree in a residential front yard. Police say Diaz, who was not wearing a seat belt, hit his head on the the windshield near the passenger side. He was pronounced dead at the scene by the Dallas County Medical Examiner’s Office, which says his next of kin has been notified.

Police also say that 75-year-old Marija Guimbellot was a likely victim of the winter storm.

A report says that officers were dispatched to her home on Lakemont Drive in Bluffview, near Dallas Love Field, at 3:30 Saturday. According to police, a neighbor says she slipped on some ice while in her front yard at about 11:30 Saturday morning.

“The neighbor was able to assist her back into her home after the complainant stated she was OK,” says Dallas police spokesperson Melinda Gutierrez. The neighbor then went home. A few hours later, someone went to check on Guimbelot, at which point she was unresponsive. The medical examiner says her next of kin has been notified, but that the autopsy has not been finished.

At around the same time Saturday an unidentified black woman in her mid-40s was found in a parking lot along the 2500 block of Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard near S.M. Wright Freeway. Officials believe her death is also weather-related, but an autopsy has not yet been performed.

She “appears to have died from exposure to the winter elements,” says Gutierrez. “There were no signs of trauma to the complainant.”

The ME’s office said this morning that it is “overwhelmed,” and police believe there might be more winter-storm-related deaths.

Those deaths are in addition to the fatal plunge from the Lewisville Lake bridge that occurred early Saturday morning, and a car accident in Arlington Friday morning also blamed on treacherous road conditions.

Update at 9:55 a.m. from Michael Lindenberger: Dallas Area Rapid Transit spokesman Mark Ball said DART is running 44 buses to shuttle passengers from rail station to rail station, as the light rail system continues to be completely off line.

Regular Sunday bus service is running as normal, he said, noting that ridership is light as many churches have canceled service this morning. He said the agency will call additional operators to work as needed.

No major accidents or incidents to report, he said.

Trees have fallen across the tracks in three locations, and maintenance crews are working on their removal this morning. He said the Paratransit service is on schedule.

Perhaps most critically, the agency says its inspecting its overhead wires, the key feature of what will determine whether the trains can run tomorrow. “We are not in revenue service, but people may see vehicles being moved or removed along our system today as we start to get things operating again. For safety reasons, people should be aware of possible trains on our tracks again.”

Update at 9:38 a.m.: Our Liz Farmer reports via Twitter that despite the Dallas Marathon’s cancellation, some folks gathered for a downtown run. Clearly they wanted more than just their T-shirts.

Those of you itching to get out of the house should also know that the Dallas Museum of Art reports that it will open today. And at least Delta and United are back to normal operations at Dallas Love Field, for those trying to escape that way.

No doubt many folks will at least need somewhere to get warm: Oncor is now reporting that 45,680 are without power, a jump from the 7:30 a.m. update that had about 42,000 still in the dark.

In a release sent moments ago Oncor says that “almost 5,000 Oncor employees, contractors and utility workers from other areas in Texas, Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Kansas, Alabama, Mississippi and Florida were working in the field.” They hope to have almost everyone’s power on by late Sunday night.

“We know it’s been very difficult for our customers who have been without power as a result of the ice storm and ongoing subfreezing temperatures,” says chief operating office Jim Greer. “We’re using all available resources to restore power as quickly as we safely can.”

But there are some folks who may not get their power back tonight.

“This includes customers who may have damage to their home electrical equipment, such as their meter base,” says Oncor. “Homeowners who have meter bases (the box that surrounds a home’s electrical meter) that are damaged or pulled away from their home will need to contact an electrician to complete necessary repairs. After electrician repairs are completed, either the homeowner or the electrician will need to contact the homeowner’s city inspection office before Oncor can safely restore service.”

Update 9:35 a.m. from Michael Lindenberger:: Denton County Transit Administration official says it’ll be “wait and see” on whether its buses will resume service Monday. (There is no Sunday service.) The transit agency suspended bus service Friday and Saturday, and will reopen for business Monday only if the highways are safe to travel.

It’s possible, says spokeswoman Kristina Brevard, that service within Denton itself will resume before service to Lewisville and Highland Village. The agency’s smaller buses service the latter locations, and must travel along ice-covered I-35E to get to their routes. Unless TxDOT’s efforts to clear some six inches of solid ice along that interstate is successful, buses will probably not make it Monday, either. Today’s brief rise above freezing could be enough, however, to get the city streets of Denton clear enough for the larger buses to operate by Monday, she said.

Train service, which has mostly been unaffected by the storm, will likely go off as scheduled, or with minor delays, she said. The heavier trains on the A-Line are powered by diesel fuel and not dependent on electricity, as are DART’s light rail vehicles. DART rail has been shut down completely through the storm, but could resume limited service Monday, officials say.

Brevard said Denton’s trains have had to deal with occasional frozen switches, but that heaters are being used to keep that from becoming a more widespread problem.

Still, with the area’s universities closed Friday and DART’s Green Line out of service, ridership on the A-Line has been greatly reduced. On Friday, fewer than 200 people boarded the trains — a total of about 250 trips — instead of the normal usage of about 2,500 trips.

Original item posted at 8:06 a.m.: And so begins our third day of ice-storm coverage … and there could be a fourth.

It begins with this bit of good news: Power is being restored across North Texas (slowly, but surely), temperatures will warm a little today, and one of the biggest airports in the world is back up to three working runways.

By about 2 p.m. temperatures across the region should climb above freezing, however briefly. But, as our Brandon Formby notes in this morning’s paper, the respite will be short-lived, perhaps three hours.

And first we need to get past this Freezing Fog Advisory, which has been extended till noon Sunday, says Jennifer Dunn, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Fort Worth. Dunn says some areas in southern Dallas County are actually seeing visibility of less than three-quarters of a mile.

The fog should dissipate around midday, when skies should begin clearing. So even before we rise above freezing — and it was 28 at Dallas Love Field at 8:30 a.m. — there could be some improvement, says Dunn.

“But we’ll be back down to 28 tonight,” she says. “There’s not going to be a significant improvement to the ice as it is right now, as we’ll only be above freezing today for a short time today. And it’s the same story Monday and Tuesday — a brief warm-up during the day, 20s at night.” Dunn says it’s likely we won’t see the 40s until Wednesday.

And, as you’re well aware, “anything that melts will refreeze tonight as temperatures fall below freezing again,” says Dunn, who says officials are concerned that Monday morning’s commute could be especially treacherous, as more folks venture out onto the roads.

But a day after a driver fell to her death when her truck plunged into Lewisville Lake, Texas Department of Transportation officials are begging folks to stay off them for at least one more day.

Crews are sanding all over, and equipment is being brought into treat especially troublesome highways. But, clearly, some places are still far worse than others.

In Dallas, TxDOT asks drivers to “stay home or go slow.” But further west, TxDOT is discouraging travel altogether. Says TxDOT, Interstate 20 “continues to be impassable west of Fort Worth” to Palo Pinto. “All travel discouraged.”

And, as our Michael Lindenberger reports this morning, gas stations are running out of fuel.

Here’s the TxDOT travel map — a bit indecipherable, but not a pretty picture.

Oncor continues to bring in outside help to restore power to those who have been without — in some instances, since Thursday night, when the first drops of freezing rain began to fall.

The energy provider says 44,642 are still in the dark — a marked drop from the 75,000 trapped in the frigid darkness Saturday night. (But, at 8:44 a.m. Sunday, that’s 2,000 more than were without power at 7:30 Sunday morning.)

“Our crews are working as quickly and as safely as they can to restore power to our customers impacted by the winter storm,” says its latest winter-weather update. “Oncor has more than 3,700 company employees, contractors and utility workers from outside the state who will be working to restore any power outages from this winter storm. We believe nearly all of our customers will have power restored by late Sunday night. The only outages that may not be restored by that time are rural customers or customers whose electrical equipment was damaged by the storm.”

But a note: If you’re without don’t keep asking Oncor when their crews are coming via those automated texts. Some neighborhoods in the dark were being told Friday and Saturday that there was “no outage information” available concerning their areas. And repair estimates flip-flopped wildly, which, perhaps, is why Oncor’s outage map no longer provides them and says only that “damage evaluation and restoration efforts are still underway for the DFW Metroplex. Most restorations to be completed by late Sunday Night.”

In another bit of good news, especially for those stranded and weary travelers hoping to get out of here, Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport now says it has three runways open and operational. Airport spokesman David Magana says 2,076 passengers spent the night in the terminals, down from the 3,000 forced to camp-out Friday night.

Magana says that about 400 departures by the airlines have been canceled so far for Sunday. The airport once again asks all passengers to check with their airlines to find out about flights or how to rebook them. You can also check the Flight Information page at www.dfwairport.com/flights.

Alas, Dallas Area Rapid Transit’s light-rail system is still out of commission.

“We are still working to restore light rail,” says the transit agency Sunday morning. “This involves cleaning and testing switches and making some equipment repairs. We have also cleared some trees that were knocked down by the storm. We have also put out more than 23 tons of ice melt on our operation and passenger facilities.”

Officials hope to restore “some level of light rail service” by Monday. It has been out of service since the storm first hit Thursday night, despite assurances that trains would be running all night to make sure they didn’t get stuck. As our Brandon Formby notes, this is the longest such outage in DART history.

“There’s simply lots to do to get the tracks, overhead power lines and rail cars ready,” says the update. “We will make sure we can operate safely before we start. We believe we will have the best opportunity to make progress on this after the temperature gets above freezing. Current models suggest that will happen Sunday.”

One thing DART has working in its advantage: A reinforcing shot of cold air due between midnight and 3 a.m. Monday isn’t going to be as frigid as earlier anticipated. Forecasts that once has us back in the teens Monday night now have us in the mid-20s, says the National Weather Service’s Dunn.