SAN DIEGO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--MD Revolution, the leading provider of digital chronic care management (CCM) solutions, and WellTrackONE are teaming up to help Renaissance Health Network (RHN) physician practices manage their chronic care patients and provide annual wellness visits. This combined approach will give physicians detailed data on their patients’ health and lifestyle to better assess risk and improve care.

“MD Revolution is excited to be working with WellTrackONE to help Renaissance Health Network better address CCM and annual wellness visits,” said MD Revolution Founder and CEO Samir Damani, M.D., PharmD, FACC. “This will help their physicians reach more patients who need additional care.”

RHN is an independent physician association (IPA) based in Pennsylvania with more than 70 associated practices. With MD Revolution and WellTrackONE, participating physicians can now provide their patients an integrated solution for preventative healthcare and chronic care management.

Under new Medicare rules, physicians can provide 20 minute remote consultations each month for their chronic care patients. However, most practices lack the technical experience and infrastructure to implement these regulations. MD Revolution and WellTrackONE provide the digital tools physician practices need to identify eligible patients, engage them remotely and bill appropriately.

With millions of Americans suffering from chronic, preventable conditions, CCM is becoming an increasingly important priority for physicians nationwide. However, it can be difficult for individual practices and IPAs to implement a program from scratch.

“The new CCM rules are great for both patients and physicians, but they’re kind of a Catch-22,” said Barry Green, MD, Executive Chairman at RHN. “On one hand, physicians are motivated to help their chronic patients; but setting up these systems on their own could actually take time away from patients. MD Revolution and WellTrackONE solve that problem for us.”

With MD Revolution and WellTrackONE on board, RHN physicians will have the ability to provide more care for their sickest patients. In addition to helping them identify and communicate with chronic care patients, the systems being put in place will extend their ability to encourage compliance and track progress. A number of studies have shown that giving patients better access to their medical team improves outcomes.

“We believe these programs will be a win-win for everyone,” said Dr. Green. “Patients will benefit from the enhanced CCM and physicians will be able to provide more comprehensive care, as well as being compensated for their efforts.”

About MD Revolution

Founded in 2011 by Samir Damani, MD, PharmD, FACC, a practicing cardiologist, MD Revolution is at the forefront of chronic disease prevention and care. With a revolutionary approach to lifestyle interventions, our digital health solution, RevUp, delivers measurable improvements in health by empowering people with personalized coaching about nutrition, fitness and health. MD Revolution works with physician practices, health systems, employers and other organizations to deliver scalable care management solutions.

About WellTrackONE

WellTrackONE, a population health management company, offers an end-to-end solution to physician offices, ACOs, integrated delivery networks, hospitals, long term care providers, and other physician networks that helps them administer the Medicare Annual Wellness Visit to all their Medicare patients. The Annual Wellness Visit has been an integral part of the Affordable Care Act since 2011 and is a key cost-reducing program of the United States healthcare budget. Using a full-service model, WellTrackONE can help physicians process these critical wellness visits with no change in their workflow and in turn allow them to identify the key risk factors of their patients. Once these risk factors are identified, physicians can initiate treatment plans through its proprietary Clinical Triggers program to prevent the onset of chronic illness and disease as well as falls, breaks and fractures. Contact Bill Archer at WellTrackONE at BArcher@WellTrackONE.com.

About the Renaissance Health Network

Renaissance Health Network (RHN) is a clinically-integrated, physician-owned and managed company founded in 1998 by a group of private practice physicians. The RHN primary care physician network is comprised of over 250 family practice and internal medicine physicians in Berks, Bucks, Chester, Delaware and Montgomery counties in greater Philadelphia.