"Super PACs are a disaster, they're a scam, they cause dishonesty," the billionaire businessman and former Atlantic City casino tycoon said during the event at the University of Colorado. "You better get rid of them. They are causing a lot of bad decisions to be made by some very good people."

Everyone blasted the McCain-Feingold law for limiting political free speech, and rightly so. But what about when Donald Trump wants to do the same ? Trump wants to eliminated Super PACS.

Who is Trump to tell other people how to make decisions with their money?

Super PACs — short for political action committees — are allowed to raise unlimited sums of money to support a candidate but are not allowed to coordinate directly with the candidate's campaign. Most candidates, including Christie, have one.

The backstory to this is that Trump was unhappy with a Super PAC that was raising money in his name. But if Super PACs are eliminated, then candidates will be held to strict limits on donations, $2,700 per candidate. This will put candidates at a disadvantage with the liberal media, which can spend the equivalent of millions of dollars to support its favorite candidates (Democrats in the general election, and crony capitalist Republicans in primaries). Super PAC funding is needed to counterbalance the enormous power of the media.

But Trump, with all his wealth he can use to self-finance his campaign, and success (so far) in the polls, doesn't care. If his plan became law, candidates would never be able to raise enough money to counteract the constant barrage of slanted news stories by the liberal media.

It's also about freedom of speech. If people are limited in how they much they can spend to support a candidate, their speech is limited. What Trump is proposing is to limit free speech.

It may not look good when a candidate like Jeb Bush raises 100 million dollars in Super PAC money, but we have seen how when the candidate is bad, even all the money in the world will not help. But Super PAC money can help good candidates, like Ted Cruz, stay afloat.

This is such an important issue that while Trump seems to be strongest on immigration and securing the border, I think his plans to limit political speech should give even supporters some concern.