Monday

Monday: "President Barack Obama: The Exhibition" at Miramar Cultural Center Pete Souza / The White House President Barack Obama, vice president Joe Biden and senior staff applaud as the House passes the Affordable Care Act in this official White House photo by Pete Souza. A collection of Souza's images will go on display for "President Barack Obama: The Exhibition" at Miramar Cultural Center's Ansin Family Gallery. President Barack Obama, vice president Joe Biden and senior staff applaud as the House passes the Affordable Care Act in this official White House photo by Pete Souza. A collection of Souza's images will go on display for "President Barack Obama: The Exhibition" at Miramar Cultural Center's Ansin Family Gallery. (Pete Souza / The White House) (Pete Souza / The White House)

The White House's official photographer, Pete Souza, has trained his camera on just about every pivotal moment of the Barack Obama presidency: the president applauding as the Affordable Care Act passes in 2010; awarding Congressional Medals of Honor to living and fallen veterans; hoisting the first Obama bobblehead. For every historic moment captured in Souza's White House candids in "President Barack Obama: The Exhibition," there are playful, humanizing ones, such as Obama bending down to let a child touch his graying hair. The show is on display through Feb. 28 at the Ansin Family Gallery at Miramar Cultural Center (2400 Civic Center Place). Free. 954-602-4500 or MiramarCulturalCenter.org.

Tuesday

Tuesday: "Shatner's World" at Kravis Center Kravis Center/Courtesy William Shatner will deliver "Shatner's World" to the Kravis Center on Tuesday. William Shatner will deliver "Shatner's World" to the Kravis Center on Tuesday. (Kravis Center/Courtesy) (Kravis Center/Courtesy)

On Tuesday, the man the world still calls Captain Kirk, William Shatner, will land his enterprise in South Florida for the second time in the past four months. His one-man show "Shatner's World: We Just Live in It ...," coming Tuesday to the Kravis Center (701 Okeechobee Blvd., West Palm Beach), features the actor, showman and sing-speaker waxing about his long life (he'll turn 85 in March) and career. The appearance comes just after October's headlining appearance at Wizard World Comic Con. He'll also be headlining this summer's Florida Supercon. Digressive and chatty, Shatner will likely touch on his galaxy of film and TV credits, how the acting bug bit him and those great frontiers into music (covers of Elton John's "Rocket Man" and Pulp's "Common People"). 8 p.m. Tickets start at $25. 561-832-7469 or Kravis.org.

Wednesday

The record label that gave us Marvin Gaye, Smokey Robinson and the Jackson 5 is in the spotlight for "Motown the Musical," making a ruckus 8 p.m. Wednesday at the Adrienne Arsht Center (601 Biscayne Blvd., Miami). The jukebox musical, which originated on Broadway, focuses on the successes, pitfalls and hits of Motown founder Berry Gordy, whose rise to music mogul yielded an impressive catalog of pop-soul. The show will close on Sunday. $29-$150. 305-949-6722 or ArshtCenter.org.

Thursday

Thursday: "Shakespeare Meets Hip-Hop" at Frost Art Museum Florida International University/Courtesy Thursday night's "Shakespeare Meets Hip-Hop" at Frost Art Museum is a night of lyricism based on the Bard’s comedies and tragedies. Thursday night's "Shakespeare Meets Hip-Hop" at Frost Art Museum is a night of lyricism based on the Bard’s comedies and tragedies. (Florida International University/Courtesy) (Florida International University/Courtesy)

What to see or not to see at Florida International University's Frost Museum of Art, which this week unveils a 400-year-old First Folio of William Shakespeare's collected plays? The arrival of the rare, 923-page volume on loan from the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington, D.C., has spawned a monthlong lineup of Shakespeare events programmed by the Frost (10975 SW 17th Street, Miami). Worth seeing is Thursday's "Shakespeare Meets Hip-Hop" open mike, in which FIU's Sigma Tau Delta International English Honors Society will spit lyrics based on the Bard's comedies and tragedies. 7:30-9:30 p.m. Free. Folio.FIU.Edu has the full programming lineup.

Friday

Friday: B.e. Easy Music Festival Pre-party at Funky Buddha Keller Williams/Courtesy Keller Williams' bluegrass side project Keller and the Keels will headline the B.e. Easy Music Festival. Keller Williams' bluegrass side project Keller and the Keels will headline the B.e. Easy Music Festival. (Keller Williams/Courtesy) (Keller Williams/Courtesy)

As a funky, calibrated buildup to Saturday's B.e. Easy Music Festival in Lake Worth's Bryant Park, the Funky Buddha (1201 NE 38th St., Oakland Park) will stage a preparty inside its brewery at 5 p.m. Friday with music by Sawgrass Express and Juanjamon Band. This all leads up to the Saturday's bill of yoga, classes , workshops, easygoing vibes and music, headlined by Keller Williams' bluegrass side project Keller and the Keels, the Heavy Pets and Ancient Sun. Proceeds from the preparty and concert will benefit the B.e. Easy Scholarship Fund, Inc., which helps youth combat drug addiction. BeEasyMusicFestival.com.

Saturday

Saturday: South Florida Chillounge Night in Fort Lauderdale South Florida Chillounge / Courtesy After a two-month postponement, the South Florida Chillounge visits Huizenga Park in Fort Lauderdale. After a two-month postponement, the South Florida Chillounge visits Huizenga Park in Fort Lauderdale. (South Florida Chillounge / Courtesy)

Postponed in December due to bad weather, the poshification of Huizenga Park known as the South Florida Chillounge will turn into something resembling a South Beach rooftop party on Saturday: DJs, cabanas, top-shelf bottles, slick white lounge chairs and aerial balloon performances. Wait, scratch that last one. That's just a Chillounge thing, as are the performances by a Brazilian samba troupe, stilt walkers, fashion shows and a "daybed parade," in which shirtless men will carry women on daybeds chariot-style. 6-11 p.m., and the afterparty continues at Stache. $25-$35, $120 for the VIP treatment, which includes free food and beverage, at 1 E. Las Olas Blvd., Fort Lauderdale. Benefits Riverwalk Fort Lauderdale. ChilloungeNight.com/Fort-Lauderdale-2016.

Sunday

Sunday: "Njideka Akunyili Crosby: I Refuse To Be Invisible" at Norton Museum of Art Marc Bernier/Courtesy Njideka Akunyili Crosby's solo exhibit “I Refuse To Be Invisible” is on view Sunday at the Norton Museum of Art. Njideka Akunyili Crosby's solo exhibit “I Refuse To Be Invisible” is on view Sunday at the Norton Museum of Art. (Marc Bernier/Courtesy) (Marc Bernier/Courtesy)

The collages of Nigerian-born artist Njideka Akunyili Crosby, whose solo exhibit "I Refuse To Be Invisible" is on view at the Norton Museum of Art (1451 S. Olive Ave., West Palm Beach), are bracingly intimate. There's an African-American family sitting quietly in lounges; and there's the artist stroking her lover's hair in the bedroom; and the artist, again, sharing her lover's gaze in the dining room as her family stares with their arms crossed. But Akunyili Crosby's collages also smack of something global: Each photo is composed of a dense tangle of acrylic paint, drawing and photographs of Nigeria's colonial period and 1970s and '80s family snapshots. Akunyili Crosby's exhibit, on view until April 24, is open 11 a.m.-5 p.m. Sunday. $5-$12. 561-832-5196 or Norton.org.