While you, silly person, have been worrying about the government shutdown, its effect on the economy, its effect on people’s jobs and veteran’s benefits, etc. etc.– Michele Bachmann and her pals over in Congress have had a case of the giddies. In fact, Bachmann appeared on Hannity last night to wax poetic about how this is just the absolute happiest they’ve ever been in all their lives. Why? Is it because they’re getting paid to do no work while other Americans are going to have to work for IOUs? Kind of! But also it’s because they believe they’re winning the “national dialogue.”

Which they’re not. They’re not winning at all. They look like assholes. The vast majority of the American people are not happy with what they’re doing. And yes, the vast majority blame them and not the Democrats. Which is fair, given that for the past year or so, Republicans have been going around bragging that they’re going to shut down the government. People know a hostage situation when they see it.

Given the millions of Americans signing up for the Affordable Care Act– in such droves that the servers haven’t been able to handle the traffic, it’s getting harder to say that it is the “will of the people” that it be defunded, delayed, or gotten rid of entirely.

In fact, they’re not even really winning the dialogue in the House. Right now, with all 200 Democratic votes and the votes of 20 Republicans who are a bit more on the sane side, there are enough votes (217 are needed) to pass a clean continuing resolution.

However, the reason this isn’t even being passed to the floor is because Boehner is abiding by the “Hastert Rule.” The “Hastert Rule”–named for Dennis Hastert–is a principle used by Republican Speakers of The House that basically means that a bill will not be brought up unless it has support from the “majority of the majority” party. It should be noted that even Dennis Hastert does not think this is the time or place for the Hastert Rule.

But I digress. It’s almost monstrous for Bachmann and Co. to be this ecstatic over something that worries the rest of us. It’s actually just creepy. I mean, there are over 3,000 low-income kids who will be denied Head Start programs, as over 50 have had to close their doors because they didn’t have the funding to stay open. And that’s on top of the 57,000 kids who lost their slots due to sequestration. There are Federal Workers living paycheck to paycheck who will have to accept an IOU in lieu of pay. So, it’s pretty damn shitty for a whole lot of people who aren’t up there grandstanding.

To add to the cognitive dissonance, Bachman, Cruz, and others are now also complaining about this shutdown that has made them so very happy. They’re trying now, to present themselves as the ones who are trying to keep the National Parks open for WWII veterans. Which is weird because not only did they force this damn shutdown, but also they want to get rid of many National Parks in order to appease corporations who would like to build things in them. These parks, by the way, were a thing invented by non-crazy Republican Theodore Roosevelt.

I also feel pretty compelled to mention that while they are out frolicking at the Lincoln Memorial and posting tweets about how very much they care about veterans and the “Greatest Generation”– these are also the people who want to slash the living hell out of Veteran’s Benefits.

You can’t have your cake and eat it too. You can’t talk loudly and in public about your plans to force a shutdown, then actually force the shutdown, then claim you are thrilled and delighted by it, and then complain that really it’s the fault of the Democrats and all the bad stuff about this should be blamed on them for wanting to fund something that is the actual law of the land now. The Affordable Care Act was approved by Congress, signed by the president, declared constitutional by the Supreme Court of the United States, and Obama was re-elected President in a campaign in which this was probably the biggest issue at hand. The “dialogue” is over now. You lost.

You can’t say you are winning the national dialogue when you are hideously unpopular and hated by everyone. You can’t even really say you’re winning in the House when, if it came to an actual vote, you would lose. Repeating something over and over doesn’t make it true. I could spend all day insisting I am the Queen of England, that doesn’t mean that a crown will be arriving in the mail for me tomorrow.

At the end of the day, though, I think that what’s really going to end this era of crazy ass Conservative Radicals is not just going to be the fact that they’re nuts or that they suffer from severe cognitive dissonance, but the fact that they’re just so goddamned mean. There is nothing more vicious than to speak rapturously of your own joy while other people are suffering from its cause. Schadenfreude isn’t satisfying when it’s leveled against the weak or impoverished, and this smarmy narrative of comforting the comfortable and afflicting the afflicted can’t go to far before it starts to sicken people who don’t happen to be actual sociopaths.