Today's Marco Rubio news: Christmas is over, Iowa has snow and the presidential caucuses are nearly a month away. So it's time to move...backward.

Reporting Marco Rubio news, we told you on Dec. 9 about a New York Times story that said the Florida U.S. senator slipped a "little-noticed health care provision" into a giant spending law last year and has "tangled up the Obama administration, sent tremors through health insurance markets and rattled confidence in the durability of President Obama's signature health law"

Not so fast, say others (to Rubio, who's now running for president, and to the Times). The Washington Post's Fact Checker column on Dec. 23 gave Rubio four "Pinnochios" -- which means it found the claim to be a whopper. And it added, "So far, with the exception of a careful report in the Associated Press, much of the media have gotten this story wrong."

The problem, writes the Post's Glenn Kessler, is that others in the Senate did the lifting:

"In reality, in the sausage making of the law, Rubio didn't make the sausage that has wounded the law. He had wanted to make a different sausage. But through deft marketing, he managed to slap his name on this one."

This involved something called a risk corridor, which was supposed to help share risks among health insurers. Under the Affordable Care Act, they were creating an insurance system that had to accept most applicants, yet it put limits on premium prices for such applicant differences as age, and it didn't allow insurers to charge more for sicker patients. It could take a few years to find the right premiums-versus-costs equilibrium for such a system. But with a risk corridor, insurers charging too much for their policies (relative to their actual costs) would have to pay a small share into the risk-corridor pool, once they accounted for their medical claims. Insurers undercharging could draw money out of the pool.

This would require transfers, from insurers to the government, and from the government to other insurers. There could be shortfalls initially (and there were) but they were supposed to balance out in the second and third years. Whether they will is an open question. Meantime, Republican lawmakers have boxed in the Obama administration by restricting transfers from government funds without specific congressional appropriations -- which is highly unlikely under a Republican Congress.

This means insurers who need the money right now cannot get it. A number of them could ultimately exit the Affordable Care Act's health-care-exchange market, upending the whole system.

To those who say good riddance, credit should go to Republican Sen. Jeff Sessions of Alabama, and Reps. Fred Upton of Michigan and Jack Kingston of Georgia, the Washington Post says. Rubio made it known that he disliked the risk corridor, but so did others, including Rubio presidential-nomination rival Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, Kessler writes. As to the actual work, it was performed by Sessions, Upton and Kingston.

From the Post: Rubio "needs to adjust his rhetoric to acknowledge that the key plays were made by other Republicans — and the news media should not so credulously accept his claim": Washington Post.

The day after the New York Times story ran, Michael Hiltzik of the Los Angeles Times wrote in a column that the claims made by Rubio "are a little overheated, wholly misleading and spectacularly cynical." Hiltzik took his own swipe at the New York Times, noting that what it called a "little-noticed" provision was certainly noticed by, well, Hiltzik and the Los Angeles Times, among others.

Hiltzik also wrote that the insurers who lost money and expected risk-corridor payments still may be owed it. Citing Nicholas Bagley of the University of Michigan Law School, he said that the health plans owed risk-corridor money have the right to sue the government in the U.S. Court of Claims. If the court upholds their claims, the taxpayer hasn't saved a dime.

And Hiltzik noted that for all the criticism, the idea of a risk corridor was not new or unique to the Affordable Care Act.

"Indeed, a similar arrangement had been written into Medicare Part D, the prescription drug benefit enacted by a Republican Congress in 2003": Los Angeles Times.