Two Israelis were murdered in front of their children by a drive-by shooting. Luckily, all four of their children survived the horrific ordeal, which occurred in the Israeli settlement of Neria in the West Bank. Ynet News is calling this incident a terrorist attack, and Hamas has issued a statement supporting this brutal murder:

A husband and wife in their 30s, Eitam and Na'ama Henkin from the settlment of Neria, were killed in a drive-by shooting attack on the road between Itamar and Elon Moreh in the West Bank on Thursday night. Their four children aged 9, 7, 4 and 4 months were in the car and were said to be physically unharmed but treated for shock. […] "It was a very difficult sight," said MDA paramedic Boaz Malka. "We saw a car in the middle of the road with a man in his thirties next to it with wounds to his upper body, and a woman in her thirties inside the car also seriously wounded in her upper body. They were without signs of life, and unfortunately we had to declare them dead at the scene." […] Tensions and disturbances in the West Bank and East Jerusalem have been particularly high during the Jewish High Holy Days, even in comparison to many months of sporadic violence. In late August, an Israeli was shot while driving from inside a passing vehicle bearing an Israeli license plate at Jit Junction in the West Bank.

This attack comes after the president of the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, said that the PA was finished with the Oslo Accords, which establishes the foundation for a two-state solution. He also said that the Palestinians were dedicated to building a "culture of peace" at the United Nations:

We do not respond to the Israeli occupation’s hatred and brutality with the same. Instead, we are working on spreading the culture of peace and coexistence between our people and in our region, and we are anxious to realize it and to witness the day when all of the people in our region will enjoy peace, security, stability and prosperity.

Right, and the murdering of innocent Israelis is how you spread that culture?