Two Copley trustees sworn in

12/26/2013 - West Side Leader



By Ariel Hakim

Summit County Common Pleas Court Judge Tammy O’Brien administered oaths of office at the Copley Township Board of Trustees meeting Dec. 18 to Trustee Dale Panovich and Trustee Scott Dressler, who both won re-election in the November General Election. Photo: Ariel Hakim

Summit County Common Pleas Court Judge Tammy O’Brien administered oaths of office at the Copley Township Board of Trustees meeting Dec. 18 to Trustee Dale Panovich and Trustee Scott Dressler, who both won re-election in the November General Election for four-year terms.

Dressler has been in the position since 1998, and Panovich has been a trustee since 2006 after also serving from 1988 to 2004, according to township officials.

In other business, trustees held a public hearing for a proposed map amendment for 3290 Ridgewood Road, to change zoning from Residential-Medium Density/Industrial to Commercial-Office Retail.

The proposed rezoning for the parcel, located on the border of Fairlawn and Copley, follows Copley’s comprehensive plan for future land use, noted Planning Director Matt Springer.

Following the hearing, during which no objections were heard, trustees approved the change.

Trustees also set another public hearing for additional proposed map amendments for 4640 Medina Road, 4608 Medina Road and 22 Scenic View Drive for rezoning to Commercial-Neighborhood Retail for Jan. 15 at 6 p.m., prior to their regular meeting.

Also at the meeting, trustees heard from Yolanda Walker, executive director of ReWorks, on Summit County’s solid waste management plan. The countywide plan is updated every five years, and elements of this update include continued financial support for residential curbside recycling programs; expansion of commercial waste reduction and recycling opportunities for businesses; and a countywide recycling education campaign, according to Walker. The agency must ask Summit County communities to approve or disapprove of the plan, she said.

Following her presentation, trustees approved the plan.

In other action, trustees:

adopted a resolution for temporary appropriations for 2014 totaling nearly $13 million. Fiscal Officer Janice Marshall said the amount is an increase of 0.63 percent over last year’s temporary appropriations;

approved paying approximately $550,000 for Copley’s share of expenses for 2014 for its joint dispatch center with Norton and Barberton;

approved a memorandum of understanding with Teamsters Local 348 to settle six grievances filed in November 2012 and January and March 2013. Marshall said the matters were mostly regarding assignment of overtime;

authorized Life Force Management to write off approximately $16,600 in uncollectable ambulance billing;

approved purchasing a server and miscellaneous associated features for storage of police cruiser camera video, for $3,400;

accepted anonymous donations to the police department totaling $3,001;

noted residents may recycle Christmas trees through the Service Department, which is offering a free pickup Jan. 6. Township officials request trees be placed curbside unbagged prior to 7 a.m. the day of pickup, with all decorations removed. For more information, call the Service Department at 330-666-0365; and

approved an annual organization resolution for the township and its employees, stating, among other routine items, that trustees will continue to meet twice a month for regular meetings on the first and third Wednesdays of each month.

Trustees also cleared up an item of old business as they approved a resolution supporting the formation of the Wolf Creek Watershed Conservancy District, subject to approval of funding by all three communities involved — Copley, Barberton and Norton. Creating the district is an effort to mitigate storm water problems in the three communities, according to township officials.

Following an executive session, trustees confirmed the hiring of Brett McShane as part-time patrol officer, who successfully completed prehire testing.

Also, the following day, Dec. 19, trustees hosted a special meeting, a discussion with U.S. Rep. Jim Renacci (R-District-16), which brought a full house of about 30 residents to the trustees’ meeting room. Trustee Helen Humphrys said the discussion was very informal and mostly focused on the Affordable Care Act. Renacci would like to hold a Town Hall meeting in Copley once a year, she added.

The Copley Board of Trustees’ next regular meeting will take place a day later than usual since New Year’s Day falls on the board’s usual meeting date. The meeting will be Jan. 2 at 6 p.m. at the Copley Township offices, 1540 S. Cleveland-Massillon Road.