The biggest bill in a plan to close a shortfall in the state budget was approved in the Alabama House of Representatives today.

The House voted 52-46 to raise the tax on cigarettes by 25 cents a pack, to 67.5 cents, generating an estimated $66 million a year for the General Fund.

It's part of a plan supported by the Republican leadership in the House to raise a total of about $130 million in taxes.

Rep. Connie Rowe, R-Jasper, sponsor of the cigarette tax bill, said she wasn't excited about carrying a tax bill but thought it could be part of the solution to keep the General Fund afloat.

According to the Federation of Tax Administrators, Alabama had the fourth lowest state tax on cigarettes in the country as of Jan. 1.

At 42.5 cents a pack, Alabama's tax is lower than the state tax in Florida (133.9 cents); Mississippi (68 cents) and Tennessee (62 cents) but higher than in Georgia (37 cents).

The bill moves to the Senate.

Earlier today, the House approved two other bills that are smaller components in the tax plan. One would add a per-bed tax for nursing homes, the other a 15-cents per prescription tax on pharmacies for Medicaid. Each would generate an estimated $8 million a year for Medicaid.

Rep. Steve Clouse, R-Ozark, the House General Fund budget chairman, said he believes the willingness to support tax increases is a result of people contacting their representatives.

"I think it shows members all over the state are hearing from their constituents about how important these different agencies are, from Mental Health, to Medicaid, to the courts, to prison reform to keep the feds from coming in here and unlocking the doors," Clouse said.

This afternoon, lawmakers are scheduled to consider bills to raise the maximum business privilege tax, the car rental tax and the auto title fee.

Most of the Democratic minority in the House voted against the cigarette tax increase.

Rep. Craig Ford, D-Gadsden, the House minority leader, said Democrats would continue to push for Gov. Robert Bentley to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act and for a vote on a lottery bill before supporting tax increases.

"The hypocrisy of this whole special session is the Republicans ran on a no-new-tax pledge and we're down here raising taxes on every day Alabamians instead of letting the people have the right to vote on a lottery," Ford said.

Ford has introduced a bill calling for a constitutional amendment vote on a lottery to fund college scholarships.