PHILADELPHIA — Jayson Werth strolled through the visiting clubhouse at Citizens Bank Park on Sunday afternoon, rejoining the Washington Nationals after their 4-3 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies.

Manager Matt Williams said Werth would travel with the team to Boston for its three-game series against the Red Sox, which begins Monday. The left fielder has long set Monday’s game as a goal for his return and seems likely to play in the series-opener, barring any unforeseen issues.

When asked about Werth, Williams was optimistic but noncommittal.

SEE ALSO: The Rundown: Nationals avoid the sweep with extra-inning win

“We’ll see,” he said. “We’ll see how he wakes up [Monday]. Today he’s good, so we’ll make that determination in the morning.”

Werth, 35, had surgery to repair the AC joint in his right shoulder Jan. 9 and was limited in spring training. He played in the outfield and ran the bases but did not take an at-bat in a Grapefruit League game.

Werth began the season on the 15-day disabled list and was eligible to be activated Saturday. He played in three games during a minor-league rehabilitation assignment at Single-A Potomac last week, finishing 1-for-6 with a solo home run and three walks. He started in left field twice and served as a designated hitter in his most recent appearance.

Should the Nationals decide to activate Werth for Monday’s game, they could start him in left field or slot him as the designated hitter to ease him back into big-league action.

Rendon taking light swings

Williams said third baseman Anthony Rendon is taking light swings at the team’s minor-league facility in Viera, Florida, which is the next step in his return from a sprained medial collateral ligament in his left knee.

Rendon recently progressed from lateral movement drills to fielding ground balls. Williams said he’s started hitting balls off a tee or tossed lightly to him by a coach. He began the season on the 15-day disabled list and was eligible to return Saturday.

“He’s running, he’s swinging, he’s throwing, he’s taking groundballs. So all of those things are good,” Williams said. “Just tee and flip right now, just to make sure that he gets through that part of it without any issue. But yeah, he’s doing all of it, swinging and running.”

Scherzer turns in six strong innings

Max Scherzer was as good as advertised on Opening Day, and he followed up that performance with six solid innings of work Sunday against the Phillies.

Scherzer allowed only six hits and one earned run while striking out eight. On multiple occasions, he used his cutter, a recent addition to his pitch repertoire, to finish off at-bats.

“That’s the pitch I’ve been working at,” Scherzer said. “It’s just a version of my slider. I think I have a chance to pick it up quicker than most pitches you would take, so hopefully I continue to make strides with that pitch and bring it into my game as much as I can.”

Scherzer was unhappy with his fastball command Sunday and said he was inconsistent working out of the windup. However, he has allowed only one earned run in his first 13 2/3 innings with the Nationals.

Robinson comfortable at the plate

Making just his second start of the season in left field, Clint Robinson went 3 for 5 with a double and a run in Washington’s 4-3 win over the Phillies, scoring what proved to be the decisive run.

“I feel good,” he said. “I’m just trying to go out there and keep it simple and let the ball fall where it falls.”

Robinson has spent most of his professional career in the minor leagues, and he had only 13 big-league at-bats and three hits entering this season. In limited playing time with the Nationals, however, he is hitting 4 for 10 and appears headed for an uptick in playing time.

“We want to keep him as fresh as we possibly can with those at-bats,” Williams said. “He can play both outfield positions. He plays first base. So there’s a lot of options for him depending on our main guys getting a day off or, like today, getting him into the lineup to boost our offense a little bit.”