ARVADA — You have to love Joe Johnson. Throughout the eras and changes in terms of shotgun formations, pistols or whatever else filtered its way into schoolboy offenses, the ThunderRidge head coach still lives for the basics.

He demands tough play and has always taken a special interest in his offensive lines.

Saturday night was another Johnson example — the Grizzlies won the line of scrimmage repeatedly and bettered Ralston Valley by 36-18 in nonleague at the NAAC in one that really wasn’t that close, but may also be somewhat surprising for the rest of Class 5A in terms of ease.

The Grizzlies, ranked No. 2 in the CHSAANow.com poll, moved to 2-0. Fourth-ranked Ralston Valley dropped to 1-1. Both programs were semifinalists a year ago.

Concerning up front on offense, all you really need to know is that ThunderRidge held Ralston Valley to all of three snaps from center in the first quarter. The Grizzlies enjoyed two long, time-consuming drives and set the tone for the rest of the night.

With touted left tackle Sam Jones, left guard Blake Jacobs and center Brandan Chase, the Grizzlies were power players in every sense.

“We have two younger guys on the right side of the line, but those three guys (on the left) were the anchor for us,” Johnson said. “I’m proud of our guys.”

The ThunderRidge offensive front opened holes for rushes, protected quarterback Brody Westmoreland and wore down the Ralston Valley defense on a toasty evening.

“We did a lot of base blocking and we feel good our about offensive line,” Jacobs said. “It feels very good to come out here and play against a good team like that to not only control them, but to able to stop them and to hold them to as many points as we did was remarkable. The Mustangs are a very good football team.”

Westmoreland, who will play baseball in college and is in his fourth year as a starting quarterback for the Grizzlies, ran for two touchdowns and threw for two, to Tristan Powers and Mark Ciurczak.

Defensively, the Grizzlies never allowed the Mustangs to seriously challenge. Again, ThunderRidge was good up front and linebacker Tyler Seno contributed two sacks, one a biggie in the final seconds of the first half that helped keep the Mustangs scoreless.

ThunderRidge led all the way, scored in every quarter and felt good about its front walls.

“We also got good blocking from our tight ends,” Johnson said. “We’ve played very well on defense the past two weeks … I thought we controlled (the Mustangs) pretty good.”

Matt Stanley added a TD run for ThunderRidge.

Kevin Meadows caught two scoring passes for the Mustangs.

Neil H. Devlin: ndevlin@denverpost.com or twitter.com/neildevlin