Several speakers at the 6th Congressional District Republican convention rallied around the Donald Trump banner Saturday.

Cave Spring High School’s auditorium had many open seats for the meeting that elected a district chairman, delegates for the national convention and members of the state central committee.

District party leaders, including longtime Rep. Bob Goodlatte, R-Roanoke, who faces challenger Harry Griego in a June 14 primary, cited defeating likely Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton or nominating conservative Supreme Court justices as reasons to rally around the polarizing Trump.

“It’s absolutely essential that we be united and move forward as one in this critical election,” Goodlatte said, naming Trump in his congressional candidacy speech.

Prior to the Super Tuesday election he did not endorse a candidate.

While many Republicans fought hard against naming Donald Trump the party’s nominee and a few still continue the fight, many are falling in line behind the party’s bombastic new standard bearer.

Without saying Trump’s name, outgoing district Chairman Wendell Walker said party members should work together to elect the eventual nominee to be decided at the Republican National Convention in July.

“America’s going to be great again, ladies and gentleman,” Walker said in an opening speech, a reference to Trump’s campaign slogan. “It’s gotta start in this room.”

In an interview leading up to Super Tuesday, Walker had said he hoped Trump would be knocked out.

“Trump’s got the money to go a long time, but at some point people are not going to continue to tolerate his potty mouth, his intimidating, his bullying ways. That’s just not America. I hope not,” Walker said in an interview with The News & Advance in February.

On Saturday, he cited picking a conservative Supreme Court justice to replace the late Justice Antonin Scalia and other possible vacancies that would come up in the next term as reasons the party needs to unite.

Griego, a pilot out of Roanoke County, said previously he supported Trump but used his congressional candidacy speech Saturday to continue his attack against Goodlatte, whom he hopes to unseat.

In his mostly quiet campaign, Griego has said the 20-year congressman has voted to pass budgets funding Planned Parenthood, the Affordable Care Act and the president’s “amnesty” policy toward immigration.

“Our incumbent has a long history of capitulation and compromise,” Griego said.

Goodlatte, who spoke first, said he has fought the above policies.

Tom Howarth, Warren County Democratic district chair, will take on the Republican nominee after receiving the nomination from the 6th Congressional District Democrats Saturday.

After Ralph Smith, former state senator, dropped out of the race for district chairman, Scott Sayre, a Rockbridge County Republican, cruised to the nomination.

Sayre, whose platform focused on bringing voter data software to local committees to give them more autonomy, won strong local support throughout the district ahead of Saturday’s convention.

Smith was not on the ballot Saturday and Sayre, a former 6th District vice chair, was elected district chair without conflict.