A new study released Tuesday and reported on by the New York Times confirms something that probably isn’t much of a shocker: America is lagging behind many developed nations when it comes to our math and reading skills.

However while the Times and others apparently expected the ADD generation to fall behind our global peers they do seem pretty surprised that middle-aged Americans aren’t exceptionally advanced beyond their counterparts. “Even middle-aged Americans — who, on paper, are among the best-educated people of their generation anywhere in the world — are barely better than middle of the pack in skills,” reports the Times.

Of 23 countries Japan ranked first and Finland second on reading and math skills. The Netherlands, Sweden and Norway were also near the top. The U.S. clocked in near the middle in reading and near the bottom in math. Spain, Italy and France were at near the bottom in both reading and math.

“The first question these kinds of studies raise is, ‘If we’re so dumb, why are we so rich?’” the Times quotes Anthony P. Carnevale of Georgetown University as saying.

But what the study really finds isn’t just that Americans are dumb, but that we have a few very skilled people way at the top of the pyramid, and a large base ranking way at the bottom in skills. “The American results were among the most polarized between high achievement and low,” writes the Times.

Remind you of anything else? Polarization between high and low is roughly a model for the structure of American society writ large. Whether it’s education, our economic structure, or the way we think about healthcare, you see this pattern everywhere. How common is it for someone to say, “Well we may not insure everyone in this country, but our hospitals are the most sophisticated in the world”? Similarly, America is only a “rich country” when you look at the aggregate funds hoarded stateside. We look rich because our outliers are so rich they bring the average up, but the tiniest percentage of our country controls all that wealth. The vast majority of America is not exceedingly wealthy.

Obamacare is essentially an attempt to reorient the healthcare system from one of extreme polarization between the haves and the have-nots to a more even-tempered system that benefits a larger portion of the whole. Sounds like we could use a similar overhaul in our education system.