In the aftermath of the crisis in Washington — or more aptly, in the lull between crises — there is a danger that a few smug assumptions will solidify into received opinion on this side of the Atlantic. In the hope of dispelling some dangerous misconceptions, I will attempt to counter three myths that manage to be both alarmist and complacent at the same time.

The first is that the American democratic system is now so damaged that the country’s ability to govern itself effectively is in unprecedented peril. In fact, what has been impaired is the temporary credibility of the federal government, which has relatively little effect on the lives of most Americans. It is state governments that run the affairs that govern most civic and economic activity — and in large part (barring the occasional California-style bankruptcy), state governance is chugging along just fine. That is why the White House had to make such a show of closing public monuments and national parks during the “shutdown”: otherwise, scarcely anyone might have noticed it.

Few people I talk to in Britain appreciate just how much political, judicial and fiscal independence the states of the union have (and are guaranteed under the Constitution) from central government authority. This separate integrity is so sacred that one of the points of contention in the drafting of Obamacare was the matter of whether health insurance could be bought and sold across state lines.

Of course, there are federal programmes such as social security, Medicare and some welfare benefits that would be affected by any longer-term hiatus, but it is precisely this question of how large a role federal agencies should be permitted to have — and how much they should be able to spend — that is at the heart of the Washington conflict. There has been an inexorable push over the past century toward the centralisation of power at national level and the loss of local self-determination.

This is not just a US problem. Indeed, we are encountering just such a conflict in Europe now between the powers of member states and the central governing agencies. (I shall return to this point.) But what is unique in America’s dynamic is that its head of state does not have anything like the governing authority of most national leaders. The American president may be the most powerful man in the world by virtue of the country’s wealth and military strength, but within his own government he is simply head of the executive branch, which is checked and balanced by both houses of Congress and the Supreme Court. He has considerably less internal power than most prime ministers of smaller, poorer nations. As anyone who has tried to follow the arcane details of this dispute will know, US political structures are very, very complicated — particularly by comparison with parliamentary democracies — and this is entirely by design.

This brings us to the second myth: that Washington politics is now dysfunctional. It may be messy, crass and frighteningly parochial in its lack of concern for the outside world, but it is actually functioning pretty much the way the Founders intended it. So determined were they to constrain the potentially tyrannical might of central government that they constructed a system that would make it damn-near impossible for it to do anything radical or disruptive of general expectations. They did not, of course, envisage a future in which this union of rebellious colonies would become the most potent force on earth — and in which its enforced paralysis would have global repercussions. Ironically, it is America’s success in the world that has helped to create this dilemma for its constitutional structure.

What the diehards in Congress were trying to resist was what they saw as a betrayal of the fundamental principles of American democracy: the huge growth of federal control over areas of life that were once subject to local (state) democratic accountability, and a scale of spending at national level that revives the old revolutionary resentment against taxation by a remote, alien authority against which ordinary citizens feel powerless.

The federal government may look ineffectual, but that is not a partisan problem so much as an existential crisis. If the Congressional Republicans had made their stand on this point — specifically, reform of the entitlement programmes that were responsible for the huge increase in federal spending — rather than on defunding Obamacare, which had been passed and signed into law, they might not have suffered such an ignominious political defeat. As it was, the White House and the Congressional Democrats could justify their refusal to negotiate simply by intoning the magical words, “Obamacare is now law”. But the larger historic argument is about how powerful centralised government should be, and how much of our money it should spend. Sound familiar?

Which brings us to the third myth. That this was a quaint internal American problem produced by a combination of bizarre Washington gamesmanship and an outmoded Constitutional framework: apart from what might have been the alarming global economic consequences, it has no relevance for us. Oh, really?

What issue is it that has exercised our own Government over recent weeks? Oh yes — it’s the matter of whether the UK should be able to change its policy on the benefits to which EU migrants to this country are entitled. You may recall that this proposed change is based on two premises: that it is unjust for those who have just entered the country to be able to claim the same benefits as those who have lived and worked here, and that the availability of such automatic entitlements acts as a magnet drawing in excessive numbers of migrants who place great demands on public services such as health and education.

The European Commission not only declared this proposal to be against EU law, but it also went so far as to issue a report debunking the case put forward by the Coalition and denying its estimate of the cost of such benefits and of migrants’ use of the NHS. In a quite extraordinarily bellicose statement, it effectively accused the British government — and the press coverage that supported it — of faking the figures. Its spokesman demanded that the British political authorities provide “evidence” for the allegation that migrants were coming to Britain to take advantage of our benefits system.

So the democratically elected government of a sovereign state was to be summoned, in effect, before the unelected, unaccountable European Commission to prove its case for a change in its own country’s welfare policy. Yes, indeed — the growing power of centralised government over local populations is going to be the big fight of the age. And it’s coming to an arena near you.