Margaret Murnane, right, recently elected to the American Philosophical Society, talks to Ph.D. student Jennifer Ellis running an experiment in a laser lab at the Joint Institute for Lab Astrophysics at the University of Colorado. ( David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer )

Dr. Margaret Murnane can mark a career defined as much by her cutting-edge research in the fields of ultrafast laser and x-ray science as the near-euphoria she experiences by empowering young physicists and engineers.

"Working with students, you combine the experience of a senior scientist with the total fearlessness of young people," says Murnane, 56, professor and fellow at the Joint Institute for Lab Astrophysics on the University of Colorado campus.

"I see science as being very social, and discoveries are both more exciting and more likely if you have more than one person thinking about them."

She's as humble as she is talented, so she isn't entirely comfortable discussing the kinds of individual accolades she's racked up over the years — including countless fellowships, a distinguished professorship at the University of Colorado, a MacArthur "genius grant" and an appointment to the President's Committee on the National Medal of Science.

Her latest honor, being elected in May to the American Philosophical Society, puts her in the company of Charles Darwin, Louis Pasteur, Margaret Mead, Thomas Edison and the organization's founder, Benjamin Franklin.

The recognition is unquestionably merited, but, Murnane says, "I would not have seen this on the radar screen at all."

Advertisement

"I see myself as a very committed teacher, working with my students and setting up a good work environment," she adds, "but seeing myself in that league was not expected."

On the seventh floor of the JILA tower at CU, Murnane occupies a corner office with a stunning view of the Boulder foothills and some of the northern part of campus. Her coffee is stacked with obscure magazines that track advances in fields, such as laser technology, that get very little airtime in popular culture, but to which she has made immeasurable contributions.

Step out of her office, take one step to the right, and you're inside the office of her husband, Henry Kapteyn, a JILA fellow, professor and an equally decorated physicist who tends more toward the entrepreneurial side than Murnane does.

"We met in a lasers class," she recounts. "And we still talk about lasers. A lot."

Together, the duo has worked to develop new ultrafast laser and x-ray sources for experiments in physics, chemistry, material science and engineering. The laser beams they work with are expected to be crucial tools for scientists in developing practical nanoscale machines both now and in the future.

While Kapteyn ponders ways that fundamental science can impact the economy, Murnane remains "very focused on education," a purpose she says her father, a long-time teacher in Ireland, instilled early on.

"My dad taught 40 6-year-olds every year for 40 years," Murnane says. "I remember an adult walking down our main street coming up to my dad and saying, 'You know, your class really taught me how to love learning, and I think if you hadn't given me that love, I would never have gone as far in my career.'

"I thought, 'Oh my god. Teachers can have very good influences and really help people attain their dreams."

Her current students can't say enough good things.

"The thing "'m really impressed with, that I've seen more in her than any of professor I've worked for, is her knowledge of the specifics of the experiments without actually being around them," said Charlie Bevis, a Ph.D. student in physics.

"She'll pop in and say hello, or she'll come in after being away three weeks, and she's entirely knowledgeable after a 5-minute catch up."

Adds Robert Karl, Jr., also working toward a Ph.D. in physics:

"I've been here for almost a year now and in that entire time I don't think I've heard her say anything negative toward anyone's ideas. She's immediately on board with ways to make things better, push them forward, make sure they happen. You can always get support, and that is awesome."

In keeping with her general pproach to education, Murnane says that when she's officially inducted into the American Philosophical Society in November, she'll be most satisfied if others — and particularly female and minority scientists — are inspired.

"I have no interest in science as an isolated activity," she said. "We learn tremendous amounts together."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness