Photo

Good Friday morning from Washington, where President Obama is preparing for a historic trip to India, Senator Harry Reid of Nevada continues his recuperation tour still bearing the wounds of a New Year’s Day accident, and Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky boasts of a legislative breakthrough. With the death of King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia early Friday, we look at the sometimes awkward moments he’s shared with American presidents. And Mr. Obama courts the YouTube generation in a conversation with three video bloggers.

The death of King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia will usher in a new era of relations between the United States and its most stalwart Arab ally.

It will also bring to a close a diplomatic chapter in which a succession of United States presidents found themselves in awkward situations caught on film.

President Obama, in one example, was photographed in 2009 greeting Abdullah on the sidelines of the G-20 summit meeting in London. In an image seen around the world, the American president was shown stooped in front of the king.

The Washington Times called it a “shocking display of fealty to a foreign potentate,” and said that by “bending over to show greater respect to Islam, the U.S. president belittled the power and independence of the United States.”

White House officials said it was not a bow, that Mr. Obama was only reaching to shake the king’s hand.

Four years earlier, a picture of President George W. Bush and Abdullah generated its own commentary. During Abdullah’s visit to Mr. Bush’s ranch in Crawford, Tex., the president and the king were photographed holding hands — a traditional Saudi gesture of friendship. Late-night comics made it a running joke and resurrected photos of Mr. Bush kissing Abdullah on the cheek.

Mr. Obama’s final visit with the king in Riyadh, the Saudi capital, in the spring of 2014 was a somber affair. By then, Abdullah was already ill, and the image of the ailing king using an oxygen tank offered the world — and the Saudi people — a foreshadowing of his passing.

— Michael D. Shear

This may be the first weekend of the 2016 presidential campaign, even though we, so far, have no official candidates.

There’s Jeb Bush in San Francisco, where the former Florida governor will speak Friday at a conference for car dealers and take questions for the first time since announcing that he might seek the White House.

On Saturday, prominent Republicans from across the country head to Iowa. The state’s caucuses — the opening round in every presidential contest — are a year away. The attraction this weekend is Representative Steve King’s annual Freedom Summit.

Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, former Gov. Rick Perry of Texas, former Senator Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas have all promised to be there to show their support of “pro-growth economics, social conservatism and a strong national defense.”

It will be a busy travel weekend for Mr. Cruz, who’s also been invited to the annual “Koch primary” hosted by Charles G. and David H. Koch, the billionaire brothers and conservative patrons. The retreat, held at a Palm Springs, Calif., resort, will provide entrée to the brothers’ vast donor network.

Officially, it’s called the American Recovery Policy Forum, and Senators Marco Rubio of Florida and Rand Paul of Kentucky have also said they’d be there. Mr. Cruz, Mr. Rubio and Mr. Paul will take part in a group discussion on Sunday night led by Jonathan Karl, the ABC News correspondent.

— Alan Rappeport

President Obama takes off early on Saturday for India, leaving behind at least some of the worries of Washington for what promises to be a warmer reception than he received on Capitol Hill for his State of the Union address this week.

He will be the first American president honored as the chief guest of the country’s Republic Day parade on the anniversary of its democratic Constitution coming into force.

It will also be the first time that Mr. Obama will be in the open air amid giant crowds in a foreign country for such an extended period.

It’s safe to say the Secret Service isn’t thrilled. The agency generally puts a president behind bulletproof glass shields, but it can’t protect him from the awkward geopolitics — much of the military hardware during the parade will be Russian-made.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who has struck a friendship of sorts with Mr. Obama, will host the president and Michelle Obama for a state dinner. The Obamas will wrap up three days on the ground with a tour of the Taj Mahal.

Mr. Obama also visited India in 2010, making him the first American president to go twice while in office.

— Peter Baker

Senator Harry Reid met Thursday with the Capitol press corps — on camera. It was the latest of his concerted efforts to show that a serious exercise injury was not going to have long-term consequences for his re-election bid next year or his role as the Senate’s top Democrat.

Since the accident in his Nevada home on Jan. 1, Mr. Reid, 75, and his staff have released photos and video that most politicians would have been reluctant to make public. They showed Mr. Reid’s badly bruised face and a large bandage covering his right eye.

Health is one subject that makes all politicians touchy: They don’t want to stir thoughts of vulnerability or retirement. And with eye surgery scheduled for Monday and the prospect of at least another week away from the Capitol, Mr. Reid wants to make clear that he is not going away, particularly with a potentially tough re-election approaching.

“We have quite an operation in Nevada that hasn’t lost a step,” Mr. Reid said. “We’re off and running.”

— Carl Hulse

It was a minor milestone, but Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky made the most of it on Thursday in announcing that the Senate had voted on 15 amendments in its first three weeks, matching the number for all of last year.

“This is the way the Senate ought to work,” Mr. McConnell said.

The dearth of Senate floor fights under Democratic control had been a major source of tension over the past few years. Before the November election, Republicans attacked Senator Mark Begich of Alaska (who lost) for not securing a single vote on an amendment during his six years in office.

Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the No. 2 Democrat, said his party deserved credit for its cooperative attitude. It was a swipe at what Democrats considered as the entirely uncooperative attitude of Republicans when they were in the minority.

Republicans made their own subtle point. Senator Dan Sullivan, who defeated Mr. Begich, was among those to get a vote on one of his amendments.

— Carl Hulse

President Obama will deliver remarks to the United States Conference of Mayors at the White House.

Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. will visit West Los Angeles College in California to discuss “the importance of helping Americans go to college.” Mr. Biden’s office also announced Thursday night that he would “be leading a presidential delegation representing the United States to pay our respects and offer condolences to King Abdullah’s family and nation.”

The National Association of Realtors will release existing home sales statistics for December.

The interrogators, the location and even some of the answers were unusual.

But a presidential interview is still a presidential interview, even if some of the questions come from a woman in bright green lipstick who calls herself GloZell Green.

Ms. Green is a YouTube star, one of three selected for a nontraditional question-and-answer follow-up to President Obama’s State of the Union address. It was broadcast on the White House’s own YouTube channel.

He and the video bloggers talked about cybersecurity, foreign affairs and how to make college more affordable. But one, Bethany Mota, also wanted to know about the president’s dream superpower. “Flying seems pretty cool,” he said.

Mr. Obama said the conversation was a way to reach “audiences that get turned off by the traditional news shows or the traditional debates.” Collectively, the three video stars have more than 13 million subscribers — eight million for Ms. Mota, three million for Ms. Green and two million for Hank Green, the third blogger in on the interviews. (Mr. Green and his brother John, author of “The Fault in Our Stars,” run the Vlogbrothers channel.)

The novice interviewers occasionally betrayed a case of nerves. Ms. Green brought her trademark lipsticks as gifts for the president’s wife and daughters. But she fumbled her words and said it was a present for “his first wife.”

Mr. Obama was quick with a quip: “Do you know something I don’t?”

— Elena Schneider

A look at the life of King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, and the country’s new leader, King Salman.

President Obama has no plans to meet with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu when he visits Washington to address Congress in March.

Martin Scorsese’s partly finished documentary about Bill Clinton has stalled over disagreements about control.

There are chaotic repercussions in Albany after the arrest of the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver. Jim Dwyer’s take on Mr. Silver’s fall.

The objection of some Republican women to a bill that would ban abortion after 20 weeks has opened a new rift in the party.

In The New Yorker, Ryan Lizza and Hendrik Hertzberg discuss the long-term significance of this week’s State of the Union address.

Ms. Magazine surveys the attitude toward abortion among women born after the Roe v. Wade decision in 1973.

Anna Goldenberg of The Jewish Daily Forward details what it takes to get tickets to “The Daily Show With Jon Stewart.”

Rich Lowry, writing in Politico Magazine, says President Obama has an unhealthy obsession with the prison in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.

Comcast’s “lobbying machine” in Washington is being tested over debates about net neutrality and the company’s proposed merger with Time Warner Cable, according to The Wall Street Journal.