Courtesy of pima.gov

● McSally Supported an Abortion Ban. In May 2015, McSally voted for a bill that would prohibit abortions in cases where the probable age of the fetus is 20 weeks or later and would impose criminal penalties on doctors who violate the ban. It would provide exceptions for cases in which the woman's life is in danger as well as for pregnancies that are a result of rape if, as amended, for pregnancies that are a result of rape against an adult woman, the woman received counseling or medical treatment for the rape at least 48 hours prior to the abortion. An exception would be provided for pregnancies resulting from rape or incest against a minor if the rape or incest had been previously reported to law enforcement or another government agency authorized to act on reports of child abuse. [HR 36, Vote #223, 5/13/15; CQ Floor Votes]



● McSally Voted to Limit Access to Reproductive Health Services. In 2015, McSally voted for the ‘No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Act,’ which “seeks to make the [Hyde] amendment permanent law, and to prevent federal funds from going not just toward abortions themselves but toward any plan, provider, or facility that offer such services. […] The bill gives insurers a big incentive to drop abortion coverage from their plans, or risk losing the large pool of consumers who receive the law’s subsidies.” [National Journal, 1/28/15; HR 7, Vote #45, 1/22/15; CQ Floor Votes]



● McSally Opposed Abortion in Cases of Rape and Incest during Her First Run for Office. “During her 2012 campaign, in a questionnaire from a conservative group, McSally said she supported repealing Obamacare and prohibiting abortion except when it was necessary to prevent the death of the mother.” [Politico, 6/09/14]

The Democratic political action committee EMILY's List put U.S. Rep. Martha McSally "on notice" for the next election cycle, making her seat a "top target" for a Democrat takeover in 2016.The PAC keeps track of Republican incumbents at all levels of government who have an anti-abortion, anti-reproductive health record.“The EMILY’s List community—more than three million members strong—is committed to holding elected officials accountable for their extreme anti-woman and anti-family records,” said Stephanie Schriock, president of EMILY’s List. “In the last five months of the 114th Congress, Congresswoman McSally has proven to be more interested in supporting national abortion bans and restricting women’s access to health care instead of the interest of the most vulnerable men and women in Arizona’s Second Congressional District. That’s why EMILY’s List is putting Martha McSally “On Notice”—her refusal to stand up for women and families in Arizona will get her sent packing in 2016.”Here's what EMILY's has kept track of: The on notice list is updated throughout the election cycle.EMILY's contributes hundreds of millions of dollars in support of pro-abortion Democratic women candidates to be elected to office.