Topics: From the Wires, News

ITOMAN, Japan (AP) — In Norman Baker’s mind, the Japanese were fanatical, brutal animals with no respect for life. To Yoshiko Shimabukuro, Americans were long-nosed demons who rained hellfire from the skies before raping and pillaging anything with the worse-than-death fate of crossing their path.

Both the 18-year-old U.S. Marine and the 17-year-old Okinawan schoolgirl had known the enemy only from the virulent propaganda they had been fed. When they finally met their foes in the closing months of World War II, in separate, back-to-back battles hundreds of miles apart, it was on the most terrifying terms. And in the 70 years since, it has been difficult to reconcile the hatred of the past with the peace of the present.

Here are their stories, as told to The Associated Press on Iwo Jima and the island of Okinawa.

___

EARLY ENCOUNTERS

BAKER arrived with the 4th Marine Division on Iwo Jima in the dead of night on Feb. 25, 1945, and was assigned to a security detachment protecting units clearing two airfields. He was the first off his unit’s landing craft.

“When the clam doors opened, I had no concept of war. I became a man in a matter of seconds. The beach was by this time a chaos of men and equipment under Japanese mortar and artillery fire. It was a sobering and aging experience. I quickly moved into a shell hole.”

One morning, as he walked past a pillbox fortification, he looked inside and saw a Japanese soldier huddled in a corner. The soldier moved. Without hesitation, Baker fired.

“He was so close when I shot him the blood splattered on me.”

“We were indoctrinated throughout that the Japanese were a people to be hated. … I was a good soldier. I developed a brutal mentality. I didn’t avoid contact.”

SHIMABUKURO was assigned in March 1945 to the Himeyuri Student Corps, mobilized by Japanese soldiers who were fortifying Okinawa and mobilizing Okinawan civilians for the fight ahead. More than half the 240 women and girls who went with her never came home.

Working out of various caves, Shimabukuro watched amputations without anesthesia, treated horribly infected wounds, listened to the cries of soldiers and sat helplessly as they died. They had little water and even less food. When a shell hit right outside a cave opening, killing all who were near, she knew the end was at hand.

Her unit was dissolved on June 18. She was ordered to leave the cave.

“We didn’t want to leave. We didn’t want to have to be scattered out there and die alone,” she said. “I asked for some kind of explosive, or cyanide, so that I could kill myself if the Americans came. I was told they didn’t have anything like that for us. They told us that if we were captured we should bite off our own tongues and bleed to death.

“We called them the American beasts. We were taught that if they captured us, they wouldn’t just kill us. They would strip us naked, rape us. So we weren’t as afraid to die as we were afraid of being captured alive.”

___

THE ENEMY RE-EXAMINED

BAKER, in an area of some of the worst Iwo Jima fighting, prepared to jump over a shell hole when he spotted a Japanese soldier moving below. The soldier faced Baker and raised his left arm above his head. Baker aimed his machine gun and motioned for the man to raise his other arm. They were just a few feet apart.

“I threw off the safety on the Thompson and prepared to kill him. His eyes pleaded for his life as he turned enough to show me that he had been shot in the back in the area of his right shoulder blade.”

The Marine behind Baker yelled at him to quickly kill the soldier. Baker said no. He was taking the man prisoner.