It was during an endless drive home from a camping trip in Eastern Washington that entrepreneur Adam Stites came up with his latest product. “What would happen if I infused heavy cream with cannabis, then mixed it with my coffee?” he mused. (“My VW van doesn’t go very fast, so I have a lot of time to think,” Stites explains.)

He road-tested the idea as soon as he got home. So strong was the first dose, Stites woke up 13 hours after chugging a single cup. Nonetheless, his professional interest was piqued. Soon he set up Mirth Provisions to sell a commercial version of his creation: marijuana-infused cold-brew coffee, dosed up with 20 milligrams of THC per serving. Waggishly named “Legal,” it’s the ultimate wake and bake.

“Our customers are not looking to get blown out of their mind, just ever so slightly tilt their relativity,” Stites says, employing the lyricism of a man who clearly started his day with a cup of Legal. “It’s great for a Sunday morning, where I’m at a teahouse reading the newspaper and want to focus and get some work done,” he tells us from a conference in Las Vegas.

It required a complex process for Stites to develop his signature product. Binding the weed and beans into a functional joint venture was a major hurdle. Coffee and cannabis molecules separate when brewed because cannabis oil is not water-soluble; much of Mirth Provisions’ intellectual property rests in the unique way it uses plant-based emulsifiers to keep the oil evenly suspended in water.

The science

Moreover, Stites had to find the ideal cannabis strain to complement coffee in both flavor and effect. Cannabis contains two crucial components: THC, the psychoactive element most closely associated with feeling high, and CBD, which has no hallucinogenic impact and usually leads to alertness. The two major species of marijuana, sativa and indica, contain varying proportions of THC and CBD. Stites spent months trying to find the ideal ratio of each, testing 50 different strains before narrowing his final choices. Legal’s range includes plain coffee, coffee with sugar and milk, and even fruit drinks, each juiced with its own herb recipe.

Weed adds a rich, earthy base to the flavor, he explains, while Legal’s mixture of THC and CBD confers a calm sense of focus on caffeine’s jittery high. Caffeine is absorbed almost instantly by the body, but it takes from 45 minutes to 90 minutes for the human body to process the weed so it can prolong the caffeine high, Stites says.

The profit potential

The potential profits from a mashup of coffee and caffeine are, well, high. Per IRI data from Bloomberg Intelligence, coffee sales in America totaled $9.4 billion in the 52 weeks ending Nov. 1; it’s harder to gauge the size of the pot industry nationwide, but most estimates put it around $3 billion annually. Legal coffee has racked up sales of $439,815 since it launched in September 2014, all but $6,737 of which came in during the current calendar year.

Given these numbers, Stites isn’t alone in creating canna-coffee, drinkable riffs on a spliff. Elsewhere in the Northwest, Vancouver, Washington-based Fairwinds Manufacturing produces Catapult, its own Mary Jane joe by applying oil to whole coffee beans before grinding and stabilizing the mixture. The company sold around 2,000 units last month, and owner James Hull estimates sales are increasing by 15 percent month-over-month. Both these figures are for a single state (Washington), but it’s easy to extrapolate the enormous potential market as the legalization of cannabis spreads.

Cultural factors involved

The rush of canna-coffees isn’t driven solely by the potential of its dual market, according to Jordan Michelman, co-founder of Sprudge, a Portland-based online coffee magazine. He suggests cultural factors play a role, too.

“In the Pacific Northwest, there’s this slang term for a Northwest Speed Ball, which is a shot of espresso and a puff of marijuana, and people have been doing that for quite some time,” he says.

Both cafe culture and counterculture emerged simultaneously and in the same place, says Michelman: Beatniks and hippies have been drinking espresso and smoking joints in the Pacific Northwest since the 1960s. Since marijuana was legalized, coffee roasters have been able to capitalize on that association legally, creating Speed Ball-inspired products such as Legal coffee. (Michelman calls Legal the “best tasting” of all the weed-infused brews he’s tried.) It doesn’t hurt that canna-coffees are high-margin, novelty gimmicks for dispensaries to use in luring curious newcomers, much as vaporizers probably did when first launched.

All this raises some of the safety questions inspired by vaporizers, especially the issue of gateway products. A study, published in the Journal of Neuroscience by a team from a branch of the National Institutes of Health, explored the impact of a caffeine-like drug on lab monkeys; its findings suggested doses of such a chemical tended to lead to higher intakes of weed. Combining the two, it seems, could be risky, at least according to Gary Wenk, an Ohio State neuroscience professor and author of Your Brain on Food.

“Coffee enhances marijuana’s addictive properties,” Wenk explains by email. Since it turbocharges marijuana’s euphoria in that way, Wenk continues, coffee spiked with weed could lead to dependence on the latter.

The biggest challenge for this budding industry, though, is current laws bar consumption on premises, Amsterdam-style, in coffee shops. Legal and its ilk must be brewed — and consumed — at home.