We take a look back at Nov. 17, 2013, the day tornadoes swept a path of destruction through central Illinois, in our special section "Strength Shines Through" in Sunday's Journal Star and daily posts at http://www.pjstar.com/extra and at http://www.pjstar.com/tornado2013

PEKIN – The city of Pekin is making steady strides in its recovery from the Nov. 17, 2013, tornado.

The EF2 tornado damaged 163 houses in Pekin. There were no deaths or severe injuries.

The city did not charge residents for permits associated with tornado damage. Permit costs are billed at $3 per every $1,000 of property value, said Ron Sieh, code enforcement officer. The city has not kept a running tab on the total value of the homes for which the permits were issued. Officials are planning a report to cover all of the permit values from Nov. 17, 2013, to Nov. 17 of this year. Sieh’s assistant, Juanita Vanbuskirk, said that people are still coming in at a steady pace for permits as insurance claims are settled.

Sieh said that six homes were totaled in the storm and had to be demolished and rebuilt. The rest of the 163 homes suffered damage such as broken windows, damaged siding, missing roof shingles, destroyed sheds and other damage. The damaged area included the lower part of Sheridan Road, Truman Drive, Coolidge Avenue, Eisenhower Drive, Crescent Avenue, Delshire Avenue, Lakeside Avenue, North Fourth Street and Capitol Street. Only one business sustained damage, a damaged fence.

Two homeowners have waited nearly a year for their insurance companies to pay for the damage. One of those homeowners settled the issues with the insurance company in the past week. The delays with it were related to the family’s decision to rebuild the house on a larger scale.

The other homeowners’ insurance company has now agreed to have a new engineer examine the house to see if it is totalled. The house, according to Pekin Times past reporting, has twisted rafters from the storm lifting the roof.

Three houses were demolished and not rebuilt. Two of the lots have been sold and the third is on the market.

The American Red Cross provided assistance to a total of 2,841 people In Tazewell County. The Red Cross did not break down records by municipality. There were 2,634 health and mental health services provided and four shelters with 157 overnight stays. There were 47,563 meals and snacks served and 25,594 bulk items like tarps, shovels, clean up kits and totes provided, according to Erin Miller, regional communications director.

Pekin City Manager Darin Girdler said that the city has received all of the funds due it from the Illinois Emergency Management Agency. The agency paid the city $84,044. The city also received an additional $15,811 from the state Motor Fuel Tax Fund for the replacement of stop signs, directional signs and street name signs that were damaged by the tornado. The city was not eligible for FEMA aid because the damage total did not meet the agency’s criteria.

Girdler said the city has evaluated its performance in the days and weeks following the disaster to see what improvements could be made.

“One thing we want to work on is contracting with emergency responders for things like tree trimming and hauling,” said Girdler. “(The companies) were not on standby just for us. We want a contract for a set price. We would have a much easier path for the city to be reimbursed should the event be large enough for FEMA to look at.

___

We take a look back at Nov. 17, 2013, the day tornadoes swept a path of destruction through central Illinois, in our special section "Strength Shines Through" in Sunday's Journal Star and daily posts at http://www.pjstar.com/extra and at http://www.pjstar.com/tornado2013