DERBY, Conn. (AP) - As the one-year anniversary of Derby toddler Anthony Muoio’s lifesaving surgery approaches, his family paid it forward recently to Yale-New Haven Children’s Hospital, which saved the young boy’s life.

Anthony will be 17 months old on Friday, one year after undergoing an intensive, nine-hour surgery to remove a life-threatening brain tumor.

The tumor was resting against an artery, threatening to cut off then 5-month-old Anthony’s blood supply. Doctors successfully removed the tumor, and Anthony has experienced an “amazing recovery.” He will continue with follow-up care for years, but recently graduated to having MRIs every six months instead of every three, according to his parents.

To celebrate the one-year milestone, Anthony and his parents, Sarah and Robert Muoio, and brother, Nico, paid a visit to the hospital, delivering 32 gift “bags of hope” and gift cards to the families of children facing medical crises of their own.

Anthony delivered cookies and pumpkins to the nurses’ station and hugged the respiratory therapist who took him off his ventilator last year. The family was also met in the hospital lobby by the priest who provided comfort and prayers during their trying ordeal.

“We decided to pay it forward mostly because of all the love, support, and prayers that Anthony received in the hospital,” said Sarah Muoio. “He was surrounded by an amazing doctor, nursing, and hospital staff. They carried us through his battle as a family. They put our son back in our hands better then we handed him over to them. They saved his life. We are forever indebted.”

The gift bags come courtesy of donations made by people, dubbed “Anthony’s Army,” who reached out to the Muoio family via Facebook during the two weeks they spent in the pediatric intensive care unit, following Anthony’s surgery. The bags contained comforting items including blankets and toys for the children, notepads and pens for parents, snacks, water bottles, Anthony’s Army wrist bands and post cards showing Anthony’s progress, aimed at giving parents hope for their children’s future.

“When Anthony was in the hospital, we were surrounded by an ‘army’ of people who provided us with all we would need to get through our 14 days in the PICU,” said Muoio. “My husband and I felt that a major part of Anthony’s recovery was attributed to the homemade blankets that my mother had brought us from home. In a cold and scary ICU, they provided him warmth and comfort.”

Muoio said Anthony’s Facebook page has attracted hundreds of followers watching Anthony’s progress and donating to other families in need.

Once Anthony took a turn for the better, Muoio met other parents who didn’t have the outside support her family received through friends and Facebook. That’s why she decided to create the “bags of hope” to provide comfort to those struggling with the very issues her family endured.

“It’s so meaningful for us to do this because not only do we want to raise awareness, we want to help others in Anthony’s honor because so many people helped us,” Muoio added.

Muoio, who is director of Derby’s Senior Center, said Anthony’s “smile and infectious personality” pushed the family to do more.

“He loves being around people, he volunteers with us all the time and he has really been the driving force in keeping us positive,” Muoio noted. “Until he was diagnosed, we had no idea about pediatric brain tumors, so raising awareness is so important to us. The first thing the doctors told us was that five to 10 years ago, there was no cure for Anthony’s condition. Someone raised awareness down the road, and medical advances sent us home from the hospital with our son. We so feel the need to continue that so other families can end up on our end of things.”

The Muoios are currently shooting a documentary about Anthony’s case with Yale, and have since developed a Website www.kickitforkids.org, to raise awareness.

Hospital child life specialist Leah Yazmer met the Muoios at Yale-New Haven Wednesday and expressed her gratitude for the donations.

“This donation is extremely kind and thoughtful of you and your family in honor of Anthony’s one year,” Yazmer said.

___

Information from: New Haven Register, http://www.nhregister.com