Thanks to a legislative priority of tax cuts over social services, the state-funded mental health system is capable of serving only a fraction of the estimated 4 million Floridians with mental health challenges, primarily those with severe and persistent illnesses who are in crisis.

That was the takeaway message from a panel discussion Monday hosted by the League of Women Voters of Sarasota County, during which representatives from three local mental health providers — Jack Minge, president and CEO of Coastal Behavioral Healthcare; Phillip “P.J.” Brooks, a licensed mental health counselor with First Step of Sarasota; and Ken Alexander, executive director of Bayside Center for Behavioral Health at Sarasota Memorial Hospital — discussed their challenges in meeting the mental health and substance-abuse treatment needs of the local community.

“Oftentimes, we are the receiver of last resort,” acknowledged Brooks. “It's not often that we get what I call 'the worried well.'”

According to a report on mental health spending compiled by the Florida Association of Managing Entities for 2014-2015, more than 36 percent of adult mental health funding in the state is spent on crisis intervention, while just 0.03 percent is spent on prevention and only 13.7 percent on recovery support.

That emphasis is dictated by Medicaid funding that has not increased over the past 15 years, said Minge, despite a substantial increase in the state's population. According to the most recent statistics, Florida ranks second to last among the nation's states and the District of Columbia in per capita funding dedicated to mental health. The $37.49 it spends per resident represents just 30 percent of the national average of $124.99 per individual. Put another way, for every dollar Florida spends on mental health services, states on the whole spent $4.74, according to the Florida Center for Fiscal and Economic Policy.

“Can you imagine any business running without a rate increase over 15 years?” said Minge. “We would need $400 million in effective funding now just to equal where we were 15 years ago.”

Gov. Rick Scott's refusal of state Medicaid funding through the Affordable Care Act has prevented local entities from strengthening the community-based programs that were intended to provide services after the closure of state mental hospitals since the mid-1960s. Citing just one example of a missed opportunity, Minge noted the federal government provided grants to 24 states, underwriting the development of planning strategies that would improve their mental health systems. Currently eight of those states — and potentially all 24 in the future — will be receiving implementation grants that will allow them to put their discoveries in place.

“Florida was not one of the states that applied,” Minge said.

Bayside's Alexander estimated that the number of Sarasota County residents with mental health needs as “in the tens of thousands” but said that, while the Florida Legislature is well aware of the pressing needs, “in general, things get resolved in Tallahassee by crisis or by lawsuit.”

“And of course, there's a finite amount of money,” he added. (To which an audience member responded: “There's a finite amount of thinking.")

Minge said local legislators and county officials have been supportive in advocating for more funding and have been successful in getting small increases in pocket areas. But, he added, “as a whole, this is not an issue that has been adopted at the state level.”

“Obviously, there are conflicting priorities,” he said. “And with our most recent governor, the priority is for tax cuts.”