Get off the annoying phone!

Manhattan: Re “Show Stoppers” (July 10): Good for Patti LuPone! I was at a Circle In The Square performance decades ago of “Death of a Salesman” with George C Scott. It was enthralling until an audience member starting snapping flash photos. He did not pick up on Scotts’ subtle glances at him as the rest of us did. He continued snapping away. Finally after a few tense moments, Scott stopped the incredible scene with co-star Elizabeth Wilson, and stormed up the steps to this socially unconscious egoist, grabbed the camera, berated him loudly, and had him removed. We all sat silent. Scott returned to the stage, was soothed by his scene partner, left for a moment, returned and resumed the scene. What a magical tribute to the power of effort and concentration a performer has before a live audience. As for Madonna, actor Jonathan Groff should know she also interrupts Sabbath services with late entrances, whispers and distractions. Why do these intrusive phonies bother to show up to begin with? Doris Gramovot-Borg

Donald trumps all

Bayside: Donald Trump is a leader. He excels in doing business on the world stage. He can and will provide many jobs. He can make deals in Congress. He will reverse and revise Obamacare. He will keep Social Security. He will stop illegal immigration. He loves his country. We will have good relations with counties that are our friends. He will appoint the best people to positions. He has more experience running things than any governor. Go Trump! Phyllis Ecker

Not a circus performer

Bronx: The Daily News thinks that Donald Trump is a clown. You will eat your words. Trump is exactly what the Republican Party needs right now to get the White House back. A ticket of Trump-Rubio and we are in! Hillary is shaking in those legs of hers just thinking about a debate with him. He will chew her up and have her for lunch. And his wife Melania for First Lady? OMG — looks and class back in the White House, along with guts and brains. He already has my vote. Love you, Mr. Trump. Donna De Marta

Speaking of clowns

Amsterdam, N.Y.: The only clown running for President is the elderly, spiteful woman with no clearcut political agenda. Rich Kiffney

More on clowns

Freehold, N.J.: I guess I got out of the state just in time. New York is being run by two boobs, one from the State Capitol and one from City Hall. These two clowns couldn’t run a crack house. Richard Doll

The Andy and Bill show

Brooklyn: I think it’s time the mayor and the governor stop acting like little children and grow up. The governor should know better since he has been in office longer, but no, he stoops down to the mayor’s level. The governor would have done himself a whole lot of good if he would have tried to be the better person like his father would have. You think he would have learned that from watching his dad but I guess he was not paying attention. As for the mayor, in such a short time he has managed to mess up numerous times. Here was a chance for him to be the better man and win back some trust but he just keeps digging himself into a deeper hole. I think it’s time both of them think about the people. You remember, the ones who put both of them into office. The same way they put them in office, they can easily kick then out of office. We depend on them to run this city and state to the best of their ability — not make it worse by refusing to work together. So, children grow up and act like men for all the people of New York City and State. It’s no accident I did not mention either of you by name. When you show you can work together, then I will be happy to put your names after your titles. John DeAngelo

Learn from Ed

Yonkers: Those of us of a certain age recall a wildly popular thrice-elected mayor of New York named Ed Koch, whose trademark was asking random New Yorkers on the street, “How’m I doing?” Mayor de Blasio would surely learn a lot were he to adopt a similar policy and heed the responses. Dennis M. Farley

Bill’s background

Brooklyn: I thank Voicer Arlene Soto for the reminder that our mayor has legally changed his name, not once, but twice. I guess it’s a habit (shared by other ambitious pols). He thereby dishonored his late father, a military veteran injured, I believe, in the Pacific in WWII. I guess the mayor believed that having an Italianate surname would help his political chances in NYC. Mary Gallagher

Saluting Officer Mike

Manhattan: On June 29 I had to appear at 60 Centre St. for jury duty. I wasn’t feeling well that morning when I arrived. I informed the person at the desk, who called over a court officer, named Mike. He went beyond his duty to make sure that I was okay. Mike went to get me water, twice. He stayed with me until he knew I was fine. He even went as far as to walk me outside the courthouse when I was leaving and then stayed me for a few minutes. I can’t thank Mike enough for his compassion and care for someone he didn’t even know. Thank you Court Office Mike. May God bless you and your family. Gwendolyn Barco

Standing by their horses

Bronx: To Voicer Joe Ametrano and all who hate the horse carriages: Yes, the horses are standing in the cold and the heat and the fumes, but so are the drivers trying make money to feed their families and their horses. Carmela Avellino

A surprising free ride

Manhattan: I’m 85 years old and am quite crippled, needing a cane and suffering spine trouble, knee problems and a heart that needs value replacement. On June 24, I left my walk-up apartment for the first time in six weeks to go the hair salon. I was at 86th St. and First Ave., trying to catch a cab to take me home to 89th St. However, it was 5 p.m. and the cabs were changing shifts and they were all off duty. I was waiting there for 15 minutes and was in great distress because I can’t stand for a long time, when finally a cab turned the corner and stopped for me. I was so grateful. It took just a minute or two to drive the 31/4 blocks to my building and when we arrived, I wanted to pay my fare. To my utter amazement the driver, a black man, refused to let me pay. He said that he was off duty on his way to his garage and took pity on me and he only wanted my blessing, which I readily gave. I did not get his name or number, but I would like to thank him publicly for his act of great kindness. I’m still stunned by his action. Emma Kaefer

Seeing no evil

Garden City Park. L.I.: I cannot believe Whoopi Goldberg is still defending Bill Cosby after the latest testimony which he admitted giving drugs to women he wanted to have sex with! What more proof could she possibly need to find this man guilty? I think her “view” on this matter is way off. Push those glasses up on your nose, Whoopi, and open your eyes. Lina Williams

Smart and legal

Pomona, N.Y.: Stop, question and frisk does work if done legally. You can’t violate people’s rights just to get guns off the street. Martin L. Gleason, Ret. P.D.

Uncapping crime

Briarwood: To all the geniuses who were yelling about ending stop and frisk: With shootings and killings up along with other crimes, an old saying comes to mind: Be careful what you wish for. William Nagrenol

Cuban name game

Jamaica: All Latins and a lot of Americans know that Havana’s original, actual and current name is Habana. So when and why did gringos change Habana’s name to Havana, and while they were at it, why didn’t they change Cuba to Cuva? Oscar Barros

Jenner and Jenner alone

North Babylon, L.I.: Bruce Jenner is an egotistical nut job. He is a selfish person who only cares about ways to get his/her/its picture on the TV and in the newspapers. Did he take into consideration how his children or his grandchildren would feel before he/she/it undertook his transformation? I think not. Patrick Capone

Toll the pedestrians

Whitestone: So a tourist has now taken a photo of himself on an outer beam of the Brooklyn Bridge. Last summer some artists replaced two American flags atop towers of the structure with massive white flags. With all the people walking up and across the bridge, we should put up tolls. We would make a fortune. Sally De Felice