Friday’s terrorist attacks in Paris that killed scores and left hundreds injured have prompted the NFL and hosting teams to increase security during Sunday’s games, including Broncos-Chiefs at Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

Three suicide bombings rattled the Stade de France, where France and Germany were playing an exhibition soccer match Friday, the first of which sparked a wave of attacks throughout the city.

The NFL on Saturday released a statement saying it had been informed by the Department of Homeland Security and FBI that there were no known threats against NFL stadiums.

RELATED: Eiffel Tower goes dark as France mourns 129 dead

The safety of our fans, stadium personnel, and teams at all NFL games is our priority, and security at our games is robust. Our procedures have been certified and designated by the Department of Homeland Security since 2008 as effective anti-terrorism technology. All NFL clubs use mandatory metal detector screening and multiple layers of perimeter security external to the stadium to safeguard fans and the stadium from explosive threats. Following the events in Paris on Friday, we are closely monitoring events and have been in communication with the Department of Homeland Security and the FBI, which have informed us that there are no known threats against NFL stadiums.



In addition to our standard procedures described above, there will be an increased security and law enforcement presence both inside and outside stadiums in the parking lots of our stadiums this weekend. We have been in contact with clubs hosting games to reinforce our standard procedures and the league’s best practices. We strongly recommend that fans do not bring bags with them to the stadium. If it is essential to bring a bag, it must be in compliance with the clear bag policy which requires that it be made of clear plastic, vinyl or PVC and not exceed 12″ x 6″ x 12.” It is important that all fans comply with these requirements, and we appreciate their efforts to cooperate with these security measures. The NFL and team security departments work closely with stadium operation personnel and federal, state, and local law enforcement to provide a safe experience for the more than 17 million fans who annually attend NFL games. The NFL and its teams continually evaluate and improve our comprehensive security plan.

Stadium Management Company, which manages Sports Authority Field, released a statement as well to reinforce its plan to increase security at Sunday’s game.

To honor the victims of the Paris attacks, a moment of silence will be held before kickoff, bumping the start time back four minutes, to 2:29 p.m.