BLACKSBURG, Va. (AP) - Virginia Tech police officer Larry Wooddell has collected more than a few stories over the past eight years, as he’s carried the leash for one of the region’s most recognizable bomb-sniffing dogs around.

He talks about leading Boomer - a 9-year-old yellow labrador retriever - through Lane Stadium before every football game, and the time the duo found a handgun that had been lost in the woods for eight months.

Boomer has sniffed out stages for President Barack Obama, first lady Michelle Obama and 2012 presidential candidate Mitt Romney. They’ve worked NASCAR races in Bristol, Tennessee, and bomb threats in Floyd County.

The duo has clocked in for every shift together for nearly a decade, and now they’re planning to retire together at the beginning of April.

Wooddell has spent 30 years in law enforcement. Boomer has worked for eight - or 56 if you’re counting in dog years.

Like any other patrol team, the pair has the kind of rapport where they seem to know what the other is thinking.

Wooddell said he knows when Boomer is about to go to the bathroom and which kind of toy will really get him excited. When Boomer interrupts one of Wooddell’s favorite stories from their early days in uniform, the handler snaps his finger and points to the ground. Boomer - like always - lies down to oblige.

“We’re a team,” Wooddell said. “We certify as a team; train as a team; do everything as a team.”

Wooddell says the pair started bonding on their very first call together.

It was a drug-related shooting where a suspect ran off into the woods. Wooddell and Boomer had just returned from their training in Richmond, and the pair happened to be standing by when the call came in.

“This is something I’ll never forget,” Wooddell said. “I cut him off leash and just let him go.”

Wooddell remembers struggling to keep up as Boomer weaved his way up a sharp embankment, found the spot where the suspect had buried a weapon and sat down - the dog’s sign for when he finds something.

“That was the most interesting because it was his very first call,” Wooddell said. “We got what we call in the K-9 world ‘street cred.’ They said, ‘Hey, he found that thing. Let’s call Boomer.’ Giles County started calling, State Police.”

Wooddell said Boomer is trained to sniff out “anything that goes boom.”

The dog can identify 25 different chemical compounds, which are used in thousands of different types of explosives.

Whenever the Federal Bureau of Investigations identifies a new compound being used in bombs, it brings a sample over for Boomer to learn.

“Not only is Boomer the best explosives-detection K-9 in the New River Valley, but he and Larry have been excellent ambassadors for the Virginia Tech Police Department,” Police Chief Kevin Foust said.

Virginia Tech has a total of three dogs: two that find explosives and a third for narcotics.

According to Maj. Mac Babb, the department plans to train another K-9 and handler team after Boomer and Wooddell’s last day.

By then, Wooddell said Boomer will be getting his first taste of nonworking life.

Right now, he said Boomer isn’t allowed to go to the park or play with other dogs when he’s off duty. That’s because he’s an officer - not a pet.

But after his retirement in April, Boomer will live on Wooddell’s five-acre property and get to live a typical dog’s life complete with car rides and walks on the greenway, Wooddell said.

“It’s a great moment when someone gets to the end of their career and gets to step away,” Babb said. “But at the time, you’ve very aware of how much people will miss them.”

___

Information from: The Roanoke Times, http://www.roanoke.com