With a binky in her mouth and a comb in her hand, Jane Komperda took literal baby steps in her dog grooming career at age 22 months.

A faded photograph shot in 1988 at a dog show depicts her as a toddler grooming a towering Old English Sheepdog during one of the many weekend competitions she attended nationwide with her parents, both avid, longtime competitors.

Komperda, now 27 and owner of Bark Me Beautiful Pet Grooming in Longmont, in late July competed in Las Vegas at SuperZoo, her toughest dog grooming show yet.

The annual national trade show for pet retailers sponsored by the California-based World Pet Association hosted 911 vendors along with a diverse dog grooming competition, a WPA spokeswoman said.

Komperda successfully competed against five other groomers to bring home two second place ribbons as an intermediate division-level groomer in the small poodles class with a cream-colored male dog named named "Chesney" and in the mixed salon styling class with a white female poodle mix with apricot-colored spots named "Zu Zu."

"It was intense," she said. "Those judges want perfection. They come over and comb through the dog and then back comb in every direction, and nothing should stick out. Every hair should be in place. And they walk around watch your every move. Normally, we take the dog and ask the client to come back in a few hours."

Practice makes perfect

Advertisement

Yet, back at the shop she and her small staff keep a pace that hardly seems pressure-free.

On an average day Komperda grooms between eight and 10 dogs, a number of them "landsharks" -- her term for dogs with behavioral issues.

Some cower. Others bare their teeth.

"It's not playing with puppies all day. This work can be dangerous. And like us, dogs have good days and bad days," she continued. "So, sometimes I have to tell the client, 'You know, they're having a rough day today, and this is as good as it gets.'"

Jane Komperda waits with Casanova, a Portuguese Water Dog, to be judged during the SuperZoo Super Jackpot competition on July 24 in Las Vegas. (Courtesy Photo / Longmont Times-Call)

Ideally, though, Komperda aims to make an impressive before-and-after difference in a dog at home in Longmont or at a SuperZoo-level competition, one that requires groomers to style dogs with at least six weeks of hair growth for the most dramatic results.

"Dog groomers all consider these shows a sport," Komperda said. "But we are very much artists, too. What we do is sculpt and make the dog look as appealing as possible for its breed. That takes lots of practice."

A good eye

Jane Komperda's mother, Cindy Komperda, compared outstanding groomers to outstanding photographers.

"You can teach anyone to groom a dog. Just like anyone can take a picture. But it takes a good eye to be great at either one of these things," she said.

Her daughter opened Bark Me Beautiful, now at 1126 Francis St., in 2007 with that in mind.

Sure, she dutifully learns trendy dog grooming styles.

Right now, the Asian fusion cut -- one Jane Komperda described as "cutesy with big bold asymmetrical cuts"-- is in.

But to keep sharpening her skills, the Nationally Certified Master Groomer tinkers with the settings on her Canon camera to develop her eye and sticks to the fundamentals of her self-taught, dog grooming acumen. Namely, she treats each dog as an individual and practices patience, she said.

"I have learned how to read a dog just by having a hand on it," Jane Komperda explained. "I can feel if it's tense or relaxed."

She talks to each dog as the fur flies with that understanding and, as if by magic, moves them around on the grooming table with just an index finger.

Then, beyond a paycheck or ribbons, she gets her reward for building relationships with these furry friends when clients report what goes on outside of her shop.

"When an owner can't say my name at home because their dog will go crazy, that's the best part of my job, just having animals that really want to come see me," she said.

Pam Mellskog can be reached at 303-746-0942 or at p.mellskog@gmail.com.