A woman has taped her mouth displaying the word Freedom on the tape as she gathers with several thousand people in solidarity with victims of two terrorist attacks in Paris, one at the office of weekly newspaper Charlie Hebdo and another at a kosher market, in front of the Brandenburg Gate near the French embassy in Berlin, Sunday, Jan. 11, 2015. (AP Photo/Markus Schreiber, File)



New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady (12) celebrates a touchdown against the Seattle Seahawks during the first half of NFL Super Bowl XLIX football game Sunday, Feb. 1, 2015, in Glendale, Ariz. (AP Photo/Patrick Semansky)



Philadelphia firefighters work the scene of an overnight blaze in west Philadelphia, Monday Feb. 16, 2015, as icicles hang from where the water from their hoses froze. Bone-chilling, single digit temperatures have gripped the region, prompting the closure of all parish and regional Catholic elementary schools in the city of Philadelphia. (AP Photo/Jacqueline Larma)



A plane that skidded off the runway at LaGuardia Airport hangs over the edge of the runway in New York, Thursday, March 5, 2015. The plane, from Atlanta, skidded off the runway while landing, and crashed through a chain-link fence. (AP Photo/Seth Wenig, File)



A large crowd moves in a symbolic walk across the Edmund Pettus Bridge, Sunday, March 8, 2015, in Selma, Ala., to mark the 50th anniversary of “Bloody Sunday,” a civil rights march in which protestors were beaten, trampled and tear-gassed by police at the bridge. (AP Photo/Butch Dill)



Robert Durst is transported from Orleans Parish Criminal District Court to the Orleans Parish Prison after his arraignment on murder charges in New Orleans, Tuesday, March 17, 2015. (AP Photo/Gerald Herbert, File)



A rescue worker is lifted into an helicopter at the crash site near Seyne-les-Alpes, France, Thursday, March 26, 2015. The co-pilot of a Germanwings jet barricaded himself in the cockpit and rammed the plane full speed into the French Alps, ignoring the captain’s frantic pounding on the cockpit door and the screams of terror from passengers. In a split second, he killed all 150 people aboard the plane. (AP Photo/Laurent Cipriani)



Cuban President Raul Castro, left, and U.S. President Barack Obama meet at the Summit of the Americas in Panama City, Panama, Saturday, April 11, 2015. It was the first formal meeting between the leaders of the two countries in more than half a century, clearing the way for a normalization of relations that had seemed unthinkable to both Cubans and Americans for generations. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais, File)



One World Trade Center stands in Lower Manhattan, Tuesday, April 21, 2015, in New York. The visitors center at the top of the 104-floor skyscraper, One World Observatory, opened to the public on May 29. (AP Photo/Mark Lennihan)



Rescue workers remove debris as they search for victims of earthquake in Bhaktapur near Kathmandu, Nepal, Sunday, April 26, 2015. A strong earthquake shook Nepal’s capital and the densely populated Kathmandu Valley before noon, causing extensive damage with toppled walls and collapsed buildings. (AP Photo/Niranjan Shrestha, File)



Britain’s Prince William and Kate, Duchess of Cambridge and their newborn baby princess, pose for the media as they leave St. Mary’s Hospital’s exclusive Lindo Wing, London, Saturday, May 2, 2015. (AP Photo/Kirsty Wigglesworth, File)



Floyd Mayweather Jr., left, connects with a right to the head of Manny Pacquiao, from the Philippines, during their welterweight title fight on Saturday, May 2, 2015 in Las Vegas. (AP Photo/John Locher)



Emergency personnel work at the scene of a deadly train derailment, Wednesday, May 13, 2015, in Philadelphia. The Amtrak train, headed to New York City, derailed and crashed in Philadelphia. (AP Photo/Patrick Semansky, File)



German chancellor Angela Merkel speaks with U.S. president Barack Obama at Schloss Elmau hotel near Garmisch-Partenkirchen, southern Germany, Monday June 8, 2015 during the G-7 summit. (Michaek Kappeler/Pool Photo via AP, File)



Golden State Warriors guard Stephen Curry, foreground, yells as he carries the Larry O’Brien NBA championship trophy in front of center Andrew Bogut after the team’s flight landed in Oakland, Calif., Wednesday, June 17, 2015. The Warriors defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers to win their first NBA championship since 1975. (AP Photo/Jeff Chiu, File)



Dylann Roof appears at a bond hearing court in North Charleston, S.C., June 19, 2015. Roof is accused of killing nine people inside Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston on June 17. (Grace Beahm/The Post And Courier via AP, POOL, File)



Brandon Risher, left, is pulled away by a friend as he cries over the casket of his grandmother, Ethel Lance, following her burial service, Thursday, June 25, 2015, in Charleston, S.C. Lance was one of the nine people killed in the shooting at Emanuel AME Church in Charleston. (AP Photo/David Goldman, File)



President Barack Obama walks with Vice President Joe Biden back to the Oval Office of the White House in Washington, Thursday, June 25, 2015, after speaking in the Rose Garden after the Supreme Court upheld the subsidies for customers in states that do not operate their own exchanges under President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act. (AP Photo/Pablo Martinez Monsivais, File)



A man walks past a large rainbow flag hanging at City Hall in San Francisco, Friday, June 26, 2015, following a ruling by the US Supreme Court that struck down bans on same sex marriage nation wide. (AP Photo/Jeff Chiu)



Police stand over David Sweat after he was shot and captured near the Canadian border Sunday, June 28, 2015, in Constable, N.Y. Sweat is the second of two convicted murderers who staged a brazen escape from a maximum-security prison in northern New York. His capture came two days after his escape partner, Richard Matt, was shot and killed by authorities. (AP Photo, File)



Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton flexes her muscles with Miss Teen New Hampshire Allie Knault, center, and Miss New Hampshire Holly Blanchard, during a Fourth of July parade, Saturday, July 4, 2015, in Gorham, N.H. (AP Photo/Robert F. Bukaty, File)



The United States Women’s National Team celebrates with the trophy after they beat Japan 5-2 in the FIFA Women’s World Cup soccer championship in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, Sunday, July 5, 2015. (AP Photo/Elaine Thompson, File)



An honor guard from the South Carolina Highway patrol removes the Confederate battle flag from the Capitol grounds in Columbia, S.C., ending its 54-year presence there, on Friday, July 10, 2015. (AP Photo/John Bazemore, File)



Caitlyn Jenner accepts the Arthur Ashe award for courage at the ESPY Awards at the Microsoft Theater on Wednesday, July 15, 2015, in Los Angeles. (Photo by Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP, File)

PAGE 2: The 2015 Year in Review