Health Care: In the wake of last week’s papal visit, Rep. Luis Gutierrez wants to extend the Affordable Care Act to 11 million illegal aliens. It’s nothing but a taxpayer-financed rescue for the increasingly unsustainable program.

The Illinois Democrat is known as a left-wing extremist who’d do anything to succor illegal aliens. So the “Exchange Inclusion for a Healthy America Act of 2015” that he introduced Wednesday to extend ObamaCare to 11 million illegal immigrants will be dismissed as a nonstarter.

After all, when asked in 2012 whether illegals would have access to the new health care system that he was selling, the president explicitly promised, “Those individuals will not be covered.” Nor should they.

Last month, however, the Department of Health and Human Services warned that as of June, only 9.9 million Americans had purchased ObamaCare insurance through the state and federal exchanges, leaving a shortfall of 11 million in the collective insurance pool.

That shortfall raises questions about the entire program’s sustainability, given that citizens are shunning the detested system that has limited choices, drained pocketbooks and lowered the quality of health care for the people who actually pay for it.

The Congressional Budget Office, which had projected 21 million sign-ups for 2016, not only got less than half of that but also learned from several states that enrollments were dropping by hundreds of thousands.

With fewer people in the pool and more older and sicker enrollees in need of care at any cost, either the premiums go up for all, or the insurance pool goes bankrupt.

What a coincidence, then, that the number of illegal immigrants in the U.S. comes to — you guessed it — 11 million, according to the most conservative estimates.

Gutierrez’s idea is to take those 11 million and have them buy the insurance that Americans won’t buy. Their insurance, he says, would be subsidized by taxpayers “if they qualify.” With most illegals in low-wage, low-skill jobs, you can bet they qualify — in spades.

So it seems that illegals are just doing the ObamaCare-buying that Americans won’t do. A scheme like this may keep ObamaCare afloat, but it will be a budget buster and damage the economy.

It will also serve as a magnet for more illegal immigrants, which of course is Gutierrez’s main idea. Subsidies for the indigent are a Democratic bailiwick, and from the indigent they expect to reap votes. Everyone wins — except taxpayers who will pay for this bailout.