NewsOne Staff

The editor-in-chief of the popular blog Urban Bush Babes is suing the New York Police Department after she says officers falsely arrested her outside a Brooklyn nightclub.

Cipriana Quann, 37, was handcuffed and placed in police custody for 24 hours following the May 2 incident, the New York Daily Mail reports. While walking into Verboten, a Williamsburg club, Quann “got in the way” of police attempting to arrest a drug suspect. When an NYPD lieutenant shoved Quann from behind, she asked the law enforcement officer to be more careful.

From the Daily News:

“Can you please watch where you are pushing. … I am a woman,” Quann told the lieutenant, who is identified in the lawsuit as Stephen Conforti.

That’s when Quann claims she was grabbed by cops who held her arms, frisked her and snapped on handcuffs.

The suit, filed Monday in Brooklyn Federal Court, states that Quann spent 24 hours in police custody before she decided not to fight the charges and reluctantly “agreed to accept an adjournment in contemplation of dismissal for disorderly conduct.”

Quann, a model who has also appeared in Vogue, Gap and a number of other blogs and publications, was not in any way involved in the arrest of the drug suspect.

Selected as one of @Oprah's "Favorite Things" of 2015, see why we teamed up with @Jawbone ▫️▫️▫️ Let's face it, keeping on track towards your fitness goals or routine is not always a walk in the park…if it was, quotes such as "No pain, No gain", "The pain you feel today is the strength you feel tomorrow", "You may see struggle but you will never see me quit" or "It is a long road, it seems impossible, but it is worth it" would not even exist. ▫️▫️▫️ With that being said, you can find creative ways to make fitness work in your favor and have fun while doing it. Incorporating a consistent routine into your weekday is impertinent to the quality of life we should all be living, and of course this not rocket science, we all know the benefits our mental and physical well being reaps. Though for many of us it is not just the physical act itself that is the most challenging, but the mental strength in staying focused daily. Which is exactly why my twin sister, TK Quann (@tk_wonder) and I (@ciprianaquann) teamed up with Jawbone UP3. Visit UrbanBushBabes.com to view some of the captivating features of the Jawbone UP3, the results of our 24 hour duel and why Oprah selected the Jawbone UP3 as one of her "Favorite Things" of 2015. ▫️▫️▫️ Photographer: Xavier Scott Marshall ▫️▫️▫️ #styleup #QuannSisters ▫️▫️▫️ A photo posted by Urban Bush Babes (@urbanbushbabes) on Dec 18, 2015 at 6:40pm PST

Her criminal case was dismissed last month, the Daily News reports.

The suit, filed on Monday, seeks unspecified monetary damages for the arrest and unlawful stop-and-frisk.

SOURCE: NY Daily News | PHOTO CREDIT: Getty, Instagram