A new poll released Thursday shows that Gov. Maggie Hassan currently leads two potential Republican challengers to her possible reelection bid, but that in each case, it’s a close contest.

WMUR poll: Hassan leads Sununu in potential 2016 match up Gov. Maggie Hassan leads Republican Chris Sununu in a potential November 2016 match up for governor, but should Hassan decide not to seek re-election, Sununu is the current favorite to defeat either of two of his fellow executive councilors More

Hassan continues to keep the New Hampshire political scene guessing about her political future. She continues to be mentioned as a prime potential candidate for a U.S. Senate battle against Kelly Ayotte, but she has said she will not make a decision until after the state budget stalemate is resolved.

Public Policy Polling of North Carolina, known as a Democratic-leaning pollster, earlier this week released a poll showing Hassan trailing Ayotte by a single percentage point. But with the poll’s margin of error at 3.4 percent, it is a dead heat.

Thursday, PPP matched up Hassan against two Republicans who are viewed as possible candidates for governor.

With the margin of error for this poll also at 3.4 percent, Hassan led Executive Councilor Chris Sununu 48 percent to 41 percent, with 11 percent undecided. She led state Senate Majority Leader Jeb Bradley 48 percent to 39 percent, with 13 percent undecided.

PPP said 38 percent of its 841-likely voter sample were independents, 31 percent were Democrats and 31 percent were Republicans. The poll was conducted Aug. 21-24.

The poll showed 48 percent of those surveyed approved of the job Hassan is doing as governor, while 42 percent disapproved. In a WMUR Granite State Poll conducted in mid-July, 54 percent said they approved of Hassan’s job performance, while 30 percent disapproved.

The PPP poll this week showed that 38 percent approved and 46 percent disapproved of Ayotte’s job performance.

PPP matched up Sununu and Bradley against three potential Democratic candidates for governor in the event Hassan does not seek reelection.

Sununu and Bradley out-polled former New Hampshire House Speaker Terie Norelli, 39 percent to 34 percent, and 39 percent to 33 percent, respectively.

Executive Councilor Colin Van Ostern trailed Sununu, 39 percent to 32 percent; and Bradley, 38 percent to 31 percent.

Executive Councilor Chris Pappas trailed Sununu; 38 percent to 34 percent; and Bradley, 38 percent to 33 percent.

Neither the two Republicans nor the three Democrats were viewed favorably, although, according to the poll, Norelli, Van Ostern and Pappas are far less well-known than Sununu and Bradley.

Sununu was viewed favorably by 32 percent and unfavorably by 39 percent with 29 percent unsure, while Bradley was viewed favorably by 23 percent and unfavorably by 33 percent, with 44 percent unsure.

Pappas was viewed favorably by 9 percent and unfavorably by 16 percent, while 75 percent said they were not sure. Norelli was viewed favorably by 13 percent and unfavorably by 14 percent, while 73 percent were unsure. And Van Ostern was viewed favorably by 10 percent and unfavorably by 11 percent, while 79 percent were unsure.

On issues, 85 percent of those polled supported requiring a criminal background check for firearms buyers, while 9 percent were opposed. Increases in the federal minimum wage were backed by 71 percent, while 12 percent supported keeping it at $7.25 an hour and 12 percent supported eliminating it entirely. Opinion on the Affordable Care Act was split, with 44 percent supporting it and 43 percent opposing it.

Meanwhile, PPP found that two-thirds of Granite Staters believe it was unfair of the National Football League to impose a four game suspension on New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady as a result of “deflategate.”

For poll results, click here.