Film extras get no glory, but critical to the process

Brian McCulley, left, takes a photo of Susan Shein, right, during an open-audition extras casting for the feature film, "Christmastime," in Boulder. Each aspiring extra had no more than about 10 seconds to leave a lasting impression. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

A good movie extra is a master in sitting, waiting and repeating.

Extras are ordered to show up on time, follow instructions and keep quiet. When filming wraps, their compensation rarely runs higher than a few hundred bucks, and sometimes runs as low as a cup of coffee. And when the movie debuts, the extra, having toiled on the sidelines for hours — sometimes day or weeks — on end, will likely go unnoticed by anyone who isn't specifically watching for them.

It's a thankless job, to be certain. On Saturday afternoon in Boulder, however, more than 100 people made clear they'd be honored to perform it.

The extra hopefuls descended upon a dance studio in a nondescript office park off 32nd Street, where the casting director of the upcoming Hollywood rom-com "Christmastime" held court for three hours, hoping to find the perfect bodies to stand behind actors like Ernie Hudson ("Ghostbusters") and Marley Shelton ("Pleasantville"), and keep their mouths shut.

"People don't understand how important this is for a film," casting director Brian McCulley said. "The background players in the restaurants, on the mall, or wherever you're shooting, those people are really important because they create the environment."

In the case of "Christmastime", a $3.5 million-budget project slated for a limited theatrical release in 2015, the environment will include parts of Denver (where another 100 or so aspiring extras auditioned Friday) and Boulder, including the Pearl Street Mall. According to director Michael Landon Jr., the Pearl scenes will be filmed Nov. 14-21, and won't require any street closures.

Landon Jr. — he of the Hallmark Channel features "Love's Long Journey", "Love's Enduring Promise", "Love's Abiding Joy", "Love's Unending Legacy," and so on — said in an interview that "Christmastime" is a story of punchless marriage, and miraculous resolution.

"An 8-year-old runaway from heaven takes it upon herself to rekindle what was once an intimate relationship, and which has slowly but surely dissolved," he said. "Our little runaway comically sets out to heal their broken hearts and bring them back together."

So, what makes the ideal extra for this sort of production?

"We're looking for regular, average people of all ages, shapes and sizes," McCulley said.

Being human, it would seem, is the only pre-requisite. Saturday's bunch mostly comprised self-selected performance artists, though — willing to stand still in the background, but confident they could deliver a line if called upon.

"Maybe they might need somebody that can speak on camera a little, or be a bit more," said Boulder's Jim Cantrell, an experienced extra who once sparred briefly onscreen with Val Kilmer.

"I think each person has something they can offer to any cast," said Alyssa Overton, a veteran musical actress, while in line for her shot at the smalltime. "Even if you're just an extra, it's kind of fun to be in the background. And maybe the director sees something that's a little different, or you've got something you can bring to the table."

More than 150 extras will be chosen for "Christmastime," but Landon Jr. said that, for nearly all of them, advancement up the credit reel will be unlikely.

"Obviously, it's rare. But it can happen," he added. "Something happens sometimes, where you see something in someone, or you have a need you weren't aware of. You never know."

For most in line on Saturday, that's OK. It's about the experience, more than anything.

"This isn't about me being boundlessly talented," Susan Shein said after her audition. "It's just a gig. Why not?"

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness