Michelle Obama stresses importance of voting in midterm elections, advocates for U.S. Sen. Mark Udall and incumbent governor John Hickenlooper

First lady Michelle Obama smiles as she is flanked by Sen. Mark Udall, D-Colo., left, and Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper, during a rally pushing voters to re-elect the two incumbent candidates, on the campus of Colorado State University, in Fort Collins on Thursday. ( Brennan Linsley / AP )

First Lady Michelle Obama, who had remained largely absent from most campaign trails before this month, rallied for Colorado Sen. Mark Udall and Gov. John Hickenlooper at a Udall rally Thursday afternoon at Colorado State University's Lory Student Center.

Obama urged the crowd to not wait another minute and vote in a race that's going to be tight in the upcoming Nov. 4 election.

"We know races like this can be won or lost by a few thousand, even a few hundred votes," Obama said.

In a Denver Post poll this month, incumbent Democratic candidate Hickenlooper held a 1-point lead against Republican opponent Bob Beauprez and Republican candidate Cory Gardner held a 2-point-lead against incumbent Democractic opponent Mark Udall.

Obama reminded the crowd of the 2010 Senate race in Colorado, determined by 14,000 votes.

"When you break that number down, that's just five votes per precinct," she said.

Speakers at the rally included Hickenlooper, Sen. Michael Bennet, U.S. Rep. Jared Polis and former U.S. Rep. Betsy Markey, who is running for state treasurer.

They all stressed the importance of voting and encouraging others to vote, which they said will affect the outcome of this election on many Coloradans' values.

"It means raising the minimum wage. It means respecting women's reproductive freedom. It means equal pay for equal work. It means responding to the opportunity that climate change represents. It means marriage equality. And it means college affordability," Udall said.

Advertisement

The speakers also mentioned what they called successes in Colorado with the Affordable Care Act, reducing unemployment and increasing job growth, among other issues.

All of these successes, according to Hickenlooper, are big feats after Coloradans had to deal with 13 federally declared disasters and "the most destructive flood in the history of Colorado."

Hickenlooper said since he's been in office, prescription drug abuse has been decreased by more than 20 percent and teenage pregnancy by more than 40 percent.

And according to Udall, the first lady came to Colorado "because she knows what's at stake."

"You're the game changers," he told the crowd. "You're the army on the ground."

Obama geared much of her speech toward the younger people in the crowd.

"Sometimes, when things are better, we don't really have a sense for how bad things were," she said.

Many in the audience of about 2,000, Obama said, were still young six years ago, and may not remember the "economy literally on the brink of collapse."

But she said these problems began to change after Barack Obama was elected, and it was because of more people coming out to vote who hadn't before.

"That's why Barack Obama is president right now. Because a whole lot of folks who never voted before showed up in 2008 and 2012," Obama said.

She stressed the importance of the midterm elections. And she said although many people are disillusioned with the amount of influence special interest groups have and the money in politics, that was the case when Barack Obama was running for election, and he still was elected.

"They each just have one vote, and so do all of us," Obama said of the special interest groups.

Udall and Obama reminded voters that they can change their addresses through the end of election day and vote on site, and if they choose to mail in their ballots early — it's Colorado's first all-mail ballot election — to make sure to use two stamps.

"We can't get complacent," Udall said. "There's too much work to be done."

<p>Republican National Committee spokesman Michael Short issued a statement after the rally: “Today's event is simply further proof that Barack Obama is banking the rest of his presidency on re-electing Mark Udall to the U.S. Senate, where he would continue to be a partisan rubber stamp for the Administration's failed agenda.” </p>

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Saja Hindi at 970-669-5050 ext. 521 or hindis@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @SajaHindiRH.