Today -- Members of Congress File Amicus Curiae Brief with U.S. Supreme Court Addressing Illegality of 'Revenue Raising' Obamacare Originating in Senate

MEDIA ADVISORY



Contact: Destiny Edwards, 202-225-4576



WASHINGTON, Dec. 2, 2015 /Christian Newswire/ -- Congressmen Trent Franks, Louie Gohmert, Rob Bishop, and 43 of their colleagues, filed an amicus curiae brief with the Supreme Court in Sissel v. HHS, which seeks to overturn Obamacare on the grounds that the law violates the Constitution's Origination Clause. Mr. Franks, Mr. Gohmert, Mr. Bishop, Mr. Schmitz, Mr. Kamenar, Mr. Gaziano, and other Members of Congress will hold a press conference announcing the filed briefing and the merits of the case. Pacific Legal Foundation is representing Mr. Sissel in the Supreme Court Case.

Press Conference Details



Who: Congressman Trent Franks, Congressman Louie Gohmert, and Congressman Rob Bishop who joined the amicus brief asking the Supreme Court to hear the Origination Clause challenge in Sissel v. HHS, Joseph E .Schmitz and Paul D. Kamenar, pro bono counsel to Mr .Franks and co-amici; and Todd F. Gaziano – D.C. Center Executive Director for Pacific Legal Foundation, which is representing Mr. Sissel in court



When: Wednesday, December 2, 2015 3:15 pm ET



Where: H-137, United States Capitol



Topic: Obamacare, Sissel v. HHS, Origination Clause of the Constitution

The brief traces the historical foundation of the Origination Clause, demonstrating that the chamber closest to the people and elected every two years has the sole power to originate revenue raising bills. The Origination Clause, found in Article 1, Section 7 of the U.S. Constitution, requires that "All Bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives; but the Senate may propose or concur with Amendments as on other Bills." Obamacare, which was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court on the grounds that it was a tax (aka a "Bill for raising Revenue") instead originated in the Senate.