"Being in this country without proper documentation is not a crime." Chris Christie in 2008



The cover story in the New York Times Magazine Sunday was devoted to our governor.

“Is It 2016 Yet?” the headline asked. “Chris Christie is back from the brink – and ready to run harder than anyone.”

The article by reporter Mark Leibovich devoted a lot of space to the hot topic of the moment. That’s President Barack Obama’s issuance of an executive order suspending the enforcement of federal immigration laws as regards about five million undocumented aliens.

“Christie was particularly hard to pin down on immigration,” Leibovich wrote. He went on to report how Christie had said “I’m not going to discuss a complicated issue like like immigration” during a trip to Iowa. Leibovich wrote of how the governor ducked questions during a trip to Mexico as well, saying “Fabulous try” after Leibovich tried to pin him down on the issue.

I can see why Christie’s ducking the issue. It’s hard to attack a federal official for declining to enforce immigration laws when you were once a federal official who declined to endorse immigration laws.

Assuming Christie enters the Republican primary races, imagine an attack ad featuring this quote:

"Being in this country without proper documentation is not a crime – Chris Christie."

That quote came amid a dust-up Christie was having with Don Cresitello in 2008. At the time Cresitello was the Democratic mayor of Morristown and Christie was the Republican U.S. Attorney for New Jersey.

Typically it’s the Republican who calls for stricter enforcement of immigration laws and the Democrat who opposes it. But the roles were reversed at the time. Cresitello was upset at Morristown’s large number of undocumented aliens in general and about crime in particular.

To that end, he sought to get the city status under the federal 287(G) program. This was part of a 1996 immigration reform that permits local police to hand over to the federal authorities any undocumented aliens accused of crimes. Cresitello said he was particularly concerned about the activites of the Salvadoran gang MS-13.

“One of the reasons that I felt we needed 287(G) was that MS-13 had an operation in Morristown and they were trying to expand,” he told me yesterday. “So there was no question there was an issue with crime relating to illegal immigration.”

Cresitello said he wanted to crack down on those employing the many day laborers who line up in town. But he said he wanted to see the Bush administration permit some form of legal status for otherwise law-abiding immigrants who would then work on the books and pay taxes.

“At the same time we were looking for a pathway to legalization for people who were here for years and years, for people who were not going to go home,” he said.

That seems like a reasonable enough position from a Republican perspective. Yet it outraged the Republican establishment of Morris County. The party bosses got even more outraged when Cresitello spoke at a rally organized by some right-wing groups supporting his plan.

And that prompted the U.S. Attorney to make a visit to a local church with a heavily Hispanic congregation. Just what was an appointed official doing inserting himself in a controversy like this?

“There was no question Christie’s motives were pure politics,” Cresitello recalled. “He was attempting to establish a base within the Latino community because he knew he was going to run for governor.”

He was indeed. But back then Christie was not the polished professional politician he is today. As he waded into an attack on Cresitello, Christie promptly inserted his loafer between his lips.

That quote about how it’s not a crime to be here without documentation may be correct in a strict legal sense. But it still qualifies as a major gaffe for the simple reason that virtually any action an undocumented alien takes while in the country, from working to failing to carry registration documents, violates federal law in some fashion.

“He as a federal prosecutor should have known better,” said Cresitello. “But he was just pandering to them.”

In the ensuing flap, TV host Lou Dobbs did a piece critical of Christie that lives on courtesy of YouTube. In it, Dobbs said the quote proved the then-unknown Christie “is out of his mind.”

His colleague Bill Tucker then reported that he could find only 13 instances between 2002 and 2007 in which Christie’s office prosecuted immigration violations. He compared tha to 597 prosecutions by the U.S. Attorney for Kansas during the same period.

Meanwhile in the midst of that controversy, four college students were shot in a Newark schoolyard by members of a gang headed by an illegal alien from Peru who had been released on bail after being arrested for aggravated assault the year before. That provided an object lesson in why 287(G) status was needed not just in Morristown but all over the state.

When you compare Christie’s stance back then to Obama’s stance today, it doesn’t look good for the governor. Obama’s merely overlooking the status of presumably hard-working aliens who haven’t been accused of any crimes.

As for Christie, just what was he defending back then?

It’s not hard to see why he’s ducking questions on immigration.

What’s hard to see is how he’ll finally answer them.

ADD: Here is an excerpt from a 2008 article in which the issue was hashed out by Brian Donohue, who was then the Star-Ledger immigration reporter:



Q. Christie said immigrants in the county illegally are not automatically committing a crime by their presence. Is that true?

A. Yes. "Illegal presence" as the offense is called, is not a violation of the U.S. criminal code. A person cannot be sent to prison for being here without authorization from immigration authorities. It is, however, a violation of civil immigration laws, for which the federal government can impose civil penalties, namely deportation.

Q. But he was later asked a hypothetical question about someone sneaking across the border and said that's not a crime either. Is that true, too?



A. No. "Improper entry by an alien" as it is called, is a violation of Title 8 of the U.S. criminal code punishable by a fine of between $50 and $250 and/or a maximum of six months in jail.

It is considered difficult to prosecute because unless authorities catch someone in the act of crossing the border, it is easier to just deport them than spend the time and money needed to prove how they crossed the border. Even in border states, first-time offenders are rarely prosecuted because the court system would be inundated with millions of cases.

Q. So it's a crime to enter the country illegally, but not a crime to be here illegally. How can you do one without the other?



A. It's not hard, and millions of people have done it. People obtain legal visas to enter the U.S. for work, study or tourism and then simply remain in the country after the visa expires. Of the estimated 12 million illegal immigrants in the United States, studies show about 40 percent to 50 percent came here legally but are now illegal immigrants.

ALSO: As if inventing Obamacare wasn't bad enough, now Mitt Romney wants to solve the immigration problem.