Bill Cosby battles his home insurer

Posted: 6 am ET

Dr. Huxtable to the ER, stat! We've got a classic case of blocked policies on our hands!

By now, many of us assumed that the disturbing sexual abuse allegations against comedian Bill Cosby -- who played Dr. Heathcliff "Cliff" Huxtable on TV's long-running sitcom, "The Cosby Show" -- would eventually be played out in a court of law.

We didn't expect this scandal to take a detour through insurance court, much less involve a home insurance policy.

Cosby wants AIG's suit tossed or delayed

Last week, the 78-year-old actor, who has been accused by at least 40 women of having drugged and sexually assaulted them over several decades, asked a federal judge in Springfield, Massachusetts, to dismiss or put on hold a lawsuit filed by his home insurer, AIG.

In June, AIG sued Cosby in California and Massachusetts over home insurance policies issued to him in those states. The insurer maintains the policies in question cover personal injury claims, which include defamation, except when those claims arise from "sexual, physical or mental abuse."

Defamation lawsuits have already been filed against Cosby by Tamara Green, Therese Serignese and Linda Traitz in Massachusetts, and by model Janice Dickinson in California. The women claim they were defamed by the denials of sexual misconduct by Cosby or his representatives.

Risk of 'substantial prejudice' seen

Cosby's counsel maintains the actor would face "substantial prejudice" if he were to have to defend himself against the women's lawsuits and AIG's policy action simultaneously.

"Forcing Mr. Cosby to fight a four-front battle would demonstrate AIG's complete disregard for the best interests of Mr. Cosby," his lawyers wrote in a court filing. "Not only does AIG's action bolster the underlying plaintiffs, who will perceive Mr. Cosby as under attack even from his supposed backers, but it splits Mr. Cosby's focus and drains his resources."

An AIG spokesman declined to comment, when asked by Reuters. The insurance company named the 4 women as codefendants in its action, stating that it was seeking relief that could have a direct impact on their defamation suits.

Though few of us take note of it, defamation and liability risk is growing with the rise of social media, to the point where some insurers advocate special coverage for bloggers.

Speaking of expenses, did you know your credit score could affect how much you pay for home insurance? Check out your credit score for free at myBankrate.

Follow me on Twitter.

Subscribe to Bankrate newsletters today!