Fifty years ago, Chuck Weishaar's hand swelled up like a boxing glove after he punctured it with a nail. He needed a doctor.

Weishaar became the first patient at North Arundel Hospital in Glen Burnie on July 4, 1965.

"There were bulldozers all over the place. I didn't think it was finished," said Weishaar, 90, of Ferndale.

The next closest hospitals at the time were South Baltimore General Hospital and Anne Arundel General Hospital, which was established in 1902.

The hospital he visited grew to become the University of Maryland Baltimore Washington Medical Center.

BWMC First Patient Courtesy Photo, HANDOUT Charles Weishaar was the first patient at BWMC when it opened on July 4th, 1965. He visited the hospital earlier this year with his son, Gary. Charles Weishaar was the first patient at BWMC when it opened on July 4th, 1965. He visited the hospital earlier this year with his son, Gary. (Courtesy Photo, HANDOUT)

Since the 65,000-square-foot hospital first opened, it's grown to a 780,000-square-foot campus, about 12 times its original size.

President and CEO Karen E. Olscamp said the hospital, which won numerous awards in the last decade, will continue to grow and deliver higher quality care at a lower price through its focus on community health programming and new technology.

Higher quality, lower cost

Olscamp, who became the CEO in 2008, said affordable healthcare is a major challenge for the health care industry, citing the Affordable Care Act as an example of the effort to combat the problem.

"If you think about some of the reasons behind this healthcare reform. It's really the country saying to us 'health care as an industry, you need to a better job, so you need to provide higher quality at a lower cost," she said.

Olscamp said early detection and prevention cuts down on follow-up appointments and costs for patients.

For example, the hospital runs a prevention program that checks blood pressure at the Harundale Presbyterian Church in Glen Burnie every second and fourth Wednesday, said spokesman Kevin Cservek.

"We're making sure the needs are not met just within the walls of the hospital," Olscamp said.

Olscamp attributes the hospital's success to its staff and community outreach programs, which includes lectures on healthy lifestyle, disease prevention and living with chronic illnesses. She said the hospital has strong cancer and cardiac care, two leading causes of death in the county.

The hospital also partners with the county and community organizations to host classes such as Stork's Nest, a program to help prevent premature births, low birth weight babies and infant mortality.

As science and technology pushes medical care into new frontiers, the hospital is learning to integrate new tools into their practice, said Olscamp.

For example, the hospital purchased a $1.8 million surgical robot in May. Robotic surgeries cuts down on preparation time for doctors and nurses and recovery time for patients, allowing for more surgeries a year, Cservek said.

The hospital performs about 175 robotic surgeries a year using its current model. With the new machine, the hospital expects to increase its number of robotic surgeries to 300 to 400 every year, Cservek said.

But new technology is costly. Doctors at the hospital say one machine does not meet the demand for robotic surgeries.

Strong work culture, strong hospital

The hospital's ability to retain talented doctors and medical staff is also a major reason for its success, Olscamp said.

"Quality and service don't happen without great people. We have longevity in our organization. A good culture attracts good people who stay and become the driving force of the organization."

In April, Healthgrades, a healthcare rating organization, recognized the hospital as one of the top 10 percent of hospitals in the country for patient safety. In 2009, U.S. News and World Report ranked the hospital as one of the best in America for neurosurgery and digestive disorders. And in 2007, the hospital was named one of the nation's top 100 hospitals by Thomas Reuters, a healthcare research organization.

Page Wacker has worked at the hospital for 50 years as a medical technologist, starting her job on July 18, 1965.

She liked the work and her co-workers, so she stayed. "Money wasn't that important to me," she said. "The hospital was good to me."

When she started, everything was done manually. And as the hospital expanded, its reputation strengthened, she said.

"They always looked at us as a Band-Aid hospital…We'd put a Band-Aid on and send them somewhere else."

In the last 50 years, the hospital more than doubled the size of its emergency services department, opened up the Tate Cancer Center, the Maryland Vascular Center, the Aiello Breast Center and the Pascal Women's Center.

And BWMC continues to expand. It will add a new 7th floor in its patient tower with 30 rooms by December, Cservek said.

Wacker saw surgery time shrink from days to hours and lab tests results come out quicker and quicker.

But as the resources expand and technology becomes increasingly sophisticated, she does feel nostalgic for the days where she knew everybody in a staff of about a couple hundred.

Now, the hospital employs about 600 doctors and about 2,800 workers.

Still, Wacker, 71, the lead technician at the chemistry lab, has known some of her co-workers for decades.

"They're super people. Not everyone is that fortunate."

The hospital has an unofficial "25 year club" — with a membership of 237 — for those who have worked for the center since at least 1980, which includes Wacker's manager Garry Fritz and Weishaar's niece Lynda Layson.

Olscamp, who has put in more than two decades herself, said the hospital tailors its resources and projects based needs of the community. And in return, the community supports its growth.

"We started out from very humble beginnings," she said.

@ChuangMGazette