Disunion follows the Civil War as it unfolded.

By late 1864, the anaconda strategy devised by Gen. Winfield Scott at the start of the war was reaching its lethal conclusion. The implacable, relentless naval blockade had crippled the South’s cotton economy, and drained the rebel army of its ability to wage battle.

Still, daring blockade runners helped maintain a supply of goods that were as vital as they were meager. Their preferred port had always been Wilmington, N.C., but after federal forces captured Mobile, Ala., in August 1864, it was also their last. With its railroad connections to Virginia, Wilmington was the last vein through which the South received goods from the outside world, and the last artery to its army. Now federal forces focused on severing that link.

Wilmington is 28 miles up the Cape Fear River from the Atlantic Ocean. One of several but by far the most formidable of the confederate positions guarding Wilmington was Fort Fisher, located right at the mouth of the river. Fort Fisher was built at the end of a narrow peninsula that is shaped like an inverted triangle; on the east side is the Atlantic, on the west, the river. Anything entering the river had to pass under the guns of what had come to be called the Gibraltar of the South.

Photo

No one would have used so respectful a sobriquet at the start of the war, when Fort Fisher’s defenses consisted of a few obsolete cannons lodged behind palmetto logs. However, under Col. William Lamb, who took command in 1862, Fort Fisher developed a more powerful posture.

Lamb had no formal training as an engineer, but several years earlier as a 27-year-old former newspaper editor, he had taken a special interest in the Crimean War, when cannons positioned atop the Malakoff Tower had enabled the Russians at Sevastopol to withstand a French naval siege for almost a year. Early in the war, Lamb personally learned a related lesson when in May 1861 he had been present at an artillery duel between a rebel battery stationed at Sewell’s Point, Va., and Union gunboats in the Chesapeake Bay below.

The gunboats often found their mark, Lamb observed, but the loosely packed dirt of the confederate earthworks swallowed the shells and absorbed the impact. Walls of brick or stone might make a defender feel more secure, but shells fired by modern rifled cannons bore into such defenses and quickly broke them down.

Looking at the infinite supply of sand sitting at his very feet, Lamb envisioned a Fort Fisher that would consist of armed towers, like at Sevastopol, but made of forgiving, absorbent sand. Over the next two years, as many as a thousand workers a day — soldiers, slaves, freed blacks, impressed Indians — built a complex of more than two dozen mounds. Interconnected, and with excavated vaults to protect men and ammo during bombardments, the mounds stood about 30 feet high, and were crowned with cannons.

Lamb arrayed Fort Fisher’s defenses on two fronts. A land face stretched 1,800 feet across the peninsula west to east until it met the Atlantic. There it met the sea face, which then went south for a mile along the ocean to the mouth of the river, where the defenses were anchored by a massive 60-foot mound topped by two powerful cannons, dubbed the Buchanan Battery. At the intersection of the faces was a 30-foot mound called the Northeast Bastion, which was heavily armed and considered the fort’s strongest point.

How odd this must have looked from the sea: the flat sandy peninsula, haphazardly decorated with patches of beach grass and a handful of wind-twisted trees, topped by these gigantic primitive dirt mounds that were bristling with guns.

Lamb not only improved the defenses of Fort Fisher; he brought a new pugnacity. Shortly after taking command, he spotted federal ships anchored a mile offshore. He was surprised to hear that this was a fairly typical arrangement; the Yanks would sit in the ocean, and occasionally fire on the fort whenever it suited them. Lamb was appalled; from that point on, when federal blockaders ventured within range, Fort Fisher opened fire and chased them out to sea. In time, blockade runners nearing the coast began to look for the lights of Fort Fisher to tell them that the most perilous part of their journey was ending, that they were now under the fort’s protection. But Fort Fisher was always undermanned; at its peak, the garrison had just 1,600 men, and often there were many fewer.

Union commanders had long contemplated assaulting Fort Fisher, but not until September 1864, after other objectives had been taken, did General Grant finally allocate 6,500 troops from the Army of the James to join the Navy’s North Atlantic Blockading Squadron for a combined land-sea operation to take Fort Fisher.

The troops were placed under the command of Maj. Gen. Godfrey Weitzel, a 29-year-old Bavarian-born graduate of West Point. Command of the naval forces was assigned to Adm. David Dixon Porter, who had scored great victories at New Orleans and, in collaboration with Grant, at Vicksburg. A complicated man, Porter was once described by Navy Secretary Gideon Welles as “boastful of his own powers, given to exaggeration . . . reckless, improvident and too assuming,” but also as possessing “stirring and positive qualities, is fertile in resources, [and] has great energy.” Porter would command a fleet of 57 ships.

As the combined forces made their way to the fort, Weitzel received an unhappy surprise: His superior at the Army of the James, Gen. Benjamin Butler, decided to come along. Butler, a political general, had attained notoriety during his tenure as military governor of New Orleans, where he was alternately called “Beast,” because of his rude treatment of Southern ladies who insulted union officers, and “Spoons,” because he allegedly pocketed silverware from the Southern homes where he stayed. As 1864 waned, Butler smelled that Fort Fisher might provide one of the war’s final chances to reap the glory of victory. Moreover, Butler had an idea for a secret weapon: a floating bomb.

The original Union plan of attack was straightforward: have Porter’s fleet bombard Fort Fisher, then send Butler’s 6,500 soldiers to finish off the survivors. But once Porter arrived off the Carolina coast in mid-December, he recognized that the sandy mounds threatened to neutralize the power of his bombardment. Moreover, the “full speed ahead” dash past the guns that he had used so effectively at Vicksburg would be impossible here; the ships that blitzed through would just pile up in the Cape Fear River, and await destruction by the Buchanan Battery. Porter had little liking for Butler, but he suddenly wanted to hear more about Butler’s secret plan.

Which was actually well past the planning stage. An aging gunboat, the Louisiana, had been stripped down, had its guns removed and part of its dock house removed. In Norfolk, it had been loaded in with 215 tons of black powder — more than 50 times the amount that had produced the Crater in Petersburg just five months before — and then sailed for Beaufort, where it had been primed. The ship was now a giant bomb. The plan was for a small crew to anchor her as close to Fort Fisher as possible, set the three 90-minute fuses aboard (a fuse, a back-up and a back-up for the back-up), and board an escort steamer that would dash to a zone of presumed safety. After that?

One school of thought believed Fort Fisher would be flattened; another thought the effect would be mild, the explosion’s impact dissolving into thin air.

“I take a mean between the two,” said Porter, reasonably and pseudo-scientifically. “I think the effect of the explosion will simply be very severe — stunning men at a distance of three or four hundred yards, demoralizing them completely, and making them unable to stand for any length of time a fire from a ship.” He also expected that buildings would tumble, guns would be buried, houses would collapse. “If the rebels fight after the explosion,” said Porter, “they have more in them than I give them credit for.” Whatever the impact, Porter planned to follow up with a massive naval bombardment of the fort, before Butler’s troops marched in.

Just after midnight on Dec. 23, guided by Fort Fisher’s own lights, Louisiana was towed to a point 250 yards away from the fort. There, 43-year-old Commander Alexander Rhind and his crew ignited the three fuses, then skedaddled, but not before Rhind took the extra precaution of setting fire to the Louisiana.

Once they reached safety, they waited. Had any of the fuses worked as planned, the Louisiana would have blown up at 1:18 in the morning. In the event, it wasn’t until 1:40 that the bomb exploded, thanks to the fire Rhind started as an afterthought. The ship erupted, producing a massive flash of light, a dust cloud, a low, heavy boom, a sulfurous, malodorous cloud that passed over the fleet, and no damage. “It was terrible,” one sarcastic rebel later said. “It woke up nearly everybody in the fort.”

The fort would have to be taken the old-fashioned way. At noon the next day, Porter brought the fleet close to shore and opened fire. Over the next five hours, his 627 guns discharged approximately 10,000 rounds — something like 115 a minute — directly onto the embracing, forgiving sands of Fort Fisher. The mighty discharge of ordnance resulted in one confederate dead, 22 injured, and two guns disabled. The fort’s comparatively puny reply — 622 shells — left 83 of Porter’s men dead or wounded.

Porter, of course, had expected to unleash all this hell to pave a path for Butler’s invasion, but the dilatory general did not appear until nightfall, when he showed up with a few transports, and promises that the rest of the men would be along directly. With the hour too late to begin landing, a furious Porter sent him away; operations would have to commence in the morning. And indeed, on Christmas morning, Porter resumed his bombardment, sending several more thousands of shells landward.

Several hours later, up the coast, General Weitzel managed to land a couple thousand soldiers on shore north of the fort. The troops advanced to within 100 yards of the land face, where they were stopped by blasts of canister from guns that Porter believed his bombardment had destroyed. Weitzel reported what he had seen to Butler — “I told him it would be murder to order an attack upon that work” — and Butler did not disagree. Looking to the skies, Butler decided that the weather was changing against him, and disregarding Grant’s specific, this-is-how-I-won-Vicksburg order to dig in, ordered a withdrawal of his men. Most got off; Butler abandoned the final 700.

“Nothing further can be done by the land forces,” Butler informed Porter, and announced that he and his men were heading back to Virginia. Porter, who in cooperation with Grant at Vicksburg had created the very model of combined army-navy operations, was shocked and furious. He ordered his ships to continue the bombardment in support of the abandoned soldiers, and the next day, when the wind changed, he brought the wet, chilled troops off the beach.

Related Disunion Highlights Explore multimedia from the series and navigate through past posts, as well as photos and articles from the Times archive. See the Highlights »

Their casualties, however, were light. One man had drowned, and 11 were wounded, proving that blood was not a factor in Butler’s decision to depart; the Beast simply wasn’t that interested in giving battle once the magic floating bomb proved to be a dud. Having collected Butler’s men, Porter, lacking any other option, withdrew as well.

The rebels could not believe their luck. “You can now inspect the works and walk on nothing but iron,” one officer remarked; none could understand why the Yankees had not attacked. At that moment, Fort Fisher’s garrison numbered only 500 men.

To learn more about this subject, see “War on the Waters,” by James M. McPherson, and “Divided Waters: The Naval History of the Civil War,” by Ivan Musicant.



Jamie Malanowski is a frequent contributor to Disunion. He is the author of the biography, “Commander Will Cushing, Daredevil Hero of the Civil War.”