NEW YORK–Hewlett-Packard Co. showed off eight new mobile devices Tuesday that it says cater to specific industries like retail and health care. The company is betting that new features, alongside its security and management services, will make the devices stand out in the enterprise market against competing devices H-P accuses of being “force fit” to meet business needs.

The devices include both tablets and so-called 2-in-1 devices that provide laptop-like functionality. The devices will run on Microsoft’s Windows operating system and Google’s Android OS. H-P also is working with companies such as SAP SE and Cerner to build applications that cater to particular industries. The hardware will be backed up by H-P’s security and services offerings, the company said.

Steven Norton/WSJ

As mobile devices change the way people work – salespeople using tablets to pitch potential customers, or manufacturers using tablets on the factory floor – H-P says other products in the market are often “force fit” into the enterprise with no real thought toward how it can actually help businesses. On top of that, they may be less secure and harder for CIOs to manage, the company said.

But for H-P, one challenge will be making sure it can provide that security and manageability while delivering value-add applications employees actually want to use. With the Microsoft devices from H-P, “you can have both, but the big assumption is that the applications that the companies want to use are available on the Windows tablet,” said Neil MacDonald, a Gartner Inc. analyst who covers H-P. “At the end of the day it’s the applications, it’s not about the device.”

Among the software in the works is an emergency responders dispatch app built by Intergraph and an enterprise asset management solution from SAP.

The devices reflect a push for collaboration between the soon-to-be separate companies, said Michael Park, vice president and general manager for H-P’s commercial mobility and software unit. “Let’s start making this operational so that when the split occurs, we have a preferred partnership and we know how to work together,” he said while standing next to Chris Moyer, CTO for H-P Enterprise Services. “That’s how we behave. We’re not going to change much.”

The company said in October last year it would break into two separate publicly traded companies, seeing better long-term potential for corporate hardware and services business than for its printer and PC unit.

With the rollout, H-P is also betting on the growth of tablets in the enterprise. Mr. Park said tablets were a natural outgrowth from H-P’s strength in the traditional PC market, but that down the road it could focus on smartphones, wearables or the sensors that power the Internet of Things. “If we’re really thinking about what business mobility is in the future, it’s about any screen size.” He said they started with tablets because it could be extended from the strength of PCs, “a baseline we could get out on.”

Research firm IDC predicted global tablet growth would slow in 2014, led by the first full year decline in Apple’s iPad shipments. Broadly, the market slowdown comes as lifecycles for tablets have gotten longer, looking more like those of PCs than smartphones. That said, Intel Corp. noted growth in its tablet business last quarter, and HP has managed to grow its personal systems business in a tough market.

H-P also hopes the devices will appeal to companies preparing for the launch of Windows 10. “Everybody in the PC segment, not only hardware vendors like H-P but their software and channel partners and certainly Microsoft, have very big hopes riding on Windows 10,” said Charles King, president and principal analyst at Pund-IT.

The move comes after Apple and International Business Machines Corp. announced a partnership to deliver industry-specific applications for companies to run on Apple’s iOS platform.