CMS announces 89 new ACOs — Pennsylvania HIE struggling with money — Iowa state senator wants to ban tele-abortions

With help from Brett Norman (@BrettNorman), David Pittman (@David_Pittman), Arthur Allen (@ArthurAllen202) and Aubree Eliza Weaver (@aubreeeweaver)

CMS ANNOUNCES 89 NEW ACOs: As our Pro Health Care colleagues report: The agency said Monday afternoon that 89 new organizations were joining Obamacare’s Medicare Shared Savings program for next year. That brings the total number of accountable care organizations participating to 424, serving 7.8 million Medicare enrollees. That includes 19 “Pioneer ACOs” in the most ambitious version of the program, down from 32 Pioneers in 2012. CMS recently released a proposed rule to update the program in hopes of drawing more participation. A list of the new ACOs is here. Aledade, former ONC national coordinator Farzad Mostashari’s ACO group, highlights the work they’re doing with EHRs and ACOs in a blog post. Staffers are “extracting practice management data and establishing interfaces to EHR data and Admission-Discharge-Transfer notifications” and “customizing EHR templates and tracking wellness visits,” says the company. "We are assisting providers in ensuring that their patients get the best care possible,” says VP Mat Kendall. “EHRs are an important tool for collecting data and ensuring that providers have the information they need to monitor the health of all their patients."

Story Continued Below

eHealth tweet of the day: #ICD-10 Code of the Week: Z73.1 Type A behavior pattern pic.twitter.com/ujSQrkCZps … Any of you exhibiting Z73.1 this week before the holidays?

A reminder: Today marks Morning eHealth’s last edition of 2014. We will resume publication on Monday, Jan. 5th. If you missed our health and eHealth holiday books gift list yesterday and you’ve still got some shopping to do, here it is: http://politi.co/1x58XbA

Welcome to Tuesday morning eHealth, where we wish you happy holidays! May you get all the fitness trackers, HealthKit-enabled iPhones and shirts with sensors you dreamed of this year. We’ll see you guys in 2015, but keep in touch and let us know if you’ve got news in early January at agold@politico.com and connect with us on Twitter @ ashleyrgold, @ POLITICOPro, @ Morning_eHealth.

PENNSYLVANIA HIE STRUGGLING WITH MONEY: The biggest challenge facing the creation of a statewide health information exchange for Pennsylvania continues to be a lack of funding, the Pennsylvania eHealth Partnership Authority said in its annual report Monday. Fees from connecting organizations and private donations haven’t panned out, so the group is asking the state for $4.7 million in funding next year, a jump from the $1.85 million it received this year. The exchange authority continues to connect regional health information organizations and public health data to the state health information exchange, the Pennsylvania Patient and Provider Network (P3N). View the whole report here: http://bit.ly/1vj4b77

IOWA STATE SENATOR WANTS TO BAN TELE-ABORTIONS: A state lawmaker in Iowa has pre-filed legislation that would essentially ban tele-abortions in the state. Sen. David Johnson, a Republican, is sponsoring a bill that would require a physician to be present to prescribe, dispense or administer abortion-inducing medication. Iowa lawmakers reconvene early next year. The senator supported a bill this year in the chamber, but it never came to a vote. Planned Parenthood in Iowa was the first in the country to offer medical abortions delivered via telemedicine. The Iowa Supreme Court is weighing a case that would challenge the Iowa medical board’s 2013 rules that essentially ban the practice. A date for oral arguments have not been set. In a tele-abortion, a doctor consults with a patient through software similar to Skype. The doctor doesn’t have to be in the room for the required screening and clinical history questions, ultrasounds and blood tests, which are administered by trained staff in the remote site. If a patient is eligible for a medical abortion, the physician remotely opens a drawer containing abortion-inducing drugs and watches the patient take the first pill.

A QUARTER OF ICD-10 TEST CLAIMS REJECTED DURING NOVEMBER TEST WEEK: Roughly 76 percent of ICD-10 claims were accepted during a week-long test period last month, CMS said Monday. “Acceptance rates improved throughout the week with Friday’s acceptance rate for test claims at 87 percent,” CMS said, calling the period a success. “In many cases, testers intentionally included errors in their claims to make sure that the claim would be rejected, a process often referred to as ‘negative testing.’ ” The November test week was the first of three ICD-10 test weeks this fiscal year. The others are in early March and early June, as the country prepares for the Oct. 1, 2015 switch date. The testing allows providers to submit ICD-10 codes to Medicare to confirm that the program accepts the claims. In last month’s test period, more than 500 providers, suppliers, billing companies, and clearinghouses submitted almost 13,700 claims.

CHIME, KLAS FORMALIZE PARTNERSHIP: CHIME and KLAS formalized their partnership Monday (it was originally announced in October). New details of the agreement, according to an announcement, include “co-developing best practice and benchmarking studies; establishing an industry recognition program for the healthcare C-suite; distributing KLAS research briefs produced exclusively for members of CHIME and its affiliated associations; and offering discounted KLAS executive services to CHIME members."

MEDICAL RECORD LESSONS FROM SONY BREACH: According the Wall Street Journal, the major breach of Sony Pictures Entertainment also exposed some of the private health records belonging to the company’s employees — an issue that could end with Sony being penalized by regulators. However, it may not count as a “covered entity” under HIPAA guidelines. “For companies looking at what happened to Sony and wanting to better protect themselves, Mr. [Abner] Weintraub [a principal consultant at advisory firm Expert HIPAA] said they need to understand that criminals see health data as money, buying it and selling it on black markets,” the Journal reports. Experts suggest that companies fearing Sony-like breaches should conduct risk assessments and encrypt their data to protect against attacks/penalties. Check out the full report: http://on.wsj.com/1sQOi73

IMPORTANCE OF BEING ABLE TO MODIFY EHRs: A study conducted by researchers from Baylor Health Care System and published by the EDM Forum found that many EHRs lack the tools necessary to deliver quality and safety initiatives. The research focused primarily in the inclusion of evidence-based care processes in ICUs, such as daily awakening and breathing trials, formal delirium screening and early mobility in ICU patients showing signs of delirium. By inserting certain tabs in the sample facility’s EHR system, the researchers hoped to make it easier for staff to track which tests the patient had received, and the results. According to the study, “the creation of learning health systems is contingent on an ability to modify EHRs to meet emerging care delivery and quality improvement needs.” Read the paper here: http://bit.ly/1HrUBEG

WHAT WE’RE CLICKING:

Biggest health data breaches in 2014 — in GovInfoSecurity: http://bit.ly/1t1YEGY

In MedScape: What will you do with all that telemedicine data? http://bit.ly/1ABRLwL

Jonathan Bush writes that for 2015, empowered docs should empower patients: http://linkd.in/1ABRREB

Apple’s HealthKit is doing glucose monitoring again, after fixing the measurements — VentureBeat: http://bit.ly/1vixeYq

In MedCityNews: Health IT company CareTech has been acquired by HTC Global: http://bit.ly/1wWIqOQ

A HIStalk poll of 307 voters finds that 64 percent think ONC should focus mainly on interoperability standards over the next few years: http://bit.ly/1vixjLN