Clemson quarterback Deshaun Watson (4) looks to pass during the first half of the Orange Bowl NCAA college football semifinal playoff game against Oklahoma Thursday, Dec. 31, 2015, in Miami Gardens, Fla. (AP Photo/Joe Skipper)

MIAMI GARDENS, Fla. – Confetti cannons rained orange and white strips on the two auxiliary stages on the field at Sun Life Stadium. Players screamed, took photos, reveled in Clemson’s 37-17 Orange Bowl victory over Oklahoma Thursday.

Steering clear of the hubbub’s epicenter, standing safely off to the side so as not to wrinkle his neatly-pressed polo shirt and khakis, was one of the men most responsible for the commotion he was watching with his arms crossed and without much facial expressions.

Behind his black-rimmed glasses, the eyes of Tigers co-offensive coordinator Tony Elliott were transfixed on the scene he had helped accomplish.

“Just sit back and watch everybody else enjoy it,” Elliott said later in the postgame locker room. “I’m hungry. I’m tired. I didn’t really have the energy to get in there because it was a back-and-forth game for a little while – and I’ve never been an out-front kind of guy.

“Obviously, my time to really reflect will come when the season’s done. But I work so hard, and our coaches work so hard. We just want to see our young men enjoy this moment.”

Elliott has become the quiet genius who prefers the tranquility of a coaches’ box overlooking his offense, rather than the adrenaline-soaked sideline where co-coordinator Jeff Scott and other coaches prowl. The system was put in place 13 months ago when Chad Morris took his methods to SMU, causing Elliott and Scott to craft the mantra “It’s a Clemson offense, not a Chad offense.”

Some listened. Some didn’t. None doubt now, as Clemson has 15 wins and no losses with Elliott and Scott in charge. The Tigers have blasted away a school record with ten consecutive 500-yard total offense games; the previous long streak was four.

Having Deshaun Watson helps. With 301 passing yards against Alabama in the College Football Playoff championship Jan. 11 in Glendale, Ariz., Watson would become the first Division I player ever with 4,000 passing yards and 1,000 rushing yards in a season.

But look past Watson’s numbers to find exactly what makes him special. If Watson has kryptonite, it is the Superman costume he’ll insist on wearing in two particular game situations: when it’s early, and when it’s a big game. Both were on display Thursday, when Watson misfired on six of his first eight attempts and either made a poor decision or poor throw on his final play of the first half, forcing a throw to Jordan Leggett that was picked in the end zone by Zack Sanchez costing the Tigers what would have been a go-ahead field-goal attempt.

“That’s the balance you have to have with a great player,” Scott said. “Deshaun’s a talented guy, and he’s smart, he knows he’ll make mistakes, but 95 percent of the time he’ll do the right thing.

“The big message to him: be yourself. Don’t force things. Football is four quarters for a reason. It gives you enough time for the best team to win.”

At halftime, Clemson owned 305 total yards, 15 first downs and a 17-16 deficit. Four trips to the red zone, and another drive ending on the Sooners’ 26-yard-line, resulted in one touchdown, three field goals and the Sanchez interception.

The math didn’t add up for mad scientists Elliott and Scott, who in the locker room might have seen a cautious remember-me wave from tailback Wayne Gallman and recalled why the Tigers were undefeated in the first place.

“The biggest thing, was don’t panic. We moved the ball really well. We just weren’t getting touchdowns in the red zone,” Scott said. “All we had to do was simplify the gameplan. Wayne was running the ball well; he’d only had seven carries (for 39 yards.) We looked at that as an advantage because he was fresh for the second half.”

Gallman noted he thought the Sooners started to wear down in the second quarter. On the opening drive of the third quarter, Gallman’s first run went for 11 yards and his last went for a 1-yard touchdown, capping a 12-play, 75-yard drive that required only one third-down conversion and established a dominating running game. With Watson (332 yards and two TDs on 55 passes or rushes) deferring to his teammates and taking smarter chances, Gallman finished with 150 yards and two scores.

“We just feed off each other. Whoever is carrying the ball, let’s get four yards a play and move on from there, and sooner or later it’s going to bust open,” Watson said. “He had some big runs and I had some big runs and it started off on the offensive line. The first half we didn’t finish drives off and we were down a point, but that still wasn’t going to stop us regardless of the situation.”

The final tally: 312 rushing yards (5.4 a carry), 218 passing yards (12.8 a completion.) That’s six out of seven games with at least 200 yards of each variety.

“We’re a versatile offense. We have all the components,” freshman left tackle Mitch Hyatt said. “If they take away the pass, we just run the ball. It’s as easy as that.”