Business Briefs: Care Finders’ Acquisitions

Care Finders Completes Two More Acquisitions

Care Finders Total Care, a New Jersey-based home health care company, has completed two more acquisitions, bringing the total number of acquisitions the company has completed to 10 over the last 24 months. Care Finders acquired Wayne, New Jersey-based Emerald Health Care Services and Morris Plains, New Jersey-based Family First Home Care. The addition of the Morris Plains location brings the number of Care Finders New Jersey locations up to nine.

As a result of the acquisitions, Robert Petroro, former owner of Family First, joins Care Finders as executive director of the private duty division.

“We are continuing to grow our private duty services with these two well-respected home care providers that have outstanding reputations in their communities,” Kevin Rogers, CEO of Care Finders, said in a statement. “These transactions are consistent with out strategy to expand and diversify our revenue streams through acquisitions, as well as organic growth, and are representative of the opportunities in our pipeline of potential transactions.”

CareCentrix Hires Ken Goulet as Strategic Advisor

CareCentrix, a company that provides support and coordination for patients who need home health care services and their families, has hired Ken Goblet as a strategic advisor to CEO John Driscoll. In his new role, Goblet will advise and assist the company’s management team in its growth and product development initiatives on home-centered value-based care.

Goulet has more than 30 years of experience leading large payer organizations. He most recently served as president of Anthem Inc.’s commercial and specialty business, leading the company’s 14 Blue Cross Blue Shield plans. He developed and executed Anthem’s Affordable Care Act (ACA) implementation strategy and positioned the company as the largest and most profitable insurance exchange health plan in the country. Prior to working at Anthem, Goblet spent more than 20 years at Cigna Corporation in various management, sales and operations positions.

Senior Helpers Launches In-Home Parkinson’s Care Program

One of the nation’s largest providers of personalized in-home senior care, Senior Helpers, has launched its Parkinson’s Care Program, a specialized training and certification program created in conjunction with leading experts from the National Parkinson Foundation’s Center of Excellence. The program is designed to give caregivers expert training and the education necessary to create personalized care plans for those living with the chronic and progressive movement disorder, Parkinson’s disease.

The new program is the second disease management training program developed and implemented by Senior Helpers, which already operations a Senior Gems Alzheimer’s and Dementia Training Program. Senior Helpers has over 240 franchised business operations across the country.

The new program will including continuing education and training for caregivers, public seminars that help inform communities about Parkinson’s disease, and staffing assistance for local facilities that require trained caregivers to assisted residents living with Parkinson’s disease. Senior Helpers is also supporting those with the disease through a partnership with The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research (MJFF).

CEO of Homemakers Health Services Resigns

Heidi Morrison, CEO of Rochester, New Hampshire-based Homemakers Health Services, a full-service charitable 501(c)3 health care agency that provides home health and social day care services, has resigned, effective June 3. Morrison has accepted another position with Benevera Health, a new partnership among five New Hampshire hospitals.

Morrison began her career at Homemakers in January 2013 and stepped into the role of CEO in May 2014. She spearheaded the agency’s web-based electronic medical record keeping initiative, implemented an organizational restructure to improve access for patients and referral partners, grew the volunteer, fundraising and grant writing programs, and created and implemented the company’s “ICARE” core values.

Prior to her work at Homemakers, Morrison was a lieutenant commander in the Navy Nurse Corps, retiring in 2011 after 20 years of active duty service. She also held positions at Dartmouth Hitchcock in Manchester, New Hampshire, and AllOne Health Resources in Woburn, Massachusetts.

Homemaker’s CFO Caroll Piper will serve as interim CEO while the company recruits Morrison’s replacement. Piper will work closely with two senior managers, Linda Howard and Kelly Dowd.

Custom Home Health Launches Hospice Program

Custom Home Health, a Royal Oak, Michigan-based provider of customized home health care services, has launched a hospice division, Custom Hospice, and now offers a full spectrum of hospice services. The division is a result of the acquisition of Troy, Michigan-based Advance Professional Hospice Care. Financial terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.

As a result of the new division, Custom plans to hire 50 home health care and hospice clinicians and management staff over the next six months to serve patients in Southeast Michigan.

Custom Home Health was founded in 2011 and provides personalized, skilled home health care, including skilled nursing, spiritual care, medical social work, nursing aides, massage therapy, pharmacy and medical supply services.

Written by Amy Baxter