Some Have More to be Thankful for Than Others Getty Images For millions of Americans, Thanksgiving is a time to take stock of all the little things for which they're thankful. And if the year's stellar job growth, impressive wage gains and general economic improvement are any indication, there's more to be grateful for in 2015 than in the sluggish recovery years that preceded it.



But that's not to say the entire country is better off today than it was a year or two ago. And even among those who find themselves in a better job or making more money, not all yearly gains have been experienced equally across the U.S. Some types of inequality walk hand-in-hand with capitalism, and some Americans have more to be thankful for than others.



U.S. News gives an economic breakdown of who has the most and least to be thankful for this holiday season. By Race and Gender

By Race and Gender iStock Most: Asian Men



Asian Americans dominate most demographic breakdowns in the U.S., commanding the highest median weekly income ($974), longest life expectancy (86.5 years) and lowest unemployment rate (3.7 percent in the third quarter). But Asian men tended to outearn and have a lower rate of unemployment than Asian women, though women in general tend to live longer than men.



Asian Americans also have proportionally low incarceration and poverty rates. And the percentage of Asian Americans with both doctoral and bachelor's degrees is higher than any other racial demographic.



Least: Everyone Else



African Americans tended to have the highest unemployment rate (9.5 percent) and poverty rate (26.2 percent) in the country, though those of Hispanic or Latino descent commanded the lowest median weekly earnings ($602). To put that in perspective, the median weekly earnings of a Hispanic man in the third quarter ($624) were nearly half those of Asian American men ($1,133).



Men overall had lower rates of unemployment, higher median weekly earnings and lower poverty rates than their female counterparts, but fewer women are incarcerated and women are increasingly dominating higher education.



White Americans were second to their Asian counterparts on most metrics, but it's worth noting that a study earlier this year found white middle-aged men are dying off at a relatively alarming rate. By STEM Field

By STEM Field Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images Most: Tech Workers



A report released earlier this year by the Computing Technology Industry Association estimated there were nearly 6.5 million tech jobs in the U.S., accounting for nearly 6 percent of the national workforce.



"The tech industry accounts for 7.1 percent of the overall U.S. GDP and 11.4 percent of the total U.S. private sector payroll," Todd Thibodeaux, president and CEO of the association, said in a statement accompanying the report. "With annual average wages that are more than double that of the private sector, we should be doing all we can to encourage the growth and vitality of our nation's tech industry."



Indeed, the BLS estimates the median earnings of computer and mathematical positions are second only to managerial ones, according to the bureau's Occupational Employment and Wages report. Such positions command median salaries of more than $79,000 each year.



That good news is mirrored in the U.S. News/Raytheon STEM Index – which shows that jobs for computer specialists, from applications software engineers to computer support technicians – are on the rise.



The bureau also estimates 93 of the Top 100 science, technology, engineering and math jobs in the U.S. come with wages "significantly above the all-occupations average" -- another data point confirmed by the U.S. News STEM Index. And the unemployment rate of STEM graduates is "consistently low," although that doesn't necessarily take into account individuals who have switched careers or are underemployed.



Least: Manufacturing



The manufacturing sector, on the other hand, has fallen on hard times. Manufacturing employers in September made the fewest number of hires (283,000) of any major sector profiled in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey published each month by the BLS.



The manufacturing sector failed to generate a net gain in jobs during the month of October, following a sector contraction of 9,000 positions in September and 19,000 in August. The sector's average hourly earnings ($25.44) fell short of other major goods-producing positions like construction ($27.54) and mining and logging ($31.40).



"The manufacturing sector of 2015 features good times for motor vehicles, abysmal times for anything tied to the oil patch, and at best mediocre times for almost everyone else," Nariman Behravesh, chief economist at consulting and analytics firm IHS, wrote in a research note last week. "Foreign trade (weak exports and hefty imports) should be a persistent nuisance. That means close to six months of winter for manufacturing, and the chill has been on for nearly a year." By Region

By Region Michael Conroy/AP Most: The Midwest and the Northeast



The Midwest claims the nation's lowest unemployment rate at 4.5 percent. The top three states for unemployment – North Dakota (2.8 percent), Nebraska (2.9 percent) and South Dakota (3.2 percent) – are all located in the Midwest.



The Midwest can also claim one of the country's lowest poverty rates. Only 14.5 percent of individuals living in Midwestern metro regions were considered poor between 2009 and 2013, according to a report released earlier this year by the Economic Research Service at the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The only region to top that was the Northeast, whose metropolitan unemployment rate was only 12.9 percent during that period.



It's also worth noting that the three states with the lowest rates of homelessness in the U.S. in 2015 (Maine, Massachusetts and Rhode Island) are all located in the Northeast, according to a report released earlier this month by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.



Least: The West



The West, meanwhile, has the highest regional unemployment rate in the country at 5.5 percent, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. New Mexico (6.8 percent), Nevada (6.6 percent) and Alaska (6.4 percent) are all among the worst states in the country for unemployment.



And thanks in large part to California alone accounting for 21 percent of the U.S. homeless population, the West held more homeless individuals (nearly 197,000) of all four major geographic regions. All five states in the U.S. with the highest rates of homelessness are found in the western part of the country (California, Oregon, Montana, Hawaii, Nevada). By Housing Situation