The University of North Carolina’s Board of Governors wrapped up its first meeting Friday with its new slate of members.

Sworn in to join the legislatively-appointed 32-member board this week were:

Pearl Burris-Floyd, a former state representative from Gaston County

Alex Mitchell, a Durham developer

Philip Byers, of Rutherford County, on staff with the charter school group Challenge Foundation

Joe Thomas Knott II, a Raleigh attorney

Walter Davenport, a Raleigh accountant who previously served on the Board of Governors

Thom Goolsby, a former Republican state Senator and Wilmington attorney

O. Temple Sloan III, who sold his Raleigh-based family company, General Parts, for $2 billion in 2014

William Webb, a former federal magistrate judge, currently an adviser at Shanahan Law Group in Raleigh

Michael L. Williford, a Fayetteville attorney

The board is in the midst of selecting a new president for the UNC system, after opting in January to get rid of sitting UNC President Tom Ross. Ross will continue to serve until this coming January.

Board members also heard from several House lawmakers yesterday, who were hopeful state budget negotiations would be worked out sooner rather than later.

“It doesn’t mean we have a deal yet but there is a lot of progress,” said Rep. Jason Saine, a Lincoln County Republican.

House lawmakers also unveiled their version of a bond proposal this week, which included funding for a number of new buildings throughout the UNC system. (Click here to read a previous News & Observer article for more information.)

Missing from Thursday and Friday’s UNC Board of Governor’s meetings was R. Doyle Parrish, a Raleigh hotel executive who was arrested this spring and charged with misdemeanor charge of assaulting a woman in relation to a domestic violence incident that occurred at his home.

Parrish stepped down from the presidential search committee, and wrote in a July 22 letter to the UNC system secretary that he would be out for the August meeting because of “some personal matters which will require a significant amount of time.”