ST. MARYS | With just 10 days before the July 22 primary runoffs, the two Republicans left in the race for Georgia’s 1st Congressional District fielded questions Saturday from voters in St. Marys.

State Sen. Earl “Buddy” Carter of Pooler and physician Bob Johnson of Chatham County want to replace U.S. Rep. Jack Kingston, who has his own Republican runoff against David Perdue for the U.S. Senate seat Saxby Chambliss is vacating.

Moderator Jeremy Spencer told the audience that neither Carter nor Johnson carried Camden County in the May 20 primary in what was then a six-man race.

“I like to think Camden County is the county win,” Spencer said. “This is their Waterloo.”

The race between Carter and Johnson has grown contentious in recent months, a development Spencer said had generated a number of “interesting ads and accusations.” He said he hoped the forum would help clear up some of the issues for voters.

Johnson, who has never held political office, played up his long military service as an Army Ranger and his continued career as a surgeon. The tea party-backed candidate emphasized his conservative values with strong language, referring to President Barack Obama as a “curse on our nation” and a “stupid, erratic president.” Johnson promised be a true fiscal conservative and a “tax warrior” who would “starve the federal government.”

Johnson said Carter merely “claims to be a conservative” but is actually a “career politician” and an “ambitious man who wants to get ahead.”

Johnson spent a good deal of his allotted time speaking about term limits, something he supports. He has pledged to adhere to a self-imposed limit of three two-year terms.

“We can’t get anything done as long as we have a professional, career class legislative body,” Johnson said. “We need term limits in Congress. I have been a staunch advocate of term limits since the beginning of my campaign.”

Carter countered those attacks by saying he wouldn’t apologize for the time he spent serving as the mayor of Pooler, Ga., and for the time he has spent in the General Assembly. He added that, as mayor, he donated his salary back to the city and that he doesn’t participate in the state’s retirement plan for legislators.

“That’s my public service,” he said.

“If you want to have term limits, that’s fine,” Carter said. “But you have to be careful. If you are going to have term limits on elected officials you better have term limits for bureaucrats, because they get out of control, too.”

He cited the Internal Revenue Service and Department of Veterans Affairs and those agencies’ recent scandals as evidence of bureaucracies run amok.

“Look at what we’re going through there,” he said. “That’s where we need term limits.”

He added that voters should think twice about imposing term limits on elected officials and what that would ultimately mean.

“Please be careful ever to give up your right to vote,” Carter said. “That’s what you would be doing.”

Citizens, by exercising their right to vote, have all the power necessary to limit terms of their representatives, Carter asserted.

“If you don’t think voting works, ask Eric Cantor,” he said, referring to the Virginia congressman who just lost a Republican primary to a tea party candidate.

The candidates did agree on two things. One is that the federal Department of Education should be completely defunded and the other is that they both oppose the Affordable Care Act.

“We have to turn Obamacare into a 3-D movie.” Carter said. “We have to delay it, defund it and defeat it.”

Johnson said the new health care law was just as much a curse on the nation as he claimed Obama is. Playing on the words of Carter’s claims, he said there should be no “delay” in getting rid of it.

Most of those who attended the forum walked away saying they had made up their minds who they were going to vote for.

Jim Stein, who practices law in St. Marys, said he planned to vote for Carter but hoped whoever won would be able to stay in Washington for a while.

“I like both of them,” he said, adding that it would take at least one term in office for either candidate to get the lay of the political landscape in Washington.

“For two years they won’t even know where the bathroom is,” Stein said.

Neither candidate would have any political power in his first term because veteran legislators would simply watch them to find out if they were capable of being re-elected before deciding whether to build coalitions with them, he said.

Kingston represented the 1st District for 22 years. Even Johnson, who decries “career politicians,” admits he was effective — dismissing the effectiveness as an anomaly among long-serving legislators.

Kingston leaves “big shoes to fill,” according to Camden County School Board chairman Herbert Rowland.

Despite the district having a longtime, popular incumbent, Rowland said he is supporting Johnson who has pledged to leave after six years.

Rowland said he supports Johnson because he is a fellow veteran.

Jeanne and Bill Robertson said they arrived undecided, although early in the race they had supported Carter. They both said after listening to the candidates field questions they had decided to stick with Carter.

“Basically we were both undecided and came here thinking that maybe we needed to clarify some things” Jeanne Robertson said. “But we have gone back to our original decision [Carter].”

Whoever Republican voters decide to send to the general election will face the winner of the Democratic runoff between Amy Tavio and Brian Reese.

Early voting is underway until Friday.