To his backers, the California-based operative is an influential pitbull. | Courtesy of Matt Hoskins An unbending leader on the right

For Matt Hoskins, bashing Republicans is good for business.

The leader of the Senate Conservatives Fund has built his operation into a financial juggernaut by throwing bombs at sitting GOP senators, propping up obscure primary challengers and deeming virtually anything proposed by Republican leaders in Washington as insufficiently conservative.

Story Continued Below

Even in the era of super PACs and full-time campaigns, rarely before have GOP senators endured a barrage of attacks launched across the airwaves by members of their own party — something that could complicate the Republican drive to win back the Senate majority this year.

Hoskins’s group posted huge fundraising totals in the months when it was most sharply critical of GOP senators — during the government shutdown — and a review of federal records shows the group has paid him and his company roughly $535,000 over the past three years.

( PHOTOS: Senators up for election in 2014)

To his backers, the 38-year-old, California-based operative is an influential pit bull, seeking to purify the GOP by ousting establishment squishes. Those supporters see a man of principle, one who is, as an ally put it, “a true believer” in the cause.

But to most Senate Republicans, Hoskins is a craven political operator with limited experience winning elections. They see a man who’s turned the SCF into a reflexive Republican opposition group with one goal: making the organization, and himself, richer. Recent targets of the group have included Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), who long feuded with Hoskins’s onetime boss, former Sen. Jim DeMint. The SCF is aggressively backing McConnell’s tea party primary challenger in 2014, Matt Bevin.

“Matt is in it for whatever Matt can get out of it,” Sen. Richard Burr (R-N.C.) said of Hoskins, who crossed paths with the senator during his time as a Senate aide. “It’s not anything more than that.”

Despite working as a senior aide to DeMint when he served in Congress, Hoskins is known to most Republicans more by reputation than by any personal connection. The DeMint acolyte moved to San Diego County years ago to be closer to family, generating enemies in the Senate GOP from afar. And several veteran Republicans said they’ve had to search for a picture of Hoskins on Google because they don’t recall ever meeting him, despite being the target of his constant attacks.

( PHOTOS: Governors’ offices up for grabs in 2014)

In an interview, Hoskins brushed off criticism over his tactics and redirected the fire at his GOP critics.

“They are always looking for someone else to blame,” Hoskins said. “If they don’t want to be criticized by conservatives, there is an easy solution: They can stop voting with Democrats.”

Free rein to attack Republicans

Hoskins has an ideal situation — he runs a multimillion-dollar operation with no board of directors to which to report. He and his core team of five staffers essentially have free rein to spend donors’ cash — to lambaste sitting senators, renovate the group’s Washington office space or build the SCF’s notoriety on the right. Since DeMint left the Senate, any fears of crossing the line against sitting senators have gone out the window.

Even though DeMint used the SCF to prop up right-wing primary challengers opposed by the establishment, he avoided taking on GOP incumbents — something that is now central to Hoskins’s mission.

Since DeMint left last year, the group, and its affiliated super PAC, Senate Conservatives Action, will soon report raking in more than $9 million in 2013, the most it has ever raised in a nonelection year, burning through much of that cash slamming fellow Republicans.

( PHOTOS: Republican 2016 contenders)

So far, the SCF has invested $2.1 million in five candidates across the country — none of whom are preferred by the GOP establishment and only one of whom is running for a seat held by a Democrat. The SCF is bankrolling conservative challengers to Kansas Sen. Pat Roberts and Mississippi Sen. Thad Cochran, and a range of other GOP senators — including Sens. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Lamar Alexander of Tennessee and Jeff Flake of Arizona — who have been the subjects of TV and radio attack ads from the group.

Hoskins made no apologies about his group’s fundraising success off of its relentless attacks on Republicans.

“We’re a fundraising organization, and we’re proud of it,” he said.

Still, some of Hoskins’s tactics seem to have gone too far for even conservative stalwarts — including one of the longtime leaders of the conservative movement, Ed Feulner, a founder of The Heritage Foundation, where DeMint now is at the helm.

After receiving a Hoskins fundraising letter attacking McConnell, Feulner turned around and cut the senator a $1,000 check last month, according to a source familiar with the matter.

“I like him,” Feulner said in an email, referring to McConnell. “I think he’s done a good job holding people together.”

( Sign up for POLITICO's Influence tipsheet)

Hoskins is part of a small network of activists who’ve tapped into the intraparty wars that have dominated GOP politics since the 2010 midterms. Hoskins, along with activists from the anti-tax Club for Growth and Heritage Action, were instrumental in pressuring conservative lawmakers to take the hard-line strategy demanding a defunding of Obamacare, even though it led to the government shutdown last October. The SCF’s two best months last year were in September and October — in the run-up and aftermath of the shutdown — when it pulled in $3.7 million. But the Club for Growth, these days, is seen by Senate GOP-ers as more reasonable and more streamlined in its targets.

“I want everybody in our coalition, whether they are the supporter of those groups, the leaders of the groups, to realize we’re not just going to find totally pure people serving here,” said Sen. Ron Johnson (R-Wis.), who won a 2010 election upset buoyed by tea party forces. “We need a broad coalition — we need to remain united.”

Hoskins said the group doesn’t just reflexively endorse any candidate, arguing there’s a thorough vetting process to ensure a would-be senator is sufficiently conservative and has a chance of winning the election. Sometimes the group even polls its 200,000 donors, as it did in making the decision to endorse Bevin, Hoskins said.

The SCF spent more against McConnell in 2013 than the GOP leader’s main Democratic foe, Alison Lundergan Grimes, who entered the race in July. The group poured $1 million into the race last year, with scathing six-figure TV ad buys slamming the GOP leader for being weak-kneed in fighting Obamacare.

Even in the Arkansas Senate race, where the GOP has united behind Rep. Tom Cotton, the SCF has so far declined to endorse him, even though it’s spent money on TV, attacking Democratic Sen. Mark Pryor.

Republicans in Washington say following Hoskins’s playbook is a recipe for a Democratic-controlled Senate.

“It’s been by and large very destructive,” said Texas Sen. John Cornyn, who faces a primary challenge and has been a frequent target of the group’s attacks. “I wish they spent more time on our political opposition rather than creating internal divisions among Republicans. That does nothing but help our political opponents.”