News, discoveries and fun …

1. The world’s first glow-in-the-dark ice cream uses jellyfish proteins. (Learn more at Lick Me I’m Delicious)

2. A beagle named Elvis can smell when polar bears are pregnant at the Cincinnati zoo. (Learn more at Cincinnati Zoo)

3. Customs agents in Los Angeles recovered a 1953 Triumph motorcycle that was stolen from a Nebraska man’s backyard nearly 46 years ago. (Learn more at Orange County Register)

4. Twenty Pound Carp, a fish with its own Twitter handle, was an unsuccessful write-in candidate for the Ann Arbor City Council. (Learn more at MSN.com) (Hilarie Grey, AARP Nevada tipped us off via 11things@aarp.org)

I voted for @TwentyPoundCarp pic.twitter.com/9RkHJp3iBn – Peter Nelson (@NelsonPJ) November 5, 2013

5. A third of herbal supplements sampled in a test contained only contaminants or fillers, not even a trace of the listed ingredient. (Learn more at AARP)

6. You can add years to your life by gardening, mowing the lawn and doing housework. (Learn more at AARP)

7. More than $1 billion of artwork looted by the Nazis, including paintings by Matisse and Picasso, was found in a Munich apartment. (Learn more at CNN)

8. Scientific proof: Smoking can make you look lots older than you are. (Learn more at AARP)

9. As many as 40 billion earth-size planets in our galaxy may be hospitable to life. (Learn more at N.Y. Times)

10. There’s a global wine shortage. (Learn more at CNN)

11. The 12 engineers who created the first IBM PC were nicknamed “The Dirty Dozen.” (Learn more at AARP)

Bonus video: “I Told My Kids I Ate All Their Halloween Candy”

Learn something this week? Mail your ideas to 11things@aarp.org, and we’ll try to include your story next time.

On Twitter, we’re using the hashtag #11things.

Let us read 11 Things to you:

Images – Ice Cream: Charlie Francis, Lickmeimdelicious; Elvis the Beagle: Cincinnati Zoo; Triumph Motorcycle: U.S. Customs and Border Patrol; Ginkgo Biloba: Wikimedia Commons; Twins: Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Journal; IBM PC: Ruben de Rijcke via Wikipedia



Music – Smithsonian Jazz Masterworks Orchestra plays Jimmie Lunceford and his Orchestra – Blue Blazes by Sy Oliver, Creative Commons, courtesy of Smithsonian Remix project.

Also of Interest

See the AARP home page for deals, savings tips, trivia and more