We had people call my office to say they were going to kill your boss to my aides.Did you know, it was awful? There were crazies, and the honest thing is, that it’s sad. It’s really sad to me because… I’m a Republican, I’m a conservative, a states’ rights person, and so to me running a bill like that, the exchange, so that Colorado could control its own destiny, to me it made absolute sense. But when there are hot issues like that… People are just ‘la-la-la’ — they can’t hear — you can’t even get through to some people in talking about it… So during that time, you just had to say, ‘I know who I am. I know why I’m here. I know how my district would vote…’

I saw a different light of people, because social media is in the age of the angries and the nasties and the trolls and people who just are haters in general. I had to just not read it. I had to just carry on. It didn’t mean my son didn’t hear things and my husband — my husband it grated… He was worried all the time, because he was really concerned for my safety. Look, when you walk to your car, when someone isn’t watching — I had to be aware all the time during that period, and it’s very emotionally and physically draining…. I’ve been followed….

There’s a difference between waking up in the morning and saying ‘I have to put my big girl’s pants on because if you want to be in this game, that’s what’s gonna happen.’ Now, that happens to some men. But I predominantly have seen people think it’s freer and they’re able to take aim at women in ways they wouldn’t to men. I don’t care if you’re Annie Oakley, frankly. They will still do it, and I think it’s a shame. It speaks again about our society and sometimes how we view women in power and in office, and to me it was a big learning lesson.

The only time I really would cry is when I thought about my staff… I was very worried about my staff because the door through the Majority Office — there is a secretary there and an aide there and I would — you know, when crazies are calling, that’s what it is, crazies, and you don’t give them place — but I always had to think ‘What do you do in an emergency? How are we going to respond?’ and those were the things for me — I was like, ‘Okay, do I go to Home Depot and buy the thing that goes over the window?’ This is what would keep me up at night. I would lay awake going ‘[Secretary’s name] has a baby on the way. Oh my god, what if something happens?’ You know, my other aide had just applied to go into the Army and wanted a bright future there. Those were the things that I can remember weeping over, just, you know, during that time, because I just really wanted to secure the safety of our people there… So I hear you about thinking about an exit strategy for a baby, because I would think about those things at night.