Packers wide receiver Randall Cobb (right) congratulates 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick after the game. Credit: Rick Wood

The burden of proof was on the Green Bay Packers' defense, and it played better than it has but not well enough to seal off quarterback Colin Kaepernick when it mattered and beat the 49ers, who have become their playoff nemesis.

Most of the NFL studio analysts we heard picked San Francisco to beat the Packers on Sunday at Lambeau Field mainly because Green Bay's defense has not proven itself to be trustworthy.

ESPN's Ray Lewis put it simply.

"The fact is Green Bay is not good on defense," Lewis said. "You take Clay Matthews away from that and they're even worse."

Cris Carter of ESPN put it another way.

"At the point of attack, Green Bay cannot hold the edge," Carter said. "That's why eventually you always see FrankGore get around the edge. You see Kaepernick on the run-veer option get around the edge.

"Is B.J. Raji still on Green Bay?" Carter asked. "If you see him in Green Bay, apprehend him and bring him to the stadium because it's going to be important that he play a good game."

But by the third quarter, Green Bay's defense had earned a thumbs-up from Fox game analyst Troy Aikman.

"These guys in the middle," Aikman said about Green Bay's defensive front. "We talked about it coming in. They really had their job cut out for them today because of the running game of the 49ers, Frank Gore and this offensive line. These guys up front have really held up well. They have been able to get penetration in the backfield. They have held their ground in the middle. Dom Capers has to be proud of the job they have done. They are short-handed and given up yards, but they have tightened up when they've had to. They have really played well."

But Aikman gave a thumbs-down to a Packers defensive play in the fourth quarter when Green Bay failed to contain Kaepernick on a third-down play, allowing him to scramble for a first down, setting up the game-winning field goal.

Cornerback Jarrett Bush blitzed on the edge but failed to contain, allowing Kaepernick to make what Steve Mariucci of the NFL Network called the biggest play of the game.

"Colin Kaepernick beat the Green Bay Packers last year in the playoffs with his legs," said Fox game announcer Joe Buck. "Picks up 11 and a huge first down here."

Said Aikman: "Just a huge mistake by Jarrett Bush as he comes off the edge. He's out there to contain Colin Kaepernick. Instead, he comes underneath the block of Gore and it opens up the edge then for Kaepernick to escape the pocket and pick up the first down. Dom Capers makes a great call to keep Kaepernick in the pocket, and Jarrett Bush makes a mistake."

Aikman was still shaking his head about the play when it was shown in replay a few minutes later.

"The big play on this drive in my opinion was Jarrett Bush off the edge in not keeping Kaepernick in the pocket on third down," Aikman said. "He is in great position, but he decides to come inside. If he just stays up the field, he's at least able to keep him there and it's unlikely that the 49ers would have done anything with it."

Kaepernick's ability to make plays with his arm, his legs and his head moved Deion Sanders of the NFL Network to make a neon-ish declaration about the San Francisco quarterback after the game.

"Colin Kaepernick is the new-day quarterback," Sanders said. "He is all that and a bag of chips."

It was the Packers' offense that was nothing special in the first half.

"They have not had any success really," Aikman said about Green Bay's offensive effort. "They have not been able to throw the football, protect Aaron Rodgers, get guys open in the secondary. I know coming into this game both Aaron Rodgers and (Packers coach) Mike McCarthy were very confident in the matchups they had, felt they could come in and exploit some of things the 49ers have in the secondary. They have not been able to do that thus far."

Fox studio analyst Howie Long remarked about the Packers' frustrations on offense in the first half.

"With the exception of the one drive after the Tramon Williams interception, it's been tough sledding for this offense for Green Bay," Long said. "And there is no smoke and mirrors with this (49ers) defense. We are lining up seven in the box and we are defying you to run the football. But when you do throw, we are going to bring four and we are going to keep people in coverage, force you to hold the football. Once again, it's four people up front. ... This defense is really good."

Big picture, Trent Dilfer of ESPN was encouraged by what he saw from Green Bay this season.

"We always say Super Bowl or bust for the best teams," Dilfer said. "Everything is a failure if you don't win the Super Bowl. That's just not true from an organizational standpoint. When you look at the Green Bay Packers, they lose Aaron Rodgers for what, seven weeks, but they found a lot in those seven weeks. They found themselves a physical, dominant back like Marshawn Lynch in Eddie Lacy. They had young defensive players, because of Clay Matthews and others getting injured, that surfaced and began to make plays. They have kind of changed their identity from a pass-first team to a team that could run the ball with physicality against one of the best run defenses in the National Football League in the San Francisco 49ers.

"So when you forecast this thing to next year, I think the Green Bay Packers should feel very good about their season and the way they absorbed all that attrition," Dilfer said. "Most importantly they have a physical presence as a runner in Eddie Lacy who can expand their offense. It's just going to make Aaron Rodgers better and play longer. I think that is big. Aaron Rodgers' career will be extended."

Call SportsDay at (414) 223-5531 or email bwolfley@journalsentinel.com