LONDON, Oct. 22, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- North America autoimmune disease diagnostics market is estimated to reach $7.09 billion in 2020 from $5.504 billion in 2014 with a CAGR 5.24%. The term "autoimmune disease" refers to a varied group of illnesses that involve almost every human organ system. U.S being the largest market for autoimmune treatments holds 43% share in the global market, it will sustain its position and will hold 44% market share in 2016. A boost is expected for the U.S. autoimmune disease diagnostic testing market in 2014 due to the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA).

Environmental, infectious, and genetic factors play an important role in initiating or exacerbating autoimmune diseases. NIH program investigates that utero exposures cause increased susceptibility to autoimmune or other diseases later in life. Increasing public awareness for autoimmune diseases, expansion in coverage allowed by Patient protection and affordable care act, increased laboratory automation are the key factors driving the North America Autoimmune disease diagnostic market. Also, increasing partnership with physicians and clinical laboratories is taking the market to higher growth levels. However, slow turnaround time for autoimmune disease diagnostic test results, high frequency of false positive results, relatively low percentage of localized autoimmune diseases are the constraints for the market growth.

NIH estimates up to 23.5 million Americans have an autoimmune disease. And in fact, of the 50 million Americans living and coping with autoimmune disease (AD), more than 75 percent of them are women. Market is estimated to grow in this region because of the increased population of women suffering from autoimmune disease.

North America autoimmune disease diagnostic market is segmented based on types i. e Localized autoimmune disease diagnostic and Systemic Autoimmune disease diagnostic segment, based on products( Drugs, Therapeutic and monitoring equipments, Diagnostic equipments), based on Service market( Consultation and Diagnosis, Therapy & Monitoring, Drug development and discovery), based on Technology( Bridge therapy, DMARD, Topical therapy, Phototherapy, Helminthes Therapy, Recombinant technology).

Major companies discussed in the report are Roche, Abbott Autoimmune, and Bayer-Schering Pharmaceuticals, Biogen Idec, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline.

What the Report Offers



1) Market Definition for North America autoimmune disease diagnostic along with identification of key drivers and restraints for the market.

2) Market analysis for the North America autoimmune disease diagnostic, with region specific assessments and competition analysis on a global and regional scale.

3) Identification of factors instrumental in changing the market scenarios, rising prospective opportunities and identification of key companies which can influence the market on a global and regional scale.

4) Extensively researched competitive landscape section with profiles of major companies along with their share of markets.

5) A comprehensive list of key market players along with the analysis of their current strategic interests and key financial information.

Reasons for Buying this Report



1) For gaining an exhaustive understanding of the worldwide market for North America autoimmune disease diagnostic. Would be of assistance in providing a comprehensive analysis of the major trends, innovations and associated prospects for market growth over the coming half a decade

2) An ideal opportunity for industry consultants, and other interested and allied parties to gain a critical insight into the factors driving and restraining the market, in addition to opportunities offered

3) Wide-ranging information provided about the leading market players and the major strategies adopted by them

Download the full report: https://www.reportbuyer.com/product/2437417/

About Reportbuyer

Reportbuyer is a leading industry intelligence solution that provides all market research reports from top publishers

http://www.reportbuyer.com

For more information:

Sarah Smith

Research Advisor at Reportbuyer.com

Email: query@reportbuyer.com

Tel: +44 208 816 85 48

Website: www.reportbuyer.com

SOURCE ReportBuyer