This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... there's a bipartisan push and fight to get rid of Obamacare so called death panels ... in which bureaucrats can exert advance control over our health care ... Pacific legal Foundation DC executive director ... Todd as Eon own joins now explains five ... the controversy is over something called the independent payment advisory board ... what is in line you oppose it ... well it was enacted as part of the Obamacare law ... and it's not advisory is one of the problems on it is in power to ... make whatever ... the so-called recommendations which have the force of wall to keep the Medicare health ... costs down ... that the main problem of course is that it violates multiple constitutional provisions ... most notably ... is accountable to no branch ... of government ... and it purports to prepare that ... congressional repealed for the most part and purports to prevent ... judicial review ... so we are supporting um we filed on behalf of twelve members of Congress ... supporting the Goldwater Institute constitutional challenge ... I've to that tradition now this is is called cruised the loo ... but what exactly I am how is that what is the isthe legal argument to buy in this case ... while the Goldwater Institute aam brought challenges under the separation of powers clause article one ... article to there's even up of prohibition ... on ... or who would restrict the president's constitutional power to make recommendations that he deems appropriate because the board would use of ... the problem is the ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ... outlast the most perverse Federal Circuit ... held that the constitutional challenge isn't right for review and that's the issue that ... is going up to the Supreme Court and we're supporting them ... and the with these twelve members of Congress ... in asking the Supreme Court to reverse them so that the Constitution challenge can go forward what happen if the court struck down the so called death panels ... well I don't think it would do as much of a deathblow immediately ... to Obamacare aam but as many of the sponsors tried to explain on they wanted to shield the bomb Obamacare of laws in Medicare from political control and ... they thought this unconstitutional ... NTT somehow was necessary ... I've to make the ... UN political decisions ... on going forward in a rationing care now there's an explicit prohibition against rationing ... but that's not to find it would be up for this ... to this unconstitutional board to decide ... I'll what is or is not on rationing wondering to find out that the Supreme Court takes the case ... well we're likely to find out in either January or February whether they'll ... take this case and if we had a censorship board ... the Supreme Court would surely say um that's a newspaper could challenge the censorship board ... on basic standards on its face even before ... the censorship board issued any decision ... and that's the exact same principle we are urging the Supreme Court and we hope that the Supreme Court takes the case it makes the exact same decision value in a bipartisan group of Congressman for the fall the case closely ... Pacific legal Foundation stack as Iam now ... thanks so much ... thank you