Buy Photo Florida CHAIN Advocacy Director Athena Smith Ford holds a picture of Florida citizens who have fallen into the coverage gap. (Photo: Photo: Royal Shepherd/Democrat)Buy Photo

Nationally, nearly four million adults fall into the coverage gap that results from state decisions not to expand Medicaid; their income is above current Medicaid eligibility but below the lower limit for The Affordable Car Act Marketplace premium tax credits, which lowers what you pay in monthly premiums. Florida is one of the states that chose not to expand.

Health Care for Florida Now — a coalition of nearly 100 organizations across the state — coordinated a "statewide day of action" for Medicaid expansion. Health care supporters attended demonstrations in Tallahassee, Orlando, Tampa and Miami calling on lawmakers arriving in Tallahassee this week to close the Florida "coverage gap."

According to Health Care for Florida Now, Leon County has an estimated 44,270 uninsured citizens, 18.8 percent of the county's population. Of that number, 20,648 are uninsured because they are in the estimated coverage gap. Gadsden County has 9,127 uninsured (23.8 percent, 4,205 in estimated coverage gap), Wakulla County has 4,322 uninsured (18 percent, 1,465 in estimated coverage gap), and Jefferson County has 2,439 uninsured (22.4 percent, 926 in estimated coverage gap).

Reed Mahoney, 56, was a part of the population stuck in the coverage grey area until his disability claim was approved in 2014. Prior to that, Mahoney worked part-time, making $10,400 a year. He said his situation prompted him to fight even harder on the behalf of others in this predicament.

"It just doesn't make any sense not to close this gap," he said while standing in front of House Majority Leader Representative Dana D. Young's office. "I pledged last year that if my situation ever changed, my attitude would not and I would continue to advocate for people in this situation."

According to Florida Community Health Action Information Network (CHAIN) advocacy director Athena Smith Ford, the Florida coverage gap was created by Florida lawmakers not accepting more than $50 billion made available to our state by the Affordable Care Act so that Floridians making around the poverty line or less ($11,670 for an individual, $23,850 for a family of four) can get access to health care coverage.

"Nearly one million working moms and dads, veterans, students and others are left unable to access the health care they desperately need," she said. "These are real people. Over 300,000 of these folks are under the age of 34. Many of them are doing what they have been told is the right thing — try to go to school."

Leaders called on lawmakers, who returned to their offices this week, to finally close the Florida coverage gap. Following a press conference on Thursday, packets were delivered to the offices of House and Senate leadership. The packets had photographs of Floridians stuck in the coverage gap as well as information on the proposed fiscal benefits of closing it.

"Our state's own Revenue Estimating Conference concluded that even though Florida would eventually kick in a small share of the costs of coverage, taking this deal would be an enormous fiscal win for our state," Ford said.

Senate President Andy Gardiner R-Orlando said over the past two years, the Senate has been open to alternate ideas for reducing the gap and providing more citizens coverage.

"The Senate has shown a willingness to consider alternatives to traditional Medicaid Expansion that allow for the use of available federal tax dollars," he said via an email response to the Democrat. "The challenge has not been lack of innovative ideas from Florida, but lack of flexibility in Washington."

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1BIlKDM