Abortion radical Sandra Fluke is apparently so far out of the mainstream. she couldn’t even get the radical voters in California to support her bid for the state Senate. Fluke is best known for pushing the HHS mandate that forces religious groups to pay for birth control and abortion-causing drugs.

After rising to national notice, she declared a bid for Congress — but eventually dropped that pursuit when other Democrats persuaded her that she wouldn’t have any luck winning the seat. Instead, she decided to run for the California state legislature.

Last night, after the massive wave election that saw pro-life candidates winning huge victories across the country and retaking the Senate, Fluke lost her legislative race.

Women’s health activist Sandra Fluke lost her bid for a seat in the California state Senate. Fluke … lost to Democrat Ben Allen in California’s 26th District. Allen won the primary in June to take the state Senate seat left behind by Democrat Ted Lieu. According to LA Weekly, the Santa Monica-Malibu school board member held a 22-point lead over Fluke after more than half of the votes were in. Both candidates, who faced off Tuesday after finishing as the top two in the June primary, raised over $1 million for their campaigns.

Last year, Fluke had a rather odd view of the legal challenge Hobby Lobby and other plaintiffs are bringing to the Supreme Court against the Obamacare birth control mandate.

She thinks if the high court allows them the ability to engage in their First Amendment freedoms to not be forced to pay for birth control or abortion-causing drugs that other groups or companies will not want to pay for blood transfusions.

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

Fluke is so obsessed with the government forcing religious groups to pay for her birth control and contraception that she compared opposing it in an interview to opposing coverage for leukemia.

Never mind that opposing government spending taxpayer funds on forcing groups with religious objections to pay for birth control and abortion-causing drugs has nothing to do with supporting legitimate health care for patients suffering from the blood or bone marrow cancer that is deadly for adults and children alike.

“If you take a step back and think about that, you work at a restaurant or you work at a store, and your boss is able to deny you leukemia coverage or contraception coverage or blood transfusions or any number of medical concerns that someone might have a religious objection to,” Fluke said. “So the folks who are still objecting [to the mandate] have some very extreme ideas about religious freedom and employee health care in this country.”