A proposed reduction in grant funds for mental health in the state’s Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services could lead to a loss of service to more than 1,000 patients in Valley and Shoreline towns.

Roberta Cook, president and CEO of BHcare, which operates two outpatient clinics in Ansonia and Branford offering behavioral health services, said the $25 million reduction expected in DMHAS’s mental health services grants would eliminate services for 1,700 patients for her agency. BHcare has 3,241 behavioral health clients in total, with 2,829 receiving outpatient care.

Among the towns most affected include Branford, as the agency said 440 patients there would lose service, followed by Ansonia with 285, with 170 patients affected in both Guilford and Shelton.

The reduction is part of Gov. Dannel Malloy’s fiscal 2016-17 biennium budget. If the budget is approved later this year, BHcare’s roughly $3.5 million in funds from DMHAS will be reduced by $2.3 million for its outpatient clinical budget, Cook said. BHcare’s total outpatient clinical budget is $5.7 million; the agency has an overall annual operating budget of $18.3 million and serves more than 12,000 patients for behavioral health, domestic violence and prevention services.

Advertisement

BHcare is DMHAS’s designated local mental health authority for Ansonia, Branford, Derby, East Haven, Guilford, Madison, North Branford, North Haven, Oxford, Seymour and Shelton. The loss in grant funds would also mean BHcare will need to lay off about 40 employees, Cook said.

“We are fighting to get it restored,” Cook said.

DMHAS spokeswoman Mary Kate Mason said the $25 million reduction is a continuation of a reduction implemented for the current fiscal year. However, for this fiscal year, the state was able to cover some of the reduction with $10 million from the Tobacco Trust Fund and $10 million covered by the department itself, Mason said. The remaining amount was left to providers to cover. DMHAS has a current fiscal year budget of $614.9 million, Cook said,

The reduction was completed in anticipation of an increase in health coverage in the state as a result of the Affordable Care Act.

“They still received grant money, just received less grant money because of the assumption that they would have more insurance[-covered] people coming in for services,” Cook said.

According to a release from Malloy’s office on Monday, more than 500,000 state residents have enrolled in health care coverage through the state’s Access Health CT program. The release celebrated the fifth anniversary of the act’s signing into law.

“Put simply, the Affordable Care Act is working,” Malloy said in the release. “Connecticut has emerged as a national leader in its implementation, and states around the country are modeling their exchanges on ours.”

Mason wouldn’t comment whether the agency is working on restoring the $25 million in cuts, though she added that there’s “internal systems design work” being completed that is examining the cut.

In the meantime, Cook said, the agency is bracing for the, “worst-case scenario.”

“We are feeling the brunt of it right now,” Cook said. The services provided to those patients are critical, Cook said, because they provide clients the ability to live in a community and in a safe environment. The behavioral health services provides assistance to people with mental illness including bipolar disorder, major depression and schizophrenia.

“The concern is that they will end up in crisis,” Cook said.

When patients don’t get the treatment they need, many of them end up using other, more high-cost services, some ending up in jail or in the hospital, Cook said.

“It doesn’t save the state money by cutting our grants, because they will just end up paying the money for a hospital or ER visit,” Cook said.

Reach Esteban L. Hernandez at 203-680-9901.