Hillary Clinton has targeted the healthcare sector once more; however, this time her main focus is on the health insurers, which include leading players such as Humana Inc. (NYSE:HUM) and Aetna Inc. (NYSE:AET). The stocks have tumbled since Ms. Clinton claimed that the two players’ merger poses “serious concerns.”

The healthcare sector has consolidated at a record rate this year, and the health insurers were active participants of the acquisition frenzy. Four of the top five health insurers – Aetna, Humana, Anthem Inc. (NYSE:ANTM), and Cigna Corporation (NYSE:CI) – have signed merger deals. While the deals had already sparked controversies, Ms. Clinton’s remarks seem to have posed serious threats to the consolidation among health insurers.

In a statement, she said: “As we see more consolidation in health care, among both providers and insurers, I'm worried that the balance of power is moving too far away from consumers.” She also claimed that the Anthem’s plans to acquire Cigna should be reviewed closely by the regulators. Ms. Clinton explained that she is quite skeptical as to whether the mergers would actually be good for the consumers or not.

What Is So Skeptical About Health Insurers Mergers

Aetna-HumanaMerger

In July, Aetna proposed to acquire Humana in a deal worth $37 billion. Recently, the deal was approved by both insurers’ shareholders. Upon the deal’s completion, the merged entity would be the largest Medicare Advantage plan provider for elderly patients.

The deals were already expected to face some major hurdles, due to some significant overlaps in the company’s operations. As the deal was made public, it was predicted that there could be undesirable competitive consequences on various fronts of both players’ insurance businesses, which include Medicaid and Medicare. Analysts also predicted that the two players could be asked to divest some major assets if they wanted to complete the deal.

However, Aetna is confident about the deal. The company has already started planning how to finance the deal, which shows that it is not worried about regulatory concerns. In a statement, Aetna spokeswoman Cynthia Michener wrote: “Aetna is focused on evolving the health care industry to a new model,” and stated that the Humana deal would create “positive change” in the market.

Anthem-CignaDeal

After Aetna and Humana reached an acquisition deal, Anthem announced that it has agreed to acquire Cigna, in a deal worth $47 billion. Upon the deal’s completion, the merged company would be the largest health insurer in the US, with regard to membership volumes.

The Anthem-Cigna merger would not only lead to a health insurance juggernaut, but also allow major cost-saving in the health insurance sector. Moreover, Anthem has forecasted that the merged company would have the potential to grab almost $155 billion in pro-forma revenues, and cater to 53.2 million consumers.

Spokeswoman Jill Becher claimed that Anthem is “engaged in a constructive and transparent dialog” with regulatory bodies, pertaining to how the merger would lead healthy competition and affordable care.

Both deals are being closely scrutinized by the US Department of Justice. A possible concern is that the deal, which would slash the number of leading health insurers in the US to three, is the recent political pressure on the healthcare sector that has weighed down the entire indices.

Ms. Clinton has targeted the healthcare sector since the past month. Last time, she targeted the rapidly-inflating drug prices, but now she has voiced concerns about the large health-insurer consolidations. She said: “These mergers should be scrutinized very closely with an eye to preventing the undue concentration that they appear to create.”

On the other hand, insurers have debated that the consolidations would aid to compete in the market, as the government tries to increase its control over the healthcare expenditures after the Affordable Care Act’s implementation.

Impact Of Hilary’s Remarks On Healthcare Stocks

At September end, Ms. Clinton presented her proposal about the reforms needed to control the practices of increasing drug prices. She pointed out that the drug makers, which will acquire an undervalued but proven drug, would increase prices several-folds, soon after the acquisition. Her proposal sent the entire biotech sector crashing down almost 19%. The major sell-off continued for almost seven trading sessions, and was followed by some extended sell-off sessions in the following week.

The same seems to be the case with health insurers. During the past two trading sessions, Humana stock lost 11% of its stock price, while Aetna crashed almost 10%. Both Anthem and Cigna declined 7.71% in the past two trading sessions. Both Humana and Aetna declined almost 6.5%. The sell-off can be expected to continue for days, similar to the sell-off that hit the biotech sector.