Topics: Alexander Haig, American History, Barack Obama, Books, Cambodia, Daniel Ellsberg, Editor's Picks, Greg Grandin, Henry Kissinger, New York Times, Niall Ferguson, Robert McNamara, Vietnam, News

Two weeks ago, a mini-scandal rocked the New York literary world. Gawker revealed that Andrew Roberts, the New York Times Book Review’s choice to review the authorized biography of Henry Kissinger, had in fact been Kissinger’s original choice to write the authorized biography.

Roberts also was a long-time friend of Niall Ferguson, the man who Kissinger wound up choosing to write his authorized biography. Roberts and Ferguson had even written a lengthy chapter together in a volume of essays edited by Ferguson. Worse yet: Roberts had revealed almost none of these involvements — with Ferguson, with Kissinger — to the New York Times when it asked him to write the review.

So unseemly were these entanglements, and the lack of transparency about them, that Margaret Sullivan, the New York Times public editor, felt called upon to rap the paper’s knuckles. Which prompted a further back and forth between Sullivan and Pamela Paul, the editor of the Times Book Review. While the back-scratching world of book reviews in the New York Times is an old topic — unlike other publications, the Times purports to be objective and untainted by personal connections, and its reviews help promote or kill books — this scandal brought it into especially sharp relief.

The person who revealed the scandal in Gawker was Greg Grandin, an NYU historian and winner of multiple academic and literary prizes. Grandin has his own book out on Kissinger, “Kissinger’s Shadow,” which was reviewed by the Times the same day that Ferguson’s bio was.

By coincidence, I was scheduled to interview Grandin at the Brooklyn Public Library on the day his review came out. I was thrilled by the prospect. (Full disclosure: Grandin and I are long-time friends. Just in case you thought the personal dimensions of this story couldn’t get any gummier.)

A lot of Kissinger commentary focuses on a simple-minded opposition between two traditions of U.S. foreign policy: the realist tradition, which is hard-headed about power, human rights, and America’s ability to do good in the world; and the idealist tradition, which believes the U.S. should promote freedom and democracy around the globe.

Grandin shows how irrelevant that debate is. His Kissinger is neither a realist nor an idealist; his Kissinger is a “political existentialist.” And where sentimentalists look back on Kissinger’s reign as a time when wise men governed, Grandin shows that there’s a direct link between the insanity of Bush’s Iraq War — and Obama’s endless wars — and Kissinger’s insanity in Southeast Asia, Latin America and Africa.

Beyond the novel interpretation Grandin offers of Kissinger, his book is a literary triumph, a marriage of style and substance that’s rare in books on U.S. foreign policy. Grandin’s chapter on the deeply troubled and personal relationship between Kissinger and Daniel Ellsberg reads like the opening act of a John Adams opera. Grandin manages to take a serious topic — the fantastically strange, and unnerving, worldview of Henry Kissinger — and make it funny. Kissinger’s Shadow is like Dr. Strangelove, but on paper. It shows you how scary Kissinger’s reign truly was, but never lets you forget the farce that was the man.

What follows is an edited transcript of our interview at the Brooklyn Public Library.

There’ve been many books about Henry Kissinger, including critical treatments by Christopher Hitchens and Seymour Hersh. Why do we need another book?

Kissinger is an outsized personality, and in these other books, he tends to outstrip the context. You learn much about Kissinger, but not so much about the national security state that he exemplifies. My book sees in Kissinger the workings of the larger system, the longer arc of post-war U.S. foreign policy.

But I want to also take on the notion that Kissinger is a foreign policy realist, that he’s opposed to the idealist strain of U.S. foreign policy. Kissinger is supposed to think the U.S. should only get into battles it knows it can win, and should only do so in defense of its interests, not its ideals. That notion of Kissinger the realist is often juxtaposed with the adventurism of the neoconservatives who drove us into Iraq. I think that’s a misrecognition of Kissinger, and my book shows how.

Picking up on that, if there’s a through-line in the book, it’s the senior thesis Kissinger wrote when he was at Harvard in the late 1940s. Tell us about this thesis, and why it’s so important to you?

He submitted it in 1950. It was the longest thesis in Harvard’s history. In fact, it supposedly prompted the creation of the “Kissinger rule,” where you aren’t allowed to submit an undergraduate thesis longer than 200 pages.

How long was it?

Four hundred pages.

You did say he was outsized.

It was a meditation on European philosophers and historians: Oswald Spengler, Immanuel Kant and Arnold Toynbee. Its title was “The Meaning of History,” and it reflected its historical moment. It has a strong flavour of post-war existentialism. You read it and you think of Sartre: the idea that life is meaningless, has no purpose, that there’s an emptiness to the universe, that there’s no moral order. But, like Sartre, Kissinger also believed that individuals could act freely and that that the best way to achieve freedom was to accept that meaninglessness and emptiness of history. What’s interesting about that thesis is that you can see how Kissinger refers back to it throughout the years and in all of his critiques of how U.S. foreign policy was practiced.

You say he’s a subjective irrationalist, a political existentialist. What does that mean?

Kissinger says that the past is a series of meaningless events and it is we in the present who impose order on the past by our present concerns. He rejects any and all forms of determinism. He also insists that there is a range of possibilities for action, that there is freedom.

This influences his ideas about diplomacy. The responsibility of statesmen is to recognize that they have freedom to move, they shouldn’t be constrained by the past, they shouldn’t let the past be a prison house of the present. He also believes — and this is where he links up to neoconservatism — that action creates meaning, and that we — states, statesmen, diplomats — don’t know our interests until we act in the world.

There’s a circularity to Kissinger’s thought. Kissinger often is held up as somebody who believes states should act out of a strong sense of interest and purpose. A constant critique that he makes of whatever the current administration happens to be is that it knows how to project power but doesn’t know why it is projecting power. But if you start to peel back the layers and get at what he means by purpose, there’s no “there” there. Ultimately, he believes we have to project power to create purpose and that our purpose is to project power. And that’s a circularity that I think is the motor force of American expansionism.

Again, a traditional realist is someone who believes that there are limits to power and that states have interests, and that have have to operate within those limits to secure those interests. You show that Kissinger has an animus to what underlies that view: namely, cause and effect. He doesn’t really believe that there are causes in the world that affect things.

After the Cuban Missile Crisis, Kissinger has this great line: “There are two kinds of realists. One that observes reality and responds to it, and the other that makes reality.” And what the West needs is the latter. That view was echoed by Karl Rove when he was in the Bush administration: “We’re an empire now and when we act, we create reality.”

This is all in the undergraduate thesis; he explicitly rejects the idea of cause and effect, of causality. We can’t think of the present as the cumulative effect of past actions because the past didn’t cause the present, because nothing causes anything. So you can’t allow the past to determine or even shape what you do in the present; you can dispense with the past.

You can see that idea with someone like Cheney, who will look at Iraq today and say, “Look, we can debate what we did twelve or thirteen years ago, whether we were right or wrong. But there’s a crisis now, and we have to act now to solve that crisis.” That’s Kissingerism: statesmen shouldn’t let yesterday’s catastrophe get in the way of today’s bold action.