On the outer: Nicky Carle hasn't played for Sydney FC since a bust-up with coach Frank Farina. Photo: Getty Images

Exactly what has happened to the forgotten man of Sydney FC, Nicky Carle?

The club’s former marquee player looked a certainty to make his return against Brisbane Roar on Friday night, having been listed as available the day before.

Adding weight to the likelihood of it being Carle’s comeback match was the decision to withdraw the club’s current marquee, Alessandro Del Piero, who was suffering from fluid on the hamstring.

Given Del Piero has been playing in the number 10 all season, it seemed inevitable Carle would take the role in which he has previously played his best football.

Advertisement

However, when the team sheets were distributed, Carle wasn’t even named on the bench. Replacing Del Piero was Alec Urosevski, a 20-year-old winger making his first start for the Sky Blues.

When pressed about why Carle was overlooked, Farina said it was a “purely tactical” decision. “I think our midfield has been performing pretty well and I don’t think Nicky Carle is a left winger,” he said. “We wanted a bit of pace because we wanted to exploit the holes behind the full-backs and young Alec did ok. It was purely tactical.”

Yet the decision to include Urosevski meant Ali Abbas – the first-choice left-winger all season – had to play more centrally.

Despite that explanation, Farina maintains Carle has not been discounted from selection in the future. “Nicky is back training with the boys, and he’s in the mix,” he said. “He had a good session [on Friday] with other 13 boys [who didn’t play].”

Conspiracy theorists will note that Carle has not played since he was suspended by Farina for disobeying tactical orders during the 3-0 defeat against Adelaide United in early February.

While that suspension was successfully challenged by the Professional Footballers' Association for breaching of the collective bargaining agreement, Carle hasn’t even been named on the bench since.

He missed the next two matches with an adductor strain but the former Johnny Warren Medallist has been declared fully fit for the past two games, only to be overlooked both times.

The coach has maintained there is no lingering tension from his move to suspend Carle – and has since selected Matt Thompson, the other player suspended at the time.

Farina could also argue the promising form of young duo Terry Antonis and Hagi Gligor have obstructed Carle’s return to the first team.

Carle is contracted to the club for another season, and would, theoretically, make a natural replacement for Del Piero – but it remains unclear whether Farina, whose own position next season is not assured, wants to keep him.

Meanwhile, the investigation into the alleged racial abuse of Abbas during last week’s Sydney derby could be settled this week with the deadline for a submission from the accused Wanderers player, Brendon Santalab, set for Monday night.

It is understood Santalab is privately maintaining his innocence over what happened, and the striker revealed to Fairfax Media last week that he believed he had been goaded by Abbas in previous matches.

Western Sydney coach Tony Popovic has indicated that Santalab, who started in Saturday's 0-0 draw with Adelaide at Pirtek Stadium, has remained relatively unaffected by the storm surrounding the incident.

“I haven't seen Brendon all week, I only saw Brendon [on Friday] but he was like everyone else, as expected,” Popovic said. “He trained well and played [against Adelaide] and gave everything he had.”