It’s been 50 years, but Tom Vidakovich can still see lefty Bobby Joe Hill bursting free down the court at Colorado State’s new Moby Gym, the final seconds ticking off the clock.

“I was the guy guarding him,” Vidakovich said. “I guess I’ll never forget it. He sure was quick.”

It was Feb. 4, 1966, and Hill and Texas Western had won 15 consecutive games in a 28-1 season they would cap with a seminal national championship just weeks later. The Miners, with a starting lineup composed solely of black players, would defeat the mighty, all-white Kentucky Wildcats 72-65 in the NCAA title game, a historic achievement that was honored Saturday at the Final Four in Houston on the occasion of its 50th anniversary.

That victory for Texas Western (now the University of Texas at El Paso) inspired the film “Glory Road” and became a watershed moment in the push for racial equality in sports and American society alike.

“They didn’t know it at the time,” President Barack Obama said of the Miners last week, “but their contribution to civil rights was as important as any other.”

About a month before that championship game, though, the Miners were just a team riding a bus to Fort Collins in hopes of keeping an undefeated season alive. All the Rams did was come a buzzer-beating shot away from potentially altering history.

“We felt like they were a great team,” said Boyd Grant, who was the 33-year-old acting head coach at CSU at the time. “And we had a pretty good team too.”

Help from the hamburger squad

As a freshman at CSU in 1966, Floyd Kerr certainly was talented enough to play varsity basketball. He just wasn’t allowed to.

It wasn’t until 1972 that the NCAA permitted freshmen to play on the varsity. So Kerr, on top of being a member of CSU’s “Fabulous Frosh” team, had another job as the Rams prepared to play the Miners.

“What coaches did in those days is they would have jerseys from the other team,” Kerr said. “They would give them to either the backups or the freshman players. They were called the hamburger squads back then because the varsity would eat us for lunch.”

It’s no wonder. CSU’s 1965-66 varsity team featured two future NBA players — big men Bob Rule and Dale Schlueter — and dynamic guard Lonnie Wright, who later played for both the Denver Broncos and the ABA’s Denver Rockets.

After Grant handed Kerr the jersey of Bobby Joe Hill, the Miners’ jet-quick, 5-foot-11 point guard, Kerr felt transformed, eager for the challenge.

“He controlled that team,” Kerr, now the athletic director at Morgan State University in Baltimore, said of Hill. “So that was my job. I played him that whole week. I got to do things I’d never thought I’d be doing in a basketball game.”

Whether it was Hill’s preparation or the capacity crowd at the 10,000-seat arena that had opened only weeks earlier, the Rams came out fighting and trailed just 43-41 at halftime.

Offense was hard to come by in the second half.

“They were so good defensively,” Grant, now retired in Pocatello, Idaho, said of the Miners. “They were the kind of team that just took your strengths away from you. Pretty soon, you were wondering what happened to your offense.”

Still, the Rams kept chipping away. A jumper by Rule with 2:25 left gave CSU its first lead, 66-64. After David Lattin tied the score on a dunk with 1:28 remaining, CSU went into stall mode and played for one last shot, a common tactic in the days before college basketball had a shot clock.

“After a timeout we came down the court,” Vidakovich said. “Our real good guard from Los Angeles named Dick Fines got the ball and kind of panicked. He took a little bank shot from the right side. He missed the shot, went a little bit early.”

The miss came with nine seconds left. Hill grabbed the rebound and called a timeout. In the huddle, Grant devised a plan to deny Hill the entry pass.

“The funny thing is we did exactly what we wanted to do,” Grant said, describing how his defense shaded Hill away from the ball. “But he was smart enough to back cut and get the ball.”

Once Hill got the ball, the race was on.

“I remember picking him up almost at half court and thinking that if I gave him a little room he couldn’t drive it,” Vidakovich said. “He just pulled up, popped up and swished right at the buzzer. Game over.”

CSU Rams nearly beat NCAA champs

The 30-foot dagger was a heartbreaker 50 years ago. But as time has heightened the significance of that season for Texas Western, the Rams involved in that loss at what since the 1990s has been called Moby Arena have come to cherish memories of it.

Who knows what their winning that game could have done? Would another defeat — Texas Western suffered its only loss of the 1965-66 season to Seattle on March 5 — have altered the Miners’ path to history? Would it have presented a tougher course through the 22-team NCAA Tournament?

It’s impossible to say, of course. But the Rams from 50 years ago are content to enjoy their small part in a historic season.

“They were intense, quick, good and they played the game right,” Vidakovich said of the Miners. “We had a lot of respect for them. I think they had a lot of respect for us.”

Kerr has another connection to the Texas Western story. His nephew is Schin Kerr, the second-oldest son of his twin brother Lloyd, a fellow former CSU player. Schin played the role of Lattin, who scored 16 points against Kentucky, in “Glory Road.”

“He’s goes back there every year for reunions now,” Floyd Kerr said of Schin. “He’s become part of their family now.”

Kerr is in Houston for the Final Four and the tributes being paid to the Miners. One team member not on hand was Hill, who died in December 2002 at the age of 59.

Perhaps Kerr should have slipped on that No. 14 Texas Western jersey one more time, a member of the hamburger squad paying his respects.

Nick Kosmider: 303-954-1516, nkosmider@denverpost.com or @nickkosmider