In fewer than 100 hours, polls open across the country. In battleground Senate states, there is still a sizable percentage of the voting population that hasn't yet decided for whom it plans to vote.

Given that a number of these races are extremely close (Iowa, North Carolina) or the polling is all over the place (New Hampshire, Alaska), it's worth considering what these undecided voters mean. Do they break one way or the other? Do they vote at all? Are they an inscrutable black hole from which no predictive light can escape?

In conversations with Scott Clement, polling analyst for the Post, and Peter Brown, assistant director of the Quinnipiac Poll, we got some answers to those questions. In order: Sometimes/maybe, not always, and yes.

"A significant number of people who say they're undecided end up not voting," Brown said, describing people who say they're undecided late in the campaign when the Post spoke with him by phone on Friday. "They're people with weak party affiliations and are more likely to call themselves independents than Democrats or Republicans" -- later explaining that "party ID gives a framework" that helps voters decide who to support. Undecided voters also "tend to be lower information voters than higher information voters," so predicting what that group might do, he said, was particularly difficult.

For political campaigns, that's a hard answer to accept. Clement suggested that, forced to try and figure out how the undecided voters might break, there are ways to do so, though "there is no clear best practice." Clement agreed that many wouldn't go to the polls at all. Some pollsters apply a model to try and figure out how they'll vote. Others "game out" how the undecideds could affect the result under certain circumstances.

This election, it's all about which party will control the Senate. PostTV visited four battleground states to ask voters there about the issues driving them to the ballot box for the midterms. (Julie Percha/The Washington Post)

There's also the idea of the "incumbent rule." Described here, the incumbent rule proposes that voters who make up their minds late tend to break against incumbents. After all, one assumes that voters know the incumbent better and have spent months not committing to support that candidate. Forced to decide, that's the path they're more likely to follow.

In 2012, Mark Blumenthal of Pollster.com argued that this idea was no longer accurate. Why? "Pollsters speculate that the the incumbent rule disappeared because of a change in the nature of campaigns since the '80s and '90s," he wrote for the Huffington Post. "Incumbent candidates have grown increasingly aggressive and are now far more willing to attack challengers early and often, so voters are making their decisions sooner and often on the basis of negative information about challengers." He also cited research that suggests it's front-runners who might see lower support from undecided voters. He quotes political scientists Robert Erikson and Christopher Wlezien: "leads shrink for whichever candidate is in the lead (usually the incumbent party candidate) rather than that voters trend specifically against the incumbent candidate."

When the Post polls, Clement explained, the interviewers ask even undecided poll respondents to pick between candidates because such voters often have inclinations toward a candidate even if they're not interested in sharing them at the outset. Low percentages of undecided voters are "a measure of quality in a survey." But with the voters that end up in that bucket, it's very hard to predict what will happen. "A lot of it," he said, "is based on intuition."

Brown offered one key point that's worth keeping in mind as far the motivations of voters was concerned. "Many of us who are in the politics business assume that other citizens are equally as interested as are we," he said. "But for many very decent Americans, it just doesn't rank that high on their list."

Poll data for the chart: Alaska (Fox News), Arkansas (NBC / Marist), Colorado (Denver Post / SurveyUSA), Georgia (SurveyUSA), Iowa (Quinnipiac), Kansas (NBC / Marist), Kentucky (SurveyUSA), Louisiana (Suffolk), New Hampshire (CNN/ORC), North Carolina (NBC / Marist), Oregon (SurveyUSA), and South Dakota (NBC / Marist).