House Republicans have retained a top-tier law firm to advise Speaker Paul Ryan on potential litigation against the Obama administration. | Getty House Republicans eye potential lawsuit on Gitmo transfers

House Republicans have retained a top-tier law firm to advise Speaker Paul Ryan on potential litigation against the Obama administration over the transfer of detainees from Guantanamo Bay.

The GOP leaders contract with Mike Carvin and Gregory Katsas of Jones Day is worth up to $150,000, according to a copy of the agreement obtained by POLITICO.

Story Continued Below

“Congress has spoken and the president does not have the authority to import Gitmo terrorist into the United States. Because the law is clear we do not anticipate the need for any legal action, but Speaker Ryan is prepared to forcefully defend Congress’s authority if the president does attempt any illegal action," said AshLee Strong, a spokesperson for Ryan.

The contract allows Carvin to “advise the Speaker (and/or his designee) regarding legal issues raised by, including possible litigation concerning, the possible transfer to the United States or elsewhere of individuals currently detained at the United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.”

Under former Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio), House Republicans sued Obama on several issues, including the White House's refusal to comply with congressional subpoenas in the "Fast and Furious" investigation, as well as executive actions on health care and immigration. The litigation is ongoing. House Republicans spent $2.5 million on a lawsuit defending the Defense of Marriage Act and close to $200,000 on lawsuits against the administration on Obamacare.

Carvin was on the team of lawyers that argued on behalf of former President George W. Bush during the 2000 election recount in Florida. He is also the lawyer arguing on behalf of teachers who are challenging union fees, a case that's reached the Supreme Court. And Carvin is the same lawyer that argued in the King v. Burwell Obamacare case.

Katsas clerked for Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas and worked for Bush in the Department of Justice. He's overseen lawsuits previously on Guantanamo Bay and the CIA.

A senior Democratic staffer accused House Republicans of being litigious.

“Whether with the so-called Defense of Marriage Act or the Affordable Care Act, the House Republican leadership continues to hire expensive Washington lawyers to achieve the outcomes they cannot get through the legislative process. It’s a stunning abuse of taxpayer funds with zero oversight," said Drew Hammill, a spokesperson for Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi.

John Bresnahan contributed to this report.