City zoning code does not allow for mobile businesses, except food trucks

Raymond Richard "Rich" Smith is, as far as the city of Longmont is concerned, peddling an illegal service.

"I don't know why this is the crime of the century," Smith said. "I'm not selling drugs, you know."

Smith repairs windshield chips, and sometimes windshield cracks, too. He has a van that he parks outside the Main Street motel where he also works as a repairman and landlord. In big red letters, the van says, "AUTO GLASS CHIP REPAIR" and has Smith's phone number. A smaller sign in the driver's window reads, "Always Available."

Smith has been repairing windshield chips for 10 years in Longmont. In 2013, he was ticketed by Longmont code enforcement for operating a mobile auto-repair business. They shut his business down for 10 days, but he started it back up again.

Last month, a code enforcement officer observed him repairing four windshield chips from his spot in the motel parking lot and charged him with four code violations plus a violation for an expired registration on his van.

The city zoning code does not allow for mobile businesses, except food trucks, anywhere in the city, said Joni Marsh, director of planning and development services.

Marsh noted that she was not involved with Smith's case but that the general purpose for such city ordinances and zoning laws is to avoid nuisance.

"There might be noise, or dust, or environmental concerns like antifreeze or something in the storm drain system," Marsh said.

Advertisement

Smith said he felt the complaints came from his competitors along Main Street, the brick-and-mortar places that specialize in windshield repair and replacement or throw in chip repair as a free bonus in car-wash premium packages.

"There's enough business to go around for everybody," Smith said. "They've got all the insurance business. If you call the 800 number of your insurance card, you'll go to them. ... Most of the stuff I do is in the hours they aren't even open."

Smith charges $25 to repair a windshield chip and $5 for every chip after that. He doesn't rely on the business for his main livelihood, working at the motel front desk since his wife died last year. He averages about two cars on a weekday and four to five on a Saturday or a Sunday.

"I don't need it to survive," Smith said. "I like doing windshield repairs. And I felt like I was pretty good at it."

Council member Bonnie Finley, who is the council liaison to the Planning and Zoning Commission, said she had heard from Smith and was sympathetic to his plight, but ultimately, the city's law was the law.

"I think it's a shame that we're impacting his ability to make a living, but I do know the city has spoken with him and tried to help him to develop a business plan to allow him to continue," Finley said. "He hasn't wanted to make those adjustments or meet the requirements."

Finley added that she wished the city could make an exception for Smith, but she feared it would set a precedent for others who want exceptions. Changing the ordinance against mobile businesses also presented a conundrum, Finley said, "because it's a good ordinance."

City employees have invited Smith to talk about his business with representatives of the planning department, but he has not. Marsh said a possibility for Smith might be to rent a garage for a certain amount of time from one of the existing auto-repair shop owners.

In the meantime, despite a court summons and an order from the city to stop his side business, Smith's van is still parked along the 1500 block of Main Street.

"What happened to innocent until proven guilty?" Smith said. "Seems I should be able to keep doing it until the judge says I can't."

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci