With ISIS in Iraq, Iran has offered to help contain the threat posed by the al-Qaida linked terrorist group known as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIS). But for some Iraq War veterans, the plans being proposed by President Obama are not enough.

In a related report by The Inquisitr, the United States apparently set the ISIS leader free in 2009, and now with ISIS in Iraq, even Baghdad is being threatened with being overrun. But President Obama has promised no American troops will be sent into Iraq even as he ponders other options.

Iraq war veteran J.R. Salzman has met President Obama in person before, and even has the pictures to prove it:

Remember when we met in 2007 @BarackObama? You said you were proud of our sacrifices. So why did you throw them away? pic.twitter.com/NYrX8Xllbx — J.R. Salzman (@jrsalzman) June 13, 2014

Salzman lost his right arm during his tour of duty, and now he has taken to Twitter to criticize how the United States has allowed ISIS in Iraq:

I did not get an arm blown off in Baghdad so you could sit on your ass and watch Iraq fall, @BarackObama. I did my job. DO YOUR JOB. — J.R. Salzman (@jrsalzman) June 13, 2014

The veteran is also pretty upset that Iran, of all countries, is being allowed to combat the ISIS in Iraq while America is still trying to figure out what we’re going to do:

If I have this right, Iran, the country responsible for the weapons expert and the IED that took my arm, is going to help America with Iraq. — J.R. Salzman (@jrsalzman) June 13, 2014

Now President Obama is discussing different ways in which the US Military may intervene in the fight against the al-Qaida linked group, but so far he’s been saying that it is up to the Iraqi government to combat the ISIS in Iraq:

“The United States will do our part, but understand that ultimately it’s up to the Iraqis as a sovereign nation to solve their problems. We won’t allow ourselves to be dragged back into a situation in which, while we’re there, we’re keeping a lid on things, and after enormous sacrifices by us, as soon as we’re not there, suddenly people end up acting in ways that are not conducive to the long-term stability of the country…. Given the very difficult history that we’ve seen in Iraq… Various military actions by the United States, by any outside nation are not going to solve those problems in the long-term.”

The aircraft carrier George HW Bush was re-positioned into the Persian Gulf so that President Obama has options for air strikes that may slow the advance of the ISIS in Iraq. Lt Gen David Deptula says that if air strikes or drones are ordered by Obama, then they can be carried out immediately:

“There are a variety of means to do this, whether you are talking about long-range, high-payload aircraft or smaller aircraft. With the requisite intelligence information you can start again in 24 hours.”

How do you think President Obama should combat the ISIS in Iraq? What do you think about the criticism of J.R. Salzman?

[Image via TruNews]