A 38-year-old detective captured on video berating a New York City taxi driver was stripped of his badge and gun, placed on desk duty and is being transferred from an elite New York Police Department unit, Police Commissioner William Bratton said Wednesday.

The action comes two days after a video was posted to YouTube showing Patrick Cherry, a 14-year veteran, screaming at the Uber taxi driver, repeatedly slamming the driver’s side door and threatening him with arrest after stopping him for failing to use his turn signal.

Speaking at a monthly briefing at NYPD headquarters, Mr. Bratton said the detective’s behavior made it harder for officers to do their jobs and went against “every one of the tenets” being taught at a three-day departmental retraining program for the department’s 35,000 officers.

“No good cop can watch that without a wince,” Mr. Bratton said sternly during a news conference. “That officer’s behavior reflected poorly on everyone who wears our uniform.”

The 3½ minute video was shot by a rear seat passenger in the vehicle.

Mr. Bratton said the NYPD’s Internal Affairs Bureau reviewed the video and forwarded the matter to the Civilian Complaint Review Board which is investigating.

The detective is being transferred from the Joint Terrorism Task Force to which he was assigned in November.

Mr. Bratton said the anger, discourtesy and language displayed in the video is “unacceptable,” in any encounter.

Mayor Bill de Blasio said the “there’s just no place for any public servant to use discriminatory or negative language.”

“Obviously, our police play a particularly sensitive role and need to show respect for all people,” the mayor said.

Over the course of his 14-1/2 years on the force, Det. Cherry has has received a total of 13 civilian complaints against him according to a person with knowledge of the latest complaint. That complaint alleges the officer was abusive, threatened the driver with arrest, was discourteous and used offensive language regarding the driver’s apparent ethnicity, the person said.

Michael Palladino, president of the Detectives’ Endowment Association, called the detective “a person of good character and an excellent Detective.”

“He really should not be judged by one isolated incident,” Mr. Palladino said.