How many do it: There are an estimated 10,000 concierge doctors nationwide, vs. 300,000 physicians in regular primary care practices.

Number of patients: A typical concierge practice has 300 to 400 patients, vs. 1,000 to more than 4,000 in a regular practice.

Dr. Thomas Hwang, a Tustin internist, didn't like the way his practice was evolving. Even as his patient load expanded, his take-home pay contracted, and he feared not having enough time to spend with his patients.

So a little over a year ago, he invited them to a big meeting at the Tustin Ranch Country Club, where he explained a new feature of his practice. Patients who agreed to pay a yearly fee of $1,600, beyond their insurance premiums, would enjoy better access to him. That included same-day appointments, real-time telephone availability, quick answers to emailed questions, and an exhaustive two-hour annual physical exam with detailed, personalized follow-up. People who were unwilling or unable to pay the fee could still see him on the same basis as before.

“I knew that if I didn't make a change in my practice, I was not going to be able to do it any more. I was going to have to join a giant group like Kaiser,” Hwang recalls. “So part of it was survival. Part of it, too, was to be able to practice in a way I was comfortable with. I didn't want my practice to be a mill.”

Hwang had decided to join a small but growing movement known as “concierge” medicine, first introduced to his practice about four years earlier by one of his professional partners, Dr. Mario Ficarola.

“The concierge practice has been able to give me some breathing room,” Hwang says. “I have one and a half to two hours a day set aside where I can do things at a more humane pace.”

In concierge medicine, patients pay a fee for a number of extra services – mostly related to access, prevention and peace of mind – that are not covered by their insurance. The practice started to gain attention over a decade ago, and is growing, though it still represents only a fraction of the primary care given across the United States today.

Critics of the practice say it creates inequity between patients who have the disposable income to pay for it and those who do not. Some also argue that, because most doctors with concierge practices have only a fraction of the patient volume that more ordinary practices do, its growth could exacerbate a looming shortage of primary care physicians.

That would only amplify one widely expected impact of Obamacare, the federal health reform law, which many experts believe will aggravate the doctor shortage. The new law is expected to bring an estimated 7 million newly insured Americans into the U.S. health system next year alone – and nearly 30 million over 10 years – putting additional pressure on already-stretched primary care providers.

MORE STRESS, LESS PAY

Proponents and practitioners of concierge medicine note that primary care physicians are already leaving the field in large numbers because of declining pay and the high stress and frustration of large patient loads. If anything, they say, concierge medicine is keeping doctors in practice because of the better financial and professional satisfaction it offers.

“Many of our physicians would have left practice. This is helping physicians extend their careers,” says Andrea Klemes, medical director of Boca Raton, Fla.-based MDVIP, a national concierge medicine network with about 660 doctors and 200,000 patients nationwide that is owned by Procter & Gamble.

Frank Rose, an internist and cardiologist in Dana Point, joined MDVIP in 2008 after two decades in a more regular, high-volume practice.

“I love medicine and I want to continue to practice it as long as I can, and this is allowing me to do that,” he says. “This is more traditional medicine like Marcus Welby, where you can sit with the patient, they can tell you their issues and concerns. If they have family issues, you can listen to that. You just don't have time in seven to 15 minutes to address those issues.”

The concept is also appealing to many patients – at least those who can afford the fees, which average about $1,500 to $2,000 a year but can go as high as $8,000 or even more in rare cases where doctors care for only a tiny number of individuals or families.

“I know if I've got an issue and I call in, I'm going to see him the same day,” says Edward Barry, 75, who pays $1,600 a year for Dr. Hwang's concierge service. “I'm sure if you talk to somebody with less income, they'll have a different opinion, but I don't view it as a high price for the value I'm getting.”

OBAMACARE'S IMPACT

Some health care analysts note that it is precisely the people with less income who will be disproportionately represented among the millions of people expected to get insurance under Obamacare. They will be individuals whose employers don't provide health coverage, or with incomes low enough to qualify for Medicaid, the state-federal insurance for the poor. Once they are insured, they, too, will be looking for doctors, which could be difficult – and add to the frustration of others who are already facing long wait times.

Because of the additional strain on physicians' time, “there could be an increase in demand for concierge medicine,” says Dana B. Mukamel, a professor of health economics at the UC Irvine medical school. “If it does have an impact on concierge medicine and some doctors take themselves out of the regular market, it could exacerbate the impact of the shortage for those who are not able or willing to pay a premium for concierge medicine services.”

However, some say that demographic realities should ensure a small overlap between doctors serving concierge patients and those caring for Obamacare's newly insured.

“Concierge programs tend to be in middle and upper middle income areas, and those areas will not have as high a density of people who will fit into the (Obamacare) programs,” says Wayne Lipton, managing partner and founder of Concierge Choice Physicians, which provides administration, marketing and billing services for 250 practices in 23 states, including the Tustin practice of Hwang and Ficarola.

There are only about 10,000 concierge doctors nationwide, compared to 300,000 physicians in regular practices, estimates Pamela Brar, a La Jolla internist who sits on the board of the American Academy of Private Physicians, which represents concierge doctors. And her numbers suggest that only around 1 percent of Americans are enrolled in concierge plans. A significant impediment to greater growth is that doctors are not allowed to take any fees directly from HMO patients.

Though hard data are difficult to get, Brar says it is a “good bet” that the average concierge-only practice has 300 to 400 patients. That compares to anywhere from 1,000 to more than 4,000 in a non-concierge primary care practice.

‘HYBRID' PRACTICES

But there are many forms of concierge practice, and not all of them restrict the patient load to such a dramatic extent.

Doctors affiliated with Concierge Choice have what Lipton calls “hybrid” practices. That means concierge patients comprise between 3 and 15 percent of their total, and they continue seeing their other patients. Hwang, the Tustin internist, says that less than 10 percent of his patients pay the concierge fee. Lipton says that in hybrid concierge practices, “there is no disenfranchisement of patients” and the extra revenue helps doctors “continue in an environment that might not be economically stable.”

At Caduceus Medical Group, a physician-owned practice with offices in Yorba Linda, Laguna Beach and Irvine, patients get many concierge-like services without having to pay a fee, says the group's CEO and co-owner, Gregg DeNicola. Same-day appointments are guaranteed, for any reason, though patients might see a nurse practitioner rather than a doctor. Emails from patients are answered within 12 hours, and the group's “medical life” center in Yorba Linda provides free massage and other amenities.

DeNicola says the group does it by reinvesting profits. The group takes all insurance, has an “aggressive” program to encourage cash payments and even accepts bitcoin, an alternative digital currency.

“If we can do it, others can do it,” DeNicola says. He says doctors should provide good service without charging a “ludicrous” fee.

Concierge patients, however, are clearly not bothered by the fee.

“It's not that I'm rolling in cash and $1,600 is nothing to me, says Peter Gelker, 67, of Santa Ana, a psychiatrist who is a patient in Hwang's Tustin practice. “But you're going to pay one way or another if you want to see somebody good in medicine. You can pay in time and in waiting. That's the way it's becoming.”

Contact the writer: 714-796-2440 or bwolfson@ocregister.com