By of the

Just like that, the Milwaukee Brewers have gone from doldrums to desperation.

Falling behind early to the Pittsburgh Pirates and once again unable to get their sputtering offense going, they lost for the fourth time in as many outings, 6-2, on Friday night at Miller Park.

With that 0-4 record, the Brewers are the lone winless team in the National League and one of two winless teams left in the major leagues along with the Chicago White Sox (0-4).

The 0-4 start matches the Brewers' worst under manager Ron Roenicke. They also opened 0-4 in 2011, his first season at the helm. Milwaukee hasn't opened 0-5 since 2003.

"I don't know if it's scramble mode," Roenicke said. "But it's disappointing that we work that hard in spring training, and did a lot of really good things, and then we come out and do this during the season the first four games.

"I know it's early. But we really worked hard to get ready for opening day. And to watch what we're doing, it's disappointing."

The Pirates, who also came into Friday 0-3 and on the heels of a pair of rain-soaked, walk-off losses in Cincinnati, scored enough to win with a three-run second inning against Milwaukee starter Mike Fiers.

Fiers struck out the side swinging on just 12 pitches in the first, but things quickly went south.

Pittsburgh sent seven batters to the plate, rapping out three doubles along the way to give Milwaukee opponents 19 against the Brewers in just under 21 innings of play to that point.

Pedro Alvarez put the Pirates ahead with a single to center, and then Alvarez scored on a Jordy Mercer sacrifice fly to center. Starting pitcher Jeff Locke followed by doubling to right-center, and just like that the Pirates held a 3-0 lead.

The three earned runs matched Fiers' high in 14 starts last season.

A long leadoff home run to straightaway center by Alvarez stretched the Pirates' lead to 4-0 in the fourth before the Brewers finally got on the board.

Jonathan Lucroy opened the bottom of the fourth with a walk before Locke recovered to record the next two outs. Khris Davis then doubled to right-center to leave runners on second and third for Adam Lind, easily Milwaukee's hottest hitter coming in.

With a double already to his credit, Lind was able to fight off a breaking ball and muscle it into center field for a two-run single, cutting the deficit in half at 4-2.

Jean Segura singled to right to put runners on the corner for Scooter Gennett, but Gennett grounded out to second to end the rally.

The only walk Fiers would allow on the night came back to haunt him in his fifth and final inning. Andrew McCutchen drew a one-out free pass, moved to third on a Neil Walker single and scored on a sacrifice fly to center by Starling Marte.

Fiers finished out the inning but was pulled after that having allowed seven hits, five runs (earned) and that walk to go along with eight strikeouts over 89 pitches.

"The big inning is something that takes the wind out of you," Fiers said. "I need to be better. I needed to put up a quality start today, and I didn't do that for my team. We ended up losing."

Tyler Thornburg and Jeremy Jeffress threw scoreless innings of relief before Marte led off the eighth with a homer to left off Neal Cotts.

The Brewers had two base runners reach in the fifth, sixth and eighth innings but failed to score each time, underscoring their offensive woes.

"We've got to pick it up. And have the same at-bats we did early," Roenicke said. "We hit some balls hard; a couple of our balls were right at people. I know you need to get some breaks, too. But we need to get it going."

The eighth ended when Gennett was called out on strikes, prompting the second baseman to smash his bat on the ground in frustration.

Home-plate umpire Mike Estabrook ejected him, leaving Roenicke to move centerfielder Carlos Gomez to second base for the ninth because he'd already used his two utility infielders, Luis Jimenez and Hector Gomez.

Roenicke chose Gomez over former third baseman Ryan Braun because Gomez routinely takes ground balls before games in batting practice.

"There's a part where you're in a ballgame where you also have to realize what's going on in the game, who's left, and you've got to keep yourself in the ballgame," Roenicke said.

Carlos Gomez did not factor into any plays defensively. It was the first time in his career, including the minor leagues, that Gomez has played infield.

"It's not fun, because it's hard to enjoy it," said Gomez, who played shortstop as a youngster in his native Dominican Republic. "It's one of my dreams, to play in the infield. And I had the opportunity today but I (didn't) enjoy it. It's really disappointing."