"I’m a relentless bastard.”

U.S. Rep. John Mica is one, indeed, at least when it comes to Amtrak.

The Florida Republican’s self-description last week reminded me of how politicians here have passions that are often out of sync with the media pack.

The press tends to focus on what’s politically hot. That means snubbing many policy-driven matters (too “dry”) and the often impactful (but “unsexy”) acts of government agencies.

Thursday brought us President Obama Contrition Day. His pained lecture on health insurance, disguised as a press conference on Obamacare changes, dominated coverage.

Even if we had bombed Syria, it would have been overshadowed by Contrition Day, the crack-smoking Toronto mayor and perhaps a speculative new poll involving Chris Christie running for President against either Hillary Clinton, Elizabeth Warren or perhaps Ashley Judd.

So it was no surprise that I was the only media person to show when the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform held a full-fledged hearing on “Reviewing Alternatives to Amtrak’s Annual Losses in Food and Beverage Service.”

Yes, a hearing on all the not-so alluring cuisine found on Amtrak. Pass the peanuts and Diet Coke, please.

Congressional hearings are orchestrated. So the witness list was characteristically stacked by Mica, a conservative big on mass transit, privatization and needling Amtrak.

Amtrak’s dour inspector general cited food and beverage losses of $72 million a year and even gingerly suggested contracting out those services.

An Amtrak bigshot executive said they’re really trying to do better, and are. A Smithsonian Institution retail chief heralded privatized services at the museums in what he later conceded was not a terribly relevant apples-to-oranges comparison.

A North Carolina state rail official detailed how they make a few bucks with vending machines on trains. He later admitted, “I don’t think vending machines are appropriate for longer routes.”

And a bone was thrown to Amtrak’s working stiffs, with a few minutes given to a longtime food-beverage worker who is also an official with its union, UniteHere.

Amtrak onboard workers earn $41 an hour, including full benefits, said Inspector General Ted Alves. He’s a seemingly somber Bostonian who could easily be mistaken for a small-town Iowa bank manager and Rotary Club member.

Dwayne Bateman, the Amtrak worker, disputed the suggestion that slashing pay was the answer. He cited his three decades of “honest and respectable work with long hours,” providing for his wife and kids and leading a middle-class life.

Our Amtrak situation is ultimately what is faced with all mass transit: We don’t fund them sufficiently, and the private sector is no panacea, given giant capital investments in rails and cars.

Amtrak has lost money for four decades, but riders and revenues are up. It had 31 million riders last year. Many shorter-distances, especially in the Northeast, are profitable, typified by the Washington-to-New York run.

The problem is always the minority of money-losing, long-distance routes of 750 miles or longer. The full-fledged dining cars on longer hauls lose money, as opposed to the austere chips-and-sandwich café cars on short routes. But do you want to travel three days from Chicago to San Francisco without real food?

Ed Howell, Amtrak’s customer services honcho, warned that eliminating many food and beverage services would prompt ticket revenue losses in excess of what is spent on them.

And while those longer routes are also essential for rural America, the Republicans who control the House — and frequently represent those same areas — want to slash Amtrak’s $1.3 billion in subsidies by half.

An irony is that Mica and Democrats like Rep. Gerald Connolly (Va.) acknowledged the superior rail systems of other nations and their reliance on government help.

Heck, Mica enviously cited how Turkey just opened a gleaming eight-mile rail link under the Bosphorus Strait that connects the Asian and European sides of Istanbul.

And this was on a morning when Washington’s most important rail line was crippled for the second straight day, creating rush-hour havoc (I can attest).

But the hearing broke up with no consensus about that those Amtrak food and beverage losses of $72 million.

Meanwhile, an aircraft carrier named after President Gerald Ford is still under construction and now $2 billion over budget, at $13 billion. The Pentagon wants another $500 million to finish it.

It’s a reminder that the Amtrak situation really and truly is about peanuts.

jwarren@nydailynews.com