Subscribe to XXL on

In a matter of months, DJ Khaled has gone from a hip-hop insider to a household name, appearing on such programs as The Daily Show and ABC’s Nightline to spread the keys to his newfound social media success. Furthering his television presence, Khaled will appear on The Ellen DeGeneres Show later today (Mar. 9) to talk about the positive vibes he emanates though Snapchat and all of social media.

Dressed like an iced out Tony Soprano, Khaled offers his usual televised rhetoric, summarizing his many music making roles, saying, “I’m like the hip-hop Quincy Jones. But I’m a CEO, too. I’m an entrepreneur. I’m a young mogul. I’m blessed.”

While everyone is aware of Khaled’s many catchphrases, the obvious kick Ellen gets from having him on adds new energy into the ongoing Khaled media storm. “Please, Ellen, stay away from them,” he advises her, and she seems eager to obey. The talk show host can’t help but laugh every time Khaled asks her if she knows what he’s saying, and is especially giddy when Khaled explains his love of breakfast as, “They don’t want me to enjoy it, so what I do is I make sure I enjoy it so amazingly.”

Khaled also speaks of his love of apples, his organic process of creating social content and sums up his outlook as, “I’m just grateful for any opportunity that I can get to take my career and my life and also inspire the young world to the next level.”

Khaled’s recent reign as King of Snapchat also includes a letter from President Barack Obama thanking him for his support of the Affordable Care Act as well as starring on the cover of a recent issue of Bloomberg Businessweek. Peep both accolades below, with Khaled’s Ellen spot up top. The Khaled-guested episode of The Ellen DeGeneres Show will air on NBC at 4 p.m. EST.

Obama wrote a letter to @djkhaled A photo posted by XXL (@xxl) on Mar 9, 2016 at 4:47am PST

Tears of joy ! New cover alert ! @bloombergbusinessweek @chafkin #WeTheBest @wethebestmusic #mypriceWentUp☝️ A photo posted by DJ KHALED (@djkhaled) on Mar 3, 2016 at 9:15am PST

See 40 Hip-Hop Albums Turning 20 in 2016

Subscribe to XXL on