Five other Colorado companies also listed among hundreds nationwide

Broomfield-based Level 3 Communications is one of hundreds of Fortune 500 companies that use offshore tax havens. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer)

What is a tax haven? The Colorado Legislative Council defines a tax haven as a country that offers foreign businesses little or no tax liability in a politically and economically stable environment. Tax havens also provide little or no financial information to foreign tax authorities. In addition, they do not require that the foreign business operate within their country to benefit from its tax policies.

States, along with Washington, D.C., that have enacted tax laws targeting foreign earnings: Alaska Montana Oregon Rhode Island West Virginia

Two of Boulder Valley's largest, most prominent publicly traded companies are holding millions of dollars in revenue in foreign subsidiaries, beyond the reach of U.S. tax collectors, a legal practice that is nonetheless coming under fire as states and the federal government look for ways to boost their own coffers.

Ball Corp. (NYSE: BLL) and Level 3 Communications (NYSE: LVLT), were among those identified this month in a new report by the U.S. Public Interest Research Group Education Fund and Citizens for Tax Justice titled "Offshore Shell Games 2015" ( uspirg.org/reports/usp/offshore-shell-games-2015).

"U.S.-based multinational corporations are allowed to play by a different set of rules than small and domestic businesses or individuals when it comes to the tax code," the report said. "Rather than paying their fair share, many multinational corporations use accounting tricks to pretend for tax purposes that a substantial portion of their profits are generated in offshore tax havens.....(this) forces ordinary Americans to make up the difference."

Countries favored by Fortune 500 Companies for tax havens. (U.S. Public Interest Research Group)

Using data taken from documents filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, the report indicates that Ball Corp., for instance, operates 29 subsidiaries in countries that have low, or nonexistent income tax rates, including the Cayman Islands, Hong Kong, the Netherlands and Switzerland, among others.

Level 3, according to the report, operates 28 subsidiaries in some of these same countries.

Ball Corp. and Level 3 declined to answer questions regarding how much revenue is being held in their foreign subsidiaries or tax rates paid on those revenues. Such disclosures are in part voluntary and depend on how public companies' choose to classify revenue and tax liabilities, among other things.

In email statements, both companies said their classification of foreign revenues was legitimate and that they complied with all relevant tax rules and regulations.

Five other Colorado companies also made the list. They are Arrow Electronics, CH2MHill, Liberty Interactive, Newmont Mining and Western Union.

Among the largest U.S. corporations holding revenues offshore are Apple and Google Inc. Apple reported $181 billion in offshore revenue in 2014 and Google $47.4 billion, according to the U.S. PIRG report.

Concern about the practice is rising, in part, because corporate earnings held in foreign tax havens are growing dramatically.

According to a report by Audit Analytics, a Sutton, Mass.-based research firm, revenue held offshore has more than doubled in the past six years, reaching $2.3 trillion in 2014, up from $1.1 trillion in 2008.

Matthew Gardner, executive director of the Washington, D.C.-based Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, a nonpartisan think tank, said the increase is tied largely to the rise of intellectual property, which makes it easy for companies to transfer such documents to foreign entities as patents and then attach a portion of revenue to those patents, without ever opening offices or manufacturing facilities in those same countries.

"Companies are pretending profits are being earned offshore. No one thinks that's a good idea," Gardner said.

Tax havens utilized by Colorado's Fortune 500 companies

This year, for the second year in a row, Colorado Rep. Mike Foote, D-Lafayette, plans to introduce legislation that would allow Colorado to tax some portion of revenues local companies hold in their foreign subsidiaries if voters approve the measure.

Foote said such action is needed to level the playing field for small businesses and ensure Coloradans derive the full tax benefits associated with Fortune 500 companies.

"For every company that has a tax haven, there are lots of small businesses who are at a complete disadvantage to these multinationals," Foote said.

Under a 2014 proposal, the Legislative Council estimated that Colorado's tax collections would have increased by $97.1 million in the state's 2016-2017 fiscal year.

According to Foote, that would have meant a significant boost for schools statewide, including an additional $5 million for the Boulder Valley School District and $5 million for the St. Vrain Valley School District.

Because companies aren't always required to report how much revenue is being held in foreign countries, it's difficult to estimate how much cash is at stake.

Last year, Colorado calculated potential tax collections based on revenue that Montana has tracked since 2003, when it became one of the first states in the country to require companies to report foreign earnings.

Today, five states and the District of Columbia have a similar requirement, according to the Denver-based National Conference of State Legislatures — Alaska, Montana, Oregon, Rhode Island and West Virginia.

Foote's measure encountered stiff opposition from the Colorado Association of Commerce and Industry (CACI), a respected statewide advocacy group. Loren Furman, CACI's senior vice president of government relations, said part of her group's opposition came because the bill was introduced late in the session.

But she said CACI members also felt it was too stringent and unwarranted.

"It would have penalized business activities," Furman said, "and it didn't distinguish between those who are legitimate and those who are clearly trying to avoid paying taxes. Our members feel how the tax code is written right now works for them."

While some companies hold nothing but cash in offshore havens, other companies have significant operations in some foreign countries, as is the case with Ball Corp. and Level 3.

"Who gets to decide what is a tax haven and what isn't? That's definitely a bone of contention," said Jackson Brainerd, a tax analyst with the National Conference of State Legislatures,

Colorado isn't the only state considering a new tax law. Brainerd said several other states have or are considering similar measures including Kentucky, Maine, Massachusetts and New Hampshire.

.

Jerd Smith: 303-473-1332, smithj@dailycamera.com