Part 1: Navigating the Marketplace

Amy McBride wanted to strike out and start her own business. But McBride, a Loghill Mesa resident and the former Development Officer of the Montrose Regional Library, had hesitated to quit her job. The library has a good group health care plan, and she figured the cost of paying an individual policy would be too expensive.

She was wrong.

McBride is friends with a Montrose-based employee of Connect for Colorado, the state’s insurance marketplace, who helped McBride pick out a new plan; it turned out that McBride’s reduced income from quitting her job would actually help her qualify for a tax subsidy to cover the cost of insuring herself. Suddenly, individual insurance became affordable.

“This was a very important factor in my decision to leave the library,” said McBride, who quit her job in December. The library had offered McBride a temporary fix: a chance to jump on its COBRA plan, which had premiums of $400 a month. But in her new plan through Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield, McBride pays premiums of just $109 a month –– a savings of more than 70 percent. Her newfound financial freedom has allowed her to take not one, but two fulfilling new jobs: writing grants for the Passage Charter School and working on the Sherbino Theater’s capital campaign. “I can afford my own insurance and still manage to make a living,” McBride said.

Seven miles away, in downtown Ridgway, business leadership and development consultant Beth Jones is living a different experience from Amy McBride. Like McBride, Jones purchases her own insurance –– but because she earns more than McBride does, she doesn’t qualify for any subsidies. Jones used an insurance broker she trusts to help pick a plan on the state’s exchange, but because of Jones’s income, the best plan they came up with still costs Jones $900 a month. And that is with a $5,000 deductible.

“I’m a staunch Democrat, but I will say the Affordable Care Act is flawed,” Jones said. “People like me are caught in the middle. I’m a hard-working American, but I make too much to qualify for subsidies” to help lower the cost of insurance. In effect, “I own a very expensive version of catastrophic insurance,” she added. “I’m happy with it as long as I don’t have to use it. I am no more likely to go to the doctor now than ever before.”

They may live in the same town, but when it comes to health insurance purchased on the state’s exchange, McBride and Jones occupy different worlds. Colorado received $148 million in federal funds to open its insurance marketplace and returned over $250 million in tax credits the first year alone, said Linda Gann, senior manager of Connect for Health on the Western Slope. She understands Beth Jones’s point of view.

A lot of people have expressed concern about the matter of those who receive subsidies versus those who do not, Gann said. “I suggest those who don’t qualify for tax credits speak to their legislators, and see if there is a chance that the law might be expanded” to include everyone who purchases insurance, since everyone who works must either have it or pay a penalty.

Regardless of where you stand on the ACA and how fair it may or may not seem, one thing is certain: the last chance to enroll for coverage will soon be here. The final day to purchase health insurance on the exchange is Jan. 31 for coverage that begins March 1. There are exceptions: people who have a significant “life event” (getting divorced, losing a job, getting married or having a baby all qualify) can purchase insurance anytime. And last week, it was announced that individuals and families who owned plans in 2015 that no longer exist –– such as Colorado HealthOP, the state’s co-operative plan –– or whose plans no longer meet minimum legal requirements have until Feb. 29 to purchase new coverage. Everybody else (who isn’t already insured through an employer) must either purchase a plan or pay a tax penalty. The fees for inaction are getting steeper: this year, penalties will be at least $695 per person. Experts estimate the fees for not getting coverage will work out to be over $1,000 per household.

A penalty isn’t enough to induce Montrose full-time college student Trenci Towner, who also has a part-time job, to purchase insurance. “I’m healthy enough that I don’t need to this year,” Towner said. “I know something crazy could happen to me, like I could be in a car accident. But I’m willing to take that risk.”

Other young people see things differently. Spencer Mack, a supervisor at the Telluride Ski School, is very concerned about owning health insurance because of his active lifestyle. “Almost my entire life is spent outdoors,” he pointed out. “I ski in the winter, and I’m a fly-fishing guide and rafting guide in the summer. I want coverage in case I get injured in a very outdoorsy job.”

According to a report released last month by the nonprofit Colorado Health Institute, the number of uninsured statewide has fallen from 14.3 percent, in 2013, to just 6.7 percent last year. A closer look at the numbers revealed that 443 “zip codes registered a decline in the probability of being uninsured between 2013 and 2015,” the report said. Just 15 zip codes “have a higher probability than two years ago.” The biggest improvement in the number of insured, the report found, was in Antonito in the San Luis Valley, which fell from 31 percent to 2.3 percent (on the flip side, Wray, Colorado, on the eastern plains, doubled its odds of being uninsured, to 14.3 percent from 7 percent over the same period).

Closer to home, in so-called Region 10 counties (Delta, Gunnison, Hinsdale, Montrose, Ouray and San Miguel), the employer-based insurance rate remained stable, the report found, and there was a “slight decrease” in individual coverage. The Affordable Care Act expanded Medicaid eligibility in states that chose to take advantage of it (Colorado was one). Between 2013 and 2015, the number of residents with Medicaid in Region 10 counties more than doubled.

This is the third year individual insurance has been available through Colorado’s exchange. Yet choosing a plan is no less confounding than before; indeed, it may more confusing than ever. “Understanding insurance is really challenging,” says Stacey Wright, an insurance navigator with the Tri-County Network, who helps residents of this region find coverage. That’s an understatement. As the box on page 11 shows, new insurance plans available in this region appear, and others disappear, every year. At the same time, rates are fluctuating, providers (meaning doctors and hospitals) are changing, and prescription coverage is shifting. And that’s not to mention the struggles some people, such as Telluride’s Spencer Mack, encounter when signing up on the state’s exchange. “It’s a complicated process, and there have been problems,” acknowledges Telluride insurance broker Brett Borup. “And those problems have driven people to seek out help.”

According to Borup, “The past two years have definitely been busier than year one.” Last year, “A lot of the problems were just getting through the system. Determining eligibility.” This go-round, Borup says, people have sought help because their insurance company essentially evanesced, which forced them to return to the marketplace (such was the case for both Beth Jones and Spencer Mack, who owned insurance through the Colorado Co-Op, which went belly up in December). In addition, Borup says, “There are a lot more plan choices this year. Anthem Blue Cross rolled out a bunch of different plans.”

The best way to make sense of the changes when you are signing up, experts agree, is to get help. If you want to keep your plan from last year, you have the option of doing nothing, and it will automatically renew. But at a minimum, you should double check whether your physician (or physicians) is still on the plan. If there is a doctor you regularly see someplace else in the state (such as a specialist in Denver), check that, too. And if there is a drug you regularly take, ensure your plan still covers it, and how much the plan pays (prescription coverage has changed on Rocky Mountain Health Plans’ HMO this year, for example). “One thing we’ve learned in the short time the exchange has been operating is that most shoppers choose a plan by price; it’s the premium, above all, that matters to them,” says Connect for Colorado’s Director of Communication, Luke Clarke.

This may not be the smartest way to pick a plan, though. “We counsel people to take a look at the whole picture,” Clarke said. “For example, if you’ve got a chronic condition and take medications for it, your premium may be low, but the savings may be entirely eaten up by how much you pay for your prescriptions. The other thing is, you want to be sure if you have a relationship with your doctor, that he or she is still in the network of the carrier you chose. Just because they were in last year doesn’t mean they will be this year. As companies try to control their costs, the network of doctors you can choose from can become smaller, because fewer doctors may be willing to accept what the company will pay for reimbursement.” There are tools on the Connect for Health website, at connectforhealthco.com, to help you determine which doctors are in a carrier’s network, and what drugs it covers. Clarke says the exchange updates this information every few weeks.

The best of advice of all may be to take Clarke’s suggestion and seek help. “Health insurance is a complicated product, and it costs you nothing to seek out help,” he says. Insurance navigators (also available through Connect’s website, under connectforhealthco./com/person-help) can help you narrow down the choices, and describe the plans, said Stacey Wright. “But we can’t give you advice. Only a licensed broker can.” Brokers receive compensation from the carriers; there is no charge for their advice.

Spencer Mack sought out assistance from the TriCounty Health Network when the Colorado Co-Op advised him it was going out of business.

“I had a short time to sort this all out, and I was a little freaked,” he recalls, but the navigators were wonderful. “They kept in close touch with me every step of the way. Their help was invaluable.”

A Telluride business owner who declined to be identified because the Affordable Care Act is “a political hot potato” also used TriCounty’s assistance to help him pick a plan. “It was a great experience,” he said. “They were super willing to work around my schedule.”

On the other hand, Beth Jones of Ridgway purchased an exchange plan through her broker. She was very satisfied with his assistance; with the ACA itself, not so much. Jones has a pre-existing condition; under the terms of the ACA, she cannot be denied coverage.

“I’m thankful for the safety net,” she said. “But it comes at a cost.”

This is the first of a two-part story.