MORRISTOWN, N.J.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--QPharma, a premier provider of compliance and commercial services to the life sciences industry, has announced the appointment of Judy Fox to the position of Director, Compliance Services.

Well-known in the pharmaceutical and life sciences compliance industry, Ms. Fox is among the field’s leading subject matter experts on compliance topics and regulations that include the Physician Payments Sunshine Act, the Affordable Care Act, and the Prescription Drug Marketing Act (PDMA) as well as Office of Inspector General (OIG), PhRMA, and AdvaMed guidance.

At QPharma, Ms. Fox will play a leadership role in advising the firm’s life sciences clients on their compliance policies and will develop plans and strategies to mitigate regulatory risks. She will work closely with clients using the company’s Python™ reporting and analytics software suite, including its qSpend® aggregate spend reporting tool and Sample Accountability and direct-to-practitioner systems.

Ms. Fox previously spent more than nine years as Director of Compliance with Compliance Implementation Services (now CIS by Deloitte). Prior to this, she spent five years as a Senior Regulatory Associate with PediaMed Pharmaceuticals. She is a member of the PDMA Alliance Board and the Healthcare Businesswomen’s Association.

“I have known and respected Judy for many years, and I’m thrilled to finally welcome her to the QPharma leadership team,” said QPharma President and CEO Patrick Den Boer. “I have no doubt that our clients will benefit from the deep regulatory knowledge and insights she brings.”

“As someone with longstanding connections throughout the industry, I have always been impressed by QPharma’s solid reputation for delivering high-quality services and solutions,” added Ms. Fox. “I look forward to contributing to the company’s continued growth and success.”

About QPharma, Inc.

Founded in 1994, QPharma provides a suite of solutions to the life sciences industry. Services offered by the company’s Professional Services division include validation services, project management, auditing, and training. The Commercial Services division provides solutions that include aggregate spend reporting, sample accountability, online training, fulfillment, and brand sales/marketing support.