When Christine Casillas of Aurora walked into the Denver Animal Shelter recently, she knew exactly who she was looking to meet: Levi, an older Chihuahua mix with a timid temperament. He fit her needs — she wanted an older, gentle dog for a companion to one at home — but he also fit her budget preferences.

Because of his age and length of stay, the shelter reduced Levi’s adoption fee 50 percent, from $130 to $65.

The discount definitely helped, Casillas said. “It’s not just a matter of adopting … it’s how much extra once you get him home: There’s vet bills and all the accoutrements like the leash and the bowl.”

Even though adopting a pet from a shelter earns you a karmic payback and is usually cheaper than buying your next best friend, that love doesn’t come free. It’s better to let your head lead before something with four legs drags your heart away.

The ASPCA estimates that the first year of owning a cat will cost an average of $1,035. A dog can cost from $1,314 to $1,843, depending on size. That total includes the fees to spay or neuter and initial medical costs, which many shelters and animal rescue organizations cover prior to adoption. Denver also requires residents to buy a dog license for $15 per year or $150 lifetime.

Despite all this, summer remains a great time to adopt a pet. As days grow warmer, shelters fill up — especially with cats, according to Denver Dumb Friends League spokeswoman Megan Rees, who said that spring and summer tend to be “kitten season.” Summer often prompts adoption specials; the league itself will offer dog adoptions for $52.80 and waive fees for cats 1 year and older Aug. 1-3 to celebrate Colorado’s birthday.

But humane workers know that an event chockful of puppies or kittens in need of adoption can overwhelm the unprepared. Rees said adoption counselors are on the lookout for impulsive adoptions. Part of the adoption process is making “sure that any patron is ready to take on the financial responsibility of caring for a pet,” she said.

“We want to make sure they find their forever home and don’t wind up back in the shelter, she said.

Savvy consumers will start by narrowing down their species and breed preferences, a task that often begins online. But prospective pet adopters need to dig deeper to avoid sticker shock later.

“People won’t realize this is a lifetime commitment you just made,” said Dr. Julie Smith, director of PetAid Animal Hospital, which helps owners retain “at risk” pets by providing discounted medical services to cats and dogs based on owner income. Smith said dental issues and recurring vaccinations are a few of the veterinary expenses prospective owners most commonly fail to consider.

While it’s difficult to budget for medical emergencies (Smith is a proponent of pet health insurance), a little research can clue prospective adopters in on hereditary or genetic trends. Many breeds are associated with specific health issues, such as eye disease for pugs and hip dysplasia for golden retrievers.

Of course, if a golden retriever is someone’s perfect match in every way but initial cost, it is possible to get a good deal by going through a shelter or breed rescue organization, according to Eileen Proctor, a longtime pet-industry veteran who speaks nationally and tries to debunk the misconception that shelter animals are “just” mutts or “throwaways.”

“The truth is, there are rescue opportunities for every breed and species,” she said. Almost every dog breed has an easily Google-able local or regional rescue organization. Talking to that organization can often provide the most accurate estimate of such a dog’s overall cost.

“We give people a pretty good idea of what normal and routine expenses are like, and then we can also tell them about extraordinary expenses, like if a dog needs particular training,” said Kevin Shipley, executive director at Golden Retriever Rescue of the Rockies.

Shipley suggested volunteering as a dog walker at one of the many volunteer-run rescue organizations to gain familiarity with a breed, or even a particular dog, before adopting. Casillas suggested visiting one of the Denver area’s many off-leash parks and talking to other dog owners.

Of course, if pet adoption decisions were dictated by cost, everybody would adopt a guinea pig or rat. But if you’re looking for true love at a dog or cat shelter, experts say that researching factors that influence pets costs, ranging from obvious ones, such as size, to lesser-known line items such as grooming needs, is the best way to ensure long-term happiness.

Nine Things to Research Before You Adopt

Adoption Fees

Typical fees are based on age and range from $10-120 for cats and $95-250 for dogs. This often includes initial shots and required spay/neuter operations. Special-needs or older pets may be available for reduced fees.

Vaccinations

Some shots recur every 1 to 3 years. Certain breeds, or dogs used in certain activities, may come with recommendations for additional vaccinations – such as kennel cough for sled-dog breeds or rattlesnake-bite vaccinations for serious outdoor dogs.

Dental

Dental issues and obesity are the top two issues PetAid Hospital sees in dogs. Some breeds require a teeth cleaning every year.

Grooming

Without professional grooming, some breeds can experience pain from mats or skin issues. Regular nail trimming is mandatory, but rescue animals may be foot-shy, meaning you may want a pro to do it.

Lifespan

Most cats and small dogs usually live longer than large dogs, but there is also variation among similar sizes — greyhounds, for example, tend to live longer than mastiffs.

Breed issues

Some dog breeds are more at-risk for certain medical problems.

Size

Size influences the cost of food and equipment such as crates, carriers and beds.

Age

Youth signals more shot requirements and possibly more training, plus the threat of some destructive behavior such as ruining carpets or shoes. Indoor gates can help keep a dog confined to a safe, durable area of your home.

Energy, dominance and intelligence levels

All of these can influence the need for training or adapting your home to your pet: A “free” dog may require an $800 fence upgrade to keep him safe. Another may need a dog door so that she can urinate more frequently. And a high-energy, high-intelligence dog may need regular doggy day care to expend excess energy – plus extra training.

Smart Money Adopting a pet