Topics: carbon dioxide emissions, Climate Change, Conservatives, Daily Caller, Editor's Picks, fossil fuel, Global Warming, Republicans, Senate Republicans, treaties, U.S. Senate, Media News, Politics News

One of the hallmarks of conservative commentary over the past few years has been the impressive ability of right-wing pundits to adhere to several different and contradictory caricatures of President Obama without suffering the slightest hint of cognitive dissonance.

To the conservative mind, the president can be, depending on the situation, a bumbling dupe who is completely outmatched by the demands of the office (see: any foreign policy issue), or he can be a brilliantly devious schemer who delicately manipulates the machinery of government to achieve his nefarious ends (see: the IRS scandal). He can be a bloodless monster who will sacrifice lives to protect himself politically (see: Benghazi), or an overly sensitive softie (see: this stupid column).

If you’ve been paying attention to some of the commentary over the past month or so, you’ve probably hit upon another caricature: Obama the checked-out, disengaged pseudo-president who does nothing but vacation and play golf “while the world burns.” Late last month, the Daily Caller’s Matt Lewis wrote a column arguing that Obama “seems to be prematurely packing his bags in hopes for an early departure.” Fox News even conducted a poll asking respondents: “Do you think Barack Obama wants to be president anymore?” (Forty-one percent said “no.”)

Well, Obama’s vacation has come to an end, and he’s transitioned from a golf-crazy layabout who doesn’t even want to preside over the nation into a tyrannical pseudo-king who is ramming his socialist policies down the national gullet.

The socialist tyranny in question is “a sweeping international climate change agreement to compel nations to cut their planet-warming fossil fuel emissions,” as reported by the New York Times. Conservatives, who tend to believe that climate change is a scam and international cooperation undermines “American Exceptionalism,” lost their minds. “Obama’s Lawless, Heartless Climate Treaty” was the headline at Commentary. “Obama’s new power grab: A climate change treaty without Senate ratification,” screamed Hot Air.

The accusations of “lawlessness” come from the novel approach the administration has to take in order to make progress on climate policy independently of Republicans in Congress. When it comes to slowing or reversing the impact of climate change, nothing can be done without the United States taking the lead role. The entire world realizes this, but, according to the Times, they also know that the U.S. will never ratify any sort of binding treaty on climate change because doing so would require a supermajority of the U.S. Senate, where there are more than enough Republicans to make sure that never happens: