WASHINGTON — When the Republican-run Congress convened in January, Senator Cory Gardner, a Colorado freshman, said his party’s task was to show it could govern “responsibly” and “maturely.” John A. Boehner, the speaker of the House, and Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, agreed. As Congress prepares to leave for its August recess, accomplishments as well as maturity have been in short supply during the first 200 days of the 114th Congress.

Partisanship is pervasive in Washington; much of the problems besetting Mr. Boehner and Mr. McConnell, however, result from deep divides within their party. The shortcomings include:

• A stalemate on a long-term transportation/infrastructure measure that most agree is essential. While they approved a short-term fix to ensure that projects don’t dry up, House and Senate Republicans publicly insulted the efforts of the other chamber; their private criticism is unrepeatable in polite company.

• Senator Ted Cruz of Texas accused Mr. McConnell of telling a “flat-out lie.” The majority leader then denied Mr. Cruz an opportunity to offer an amendment on the floor.

• Mark Meadows, a backbench House member from North Carolina, filed a motion last month asking Mr. Boehner to “vacate” his post. It was a silly, symbolic gesture, but the first such move in 105 years.

• A reneging on promises to offer a comprehensive alternative to the Affordable Care Act and to overhaul immigration. The House and Senate staged futile votes to repeal Obamacare while offering no replacement; there was nothing on immigration.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Looming over lawmakers when they return in September are fights over government funding and raising the debt ceiling; the right wing is licking its chops at the prospect.

There have been successes: A government shutdown was avoided, trade promotion authority was passed — though if there is a Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal later this year, it could be sidetracked by an internal Republican fight over the United States Export-Import Bank. In addition, a bipartisan education bill that cleared the Senate must be reconciled with a partisan House measure.

Contrary to expectations that he would be a lame duck, President Obama has dominated Washington politics in the first half of the year, and the congressional Republican majority has often appeared reactive or reactionary.

There is considerable fear among leading Republicans about the funding fights. Conservatives, the rank and file in the House, and presidential contenders in the Senate are threatening a government shutdown unless Planned Parenthood is defunded; the concessions that will be demanded for raising the debt ceiling will be greater. Mr. Obama, empowered by having no more elections to win, has no intention of bowing to these conservative challenges.

Washington was incensed by Mr. Cruz’s language and Mr. Meadows’s action. But Mr. Meadows’s office says the outpouring of reaction to his anti-Boehner call was 99 percent favorable. And grass-roots Iowa conservatives praised Mr. Cruz for taking on a congressional leader.

Top Republicans fear the rise of Donald Trump’s presidential candidacy; his attacks on immigrants and trade only exacerbate the party’s internal difficulties.

At private sessions in the Capitol, establishment Republicans, including some congressional leaders, realize that they cannot drive Mr. Trump from the race and that he might not crater soon. They are considering putting pressure on some of the second-tier candidates to bow out because the real estate mogul might be more vulnerable in a smaller field. That is most likely a quixotic mission and hope.

The poor performance of a congressional party has sometimes helped an eventual nominee: Ronald Reagan in 1980 and Barack Obama in 2008.

If Mr. Boehner and Mr. McConnell are able to avoid a disaster and pass a highway bill, along with the Pacific trade deal and a few measures next year, any adverse consequences for the party’s standard-bearer could be neutralized. If not, the once bright prospects of a Republican Congress will be an albatross for the party.