After a small wound turned into a left foot amputation, Catherine Porter was ready to fight back when she was offered the same devastating option for her right foot.

Diabetics are losing their feet for want of preventative foot care, something the country’s premiers promised “action” on more than three years ago, health-care experts say.

Like most Ontario diabetics who undergo an amputation — about 2,000 people every year — Porter developed a foot ulcer that wouldn’t heal.

The Toronto resident suffers from diabetic-related peripheral neuropathy, which makes it difficult to feel wounds in her extremities, and without proper screening or awareness of “off-loading” devices such as casts or braces that help foot ulcers heal faster, her wound eventually got so bad doctors amputated her left foot and then her leg to the knee.

“An injury that went unnoticed,” Porter said of the “bump” to her foot. “It wouldn’t heal because I couldn’t get off of it.”

A cut from a shower drain in 2013 developed into a two-inch deep open sore on the bottom of her right foot, and her surgeon again recommended amputation.

This time, Porter refused and received repeated rounds of antibiotics and a specially constructed boot to keep the pressure off her foot.

“We spent three years trying to save it,” Porter said. “And we saved it.”

A report released by the country’s premiers in 2012 quotes grim facts from the Canadian Diabetes Foundation: 345,000 diabetics will develop a related foot ulcer in their lifetime, diabetics are 23 times more likely to be hospitalized for a limb amputation, and 85% of those amputations are caused by non-healing foot ulcers.

The report was titled From Innovation to Action, but the action part has been slow to materialize.

The Registered Nurses’ Association of Ontario (RNAO) and the Canadian Association of Wound Care (CAWC) reminded the provincial government this week of the need to fund annual preventative foot-care assessments and off-loading devices, which are far cheaper and less traumatic than surgical solutions.

“They’re willing to pay tens of thousands of dollars to take off a foot, but not $100 to keep it on,” Toronto resident Allan Jarrell said.

Jarrell experienced a deep and serious foot ulcer shortly after being diagnosed with diabetes, and the costs quickly added up.

Three-times-a-week home visits, weekly treatments at the wound clinic, $250 out of pocket for an air cast and months and months before it was properly healed, he said.

Many people can’t afford the devices, on top of all the other costs related to being a diabetic, and will simply hope a wound heals, he said.

“Denial is a wonderful place.”

RNAO executive director Doris Grinspun said the premiers didn’t follow through in any significant way despite their strong words in 2012.

Provincial governments are still more willing to fund a $70,000 amputation than ongoing preventative care, she said.

Ontario Health Minister Dr. Eric Hoskins said this week he has directed Health Quality Ontario to establish a wound care group to develop quality standards for the treatment of pressure ulcers, leg ulcers and diabetic foot ulcers.

FINDINGS FROM THE 2012 PREMIERS’ REPORT

— Diabetics are prone to foot ulcers that can develop from a small unnoticed cut to become a life-threatening infection or gangrene

— Most diabetic foot ulcers and amputations can be prevented with education, monitoring and treatment

— Preventative care is the preferred option to avoid the “physical and emotional trauma” of amputations

— Diabetic foot ulcers cost the Canadian health-care system more than $150 million a year

— RNAO guidelines call for foot assessments at least once a year, if not more often for those at high risk, foot-care education and professionally fitted footwear

(Source: From Innovation to Action: The First Report of the Health Care Innovation Working Group)