iStock

LARRY ZIMPLEMAN: 2014 has turned out to be another interesting year in investment markets. At the beginning of the year there was a strong consensus that markets were poised to see higher interest rates, which would cause negative bond returns and also tend to make equity markets challenging. Instead, interest rates have actually decreased over the year, making bond returns positive again in 2014. This has also allowed the U.S. equity markets to show positive returns. Another area of real surprise in the markets in 2014 is the collapse of many commodity markets, but most especially oil.

As we look to the new year, there is an understandable tendency to assume that recent trends will continue into the near future. However, when considering investment markets it is important to think about both “macro” factors (i.e. how will global economies, central bank policies, etc. impact markets?) and “micro” factors (i.e. what will happen to corporate profits, how will consumer demands change, etc.?). Let’s just think about the U.S. equity markets. The recent robust returns in U.S. equities have some saying we are nearing a “bubble” and investors should be cautious. Others would note that corporate profitability has been good the past few years and is what has really been driving the overall U.S. equity market performance.

I think it is important for each investor to create their own overall asset-allocation policy based mostly on their ability to tolerate risk–risk being the potential that the market value might decrease and continue to be decreased for several years. Then as we enter a new year, investors can try to assess how to weight the broad asset classes within the context of the current macro and micro environments.

Here’s a basic example: Let’s assume I am a 45-year-old middle income investor and, while I understand markets can be volatile, I’m not a market expert and therefore I seek a broadly diversified asset allocation approach. In this circumstance, I might have a broad asset-allocation policy like this: 1) fixed-income investments from 15% to 35% of my portfolio, and 2) equity investments from 45% to 70% of my portfolio, and 3) other investments (real estate, commodities, etc.) from 10% to 25% of my portfolio.

My own macro view is that interest rates are likely to continue to be low throughout 2015 and U.S. equity markets are likely to see somewhat muted returns due mostly to an increase in corporate profitability. An area of opportunity may be in some of the “alternative” sectors, like REITs, commercial real estate, private equity, etc. Within the broader asset-allocation policy I mentioned earlier, I would be inclined to have about 25% of my portfolio in fixed income, 55% in equities (with 75% of that in the U.S. and 25% in other international markets) and 20% in alternative assets with a focus on REITs and possibly commercial real estate (in markets outside the major financial centers where prices have already gotten back to pre-financial crisis efforts).

The “bottom line” to all of this is to maintain a broadly diversified portfolio, because no one can consistently time investment markets. Know your risk tolerance, stay broadly diversified and you will both sleep well and see your investments increase over time.

Larry D. Zimpleman is chairman and chief executive officer of Principal Financial Group.

Read the latest Investing in Funds & ETFs Report.