A new Census Bureau report documents the alarming percentages of people in Texas and Florida without health insurance. Leaders of both states should hang their heads in shame because they have been among the most resistant in the nation to providing coverage for the uninsured under the Affordable Care Act, the law that Republicans deride as “Obamacare.”

The law seeks to cover millions of currently uninsured people by expanding the federal-state Medicaid program for the poor and by setting up new health care exchanges on which people can buy comprehensive private insurance policies, with subsidies to help middle-income people pay their premiums.

Many states, mostly run by Republican governors or legislatures, have refused to expand their Medicaid programs despite generous federal matching funds or have refused to set up their own health exchanges; they have left that task to the federal government.

Low-income residents of Texas and Florida desperately need health insurance, as shown by the Census Bureau’s Small Area Health Insurance Estimates for 2011, which were issued last week. The report found that more than 25 percent of the population in Texas under age 65 (5.7 million people) was uninsured, the highest rate in the nation. Florida was a close second, with just under 25 percent uninsured (3.8 million people). Massachusetts, whose pioneering reforms were the template for the federal reform law, led all 50 states and the District of Columbia with only 4.9 percent uninsured.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In Texas, Gov. Rick Perry and Republican legislators have strongly opposed the Medicaid expansion and refused to establish a state-run exchange, the smoothest way to coordinate state and federal programs and provide subsidies to middle-income residents. They contend that the state has other ways to deal with the uninsured, but there’s little reason to believe them given the state’s long history of failing to help and persistent complaints from medical and patient advocacy groups.

Florida has also declined to expand its Medicaid program or establish its own state-run exchange. Worse yet, it seems to be trying to make sure that the exchange that will be set up by the federal government is a failure. A few months ago, the Republican-dominated Legislature passed and the Republican governor, Rick Scott, signed a bill that strips the state insurance commissioner of formidable powers to regulate insurance premiums. Previously, insurance companies had to get state approval for rates for new plans; the commissioner could negotiate with the companies for lower rates and reject rates he deemed too high. Those powers have now been suspended for two years, the crucial start-up period for the new exchange.

The commissioner’s office, whose projections for rate increases are hotly disputed, estimated that premiums will be significantly higher next year, and the law requires insurers to explain in writing how much of the increase is the result of provisions in the Affordable Care Act, like the requirement to cover people with pre-existing conditions. The goal seems to be to discredit the reform law and discourage people from seeking coverage on the exchange.

The Obama administration has provided grants to organizations in many states, including Texas and Florida, to publicize the benefits of the reform law and to help people learn about the subsidies available on the exchanges. In states like Florida that seem determined to sabotage reform, the uninsured may have a very hard time getting the coverage they need and deserve.