After a month of learning the offense and working himself into football shape, Demaryius Thomas resembles the player who landed a $70-million contract.

Thomas exploited mismatches Thursday against the San Francisco 49ers, creating vulnerability in a cornerback with a fade route before burning him on a slant moments later.

“I’m close. I’m about 95 percent. I’m not at 100 percent yet, and I say that because I mess up and have a little mental error on the field sometimes,” Thomas said.

Thomas caught three passes for 24 yards in a preseason game at Houston last week, but misfired with quarterback Peyton Manning on multiple routes. In Saturday’s presason game against the 49eers, the first string offense figures to play a half or 30 plays, whichever comes first. The extra repetitions should improve timing and execution, particularly on third down, where the starters went 1-for-5 last week.

“We can do better,” Thomas said. “We had a couple third-and-2, third-and-3 that we couldn’t get, and I had a drop on one and somebody else had a drop on one. It’s basically doing better at that, because we were moving the ball around pretty good. I think I was a little sluggish. But so far this week, I’ve been way better than last week.”

WATCH: Are you worried about Peyton Manning if he has another so-so outing?

John Elway impressed with Broncos defense

While the offense remains a work in progress, and might for several weeks, general manager John Elway has been impressed with the defense under new coordinator Wade Phillips. Phillips switched to a 3-4 alignment, an aggressive scheme that appears tailored to the personnel.

“We feel good about the talent on paper,” said Elway, suggesting it might be the best group he’s had since he returned to the Broncos in 2011. “I am always cautious about that until we get out and play. But everybody has bought into the new system. We’re happy with the direction that it’s going.”

WATCH: Shane Ray on transition from college to NFL

Emmanuel Sanders gets a rest day

The cautious approach with Emmanuel Sanders’ hamstring injury continues. He sat out Thursday and is expected to return to practice next week after taking some passes from Manning on Friday.

“Every thing is on schedule for him to be a full-time participant next week,” Kubiak said. “I think if it was a regular-season game, he’d have a really good chance next week. Obviously, we are going to do what’s right to get him ready for Baltimore.”

WATCH: Will Montee Ball get traded?

Cody Latimer gets challenged by Gary Kubiak

Kubiak challenged receiver Cody Latimer, who has had a quiet preseason. “He’s a hard worker. He’s in the right place, but it’s time for him to start making plays on the ball and come up with some big plays.” … Elway on Manning having no feeling in his fingertips after four neck surgeries. “If I threw for 5,400 something yards and 55 touchdowns, I wish my fingers would have been numb, too.” … Left guard Evan Mathis participated in individual drills, impressing coaches with his conditioning. … A sign of the versatility of Phillips’ defense: safety David Bruton has played some linebacker, and cornerback Bradley Roby worked as a safety in a package last week.