Alicia Funderburk/Getty Images

Former governor of Alaska Sarah Palin came out in opposition to the bipartisan budget deal in an op-ed Thursday, adding fuel to a raging intra-party fight among Republicans.

In a Breitbart op-ed, titled, "Read My Lipstick: No New Taxes," Palin lashed out against the deal, calling out House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, R-W.I., who came to the spending agreement with Senate Budget Chairman Sen. Patty Murray, D-W.A.

"No one can argue with the fact that Paul Ryan's compromise budget bill raises taxes and increases spending. Show me one Republican who got elected on that platform," the former vice presidential candidate wrote. "Spare America the Orwellian word games. If the government is taking money out of your pocket to fund its growing Big Brother operations, it's a tax. Whether money is taken from you via your phone bill, your airline ticket, or your income, it's a tax. If politicians can't be honest about this, it's time to go home."

READ: Paul Ryan Says Presidential Ambitions Not Derailed by Budget Deal

But despite objections from Palin and other Republicans, the GOP-controlled House overwhelmingly passed the deal in a 332 to 94 vote. A majority of both parties supported the spending plan with 169 Republicans in favor and 62 opposed, along with 163 Democrats in favor and 32 against.

The bipartisan deal puts an end to the sequester by eliminating about $65 billion in across-the-board and includes an additional $25 billion in deficit reduction from Medicare savings through 2022 and 2023, two years beyond the cuts set by the Budget Control Act of 2011. In order to make up for those savings, the agreement calls for increased fees for airline travelers and cuts to pensions for federal workers and members of the military.

Tea Party groups have largely opposed the bill and are angry with House Leadership for publicly denouncing their influence among members in the Republican Conference. Palin urged tea partiers to continue their fight against the deal.

READ: Sarah Palin to Host New Sportsman Channel Show

"The Political Establishment will no doubt tell us that a budget battle will distract us from the fight against Obamacare," Palin wrote. "But that excuse is just the latest variation in the Establishment's old canard that they're keeping their powder dry for the next big battle which never seems to materialize because they're always too busy waving the white flag and following the path of least resistance until election day."

She ended her op-ed with a warning that Republicans could face retribution from their base in 2014 if they ignore the anger from activists.

"2014 is just around the corner," Palin wrote. "If any member of Congress thinks raising taxes and increasing wasteful spending is a winning strategy to run on, then by all means they should vote for the Ryan budget."

"We'll be watching," she added.