Topics: AlterNet, GOP, Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, Tea Party, Elections News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

The GOP elite appears ready to crown a new candidate: Marco Rubio. With the imminent decline and fall of Jeb Bush, the Republican establishment’s previous candidate of choice, signs of Rubio’s coming coronation are clear. There are reports of a “Rubio surge” in the press and in polls, new commitments from influential GOP donors like billionaire investor Paul Singer, and a growing list of key GOP establishment endorsements. Tuesday’s debate only bolstered the perception that Rubio, not Bush, represents the GOP’s elite kingmakers.

Unfortunately for Rubio and his growing base of influential backers, closer scrutiny of the Washington tea leaves portends fatal political consequences: Rubio cannot and will not win the presidency. There are many reasons Rubio is unelectable, but they can be boiled down to the following 10.

1. Rubio’s list of accomplishments doesn’t include anything that can be seen, heard or touched in the actual world. Unless there’s a broad conspiracy in the media to hide Rubio’s many and monumental accomplishments, the campaign dynamics will soon reveal that there’s not much there, even on Rubio’s own campaign website: “As a U.S. Senator, Marco has led a bold offensive to institute innovative, conservative ideas to address these fundamental issues and to restore hope in the American Dream.” Not the kinds of concrete verbs and measureable achievements one would advise a recent college grad to put on his resume, much less a candidate for president. Noting Rubio’s anemic record, Ted Cruz backers recently released a funny ad that asks, “Can anyone think of ANYTHING Marco Rubio’s ever done? Anything at all?”

2. Between a Tea Party rock and a Latino hard place is no place for a serious candidate to be.Like the GOP, Marco Rubio finds himself trapped between two diametrically opposed forces that will loom even larger this election season: anti-immigrant, anti-Latino Tea Party activists and Latino voters. This quagmire already got Rubio into problems during his bid to gain the VP spot in 2012. Activists on both sides hammered him for adopting positions they felt were too close to the other, a situation that shows signs of getting even worse.

3. Rubio’s immigrant story will sink in a sea of national scrutiny. The self-described “son of exiles,” Rubio has centered his campaign narrative around the story of his immigrant parents, whom he said, “came to America following Fidel Castro’s takeover.” Unless history books are altered to reflect that Castro’s revolution actually took place before his parents arrived in the U.S. on May 27, 1956—a full two and a half years before the Cuban revolution took place—the boat of Rubio’s phony immigration story will sink under the national scrutiny the general election will surely bring.

4. Tea Party Troubles will leave the GOP’s—and Rubio’s—tent in tatters. The fight brewing between Rubio and Tea Party favorite Ted Cruz reflects the core division that splits the party and that will burn the tent down by the end of the 2016 election. While Cruz continues to walk the talk of a die-hard Tea Partier, Rubio launched his successful bid to become Florida’s junior senator of the Tea Party only to adopt the more “moderate” tones and policy positions of his former mentor-turned-frenemy, Jeb Bush. This alienated the Tea Party base to the point where they are publicly attacking Rubio as a “sellout” on immigration and other issues, funding billboards denouncing “The Rubio-Obama Immigration Plan. Amnesty.” Though Rubio has since renounced previous positions on comprehensive immigration reform and other issues, many in the Tea Party base are supporting Cruz, who wasted no time highlighting these differences during Tuesday’s debate.