To quote my friend Jeremy… “Well, that escalated quickly.”

It’s been snowing steadily (at least where we are) since about 6am. The flakes have been falling, just like the jobs in this country. Um, if they aren’t yet, they will be, at least according to a report released yesterday by the Congressional Business Office which stated that 2.3 million full-time jobs will be lost by 2021, thanks to the Affordable Care Act, a.k.a. ObamaCare.

During the show, CVS made the following announcement: "Today, we’ve announced that we are ending the sales of tobacco in all 7,600 CVS/pharmacy stores by October 1. As a health care company, it’s time for us to take a stand and to put our customers, colleagues and patients on a path to better health." Ok... gird your loins, kids. Here comes the big debate over this policy. Smokers vs. non-smokers vs. the "what about painkillers and Cheetos?" crowd. This is what some people had to say in our Facebook discussion, which you can comment on here.

Personally, I applaud CVS' decision. What do you think? Is it hypocritical of them to continue selling other things that are not branded "healthy?" Leave a comment below, or comment on our Facebook thread.

Call it Perv Patrol, call it Florda Not Like the Rest of Us... no matter what... it's nuts.

This gentleman was told by his apartment management company that he needed to stop masturbating in front of the window. That didn't sit well with him, so he set fire to the place. Four units sustained smoke and water damage. He's now facing charges. (BTW, his face is disfigured because he shot himself in the face with a shotgun several years ago. We don't know why.)

Here's Hill-mail, in case you missed it. In other news:

Worcester's City Council has decided that circus animals are still fine with them. I'm less than thrilled with this decision.

Zimmerman vs. DMX. It's real, and I want to see it.

A woman tried to kill her hospitalized husband by injecting feces into his IV line. Yup. You read that correctly. Poop.

Don't forget, tomorrow we'll be joined by B's enforcer Shawn Thornton during THURSDAYS WITH THORTY at 8:15! Be safe in the snow!