Opposition leader Maria Corina Machado isn’t backing down from a fight even as the struggle in Venezuela escalates into what she sees as a fight for the country’s life.

Machado, 47, removed from her seat as a member of Venezuela’s National Assembly, has been vilified and punched, and now faces charges of treason against the government of socialist President Nicolas Maduro.

“Everyone in Venezuela, all of us — a labor leader, a student, a journalist, a person on Twitter — knows that if we raise our voices against the regime and expose its abuses and its corruption, there will be consequences,” Machado said in an exclusive interview with CENTRO Tampa. “We know what we’re exposing ourselves to.”

She pointed to Maduro’s recent nationally broadcast accusations of drug profiteering against the former presidents of three Latin American nations — Sebastian Pinera of Chile, Andres Pastrana of Colombia and Felipe Calderon of Mexico.

“It’s a regime capable of anything,” she said.

Shackled by the highest inflation in the world, rising violence — upwards of 16,000 murders reported in 2014 — and shortages of basic food items and medicines, Venezuela is seeing a build-up of pressure that nations including the United States fear could explode in the weeks leading up to this summer’s legislative elections.

Lt. Gen. Vincent Stewart, head of the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, said in a recent report to the House Committee on Military Affairs that “we fully anticipate major unrest and we’re worried about the elections and what that would mean in terms of increased violence and civil rights violations.”

Stewart’s concerns were echoed by 1987 Nobel Peace Prize winner Oscar Arias, a former president of Costa Rica, who in a recent letter said, “no other country in recent years has had more resources, but yielded more disastrous results. There is no international conspiracy to explain lines to buy flour or soap that last two days.”

Venezuela’s plight has been under the global spotlight since Feb. 12, when students rallied in Caracas, the capital, only to be beaten down by security forces. Opposition leader Leopoldo Lopez was arrested on Feb. 18 and charged with treason.

The decline of the country’s economy and repression of the political opposition are wearing down supporters of the socialist movement in Venezuela, who have noted that poverty overall has declined there since 2000 as access to basic necessities has increased. They say the current uprising is led largely by wealthy individuals who once held much of the power in the oil-rich country.

In the weeks after the first uprising, Machado was ousted from her seat in the National Assembly but she has remained at the forefront of the opposition, touring the country alongside Lopez’s wife, Lilian Tintori, to rally supporters.

“Feb. 12 was a key day, a historic day. It was a day that showed the world a firm, a clear picture of the people’s will to rebel against the oppression and it was also a day when it became clear to the world just how cruel and violent Maduro’s regime really is,” Machado said.

Machado’s rise in Venezuela’s political picture began in 2004 when the civil organization she led with Alejandro Praz began a campaign to recall then-president Hugo Chavez. She was deemed a traitor by the Chavez regime and charged with conspiracy and treason. The trial was suspended in 2006.

In 2010, she launched her campaign for the National Assembly and was the top vote getter on the ballot. She was removed from office March 21 after traveling to a meeting of the Organization of American States to denounce human rights violations by the Maduro government.

National Assembly president Diosdado Cabello labeled her actions treason and used a party-line vote to oust her. Machado’s passport was revoked in June.

Her continued opposition has drawn threats against her and her family.

“In just the last couple of hours I’ve been receiving threatening messages,” she told CENTRO Tampa. “They write me to tell than I’m going to attacked or that my children are going to be killed. The intimidation is constant because somehow they thing we’re going to back down. But on the contrary, every day we have more hope, more optimism and more strength.”

Machado said the opposition will note yield because “our commitment is to free this country. We know that if things continue the way they are, we will have a humanitarian crisis that will generate grave social conflicts and unrest. We’re seeing that now.”

Machado said thatthe message is getting through.

She said that on Jan. 14, during a procession in the city of Barquisimeto, she was being accompanied by soldiers when one turned to her almost in tears.

She quoted him as saying, “I beg you, don’t give up, don’t give up.’

“Seeing that, seeing a soldier get to that point, that touched me.”

mwarren@centrotampa.com

(813) 259-8037