There's plenty of info on Facebook about "oil pulling." Who knew?

An alternative Looking for a more tolerable alternative to coconut oil? John Douillard's LifeSpa sells bottles of Swish Oil Pulling Therapy for $16.99. This mixture blends organic coconut and sesame oil with turmeric and a dash of peppermint oil to make it taste better. Contact the LifeSpa, 6662 Gunpark Drive East, Suite 102, Boulder, at 1-866-227-9843 or lifespa.com.

I'm sitting here trying not to gag on a mouth completely full of coconut oil diluted with saliva.

Apparently, this is good for me.

Ayurvedic practitioners call this oil pulling. It's the big, new, ancient thing — thousands of years old, but recently super popular again, thanks to digital trendsetters such as Pinterest and Facebook.

Hold on. Deep breath. Not. Going. To. Heave. I can do this.

Oil pulling has been all over my Facebook wall for months now: promises of everything from whiter teeth to help with allergies to relief of chronic pain. I read somewhere it could treat cancer and AIDS. I was in open-minded awe — until I read claims that it could improve digestive issues.

Because it's currently causing me new ones.

In fact, if you have a sensitive stomach, now is where I tell you to run. Run far away from the rest of this harrowing tale. Chances are, you'd never try oil pulling to begin with, anyway.

Maybe I need to last the full length of time, rise mind over nausea and gargle this oil for the recommended 20 minutes.

When my husband said he'd be working late one night, I realized I had my window; if he ever caught me doing something like this, I'd never be kissed again. Even more, I'd never stand a chance of succeeding in his presence.

You see, my husband and I both have overactive gag reflexes, to the degree that it's a contributing factor to why we never plan on having more children. You try changing a molten diaper while being simultaneously trapped in an uncontrollable duet of dry-heaving "huuuu-hhhs," each one setting up the next like diaphragm dominoes. Just the memory is pushing me closer to sharing my coconut spit with the keyboard.

Speaking of, the longer you keep this oil in your mouth, the more liquid your mouth produces and the harder it is to keep it in. My cheeks are inflated like a squirrel. Every minute is worse than the last.

Must. Distract. Self.

I'm committed. I've made it this long: 11 minutes. Eleven long, slobbery minutes. I'm not giving up now.

I've played a game like this before, but it was a dare and I was 9, playing with the older neighbor kids.

This time, though, I was a sober, educated adult, during my rare free time after my kid goes to bed, by my own free will, and based solely on a Facebook forward that I totally didn't research first. Nope. Just decided to jump right in. Just marched right on downstairs during my window of opportunity — because you don't want to miss a chance like this, no sir — and scooped a spoonful of thick, white coconut glop into my mouth.

And then instantly spat it out onto the counter and stared at it in confusion.

I pushed it into the sink and rallied. I scooped another half-spoonful. Hesitated before closing my lips around it, and then shoved it right in.

Plop. My reflexes betrayed me again, as my tongue refused to participate in this game.

No, mouth, we're doing this. This time, I filled only a tiny, wee portion of the teaspoon and took it like a shot of cheap tequila. Almost swallowed, which ignited the gag reflexes again. I tried to take a deep breath, but my nose was partially clogged. My lips parted and my slimy punishment tried to break free again. Stay! I squeaked a congested breath through my nostrils and began immediately distracting myself.

I decided to put on a face mask.

Know what you can't do while gargling a mouthful of fat wad? Lean your face over the sink and wash your face. The motion swished the slop around in my mouth, and my lips engaged in tug-of-war with my will to to keep them shut.

Now I could barely breathe. I grabbed a Kleenix to blow my nose, but you know what else is tricky without the ability to mouth-breathe? Blowing your nose properly.

To the Interwebs, the great distractor.

After the damage is already more than halfway done, now seems like the perfect time to do some research on this tactic.

I immediately find my go-to local source for all things Ayurveda: John Douillard's LifeSpa.

The theory behind oil pulling: The oils pull toxins from the skin by attracting other oils, including those within the fatty layers of our skin that hold fat-soluble toxins. The spa cites studies that suggest that "oil acting as a pulling agent for toxins is well documented" and reports it's "very plausible" that the oils might be detoxifying.

The spa also recommends "herbalizing" the oil with turmeric. Oops, forgot that.

Another website: Best done in the morning on an empty stomach. One to two teaspoons full? It's bedtime, and I had a massive dinner. And I had maybe only a quarter of a teaspoon, with generous exaggeration.

After all this, I've done it all wrong.

Eighteen minutes and I'm sitting here with a mouth of lukewarm, fatty spit and am unlikely going to reap any of the benefits from it.

Then I stumble upon an article by Discovery.com.

It says there are only a few medical studies of oil pulling and none particularly convincing of a consistent benefit for "any particular condition." The verdict: Oil pulling probably doesn't do anything.

John Douillard's LifeSpa hammers it home for me: " ... more studies need to be done on the oil pulling technique ..."

Nineteen minutes. And it's on my desk in a sad pile of failure.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Aimee Heckel at 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay.