When demonstrating the world’s increasing infatuation with plastic surgery, there is no better model to use than Valeria Lukyanova. Lukyanova, or as she is more internationally recognized, the "Human Barbie," has had an abundance of plastic surgeries in order to alter her looks to resemble a doll. She is also well known for her alternative lifestyle and beliefs.

When she first made headlines in 2012, Lukyanova astonished the world with her extreme body alterations that included an almost inhuman waistline that she maintained through a diet of nothing more than carrot juice and chutney. The Ukrainian woman then shocked the world with her desire to become a breatharian, meaning that she would no longer need to eat or drink and could live only on air and light. Now the Barbie look-alike is once again making headlines for her controversial belief that race-mixing creates more flaws in beauty and therefore is causing a bigger need for plastic surgery.

Lukyanova recently interviewed with GQ Russian editor, Michael Idov, while modeling for a photoshoot with the magazine. There, she told Idov that, in her opinion, plastic surgery is on the rise because of the "degeneration" caused by racial mixing. “For example, a Russian marries an Armenian. They have a kid, a cute girl, but she has her dad’s nose. She goes and files it down a little, and it’s all good. Ethnicities are mixing now, so there’s degeneration, and it didn’t use to be like that. Remember how many beautiful women there were in the 1950s and 1960s without surgery? And now, thanks to degeneration, we have this,” Lukyanova explained in a recent NY Daily News article.

The 28-year old loves her own beauty, which she refers to as “Nordic type, perhaps with a little Eastern Baltic, but closer to Nordic.” Her counterpart, Justin Jedlica, or "Human Ken," does not seem to think as highly of his feminine mirror-image’s appearance. “I don’t really get her. I don’t get why people think she’s so interesting. She has extensions. She wears stage makeup. She’s an illusionist,” Jedlica explained in his interview with GQ.