Buzz, a Yorkie from Loveland, won the dog costume contest on Sunday at Halloween on the Promenade, which took place at the Promenade Shops at Loveland. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Humans aren't the only ones that get to dress up for Halloween.

Buzz, a Yorkie dressed as a "commando" character, arrived at Sunday's Halloween on the Promenade in a camouflage sweater, headband, spiked hair, and with a spray-painted gun strapped to his side.

He did it right, because he won first place in the dog costume contest and received a gift basket of doggie treats, bones and toys.

The costume contest, sponsored by Dog Owner's General Store, was one of many that took place during a Halloween event at The Promenade Shops at Centerra.

While children trick-or-treated for candy, rode a hay ride, played games for prizes and got their faces painted, 15-20 dogs small and tall paraded before the judges for best and most unique costume.

A cockapoo, Tara, greets another dog during the dog costume contest at the Promenade Shops at Centerra on Sunday. She and her owner, Jennifer Glass, paraded around to show off Tara's 1950s-style poodle skirt for the judges. (Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The dogs dressed as Olaf from "Frozen," a bumble bee, sports teams, a hot dog, fairies and princesses.

Buzz's owner, Dale Littlefield of Loveland, made the costume herself out of toy parts and the doggie sweater from Wal-Mart.

"We've come for the past three years and we just love it," Littlefield said after the event, beaming at her dog and the gift basket of treats. "It's just fun and it's a good way to get attention for the dog."

Littlefield was at the event with her daughter, Shannon Littlefield, who also entered her dog, Miley, painted yellow and dressed as a Minion from the cartoon, "Despicable Me."

Ethan and Morgan Stanford of Loveland really wanted to bring their Yorkie, Itty Bitty, according to their mother, Tracy. So they dressed her as a monster and brought her along.

And Jennifer Glass brought her cockapoo, Tara.

"We were here last year; we heard about it and thought it would be fun to bring the dog," said her mother, Cindy Dyke.

Glass thought it would be a cute idea for a poodle-mix to wear a poodle sweater, and she found a 1950s skirt online.

D.O.G.S. has hosted the contest for about five years now during the Halloween event at Promenade Shops at Centerra.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter at twitter.com/jessicabenes.