Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Anti-violence crusader Christopher 2X hosted a meeting Thanksgiving morning with two mothers who have lost their sons to violence. Marty Pearl/The Courier-Journal

Buy Photo Darlene McNealy, mother of Joe McNealy who was shot and killed in 2009, hugs Kela Brasher, the mother of Steve Bledsoe, another victim to violence that was murdered in 2013. The two mothers agreed to shake hands and hug as an official peace agreement. (Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Two Louisville mothers of slain sons from feuding factions united on Thanksgiving to promote peace, sobbing in each other's arms.

"It just needs to stop," said Darlene McNealy. "We need to come together."

Anti-violence crusader Christopher 2X hosted the meeting Thanksgiving morning at his Muhammad Ali Boulevard office, a block from the 19th Street intersection where Joseph "Lil' Joe" McNealy Jr., 21, died from five gunshot blasts Nov. 28, 2009.

Darlene McNealy met with the mother of Steve Bledsoe, whom police and prosecutors had blamed for having a role in her son's death.

Bledsoe was jailed after police pegged him as the getaway driver in the murder. His best friend, Marcus Crook, eventually admitted to killing McNealy without any accomplices during a dispute over a debt, and charges against Bledsoe were dropped. Crook is serving a 10-year sentence after pleading guilty in 2012 to first-degree manslaughter.

"Through your losses there's a bigger calling," 2X told the families, gathered at a conference room table with others who have lost loved ones to gun violence.

But some friends of the victim still blamed Bledsoe.

"The way things work in this community with young people, you don't have to commit a crime to be the one who done something," said Bledsoe's mother, Kela Brasher, who insists her son was innocent. "If you are associated with someone, that makes you a target as well."

Two years ago, Bledsoe, 24, was also killed, peppered with more than 25 bullets, she said.

Police charged Angelo Cross, 28, with Bledsoe's July 15, 2013 murder at Greenwood Avenue near 32nd Street, but Brasher said she believes several other gunmen - who were friends with McNealy - are involved. Ongoing tensions started years earlier with another murder falsely blamed on her son.

"I'm tired of young black men getting killed," Brasher said. "I'm tired of mothers crying."

Bledsoe, a convicted drug dealer, had been working to turn his life around after learning that his girlfriend was pregnant, Brasher said. He had plans to attend college to become a carpenter.

Brasher said she is still coping with the grief and anger, and she believes several accomplices remain free.

"I'm struggling," she said. "I want peace, but how can I have peace without justice? I don't want them to be killed on the street, but they should all be locked up."

The man charged with her son's murder insists he fired in self defense. He remains at home on house arrest with an ankle monitor while awaiting trial.

"He's able to enjoy Thanksgiving with his family," Brasher said. "My son is in the grave."

A witness, who reported seeing one shooter and an accomplice, told police that Bledsoe's last words were: "Tell my mother I love her."

Buy Photo Teresa Miller, clockwise from left, Darlene McNealy, Christopher 2X, Ki'Anthony Tyus, Kela Brasher, and Angela Newby Bouggess have a sit down meeting Thursday morning. There have been ongoing tensions between the two factions of McNealy and Brasher's families and friends, the two matriarchs hope to quell any plans for revenge over their sons' deaths. Nov. 26, 2015 (Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)

'We've had enough'

A day before the families came together to call for an end to gun violence, three more families lost loved ones in Louisville - as the city's homicide tally climbed to 74. That's the highest since 1996, according to Louisville Metro Police data.

During the meeting, McNealy's mother held up a large sign that read, "R.I.P. Louisville," which she plans to display during a Saturday vigil for her son and other victims of violence. Along with Joseph McNealy's 2009 murder, she lost two children to murders in Louisville in 1996 - an 18-year-old daughter and a 20-year-old son.

"I'm feeling the pain every day," she said.

McNealy's aunt, Teresa Miller, invited Bledsoe's mother, Brasher, to attend the vigil Saturday - on the sixth anniversary of McNealy's slaying - to remember all murder victims.

But Brasher, who said she has respect for McNealy's mother and aunt, feared that friction is coming from his friends who still blame her son for a part in McNealy's death.

"If I go to the vigil, I put myself at risk," Brasher said a day before the meeting. "You never know what's on someone's mind and they all got guns." She read on Facebook, as recent as Wednesday, how the tensions between her son's friends and those of Bledsoe still simmer with posts degrading the victims and lusting for revenge.

"It's deepening the knife already in our chest," Brasher said. "We need closure, not the constant back and forth."

But Teresa Miller, McNealy's aunt, decided it was time to bring both families together.

She told Brasher, "You share a loss that we all share. This fight goes bigger than us, but it takes us to do it. We're tired. We've had enough."

On Thanksgiving, the two mothers wiped tears but left smiling, knowing they're united in a cause to save lives.

"I can be an influence and show young people how this hurts," Brasher said. "I can convey the message that we can embrace each other in love. We got to get rid of this hate."

Reporter Beth Warren can be reached at (502) 582-7164 or bwarren@courier-journal.com.

Vigil for Joseph McNealy and other homicide victims

Relatives of Joseph McNealy's are organizing a vigil for 6:30 p.m. Saturday, the seventh-anniversary of his murder at the corner where he was gunned down, 19th Street and Muhammad Ali Boulevard. They are inviting anyone impacted by violence to attend.

Buy Photo Darlene McNealy, mother of Joe McNealy who was shot and killed in 2009, holds a sign pleading for the violence to stop in Louisville. McNealy agreed to meet Thursday with Kela Brasher, the mother of Steve Bledsoe, another victim to violence that was murdered in 2013. The two mothers agreed to shake hands and hug as an official peace agreement to try and stop the violence between their fueding families. Nov. 26, 2015 (Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1jmao2r