It’s that time of the year again.

Time when folks start digging through their receipts, checking over forms, and often speaking with their consultants as they once again file their tax returns for the coming year.

Tax time can often be a confusing time for people as they struggle to maximize their refunds or reduce the amount of money they owe to the IRS. This is a busy period for tax consultant groups such as H&R Block in Tunkhannock, as they work with clients to help make filing their tax claims as easy as possible.

Dawn Weller, Master Tax Advisor and Officer Manager of the H&R Block office in Tunkhannock provided information in several major areas of interest to most taxpayers. The first area dealt with how people could be affected by the Affordable Health Care Act - commonly known as “Obamacare.”

“There are two new tax forms that our clients have been receiving - 1095B and 1095C - that provide the client health insurance information to the IRS,” Weller explained. “That provides to the IRS who your health insurance provider is, and who is covered. And that’s important because if there are members of your family who have no coverage, or there are gaps in their coverage, then there is going to be a penalty calculated on their tax form.”

Although the 1095B and 1095C forms are being made available to the public, Weller said, you don’t have to bring them in this year to do your taxes. Next year though, they will probably be necessary, she cautioned.

Also, there are some exceptions available in certain situations, allowing a person to avoid paying the penalty.

“The exceptions are short gaps in health insurance coverage,” she said.

Weller continued by explaining that if a person period of non-insurance is less than three months during the tax year, they do not have to pay the penalty. However, if the period of non-coverage is three months or more, then the penalty must be paid.

Another exception, she said, are those without insurance coverage, but also are not required to fill out a tax return.

Another important area Weller covered is tax identity theft.

“It’s a huge issue in which the taxpayers need to take steps to protect themselves,” she explained. “The most important thing is to keep personal information such as Social Security numbers and birthdates secure.”

Another way a person can prevent identity theft is by filing their tax claims early, she said, because it provides a shorter window for identity thieves to file fraudulent returns.

“In 2013, $5.2 billion in fraudulent refunds was paid out by the IRS,” Weller said.

People who are the victims of fraudulent tax refunds will find their legitimate claims rejected by the IRS.

“Then you have to go through the process of proving who are you by filing police reports and with credit agencies,” Weller explained. “A person (whose been victimized) can get a refund, but it usually takes six to nine months.”

One service provided by H&R Block is a tax ID shield, she said. This is software that lessens the likelihood of a tax filer becoming a victim; or if that does occur, providing assistance to help get the matter corrected.

Tom McGough, District Manager for H&R Block for the Wilkes-Barre and Scranton area, said that a client’s information is stored on the company’s efile system. If another person attempts to fraudulently file the tax information through H&R Block, the client is notified, which gives them the opportunity to notify the IRS.

One of the biggest points of interest which practically everyone wants to do is maximize their refunds.

“It important that people make sure they have all the necessary tax documentation,” Weller said. “Together with having a tax professional who has the expertise on all the deductions.”

A tax professional can also provide vital information on tax planning, McGough explained. This allows a person to determine the correct amount that should be withheld from each of their paychecks. If the amount is incorrect, people can find they owe money when it’s time to fix their tax returns.

Weller also provided information on what a person should look for when seeking professional tax advice. It’s important that those seeking out a professional carefully examine what kind of knowledge they have of the tax field.

“It’s critical that the taxpayer filed the right professional who has the expertise and the knowledge to prepare their tax return,” Weller said. “Security is also important-they need to trust their tax professional.

Honesty is another critical area. Weller said people should be cautious if a professional prepares a claim that has a refund which seems too large, based on the deductions and tax credits that can be legally claimed.

“Fees are never based on the amount of the refund,” Weller explained. “Fees are based on the form that is filed.”

A good professional will also provide guarantees to the taxpayer.

“They (the taxpayers) need to know what is going to happen if an error occurs. Is the preparer going to be there (at the audit)? Is the preparer going to help pay the penalty? Reputable tax preparers guarantee their work. Finally, there’s availability. A professional should be available year-round to help you.”