Bruno Mars, who headlines the opening night of Summerfest June 25, performs during the halftime show. Credit: Bill Kostroun

By of the

Looks like Summerfest is going to have a good opening night.

Sunday's Super Bowl halftime show with soulful pop star Bruno Mars offered a sneak peak at the Big Gig's headliner June 25. While naturally the scale of the 13-minute spectacle — with its stadium-wide firework finish to "Just the Way You Are" — isn't going to fit inside the Marcus Amphitheater, what stands a good chance of making the transition is Mars' showmanship.

With a golden blazer and a thick poof of hair — big and sturdy-looking enough to catch a 30-yard pass — Mars was clearly trying to emulate James Brown, but with a 21st-century twist. Following a cutesy kid chorus' revamp of a portion of "Billionaire" (without, actually, the self-involved lyrics about wanting to be a billionaire), Mars made his appearance with a high-energy drum solo atop a moving stage, leading into "Locked Out of Heaven" backed by a full band (plus horn section). Squinting eyes seemed to steal Mars' ability for a stronger emotional connection, but his body did most of the talking anyway, with some perfectly timed pelvic thrusts (still quite tame by Beyoncé standards).

From "Heaven" came a curious choice, so-so chart performer "Treasure" (by Mars' standards). It came off like filler for a performance that didn't really have any time to spare. But it was followed by the halftime highlight, "Runaway Baby," with Mars offering up a jittery soul man variation of Michael Jackson's moonwalk, sliding back smoothly as his feet pivoted off his heels into a million different directions. Interesting that all the digital screens, flashing lights, firework fury and a couple shirtless Red Hot Chili Peppers couldn't capture the excitement of this cool-looking dance move.

Speaking of the Chili Peppers, they attacked a one-and-done performance of "Give It Away," with typical wild-child abandon. But it wasn't all that different from the band's treatment of the song after all these years. Mars graciously stepped to the side, reducing himself to little more than a hype man. Pity Mars' brass-blaring band didn't give the Peppers some new flavor; the horns went swinging near the end of "Away," but they were inaudible. It would have been even better for the Peppers to sprinkle in some freaky funk into one of Mars' hits.

An opportunity missed, but nevertheless Mars' primary mission was accomplished: He pulled off a strong halftime show so he can help sell some concert tickets. Which, in the case of the Summerfest show, happen to go on sale at noon Monday.

But Mars' halftime show was hardly the only musical event.

■U2 premiered its new single "Invisible" as part of an ad for Bank of America and Bono's philanthropic organization (RED), devoted to raising money and awareness for AIDS prevention. It's available as a free download until Monday night at iTunes.

■And on a night that included notable artist appearances from the likes of Bob Dylan and OneRepublic, one song placement of note was "Coming Home, Part II," from Mazomanie native Skylar Grey, used for a Budweiser ad depicting a real-life American soldier's homecoming.

Facebook: fb.me/piet.levy.18

Twitter: twitter.com/pietlevy