SAN FRANCISCO & ROCKVILLE, Md., March 8, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Melanie Bella, the former Medicaid Director for the state of Indiana and the first Director of National Duals office, has joined Care at Hand's advisory board to bring her unique experience in managed care.

Melanie Bella is currently the Senior Vice President, Policy & Strategy for Alignment Healthcare. She started this position in 2015 after role as the first Director of the Medicare-Medicaid Coordination Office at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Ms. Bella joined CMS in 2010 to establish the office, which was created under the Affordable Care Act (Section 2602). Under her leadership, the Office designed and launched demonstrations across the country to test new delivery system and payment models for Medicare-Medicaid enrollees in both community and institutional settings.

"Care at Hand is bringing together the medical and non-medical worlds in ways that will create significant social value, advance key policy goals, and, most importantly, improve care for people who need it the most," said Melanie Bella.

Ms. Bella will serve on the board alongside another recent addition, Ms. Jennie Chin Hansen, who was voted as PBS's top 50 Influencers in Aging in 2015. Ms. Chin Hansen is the co-founder of the PACE program, former president of the AARP, and former CEO of the American Society of Geriatrics.

"A key part of the success of the PACE program is the engagement of a multidimensional team," Hansen notes. "Dr. Ostrovsky and his team are taking that concept to a contemporary level by elevating the role of the non-medical providers using predictive data. This will enhance and empower the direction workforce innovation needs to go for timely care effectiveness and quality."

Care at Hand's CEO, Dr. Andrey Ostrovsky, says he "is honored to have such experts in advisory roles. Making a big impact on the complex world of healthcare requires deep knowledge and vast experience. With Ms. Chin Hansen and Ms. Bella, Care at Hand has intimate access to the preeminent experts in aging and managed care."

About Care at Hand

Care at Hand is a digital health company on a mission to ensure people can thrive in their homes and avoid unnecessary stays in hospitals. The company's flagship technology is an evidence-based predictive insights platform powered by non-medical staff. For payers and providers struggling to optimize margins and achieve the Triple Aim, Care at Hand provides a smart survey platform that identifies early medical and psychosocial risk factors for hospitalization. Unlike episodic predictive models limited to claims and EMR data, Care at Hand predicts hospitalization risk in the blind spot between doctor visits using the observations of existing frontline staff.

PRLog ID: www.prlog.org/12535898

SOURCE Care at Hand