U.S. Senate candidate Milton Wolf’s large bus rolled into Topeka on Saturday morning as part of his “Save the Republic” tour, predicting “we are going to win” against his opponent, Sen. Pat Roberts.

Wolf stopped at Hughes Park, S.W. 7th and Parkview, and spent about an hour speaking with supporters.

“People are so tired of negative politics,” Wolf told about 10 people who gathered in the park.

He was speaking about campaign ads from his opponent, who is seeking a fourth term in the Senate.

Topeka was one of three cities Wolf visited Saturday. He spent half an hour talking with people at a doughnut shop in Newton before visiting Topeka. From 3 to 4:30 p.m., Wolf was scheduled to appear at a candidate forum in Manhattan and was slated to return to Topeka from 6 to 8 p.m. for a rally and cookout at Hughes Park.

Christy Lockard, of Tecumseh, said she supports Wolf in his Senate bid.

“I just like Milton,” Lockard said. “He stands for everything I do. He wants to make the country better. Right now, it’s stagnant. We need change.”

A recent SurveyUSA poll shows Roberts’ advantage over Wolf narrowed to 20 percentage points, down from 33 points. The margin of error was plus or minus 3.8 percent.

Wolf, a Leawood radiologist, has drawn criticism from Roberts for posting X-rays of dead and injured people accompanied by jokes about the images on his Facebook page. The Kansas Board of Healing Arts is investigating Wolf’s display.

“If I have offended anyone, I apologize,” Wolf said Saturday when questioned about the posts.

He said it was something he posted a long time ago on his private Facebook page.

Mark Saylor, a Topeka doctor, has been campaigning for Wolf by knocking on doors and talking to friends and neighbors about his support for Wolf.

“I don’t like the permanent political class who are in Washington,” Saylor said.

Doctors have a crass sense of humor, Saylor said, and Wolf’s posts on Facebook were made before he knew he was going to run for Senate. Wolf has apologized for the posts, and people should move on to more important issues, Saylor said.

Jonathan Schumm brought his 14 children to the park to meet Wolf. Wolf introduced himself to all of the kids and flipped through a book with the youngest.

Also showing support at the gathering was Rep. Josh Powell, of Topeka.

After a short meet-and-greet, Wolf walked with supporters to a covered shelter, where he talked about Roberts’ “negative” campaign.

Roberts executive campaign manager Leroy Towns responded Saturday via telephone, saying the “negative campaign ads were started by Wolf.”

Towns also said Roberts remains on top.

Wolf is one week into his two-and-a-half-week tour.

“We have been all over the state,” he said. “We have met a lot of former Pat Roberts supporters on this trip.”

Wolf mentioned several times that Roberts has been in Washington, D.C., for 47 years.

“No one should be in Washington for 47 years, especially when Washington has lost its way,” he said. “Something big is happening, and the polls are showing it. He is in a free fall right now. We are surging. We have a week and a half, and we are going to win this thing.”