Staff Report

gsanews@scbiznews.com

Published June 26, 2014

Oconee Medical Center will become part of the Greenville Health System. As part of the 50-year lease arrangement, Greenville Health will assume Oconee Medical’s $80 million in long-term bond debt, and a statement said job reductions in Seneca are likely to continue.

In the statement, Oconee Medical Center said, faced with Affordable Care Act payment cuts and other changes, the goal of its board in an affiliation has been “to ensure that Oconee Medical Center survives and thrives long into the future.”

The lease agreement approved separately by the boards Wednesday takes effect Oct. 1 and gives GHS options for two 25-year extensions. Oconee Medical’s staff will become GHS employees when the agreement takes effect, and employed physicians will be offered positions with University Medical Group, the physician network of GHS.

“We are so fortunate to have an organization of the caliber of Greenville Health System right here in the Upstate, and even more fortunate to be part of GHS,” said Jeanne Ward, who has worked at Oconee Medical for more than 40 years and will continue as its president and CEO.

Oconee Medical Center’s board will oversee the lease and advise GHS trustees, who will be the decision-makers, the statement said.

With 169 licensed beds, Oconee Medical Center’s acute care hospital becomes the eighth hospital in the GHS system. The hospital anchors a private, nonprofit system that also includes a 120-bed long-term care facility, hospice and home health agencies, a physician network, outpatient programs and wellness services for employees. The medical staff includes more than 120 physicians.

While the lease does not call for changes in Oconee Medical’s workforce, a statement said there has been a reduction of 260 employees since 2009 — including some in April — and “we anticipate that will continue for the foreseeable future, as long as health care reform continues to drive down payments to health care providers.”

Michael Riordan, president and CEO of GHS, said that “together we will make a positive impact on the health of the communities we serve by improving access, quality and value.”

The agreement follows a nonbinding memorandum of understanding in January and an intent to affiliate agreement in April.

As part of the lease, GHS pledges to deliver quality health care services to Oconee County, keep facilities in good repair, make facility improvements as needed and meet the health care needs of the communities served by Oconee Medical Center, the statement said.

Oconee Medical officials considered other out-of-state affiliations, but the board chose GHS partly because it’s a South Carolina-based organization that shares similar values and a commitment to the health of people in the Upstate.

The statement said the combination of payment cuts and transformational change have put enormous pressure on all hospitals, but especially smaller community hospitals. Some hospitals are affiliating and others that can’t find partners are closing. Six community hospitals in Alabama have closed in the past 18 months, four have closed in Georgia in the past two years, one recently closed in North Carolina and Wallace Thomson Hospital in Union has just declared bankruptcy.

Greenville Health System is South Carolina’s largest nonprofit health care delivery system, with six medical campuses, a tertiary medical center, research and education facilities, community hospitals, physician practices and numerous specialty services throughout the Upstate. The 1,358-bed system has 15 medical residency and fellowship programs. GHS is also home to the University of South Carolina School of Medicine Greenville.

In May, the GHS board voted to develop “multispecialty, ambulatory care centers” in Spartanburg and Anderson, signaling a possible turf war with Anderson-based AnMed Health. The trustees did not announce a timetable. AnMed Health issued a statement that included a reference to “cherry picking only certain patients. We are sure all of this has been carefully considered by the GHS officials, and we are sure it will be carefully reviewed by the state agency charged with its oversight.”

Greenville Health Vice President of Strategic Services Malcolm Isley said cherry picking paying patients is “not the intent” of the expansion plans but GHS is looking to provide its services where it is accessible to Upstate residents.

“We believe the Upstate is our market,” Isley said. “We want to make sure we provide GHS options to them close to where they live and work.”

GHS last year affiliated with Laurens County Medical Center and previously joined with Columbia-based Palmetto Health in joint ownership of Baptist Easley Hospital. GHS has also joined with the Medical University of South Carolina Hospital in Charleston in a new limited liability company that also includes Palmetto Health, McLeod Health in Florence and Self Regional in Greenwood.

GHS is not alone in looking for affiliation opportunities. AnMed on Jan. 1 affiliated with Cannon Memorial Hospital in Pickens and has announced other affiliations in Georgia.

AnMed is affiliated with Charlotte-based Carolinas Healthcare System.

GHS has six medical campuses, a tertiary medical center, research and education facilities, community hospitals, physician practices and specialty services throughout the Upstate. The 1,358-bed system has 15 medical residency and fellowship programs. GHS is also home to the University of South Carolina School of Medicine Greenville.