BRUNSWICK | Workers were putting the finishing touches this week on a multifamily housing complex on the grounds of an old elementary school.

Driveways and sidewalks were being poured and landscaping finished off in anticipation of the July 1 occupancy date for Norwich Commons, a public-private venture meant to provide affordable housing to working families and spark a resurgence of a blighted neighborhood on the northern edge of town. Half will be ready by midweek and the rest in coming days.

“This is a catalyst site to get redevelopment going along Norwich Street,” said developer Bill Gross of the W.H. Gross Construction Co.

The $8 million development consists of 52 units and was financed by Gross through a state and federal tax credit program. Gross sold off some of the tax credits to major corporations to raise money to fund the project. He bought the abandoned school yard from the city for $487,000 and began construction last summer. As work progressed, the project gained momentum and will open with a full house.

“We’re 100 percent leased with a waiting list,” Gross said.

The north Brunswick area along Norwich has been called blighted, with post-World War II homes, many of them beyond repair, and rundown commercial storefronts packed tightly together. The old C.B. Greer Elementary School occupied the site until a couple of years ago when it was torn down to make way for Norwich Commons.

City Manager Bill Weeks said the project has generated excitement and hope for the future of the area.

“This is turning out better than I anticipated,” he said. “It’s a quality job and will spur improvements throughout the whole neighborhood.”

The city put one requirement on Gross at the outset — to keep the school’s gym for the use of residents.

It has been turned into a community center, with an area for exercise, a police substation, a library and computer room.

In addition to affordable rents, the units are designed to reduce the utility bills of residents.

The buildings are designed to meet EarthCraft standards, Gross said, which include energy efficiency, water conservation and low maintenance. They also will comply with the American With Disabilities Act. The Craftsman architectural style dates from the 1940s.

The complex also has Brunswick’s first underground system to collect stormwater runoff and let it percolate slowly into the groundwater rather than dumping it into the city system, Gross said.

The system won’t catch it all and during extremely heavy rains it will overflow into the city storm water drainage, but it will be help the environment, Gross said.

Gross said he had expected an earlier opening for the complex but progress was slowed when his company was forced to replace water and sewer lines serving the site.

“You know how they talk about the crumbling infrastructure of the country? This is a perfect example,” he said.

The public suffered with Gross with the traffic on Fourth Street having to detour around the block for months.

Times-Union Georgia Editor Terry Dickson contributed to this report.