The 2010 Affordable Care Act created a shorter licensing path for lower-cost versions of cell-derived drugs called biologics. Sarfaraz Niazi is working to get among the first of these substitute drugs called biosimilars approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration . A former Abbott Labs scientist and University of Illinois at Chicago professor, Niazi is founder, chairman and CEO of Therapeutic Proteins International LLC in Chicago. He shares how he’s taking the cost out of manufacturing biological drugs and provides advice on being a better inventor.

Q. What prompted you to pursue biosimilars?

A. In 1995, I realized that the future of human medicine was going to be in biological products. Once these patents expired, there would be an opportunity to bring affordable versions of these drugs. Unlike chemical drugs that you can produce at very low cost, these drugs are manufactured from living cells and require very large investment and, as a result, have a very high cost. The first motive I had was how can I make these products just as safe and effective but be affordable, not just here in the U.S. but worldwide.

Q. How and why did you change the drug-making process?

A. If you know how wine is made, you have a fermenter in which you grow a living entity like yeast or bacteria or a cell, and at end of cycle you remove the cells and bacteria and concentrate the product. But when we started producing these therapeutic molecules or drugs, that process had a lot of disadvantages: cross-contamination issues, high variability in production, extremely high cost in maintaining those large vats and not being able to maintain high safety in using that process.

I realized I had to design something that is totally single use. I embarked on a disposable technology (a fermenting bag). At the end of cycle, the whole thing gets thrown away without having to clean, or worry about cross-contamination or the consistency in which we produce these molecules. Also, it gives me a much smaller footprint. The amount of drugs we can produce right here would (otherwise) take a 100 times larger space and perhaps another 50 times more investment.

Q. Where are you with the FDA?

A. We intend to file two products this year and two products next year. The first two are similar to ( Amgen Inc. ’s) Neupogen and Neulasta used in cancer treatment to boost the white blood count or immunity. The current market for those two molecules is close to $6 billion. Next year the products are for rheumatoid arthritis similar to (Abbvie’s) Humira. It’s a $12 billion product and growing like 20 percent a year.

Q. You have 70 patents. What else have you invented?

A. I have patents on how to age wine, a patent I’ve sold to Rolls Royce about turn signals and automobiles to make them safe. One product is for diaper rash. One is a camera shutter I’m patenting now, and changing the print of books so it’s easy to read as you turn your head. I’m very curious to see how I can make things easier. I have a hat with strategically located holes in the brim so it won’t fly off. It’s called the Windy City Hat.

Q. What advice would you give someone to invent better?

A. You should never get enamored by your thoughts. If the idea does not solve a problem or move the quality of life farther, there are so many more things to be invented.

Q&As are edited for length and clarity.