Buy Photo Police scan the scene of an officer involved shooting in Shively Friday morning. Jan. 9, 2015. (Photo: Matt Herp, Special to the C-J)Buy Photo

The suspect in the Friday shooting of a Shively police officer has been identified as Kenneth R. Probus, 53.

Probus is in serious condition at University of Louisville Hospital, according to Dwight Mitchell, LMPD spokesman.

Shively police officer Wes Singleton was shot four times in the legs Friday in a shootout with drug suspect Probus. Singleton underwent surgery Friday evening and he is expected to recover. He was reported in stable condition at University Hospital on Saturday.

He was wounded around 11 a.m. Friday while attempting to serve a narcotics search warrant at a residence in the 4100 block of Eden Lane. Shively police said the house had been the subject of an ongoing investigation and sent nine officers to deliver the search warrant. They had only been on scene only briefly when a man inside the house began shooting. Police shot back, striking the suspect.

Probus is listed as the co-owner of a house at 4113 Eden Lane, according to Jefferson property valuation records.

Singleton, 31, is a six-year veteran of the Shively police department and is married with a small child.

On Friday evening, Shively Police chief Kevin Higdon thanked the public for their support. Louisville Metro Police's Public Integrity Unit is handling the investigation and would deal with charges against the injured suspect.

LMPD spokesperson Phil Russell said a woman that he identified as Loretta Harris was arrested and charged with trafficking in a controlled substance after the Friday morning exchange of fire. She was arrested on a warrant but was not charged in connection with the shooting.

Police said they found less than two grams of methamphetamine after searching the male shooting suspect's house in Shively. Harris is being held at the Metro Corrections Department.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Louisville Metro Police Department Sgt. Phil Russell updates the media on the shooting that involved a Shively officer. Matt Herp, Special to CJ

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1OYqrvY