Billings, MT

A Billings family picked up a dangerous hitchhiker on the way back from Yellowstone National Park.

A grizzly bear latched onto the family's car just outside of Cooke City and the entire experience was caught on camera.

"There's a bear on my car, oh my gosh!" says one woman sitting in the vehicle.

In a rare bear encounter, one Montana family sat face to face with a grizzly.

"They were just grazing mostly on the grass and weren't bothering anybody," said David Peters, the driver of the vehicle. "Then one of the bears decided to check out one of the cars across the street and he did. Then he dropped down and bee-lined right for our vehicle."

David Peters said the experience behind a few inches of glass was really more exciting than scary.

"It wasn't really scary for me and my wife; we'd seen bears before," said Peters. "The bears didn't show any sign of aggression, they were more curious than anything else."

But what the camera doesn't show is that Peters was outside of the vehicle, snapping pictures of the bears.

As one bear came toward the vehicle, Peters sneaked around the back and hopped in the back seat.

"I was kind of playing this which way is he going with the bears," said Peters. "It's five seconds of inattention that was really not good. It could've been disastrous if that bear had come straight for me instead of the front of the car like he did."

He caught a lucky break.

Peters walked away from the incident with only a few minor scratches --- on his car, and an unforgettable memory caught on camera.

In the video, a young girl can be heard shouting: "He smells the beef jerky!"

"I asked my friend's daughter Elise if she thought she'd have nightmares over the whole thing," said Peters. "And she said 'Are you kidding me? This is the best day of my life ever!'"

Peters' car still has the scratch marks and mud smears from the bear's paws.

For now, Peters said his wife won't let him wash the evidence of the story away.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.