The White House is decked out with 62 Christmas trees and more than 70,000 ornaments — ready for what will be tens of thousands of visitors in the coming weeks.

Most of the decorating is done each year by volunteers from all over the country who apply for the chance to deck the halls of America's house. Each year, hundreds apply but fewer than 100 get the chance.

Christina Donovan and her fiance Trevor Smith both submitted applications this year. The couple runs a design company that includes holiday decorating.

They said they had agreed that "we would support each other if only person went, the other person would go to museums all day."

And at first, it looked like that could happen. She says her fiance got his email confirmation from the White House first.

"And I was waiting. And I was waiting," she said. "And I was, you know, very happy and proud for him."

Twenty minutes later, the suspense was over. Donovan and Smith helped decorate the Blue Room including the official White House Christmas tree. And, Smith said, the East Colonnade where they hung a whole lot of paper snowflakes.

"It was long work. It was tedious work, anchoring all 8,000 snowflakes," he said. "But it was absolutely wonderful and ... when it was all done just the impact of the entire hall was just breathtaking I think."

Fact check: It is breathtaking.

Donovan and Smith said they were "truly honored" to have the opportunity to help decorate the White House. And even though they didn't get to meet the first lady, they said they were able to meet presidential dogs Bo and Sunny.

Andrea Marks from Spotsylvania, Va., who helped decorate the Red Room, said "This is one that I will never forget."

"It's not like walking through and doing the tour," she said. "It's being a part of it and seeing how it comes together. And I have learned so much decorating skills now. So now I know how to decorate. I had to come to the White House to learn how to decorate."

Marks can be forgiven for not knowing how to decorate when she arrived. She spent a career in a field where tying bows and straightening garland isn't required — as a 30-year combat veteran of the U.S. Army.

She grew up in Jamaica and England and came to the U.S. when she was 17. Back then, she said, "I was a teenager in a foreign land looking for what to do next in life." After speaking with a young woman who said she was going to join the Army, Marks said she asked her "What do they do in the Army?"

"She said, 'girl you get to travel, wear a uniform and meet people.' I said, 'How you sign up?' Thirty years and 11 days later, I retired. That's my story," Marks said.

Marks retired as a command sergeant major, the second-highest enlisted rank in the Army. "So we were in Iraq, Afghanistan, Djibouti ... Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan — yeah, we were everywhere."

And now the White House.

For Cheryl Forbes, an elementary school vice principal from New York City, there was a moment when the experience of decorating the White House got very real, and exciting.

"I made ornaments for the Oval Office," she said. "The garland for the tree we made in the Oval Office. And I was just like astounded."

It was a blessing she said. An experience she will never forget.



Copyright 2015 NPR. To see more, visit http://www.npr.org/.

Transcript

SCOTT SIMON, HOST:

The White House is decked out with 62 Christmas trees and more than 70,000 ornaments, ready for all the visitors in the coming weeks. Most of the decorating is done each year by volunteers from all over the country who apply for the chance to deck the White House halls. NPR's White House correspondent Tamara Keith introduces us to a few of them.

TAMARA KEITH, BYLINE: Each year, hundreds of people apply to be volunteer decorators at the White House. Fewer than 100 get the chance. Christina Donovan and her fiance, Trevor Smith, both submitted applications this year.

CHRISTINA DONOVAN: We had agreed originally that we would support each other if only one person went. The other person would go to museums all day.

KEITH: And at first, that's what it looked like was happening. She says her fiance got his email confirmation from the White House first.

DONOVAN: And I was waiting, and I was waiting. And I'm the - you know, very happy and proud (laughter) for him.

KEITH: Twenty minutes later, the suspense was over. Donovan and Smith helped decorate the Blue Room, including the official White House Christmas tree, and, Smith says, the East Colonnade, where they hung a whole lot of paper snowflakes.

TREVOR SMITH: It was long work. It was tedious work but, you know, anchoring all 8,000 snowflakes. But it was absolutely wonderful, and it was just - when it was all done, just the impact of the entire hall was just breathtaking.

KEITH: Fact check - it is breathtaking. Andrea Marks from Spottsylvania, Va., helped decorate the Red Room.

ANDREA MARKS: This is one that I will never forget because it's not like doing - just walking through and doing the tour. It's being a part of it and seeing how everything comes together. And I have learned so much decorating skills now. So now I know how to decorate. I had to come to the White House to learn how to decorate.

KEITH: Marks can be forgiven for not knowing how to decorate when she arrived. She spent a career in a field where tying bows and straightening garland isn't required.

MARKS: I am a 30-year combat veteran of the United States Army.

KEITH: She grew up in Jamaica and England and came to the U.S. when she was 17.

MARKS: And when I came to America, I was a teenager in a foreign land looking for what to do next in life. So I walked around the high school and asked everybody what they were going to do. And a young lady said, I'm going to join the Army. I said, what they do in the Army? She said, girl, you get to travel, wear a uniform and meet people. I said, how do I sign up? Thirty years and 11 days later, I retired. That's my story.

KEITH: Marks retired as a command sergeant major, the second-highest enlisted rank in the Army.

MARKS: So we were in Iraq, Afghanistan, Djibouti, Africa, Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain, Kyrgystan, Uzbekistan (laughter).Yeah, we were everywhere.

KEITH: And now the White House. For Cheryl Forbes, an elementary school vice principal from New York City, there was a moment when the experience of decorating the White House got very real and exciting.

CHERYL FORBES: I made ornaments in the Oval Office. The garland for the tree we made in the Oval Office. And I was just, like, astounded.

KEITH: It was a blessing, she said, an experience she will never forget. We have pictures of the decorations and the decorators on our website at npr.org. Tamara Keith, NPR News, the White House. Transcript provided by NPR, Copyright NPR.