A young patient is examined remotely by a doctor who can see his throat thanks to telemedicine and an "all-in-one scope." (Photo: Samantha Wainright for TeleHealth International Partnership)

Videoconferencing doctors from other areas could help solve the problem of hospital closings and doctor shortages that hit heavily rural states, but proponents say states move too slowly in allowing it.

This practice of telemedicine has been caught in a conflict between insurers, doctors and officials reluctant to allow physicians who haven't seen a patient in person — and may never follow up — prescribe drugs or treatment.

Nearly 30 states don't allow reimbursement for video visits, which keeps doctors from practicing telemedicine. There's no organized opposition to the practice — the American Medical Association endorsed it in June — but state legislatures and medical boards have been slow to change rules and laws to allow it.

Alabama, Arkansas, Missouri, Nebraska and Texas are the most restrictive when it comes to patients in rural areas being treated by a doctor on video whom they haven't met in person, according to a study by the American Telemedicine Association, which supports expanding the practice.

USA TODAY reported last month that 43 rural hospitals have closed since early 2010 and that the closings often make it impossible for heart attack and stroke victims to get care within the hour recommended for treatment. Texas had the most closings with six, and Georgia and Alabama had the second-most, with five each, according to the North Carolina Rural Health Research Program.

Because many rural counties don't even have a primary care doctor, telemedicine is designed to link doctors or other health care providers, such as physician's assistants or nurse practitioners, with doctors in other locations who could treat a patient.

Many states worry that doctors who treat patients on video remotely may not do appropriate follow-up.

"All states want to guard against is the situation where I call up Dr. Smith, who I've never seen or talked to before and will never see or talk to again, and he prescribes me medicine," says Kevin O'Dwyer, attorney for the Arkansas Medical Board.

O'Dwyer says that when it comes to his state, telemedicine advocates often wrongly "paint a picture of a poor patient out in the middle of nowhere hundreds of miles from the closest medical professional." He says psychiatrists are the only specialists the state doesn't have enough of.

Despite some states' reticence, the AMA estimates more than half of states will try to establish or upgrade telemedicine laws and regulations next year.

Telemedicine would help hospitals avoid Affordable Care Act penalties levied when patients have to be readmitted within a month after discharge, proponents say. They say telemedicine is an obvious way for doctors to improve the quality of their care, which they are rewarded for doing under the ACA.

The AMA's board of trustees recently approved a series of model telemedicine bills that it hopes state legislators could introduce next year. The draft legislation covers state licensing and reimbursement for telemedicine services.

Eleven states have signed on to a compact developed by the Federation of State Medical Boards that would streamline the process for a physician interested in telemedicine to become licensed in several states.

Medicare and Medicaid will reimburse doctors in some video treatment situations, but some insurance companies resist telemedicine. Jay Sanders, an internal medicine doctor, says United Healthcare, Wellpoint and Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans have been most receptive. He predicts others will soon realize "if my patient can have telemedicine for $50 and keeps out of emergency, which costs $1,500, I'm going to reimburse for that."

Sanders was a young resident in Boston in 1967 when his professor came up with the idea to link patients at the medical center at Logan Airport with Massachusetts General Hospital through video, so they wouldn't be delayed in traffic.

In 1991, he began working with Gov. Zell Miller to connect Georgia's rural hospitals with the big medical centers in Atlanta. The effort helped turn Georgia into a model for statewide telemedicine.

"This technology can be so pervasive that states have got to catch on real quick," says Jimmy Lewis, CEO of Hometown Health, which represents rural hospitals in Georgia and Alabama. "The ACA is going to require such massive changes that the only way to keep up is to implement telemedicine."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1CW2xBj