By Danealia Maretka

Kaiser Permanente is failing its mental health patients. Last year the HMO was fined $4 million by state regulators because it systemically understaffed its psychiatry department, falsifying records to conceal the illegal appointment delays that resulted, and providing misleading information to its patients about the care available to them.

But rather than hire enough mental health clinicians — psychologists, therapists, social workers and psychiatric nurses — to provide timely, quality care in compliance with state law, Kaiser instead merely shifted its resources, directing us to see more first-time patients to give the illusion of timely access to care.

But after an initial appointment for diagnosis, Kaiser patients here in the Valley and at Kaiser clinics throughout the greater Los Angeles area are forced to wait weeks for follow-up appointments, making consistent, effective treatment difficult if not impossible. Due to insuffcient staffing, Kaiser frequently has to refer these patients out to Kaiser contracted mental health clinics and mental health clinicians to see these patients.

And the problem is getting worse as more patients come into the Kaiser system under the Affordable Care Act. Kaiser has enrolled 250,000 new members in California, but its staffing levels have not kept pace. As Kaiser shortchanges its mental health patients, the company is scoring record profits year after year — more than $14 billion in the past five years.

Last month, Kaiser mental-health workers proposed that the HMO establish clinician–management committees in each facility to determine staffing levels and outsourcing needs with help from a mediator if the two sides cannot reach agreement. Other healthcare systems already used this approach, but Kaiser rejected it completely.

When our patients aren’t getting the care they need in our increasingly corporatized healthcare system, it’s our job to stand up for them. That’s why we’re striking this week and picketing Kaiser medical centers in the San Fernando Valley, Los Angeles, Orange County, and many other locations throughout California. We have exhausted all other means of persuading Kaiser to meet its legal ethical obligation to provide the timely, quality care its members pay for with their monthly premiums.

Kaiser is a leader in the healthcare industry. As Kaiser goes, the industry goes. With its huge profits, Kaiser can and must do better.

Danealia Maretka, a licensed marriage and family therapist, has worked for Kaiser since 2003 in Reseda.