A bipartisan group of Senate appropriators are negotiating a supplemental package for the Zika virus, which is expected to be offered on the Senate floor, Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Thad Cochran (R-Miss.) said Thursday.

The leaders of two subcommittees, Sens. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.), Patty Murray (D-Wash.), Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) and Pat Leahy (D-Vt.), are negotiating the proposal, Cochran said at a committee markup.

“My expectation is that this proposal will be offered to an appropriations measure on the Senate floor in the near future.”

Ranking member Sen. Barbara Mikulski (D-Md.) said action must take place by July 1.

“I hope that we have one, an agreement, and work hard to develop it, and number two, we actually pinpoint a vehicle that will occur sooner rather than later to be able move it,” she said.

Speaking to reporters Thursday, she declined to elaborate on the package, saying, “It’s too early to talk about details.”

Blunt, who is chairman of the Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education and Related Agencies, said the senators are close to reaching the right amount of funding for the outbreak.

“The goal here is not to get an emergency supplemental on just any bill, but to be sure we get it on a bill to get it to the president’s desk,” Blunt said. “I respect your decision that today might not be the right day to put it on these bills, but we’re all going to be working jointly to find a way not just to say we put this on an appropriations bill and it’s out there.”

It’s still unclear whether the movement in the Senate will spur any additional movement in the House, though. Appropriations Chairman Rep. Hal Rogers (R-Ky.) told reporters Thursday that he still did not know what was included in the Senate package.

When asked if House Republicans would agree to additional funding on top of the Ebola funds the administration has already transferred to use for Zika, Rogers said, “I don’t know yet.”

Rogers has said House Appropriations Committee staff are working on a supplement for Zika, but the Obama administration still has not sufficiently responded to questions about how the funding would be used.