Topics: GOP, Republicans, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, Speaker Boehner, U.S. House of Representatives, U.S. Senate, News, Politics News

The first fully GOP-controlled Congress in nearly a decade is almost on their five-week recess and off to the town halls of their local districts to face their constituents, the American people, who recently gave Congress a measly approval rating that often can’t even hit double digits.

When Republicans campaigned last fall to wrestle control of the Senate from the Democrats, they promised a grand makeover, attempting to shed their image of obstructionists lying in opposition. After the elections, their 54 seats in the Senate and overwhelming majority in the House would be enough, the argument went, to bring productivity back to Washington. In a Wall Street Journal op-ed the morning after their election night victory, newly minted Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and House Speaker John Boehner vowed to “honor the voters” by “focusing, first, on jobs and the economy.”

“The first thing we need to do is demonstrate we heard what the voters were saying on Nov. 4. To me, they said we want you to function and we want you to solve problems,” Texas GOP Sen. John Cornyn, the number two Republican leader in the Senate, told CNN in January. Days later, Boehner faced a revolt in his chamber, with 25 conservative Republicans voting against his re-election.

Republicans promised to get off to a fast start but after an ill-fated GOP strategy to fight President Obama’s executive orders on immigration threatened to shut down the Department of Homeland Security in February just as the terror group ISIS made headlines for a gruesome mass beheading, any hopes for a functioning legislative body were quashed. Boehner had, after all, promised to fight “tooth and nail” the executive action allowing roughly 5 million undocumented workers to remain in the U.S.

DHS was ultimately funded.

In March, Senate Republicans hijacked a bipartisan bill against human trafficking to impose new limits on abortion because — jobs?

“The terrible, horrible, no good start for GOP,” headlines read as Republicans reached their first 100 days in office, seeing only two bills become law — a terrorism insurance measure and a veterans suicide prevention bill, both of which were left over from the year before.

Now as they head off to summer recess, Salon takes a look at just some of the broken promises Republicans will have to explain to their base supporters, supporters who have spent a summer being fed right-wing red meat by the likes of presidential candidates Donald Trump, Sen. Ted Cruz and the rest of the circus:

Keystone XL pipeline

“If we have a new majority next year, and a new majority leader, the Keystone pipeline will be voted on on the floor of the Senate, something the current majority has been avoiding for literally year.” – Sen. Mitch McConnell

The Keystone pipeline, which would carry oil from the tar sands of Canada to the Gulf of Mexico, did win congressional approval. But President Obama eventually vetoed a bill that would have approved construction of the controversial oil pipeline, the first major veto of his administration. For their part, Republicans in the Senate, failed to encourage enough Democrats to go against the White House and override the veto in March.