AAMC's worried about subpoenas for fetal tissue researchers

ACADEMIC MEDICAL COLLEGES "DEEPLY TROUBLED" BY HOUSE FETAL TISSUE PROBE — The Select Investigative Panel on Infant Lives wants more information about researchers involved in studies of human fetal-tissue. And its leader says she's not getting enough help from the health care industry.

“Unfortunately, some of these organizations have so redacted documents — even after being subpoenaed — that it is impossible for us to get the complete picture of what is actually going on,” Chair Marsha Blackburn said after the panel issued eight more subpoenas this week.

Story Continued Below

— Critics say the panel is intimidating, not investigating. The Association of Academic Medical Colleges says it's worried — especially because the House's latest subpoenas may involve names of graduate students, administrative and support staff and other people who may not have much or anything to do with the work.

"[The] panel has provided neither compelling reasons for the need to collect this information, nor any assurances that it would be adequately safeguarded," the association writes in a letter to Blackburn and the panel's ranking member, Rep. Jan Schakowsky. "AAMC-member medical schools and teaching hospitals remain very concerned for the safety of their scientists, physicians, staff, students, and patients, particularly in light of the heated debate surrounding the issue of fetal tissue research."

See the letter: http://bit.ly/1UXhzi8

— Why researchers are so concerned. Being publicly linked to fetal tissue studies puts people at risk of personal attacks, such as being compared to Nazis — or worse.

"This really isn’t about science,” Edward Halperin, chancellor and CEO of New York Medical College, told POLITICO's Brett Norman last year. “This is really people making a point about abortion and it's outrageous.” Read the story: http://politi.co/235T9oi

MEDICARE BUNDLED PAYMENT PROGRAM STARTS TODAY — It’s unclear how many providers are ready for the move, as Pro Health Care’s Erin Mershon points out, but there’s little doubt it will test the abilities of hospitals, doctors and rehab centers to share patient information and coordinate care. Medicare’s Comprehensive Care for Joint Replacement program hopes to save about $153 million, or 1.2 percent of the $12.3 billion the agency is expected to spend on knee and hip replacements over the next five years. More from Erin: http://politico.pro/1RML4mH

WHITE HOUSE PLANNING A MEASLES 'MISSION TO MARS' — Inspired by Vice President Joe Biden's cancer "moon shot" initiative, rumor has it that officials are planning an even bigger initiative to tackle America's resurgent measles problem, to be led by senior adviser April Fools.

THANK GOODNESS IT'S FRIDAY PULSE — And just to be extra-clear, that last section was a joke. A prank. There's no "Mission to Mars" initiative … and thankfully the editors let me have this measly pun. Send groans and tips to ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

WHAT CMS FOUND OUT ABOUT THERANOS — The agency's inspection report — which the Wall Street Journal obtained in full — found that quality-control checks on Theranos' blood-testing devices routinely failed the company's own standards. For instance, 29 percent of quality-control checks failed in October 2014, and 24 percent failed in February 2015.

More bad news: Theranos also employed unqualified personnel and failed to follow proper quality-control procedures, CMS concluded. And many patient test results were inaccurate.

"This is the first time that we’ve actually seen data from the Theranos instrument, and it’s as bad as one would have worried it would be,” Weill Cornell Medical College pathologist Stephen Master told the Journal. “Based on this data, it’s hard for me to believe that they went live with this instrument and tested patient specimens on it." http://on.wsj.com/1UXFj5Z

ICYMI: ONLY ONE-THIRD OF HEALTHCARE.GOV ENROLLEES KEPT THEIR PLAN — That's according to a new analysis of 2016 enrollment from Avalere Health, which notes that it's the second straight year in which only one-third of exchange customers kept their plan.

There are different ways to think about this: Two-thirds of exchange customers every year are likely to shop around. That puts pressure on insurers to offer competitively priced premiums, but also complicates efforts for ongoing chronic care management.

WHAT WE LEARNED ABOUT OPIOIDS YESTERDAY — POLITICO Pro's Health Care Briefing on the U.S. opioid epidemic focused on the culture of prescribing — specifically how doctors approach pain treatment — and moderator Joanne Kenen summarized some of the key takeaways from the panel of experts:

· The opioid conversation is focused on chronic misuse — but the problem really begins with the first prescription

· Physicians don't want strict limits on what they can and can't prescribe

· Payers are willing to partner with physicians to help change how they practice

· Prescription drug monitoring databases can play a key role in helping disseminate information, but the databases need improvement

· The national interest in opioids has changed rapidly — much faster than the experts expected

Watch an archived video of the briefing: http://politi.co/1UvYLGR

See the working group report: http://politi.co/1VTlBaWw

CDC SAYS PEDIATRIC AUTISM LEVEL IS HIGH — BUT IT ISN'T GETTING HIGHER — That's according to a CDC report published yesterday in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report Surveillance Summary. The report shows that about 1 in 68 school-aged children have been identified with autism spectrum disorder, which is essentially no change in ASD prevalence from the previous report released in 2014. See the report: http://1.usa.gov/1ZOIBI4

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

ALMOST NINE PERCENT OF JOBS ARE IN HEALTH CARE — That's according to a Bureau of Labor Statistics report on employment and wage data released this week, which found that 12 million people worked in health care as of May 2015. (That number has gone up by about 400,000 jobs in the past 11 months.) Registered nurses alone accounted for more than 2.7 million jobs last year. http://1.usa.gov/1UG4w58

Mean hourly wages

· Surgeon: $119.00

· Family and general practitioners: $92.36

· Registered nurse: $34.14

· Home health aide: $11.00

NEW HAMPSHIRE LOOKS LIKELY TO KEEP MEDICAID EXPANSION — The state Senate yesterday voted to continue Medicaid expansion through 2018, easily overcoming opposition from Republicans in the upper chamber, Pro's Rachana Pradhan reports. The bill, which passed on a 16-8 vote, now goes to Democratic Gov. Maggie Hassan, who made reauthorization a major priority this year.

— But what happens after that? New Hampshire is seeking a waiver to continue the program beyond this year, and part of the state's request is for a work requirement - something the Obama administration has never approved - and copays if enrollees visit the emergency room for non-emergency purposes. However, the legislation includes a clause to ensure that the program won't end if CMS rejects a work requirement, a provision that some Republicans criticized heavily.

MEDICAL MILESTONE: JOHNS HOPKINS SUCCESSFULLY TRANSPLANTS ORGANS BETWEEN HIV-POSITIVE PATIENTS — Surgeons at the Baltimore health system yesterday performed the nation's first liver and kidney transplants between an HIV-positive donor and recipients. The groundbreaking surgery is expected to help expand the pool of potential organ donors and speed transplants to HIV-positive patients. http://bsun.md/1pOTtck

THE STORY OF THE WEEK … is Bloomberg's deep dive into whether Johnson & Johnson hid evidence that using its baby powder is a cancer risk: http://bloom.bg/1UXsqZt

THE PODCAST OF THE WEEK … is Slate's Amicus podcast on Zubik v. Burwell, where host Dahlia Lithwick spends 30 minutes breaking down the case with special guest Paul Clement — who was fresh off arguing on behalf of the plaintiff — and Walter Dellinger, acting solicitor general in the Clinton administration. It's very much worth a listen: http://slate.me/1VcMyG0

— Dellinger was unimpressed with the Supreme Court's performance. "What came clear to me at the argument is that they did not understand women’s reproductive health," Dellinger said. "They did not understand Obamacare. They did not understand how health insurance works. And I’m not sure which of those was worse."

ON TAP TODAY — CDC hosts its one-day Zika Action Plan Summit to discuss how local, state, federal, and non-government officials can coordinate a response to Zika. … The Center for Medicare Advocacy hosts the 2016 National Voices of Medicare Summit and Senator Jay Rockefeller Lecture at the Kaiser Family Foundation Building. … Universities Allied for Essential Medicines will hold a rally outside of PhRMA's office

ON TAP NEXT WEEK — The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget on Monday morning holds its 2016 Mortimer Caplin Conference on fiscal issues facing the next president. The Senate HELP Committee on Tuesday will convene to mark up five pieces of legislation related to research and medicine.

HOW TWO HEDGE FUND 'QUANTS' WERE ABLE TO DIAGNOSE HEART DISEASE — They built an algorithm that's proved as effective as a cardiologist when analyzing MRI images of the heart. http://on.ft.com/1Y2QOqO

WHAT WE'RE READING

Jonathan Cohn details how big pharma is making big dollars off the business of sleep: http://huff.to/1M4WVKs

Only one country offers health care to migrants, regardless of their immigration status: Thailand. http://n.pr/1RBb4Mo

The Blue Cross Blue Shield report that got a lot of ink this week wasn't especially shocking, Margot Sanger-Katz writes: Of course enrollees under the ACA exchanges were sicker and more expensive than their counterparts: http://nyti.ms/1ZPmEIZ

The Advisory Board's Rob Lazerow explains how hospitals have prepared for today's launch of mandatory bundled payments: http://bit.ly/1RB9OZw

More on the shocking allegations that the CEO of a for-profit hospice company was telling nurses to kill patients: http://thebea.st/1M51Lra

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **