"Now this problem is going to travel to communities that are not prepared or aware of it." - Rep. Lou Barletta

MECHANICSBURG — U.S. Rep. Lou Barletta says he is concerned that thousands of unaccompanied illegal immigrant children being housed at the U.S. border will be relocated to communities across the country — including Pennsylvania — without being properly processed.

Barletta said U.S. authorities must first ensure the children are given medical and background checks and then determine who will pay for the relocation. Barletta said he is concerned with the reported increase in infectious diseases at the border.

"I'm one who believes we need to stop this flow before the problem gets greater," said the Republican congressman Tuesday in Mechanicsburg.

"Sixty-five thousand minors could turn out to be 165,000 if the federal government continues to work hand in hand with the drug cartel that is making money transporting these kids to the U.S."

In the past several months, U.S. immigration authorities have scrambled to deal with a surge of unaccompanied children from Central America who have been left at the border or have crossed into Texas. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security has sought to hire chaperones for upward of 65,000 children.

Barletta, who will travel Thursday to Texas for a firsthand assessment of the situation at the border, became closely involved in the topic this week, when the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants was making inquiries about relocating the children to Hazleton, the congressman's hometown.

An official with the nonprofit based in Arlington, Va., on Tuesday confirmed that Hazleton had been scratched from the list of possible relocation destinations.

Stacie Blake, a spokeswoman for the nonprofit, said the organization, which closely works with the U.S. State Department and the federal Department of Health and Human Services, will continue to explore community options, including some in Pennsylvania. The tide of unaccompanied children at the border corresponds to increased violence in parts of Central America, Blake said.

"When you see those patterns, you realize it's a humanitarian and migration crisis related to violence," she said.

Barletta is critical of the Obama administration, which knew in January of the mounting crisis, for failing to handle it properly.

"Why now, six months later, are we looking for shelters if we knew these children were coming," said Barletta, who represents the 11th Congressional District.

"Why were we not prepared with shelters in place at the border? Now this problem is going to travel to communities that are not prepared or aware of it. It will become their problem."

News that the organization was considering a former corrections facility in downtown Hazleton as a possible relocation site was swiftly met with opposition, not only from Barletta but from several municipal leaders, according to a report in the Wilkes-Barre Times Leader.

Blake urged understanding and compassion from federal and local officials.

"These are children in need of protection," she said. "They don't, on a whim, decide to travel thousands of miles alone in such a treacherous situation."

She said regardless of anyone's opinion on immigration, the children are now part of an established immigration system and deserve to be processed properly.

"We want to avoid a knee-jerk reaction and send these children back without asking questions about safety and returning them to a dangerous situation," Blake said.

"This is a nation of immigrants. We have welcomed lots of different types of folks for lots of reasons over the course of our history. Whoever our ancestors were they benefited by coming to the U.S. seeking protection. We think it's important to maintain that value at this time."

The organization, Blake said, has been working with the federal government for 10 years to place vulnerable immigrant children in temporary shelters and foster care.

Blake said nearly all of the children considered vulnerable had been traumatized. Ninety-five percent of the girls had been raped, and most of the boys had seen a member of their family killed or had been threatened with violence.

Blake said the some of the children will qualify for protection under U.S. immigration law because they've been trafficked or abused.

"This is a long-standing protection policy. It's nothing new," she said.

Children who do not qualify for the protection will be deported, she said.

"Our No. 1 goal throughout this process is protecting children," she said. "They are children they are fleeing a horrible desperate situation."

Barletta said he will continue to demand that U.S. authorities handle the crisis properly and provide answers to questions from local and nationally elected officials.

"I want questions answered before they begin to transport them anywhere - proper screening and medical and backgrounds, what's the plan, who will pay and what the cost will be to local governments," Barletta said.

Barletta was in Mechanicsburg to receive the Legislator of the Year award from the National Volunteer Fire Council. Barletta was an outspoken congressional advocate for volunteer firefighters this year who fought against a mandate in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act that would have required preventing volunteer fire companies and emergency response agencies to pay for health care coverage.

Barletta was presented with the award at the Washington Fire Company by Fairview Township firefighter Bob Timko, who first alerted Barletta to the problem in 2013.