Rather than a five-week sprint to the finish, candidates for the 42nd Canadian federal election will have to endure an 11-week marathon.

Prime Minister Stephen Harper officially asked Governor General David Johnston to draw up the writ on Sunday, launching an election campaign that will last more than two months and conclude with a vote on Oct. 19.

In Brantford-Brant, like most of the country, the race already started a while ago.

“It’s been unofficially on for well over a month in our riding,” incumbent Conservative MP Phil McColeman said. “I’ve felt it’s been full campaign mode for some time now. The only difference going forward is that we’ll be able to put up signs."

McColeman is facing a second challenge from 2011 runner-up Marc Laferriere for the NDP, as well as Liberal newcomer Danielle Takacs. The Green Party’s Kevin Brandt and Libertarian party’s Rob Ferguson are also in the race and have experience from last year’s Brantford municipal election.

Putting up lawn signs was first on the agenda for Takacs. Her team drove out to the home of former Ontario Liberal leader Robert Nixon on the eastern border of the riding within hours of the start of the campaign on Sunday.

Nixon, who is also former Brant MP Jane Stewart’s father, asked for the first Takacs lawn sign following the formal start of the election.

“I was so excited when the request (from Nixon) came through,” Takacs said. “I thought it was a very creative way to connect the old and the new. To have his support is inspiring and keeps me motivated on the target."

Takacs said they were poised and ready for the start of the early campaign. Her team planned to have a load of signs out over the weekend.

She said the official start didn’t signify any big shift in what her team has been doing.

“Nothing has changed,” Takacs said. “That’s how our campaign sees it. Everybody knew this was coming and knew it was coming early.

“We’ve already been busy getting my name out there and talking to people."

Takacs said she has been working hard to connect with the electorate as a first-time candidate.

“I have been proving to people that I have the skills to fight for them and I am ready to be the next MP,” she said.

Takacs has worked inside the Liberal party – federally and provincially – since she was inspired by former Brant MP Jane Stewart to join the Young Liberals club.

Those years of work with the party have helped her make many Liberal connections.

She has brought in six Liberal MPs – Scott Simms, Adam Vaughan, Carolyn Bennett, Frank Valeriote, John McCallum and John McKay – for visits to Brantford-Brant since the start of the year.

“It was a really great feeling to bring somebody like Adam Vaughan – who you know has a say in the Liberal platform – and have them walk away and say the visit to Brantford was worthwhile (for policy development),” Takacs said. “It is exciting for me to then come back and show (the platform) and how we contributed to it in Brantford."

Former prime minister Paul Martin is next to visit. He and Takacs will meet with representatives from Six Nations and the Mississaugas of the New Credit on Aug. 21.

The local NDP campaign has been busy for a while now. They were the first to open a local campaign office in April.

The team took the Civic Holiday weekend off, knowing that the campaign would likely be launched.

“We’ve asked all our local volunteers to take Sunday and Monday off to be with their families and enjoy summer,” Laferriere said in a statement on his website. "Family should always come first."

In the same statement, Laferriere took the Conservatives to task, calling the extended election wasteful and unfair.

"It would give them a chance to outspend the other political parties under new rules brought in by the Conservatives ‘unfair' elections act,” Laferriere said. "Welcome to big money in local politics."

The longer election period means political parties can spend closer to $50 million on the campaign. The usual five-week campaign caps spending at closer to $25 million.

Laferriere said a longer election also means additional taxpayer costs to fund Elections Canada offices and staff for twice as long as usual.

“(It is) the longest election period since 1872, when candidates and leaders had to travel by train or horse and buggy to campaign,” Laferriere said. "In the information age we all live in now, 78 days is just too long, too expensive and completely unnecessary."

McColeman said the longer election period should have some benefits.

“This provides for a much greater opportunity for more Canadians to participate in the political process,” he said. “Some people tend to just sit out the short election periods. But this allows for an extended opportunity to jump in and get involved."

McColeman, who was first elected in 2008, said one of the main issues for the campaign locally will be about continuing to provide for the needs of the communities.

“That is what continues to be expressed to me throughout my years as MP,” he said. “We need to make sure the needs of the city, county and two First Nations are a high priority.

“A lot of that recently has been for the federal government to recognize and participate in the shared expense of infrastructure and shared expense of programming.”

Takacs said she has been hearing at the doors that Brantford-Brant voters want a representative that will fight for them.

“I’ve been getting a lot of comparisons to Jane Stewart, which is really special for me,” Takacs said. “She is the one who inspired me to get involved."

Takacs singles out farming and agriculture, affordable hosting and building positive relationships with natives as three issues that she expects to resonate in Brantford-Brant.