Soasta Inc. Chief Executive Tom Lounibos Soasta Inc.

Cloud testing vendor Soasta Inc. has raised new funding and hired new executives in preparation for more growth, Venture Capital Dispatch has learned.

The company raised $15 million in debt from Hercules Technology Growth Capital, taking total funding to $78 million, and added chief financial and chief strategy officers.

CFO Pete Boyes joined Soasta in September from ID Analytics Inc., where he was both CFO and chief operating officer. ID Analytics was acquired in March 2012 by the identity protection vendor LifeLock, which went public a few months later.

CSO Gamiel Gran, who also joined in September, is a former partner at Sierra Ventures and ran that firm’s annual summit for chief information officers, where executives from some of the world’s largest companies gather to discuss tech trends.

“CIOs are scared,” Mr. Gran said. “They come to this event around the idea of access to innovation, and it’s scary to someone who’s running operations [because innovation] breaks things…What do you do to retain your job? To survive?”

Soasta was founded in 2006 with the idea that cloud computing would be very important. Companies and government agencies that are expecting a spike in Web usage use Soasta’s tools to simulate a big online event and see if their infrastructure will hold up.

The company says it monitors more than 110,000 significant revenue-producing websites around the world, has thousands of users for its free tools and about 400 paying customers, including Best Buy, Netflix and NASA, which used Soasta when it broadcast the landing of the Mars Curiosity rover over the Web in 2012.

Soasta also did testing for the 2012 London Olympics and the 2014 Sochi Olympics and now has a 10-year contract with ATOS, the tech provider of the Olympic Games. It offered services to Healthcare.gov after that website’s troubled launch but was declined because it wasn’t an approved contractor.

“It’s like landing a 747 into SFO, and you could add fog. That’s what we do for developers,” said co-founder and Chief Executive Tom Lounibos.

Plans for growth include international expansion and more support for mobile apps and sensors in anticipation of a burgeoning market for the Internet of Things.

Canaan Partners General Partner John Balen, who’s on Soasta’s board, said the company is growing fast enough that it can well afford to take on debt, and that it’s a smart way to maximize capital in an environment with “extremely attractive costs.”

Although Soasta’s chief competitor is still Mercury Interactive, which Hewlett-Packard acquired in 2006 for about $4.5 billion, newer companies like New Relic Inc. and AppDynamics Inc. that monitor the performance of Web applications have drawn new attention to the whole space, he said.

New Relic, which booked $85 million in sales for the 12 months ending Sept. 30 and has filed to raise about $105 million on the New York Stock Exchange, is expected to start trading as a public company on Friday. AppDynamics, which is private, said it expects to surpass $160 million in annualized bookings.

“You think testing, who cares, and lo and behold, people are paying attention to it,” Mr. Balen said.

Soasta has no plans to raise more money, Mr. Lounibos said. Valuation is more than $200 million. Other investors in Soasta include Macquarie Capital, ROTH Capital, Formative Ventures and Pelion Venture Partners.

CORRECTION 12/16/14: This story was changed to correct Soasta’s role with the Olympic Games. The company has a 10-year contract with ATOS, the tech provider of the Olympic Games. An earlier version of this article incorrectly state that the company had a contract with the Olympic Games.

Write to Deborah Gage at deborah.gage@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @deborahgage