What If: A Republican and Democrat weigh in on the real-estate mogul's candidacy.

Donald Trump (Photo: Getty Images)

We asked two experts to weigh the impacts if Donald Trump represents the GOP in the 2016 presidential race.

----------------------------

TRUMP DOESN'T REPRESENT US

Lorna Romero (Photo: handout)

You may as well ask, “what if the GOP just throws in the towel for 2016?”

Seriously, if my fellow Republicans pass up our party’s numerous (perhaps too numerous) qualified candidates in favor of Donald Trump, they are basically handing the White House to Hillary Clinton. Shudder.

With “The Donald” and his outsized ego as the nominee, there may not even be room on the GOP ticket for a VP pick.

ROBERTS: How the GOP could have saved itself from Trump

Regardless, it would be a dream come true for Democrats. No need to spend time and resources dragging Trump’s reputation through the mud when he’s been doing that job quite nicely all on his own, thank you very much. Alienating Latinos. Juvenile name-calling. Boorish antics. This is the guy my Republican Party intends to nominate?

I don’t think so.

Trump does not reflect the values and priorities of the GOP in 2016. Sure, he can get a crowd fired up on illegal immigration, but he has not brought anything productive to the debate. “Secure the border” is not a strategic plan any more than “sell lots of stuff” is a business plan.

Don’t get me wrong, illegal immigration and border security are critically important. Immigration fixes are long overdue. But we need a GOP nominee capable of leading a rational conversation without drifting into the kinds of petty mocking that has marked Trump’s campaign thus far.

If we really want to Make America Great Again, as Trump sported on his baseball cap while visiting the U.S.-Mexico border, then we need to send “The Donald” back to his penthouse in Manhattan.

Lorna Romero is associate director at Veridus, LLC, and former senior aide to Gov. Jan Brewer.

----------------------------

A FLIP-FLOPPER WON'T WIN

Barry Dill (Photo: handout)

If Donald Trump is the GOP presidential nominee we can expect at least four more years with a Democrat as president.

However, please don’t get overly enthusiastic, my fellow Democrats. Donald Trump’s chances of winning the GOP nomination are about equal to an ice cube surviving an hour in the summer Phoenix sun.

You see, at one time Trump was pro-choice but now says he isn’t. He hates Obamacare but has supported universal health care.

He says he support veterans then disparages the character of U.S. Sen. John McCain, a bonafide war hero. While McCain was tortured as a POW during the Vietnam War, Trump obtained three deferments.

He says he is opposed to gun control but supported banning certain weapons.

In 2013 he said he was for traditional marriage but said his views on same-sex marriage are evolving. By the way, he considers his two divorces and three marriages as “traditional.”

He supported Hillary Clinton for president in 2006 and gave money to the Clinton Foundation.

Not exactly a platform that mainstream Republicans are looking for.

My Republican friends' heads are spinning at the thought he may win the nomination. He is an opposition researcher’s dream candidate.

What really leaves my GOP friends depressed, and my Democrat colleagues rejoicing, is the possibility that Trump will lose the GOP primary and run as an independent. That is a much more likely scenario, which would split the GOP vote and ensure another Democrat victory.

Many things have been said about Trump recently, but the Des Moines Register really hit the nail on his terribly coiffed head: “He’s a feckless blowhard.”

Barry Dill is a partner at First Strategic Communications and Public Affairs.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1S2GQab