The Associated Press

6:15 p.m. (CDT)

U.S. House Speaker John Boehner says he's "shocked and saddened" by allegations against former House Speaker Dennis Hastert.

An indictment issued Thursday in Chicago accuses the Hastert of agreeing to pay $3.5 million in hush money to keep a person from the town where he was a longtime schoolteacher silent about "prior misconduct."

A person familiar with the matter tells Associated Press reporter Eric Tucker that payments from Hastert were an apparent effort to conceal decades-old allegations involving sexual misconduct.

The person spoke on condition of anonymity because the investigation is ongoing and the allegations are not contained in the indictment.

Hastert and Boehner are both Republicans.

Boehner released a statement saying, "The Denny I served with worked hard on behalf of his constituents and the country."



5:30 p.m. (CDT)

A person familiar with the matter tells Associated Press reporter Eric Tucker that payments from former U.S. House Speaker Dennis Hastert were an apparent effort to conceal decades-old allegations involving sexual misconduct.

The person spoke on condition of anonymity because the investigation is ongoing and the allegations are not contained in an indictment issued Thursday.

The specific nature of the allegations was not immediately clear.

An indictment issued Thursday in Chicago accuses the Republican of agreeing to pay $3.5 million in hush money to keep a person from the town where he was a longtime schoolteacher silent about "prior misconduct."

3:50 p.m. (CDT)

Wheaton College says former U.S. House Speaker J. Dennis Hastert has resigned from the board of the Christian school's public policy and government center that bears his name.

The resignation was the latest fallout from a federal indictment accusing Hastert of violating banking laws. The indictment alleges Hastert was paying hush money to keep someone silent about "prior misconduct."

The college is home to the J. Dennis Hastert Center for Economics, Government and Public Policy. The center was established in 2007, when Hastert stepped down from Congress after eight years as speaker.

12:20 p.m. (CDT)

Plans to honor former U.S. House Speaker Dennis Hastert with a $500,000 statue at the Illinois Capitol were put on hold earlier this month after he asked that they be shelved because of the state's budget crisis.

Illinois House Speaker Michael Madigan filed legislation on May 5 to set aside the money to honor Hastert, a former Republican Illinois congressman.

But Madigan spokesman Steve Brown says Hastert called about a month ago "and said he appreciated the recognition and honor, but asked us to defer given the state's financial condition."

The legislation filed by Madigan, a Democrat, hasn't seen movement since May 14.

Hastert was indicted on federal charges Thursday that accuse him of violating banking laws.

11 a.m. (CDT)

U.S. Sen. Mark Kirk of Illinois says anyone who knows former U.S. House Speaker Dennis Hastert is "shocked and confused" by news of his indictment.

The Republican says it's a "troubling development" and more details are needed.

Hastert, a former Republican Illinois congressman, is accused of violating banking laws as he withdrew money after agreeing to pay someone $3.5 million to pay someone to keep quiet about "past misconduct."

Kirk released a statement released Friday morning, saying Hastert should be given his day in court considering the serious accusations. Kirk says his thoughts are with Hastert's family.



[READ: Dennis Hastert's Hush Money Scandal Deserves Further Investigation]

10:30 a.m. (CDT)

The U.S. attorney's office in Chicago says former U.S. House Speaker Dennis Hastert has not been arrested following charges linked to allegations he agreed to $3.5 million in hush money.

Prosecutors' spokesman Kim Nerheim says an initial court date will be set soon by a federal judge. A new court docket names U.S. District Thomas M. Durkin as the presiding judge in the Illinois Republican's case.

Nerheim says defendants are typically not arrested "unless they are considered a flight risk." She declined to comment on details of Hastert's case.

Thursday's indictment charges the 73-year-old with breaking banking laws as he withdrew money to pay someone to keep quiet about "past misconduct." He's also charged with lying to the FBI.

The indictment doesn't detail the alleged misconduct by Hastert.

10:25 a.m. (CDT)

Officials with the northern Illinois school district where former U.S. House Speaker Dennis Hastert worked from 1965 to 1981 say no one has contacted to district to report any misconduct involving him.

In a statement released Friday, officials with Yorkville Community Unit School District #151 say they were made aware of the indictment when it was released publicly on Thursday and they have no knowledge of any alleged misconduct.

District officials say they'll cooperate in any investigation if asked by the U.S. Attorney's office.