"I hope I die before I get old" - Pete Townshend of the Who



In 1965, the Who’s Peter Townshend penned the immortal line, “I hope I die before I get old.”

Coincidentally, that’s also the year that Medicare was created. It hasn’t held up as well as the song. And that prompted bioethicist Ezekiel Emanuel write a piece for the Atlantic headlined “Why I Hope to Die at 75.”

“By the time I reach 75, I will have lived a complete life,” he wrote. Emanuel went on to say that he doesn’t actually intend to check out at 75, but he does intend to forego any extraordinary measures that would artificially extend his life. He doesn’t want to become a burden on those younger than him.

Good for him, I say. But then I’m a conservative

As for all of those people who objected to Emanuel’s piece on the grounds that there should be no limits on end-of-life spending under Medicare, I don’t know what you’d call them. They’re certainly not conservatives.

They were all over the internet last week repeating some variant on this mantra: “End-of-life decisions should be between the patient and the doctor.”

That’s like saying your decision on what sort of car to buy should be between you and your car dealer. Fine - if you’re paying for it. Buy yourself a Porsche.

But if I’m paying for it, you’re getting a Ford Taurus – and a used one at that.

By that standard, there would be about 10,000 Tauruses on the road for every Porsche. Most of these people are under the mistaken impression they’ll be paying their own way when they’re over 65. Nonsense. In America, those on Medicare do not pay anywhere near the full cost of their insurance. And that is causing it to go bankrupt.

That comes from a more serious work on the topic released last week, a 500-page study titled “Dying in America” by the National Academy of Sciences.

“Despite popular misconceptions, Medicare is funded by current contributions and revenues,” the study states. “In general, beneficiaries have not fully ‘paid in’ during their working years for the benefits they later ‘take out.’ In 2010, for example, a one-income, average-wage couple took out more than $6.00 in Medicare benefits for every $1.00 paid in.”

If the government’s picking up 83 percent of your medical bills, it’s silly to say the government should have no say in what services you receive. Yet that’s what a writer on the putatively conservative American Thinker site did last week. M. Catharine Evans attacked the study’s authors for suggesting that patients should be counseled on cheaper options when they’re ready to check out.

“A lot of God-fearing Americans do not want a bunch of right-to-die doctors deciding when life should end or engaging in death conversations with their children,” Evans wrote.

Fine. Pay your own hospital bill. Nobody’s stopping you. But unless you’re one of the Buffetts – Warren or Jimmy – you probably can’t afford $100,000 or so a week to be treated in an intensive care ward as you await your appointment with St. Peter.

However the idea that the government should pick up that tab represents nothing more than an endorsement of the system in effect in Townshend’s country, socialized medicine. The difference is that in England they accept that in return for low costs they get low-quality care. They get Mini-Cooper care on a Mini-Cooper budget. Here, people want Porsche-level care on a Taurus budget.

This point is lost on the sort of boobs who are given voice on the internet. The comments on that American Thinker article quickly descended into a violation of “Godwin’s Law,” the rule that the thread must stop whenever a commenter descends into Nazi comparisons. Of the hundreds of commenters, only one made sense:

“The best medical care gets better (and more expensive) every year,” the guy wrote. “Ten thousand people a day turn 65. Good thing printing presses and paper are no longer needed to mint money, we would run out of ink.”

Exactly. If we ever returned to the gold standard - as Republican Senate candidate Jeff Bell proposes in his uphill battle against incumbent Cory Booker - we’d have to make massive cuts to Medicare. Add a balanced budget amendment and Medicare simply couldn’t continue to exist in its present form.

But that won’t happen. The politicians will keep pandering to my generation. As for future generations, they better hope they die before they get old.



COMMENTS PLEASE STICK TO THE TOPIC: I noted that a lot of commenters are going off on tangents about private insurance, Obamacare, etc. Those comments belong elsewhere. This column is about Medicare and Medicaid, as is the report I noted. You can find a copy of it here.

dying in america.pdf

It's 500 pages and I don't expect you to read the whole thing. But please read at least the summary and some chapter headings before commenting.

.