The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has a "lack of confidence" in how to handle the Ebola crisis hammering the nation, says former GOP congresswoman Dr. Nan Hayworth, who hopes to retake New York's 18th District which she lost to Democrat Rep. Patrick Maloney."Unfortunately there is a lack of confidence and this is the latest in a series of confidence-challenging maneuvers or statements or actions," Hayworth said Wednesday on "the Steve Malzberg Show" on Newsmax TV "There was this reassurance that was really quite firm: it's not going to come to the U.S. Now, I as a doctor listening to that … don't know quite know how it couldn’t come to the United States since we have modern day air travel."And now that it is in this country, we are a much more mobile population than the folks in most of West Africa. So it really is seriously time to stem that flow from the source."Hayworth discussed her concerns just hours after the CDC revealed that a second Texas nurse who treated the first U.S. Ebola case has contracted the virus. And Hayworth is urging that tough travel restrictions be enacted."We do have to have travel restrictions. As a doctor, I know having worked with patients who have infectious diseases, this disease can be transmitted through droplets," she said."So the problem is someone who has the active virus sneezes or throws up or has other fluids coming out of his or her body, those who are exposed to the droplets in the air could become ill."So we really need to treat this and it's a very deadly disease. It's not like catching a cold, so we need to treat this with a much higher level of seriousness and we do have to have travel restrictions."Asked by Steve Malzberg why she is running for her old seat again, Hayworth said:"I know we can do so much better … Congressman Maloney, has voted 80 percent of the time with the president and with the congresswoman he'd like to make speaker of the House again, Nancy Pelosi."That in our district is a pretty disastrous record and people are suffering from burdens that needn't be there."She said Republicans in Congress must do more to help Americans."I'd like to see them lift burdens from the folks who are suffering the most and that is folks in our middle class, working families, small businesses, our mainstream mom and pops," she said."The Affordable Care Act, Obamacare, people's premiums are unaffordable. The deductibles are unaffordable and our current congressman supports that entire agenda."Try to get a loan or a mortgage from a community bank or a community lender. Very difficult to do."Hayworth, an ophthalmologist, came out of nowhere to overcome several more established Republicans for the nomination in 2010 to represent the district, which includes West Point and towns on both sides of the Hudson River, an hour's drive north of New York City.A political newcomer, Hayworth was a favorite of the Hudson Valley's growing tea party movement.Hayworth unseated Democrat Rep. John Hall in 2010, but two years later, as President Barack Obama was demolishing Mitt Romney in New York, Hayworth lost to Maloney by a slim margin — 52 percent to 48 percent.