Kentucky labor leaders are trying to slow the state’s momentum toward a right-to-work law that would let Kentuckians opt out of paying union dues.

With Republican Gov.-elect Matt Bevin taking office next week, circumstances aren’t rolling in union bosses’ favor. Bevin was elected by a nine-point margin after campaigning on making Kentucky a right-to-work state.

Republicans control the Kentucky Senate, and the Democratic majority in the Kentucky House shrank to six when Louisville Rep. Denny Butler switched parties.

Kentucky Senate President Robert Stivers told the Louisville Courier-Journal more than a dozen other House Democrats have flirted with the idea of jumping ship. Kentucky House Speaker Greg Stumbo is a firm opponent of right-to-work.

Because all of the House members hoping to remain in office are up for re-election next November, Bevin’s big victory will loom over Democrats during the state legislative session starting Jan. 5.

In a right-to-work debate with Jim Waters of the free-market Bluegrass Institute on WEKU 88.9 after the election, Kentucky AFL-CIO president Bill Londrigan insisted forced union dues were necessary to cover unions’ representation costs.

Calling right-to-work “a way for big business to try and strangle unions so we can make less wages and bargain less contracts,” Londrigan suggested workers who don’t want to be forced to pay unions should quit their jobs and find work with non-union employers.

Right-to-work is “all about whether you can control the political system so you can turn back the clock on workers,” said Londrigan — who was paid $77,079 in 2012, based on the latest available Kentucky AFL-CIO IRS return.

As part of the Kentucky AFL-CIO’s efforts to bolster the Stumbo wing of the Kentucky House, the union federation is circulating an online petition mimicking Londrigan’s accusations about right-to-work.

Sign the petition: STOP Matt Bevins "Right to Work" in Kentucky https://t.co/AhcKeTr5nH — Kentucky AFL-CIO (@aflcioky) November 17, 2015

“The ultimate goal of ‘Right to Work’ is to break unions so businesses can lower pay and benefits to workers,” the petition claims. “It has nothing to do with your right to work!”

“It takes away benefits and opportunities from our family, pension, retirement, etc.,” the petition to stop right-to-work continues.

Right-to-work laws in no way prevent workers from organizing unions, joining unions or negotiating for pay and benefits. The creator of the petition did not respond to questions from Watchdog.org.

RELATED: Labor bosses’ big loss could bring right-to-work to Kentucky

Julia Crigler, state director of free-market activist group Americans for Prosperity, told Watchdog.org right-to-work should be supported by Republicans and Democrats alike.

“Right-to-work is supported by more than 58 percent of Kentuckians, on both sides of the aisle; lawmakers should be eager to support a policy that has popular support across party lines and is proven to grow jobs,” Crigler said.

In an AFP Kentucky poll conducted in March, 80 percent of respondents said workers “should not be forced to join a union or pay dues to one they don’t support.”

From January 1995 through August, six of the 10 states with the worst private-sector job growth were states without right-to-work laws. Indiana and Michigan — which both passed right-to-work in 2012 — were in the bottom 10, as well.

The seven states with the fastest private-sector job growth from January 1995 through August were all right-to-work states, a review of seasonally adjusted data from the U.S. Department of Labor shows.

During the same period, Kentucky’s job growth ranked 34th of the 50 states and Kentucky’s labor force had the second-worst decline in the nation.

“Frankfort needs to realize that November was Kentuckians demanding more opportunity and if legislators cannot deliver pro-growth policies they should be prepared to play musical chairs, because seats will change,” Crigler added.

Contrary to heated union rhetoric and warnings of political fallout for right-to-work backers, voters in Indiana, Michigan and Wisconsin have continued supporting lawmakers who helped pass right-to-work laws in each state.