President Obama claps along to the music as he arrives with first lady Michelle Obama for services honoring the life of Rev. Clementa Pinckney on June 26, 2015, at the College of Charleston TD Arena in Charleston, S.C. (Photo: Carolyn Kaster, AP)

President Obama just had one of the biggest weeks of his presidency: Supreme Court decisions on Obamacare and gay marriage, legislative victories on trade and a widely acclaimed speech in Charleston, S.C.

But that still leaves Obama with 82 weeks left in his presidency, and much of his agenda still undone.

"He is genuinely determined to try to make the most of every day that he has remaining here at the White House," press secretary Josh Earnest said last week. "A lot can get done in 18 months, and the president is determined to use every single day to try to advance many of the priorities that he believes we need to make additional progress on."

Even with Congress firmly in Republican hands for the rest of his presidency, Obama hopes there are some bipartisan proposals he can get through Congress. But he's also stepped up his use of unilateral executive action in the last few years, and he'll be defending some of those in court. And like other second-term presidents, Obama will turn to foreign policy in an attempt to burnish their legacies.

Here's a list of major accomplishments Obama would like to get done before his successor is sworn in:

Climate change: The United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris this year will seek to achieve legally binding reductions in carbon emissions across the globe. Obama will almost certainly attend, building on a tentative climate deal with China last year. By casting climate change as an economic and national security issue, he's elevated it to a unique position among his second-term priorities.

Iran nuclear deal: Obama's efforts to negotiate a peaceful resolution to Iran's nuclear ambitions faces its next test this week, as six world powers attempt to ink a final accord. Questions remain about how Iran will verify its compliance and what sanctions Western powers will roll back. Then, Congress will hold what will likely amount to a symbolic vote of no confidence on the agreement.

Islamic State: Obama has made clear that he'll measure the fight against extremists in Syria and Iraq in years, not weeks. Obama approved sending 450 more advisers for the effort this month, but explicit congressional authorization for the mission has been slow in coming.

Trade: Obama's big legislative victory on trade last week was almost entirely procedural. He still needs to negotiate the United States entry into Trans-Pacific Partnership — a 12-nation trade accord that would reduce tariffs and standardize labor regulations along the Pacific Rim. The trade promotion authority passed by Congress last week requires Congress to give that finished trade deal an up-or-down vote.

Criminal justice reform: An unusual coalition of liberal Democrats and libertarian Republicans are working on proposals to reduce mandatory minimum sentences, especially for drug crimes. Obama has said there's a unique window of opportunity to act while the crime rate — and the incarceration rate — are at their lowest levels in 40 years.

Government spending: Obama and Republicans are headed for another showdown over spending. The president is threatening to veto any spending bill — defense-related or domestic — that keeps 2011-era spending caps in place.

Tax changes: This would seem to be difficult to accomplish with the president and Congress so far apart on key aspects of tax policy. But the two sides actually agree on some points — especially on corporate taxes. "There's been some discussions about whether or not we can close some tax loopholes and use revenue from those closed loopholes to invest in infrastructure," Earnest said last week. "There is some indication that Republicans, at least in principle — some Republicans in principle would support an idea like that."

Gun control: When Obama spoke to reporters the day after the Charleston shootings, many observers said he seemed resigned that nothing would happen as long as the National Rifle Association remained a powerful lobby on Capitol Hill. Not so, Obama said the next day. " I want to be clear — I am not resigned. I have faith we will eventually do the right thing. I was simply making the point that we have to move public opinion. We have to feel a sense of urgency. Ultimately, Congress will follow the people."

Immigration: With any changes to immigration law bogged down in Congress, Obama has taken the unilateral route by delaying deportation to 11 million undocumented immigrants. But that plan has suffered several setbacks in court, delaying implementation.

Cybersecurity: Just a year ago, cybersecurity was a buzzword reserved for policy wonks and corporate IT departments. But a series of high-profile data hacking incidents — from retailers to movie studios to the federal government's own employee database — have put it at the top of the White House agenda. Obama is asking Congress for cybersecurity legislation even as he tries to manage an increasingly serious crisis in his own administration.

Cuba: The Obama administration is still negotiating several remaining issues — including freedom of movement for its ambassadors — before finalizing a historic agreement to reinstate normal relations with Cuba.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1NqZX77