Access Community Trust welcomes its first Lowestoft tenants

Access Community Trust have renovated the Beconsfield House building on Surrey Street, Lowestoft. The building provides accomodation for vulnerable young people. Â©archant2014

An inspirational project that provides affordable homes for young people in Lowestoft welcomed its first tenants in time for Christmas.

Email this article to a friend To send a link to this page you must be logged in.

Access Community Trust have renovated the Beconsfield House building on Surrey Street, Lowestoft. The building provides accomodation for vulnerable young people. One of the accomodation rooms. Access Community Trust have renovated the Beconsfield House building on Surrey Street, Lowestoft. The building provides accomodation for vulnerable young people. One of the accomodation rooms.

Access Community Trust (ACT) worked with builder Craig Atkinson to convert the former Beaconsfield Conservative Club in Surrey Street in to flats for 16 to 25 year olds.

The first tenants moved in to the newly-renovated Beaconsfield House this month.

Many of the tenants have moved from the homelessness charity’s Phoenix House hostel, in Kirkley, which provides intensive support to help young people address their problems before moving on.

They are employed or in education and ready to take that next step towards independence – but their progress is often hindered by a lack of suitable and affordable accommodation in Lowestoft.

Access Community Trust have renovated the Beconsfield House building on Surrey Street, Lowestoft. The building provides accomodation for vulnerable young people. Amy Cross in her new Flat. Access Community Trust have renovated the Beconsfield House building on Surrey Street, Lowestoft. The building provides accomodation for vulnerable young people. Amy Cross in her new Flat.

ACT chief executive Emma Ratzer said: “The service is about demonstrating our commitment to 18 to 25-year-olds in Lowestoft and raising their aspirations.

“We recognise that to aspire to having a job or going back to college, you need to have somewhere nice to live.

“We wanted to give them an option other than staying at home or living in a hostel.

“The problem with a hostel is that the way it is set up financially, it doesn’t pay to stay there if you find work because the charges go up.

Access Community Trust have renovated the Beconsfield House building on Surrey Street, Lowestoft. The building provides accomodation for vulnerable young people. Lisa Hayler in her new flat. Access Community Trust have renovated the Beconsfield House building on Surrey Street, Lowestoft. The building provides accomodation for vulnerable young people. Lisa Hayler in her new flat.

“It is about having somewhere to live that’s affordable, nice and safe to rebuild their lives and aspire to education and careers.”

ACT has signed a 20-year lease with the owner of Beaconsfield House.

The conversion was carried out free by builder Mr Atkinson in return for percentage of the rent on the properties.

The accommodation includes 19 one-bed flats and a shared unit for four people.

Access Community Trust have renovated the Beconsfield House building on Surrey Street, Lowestoft. The building provides accomodation for vulnerable young people. Remell Davis outside his new home. Access Community Trust have renovated the Beconsfield House building on Surrey Street, Lowestoft. The building provides accomodation for vulnerable young people. Remell Davis outside his new home.

ACT staff are based on site at Beaconsfield House to provide support if needed, but the aim is for the young people to take control of their own lives and live independently.

Mrs Ratzer said the charity had launched the Access All Areas project, which incorporated Beaconsfield House, to address the findings of the 2012 report The Frustration of Aspiration.

The report has been put together by education and training specialists Ambitious Minds and pulls together a host of figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) to create a picture of the best and worst places to live when growing up.

Key factors include GCSE results, youth unemployment and house prices in relation to average earnings.

Lowestoft was ranked in the top 10 worst places to be a teenager in the report and is Mrs Ratzer said the town was a hot spot in the Eastern region for youth joblessness.

She said the charity was committed to continuing its work with young people, despite large funding cuts from Suffolk County Council.

• Amy’s story

Amy Cross, 19, spent six months living in Phoenix House after experiencing family problems.

She works full time as a carer at North Bay House care home in Oulton Broad and is enjoying her independence at Beaconsfield House.

She said: “I thought it was time to stand on my own two feet and learn how to do everything by myself.

“I did like the support from staff at Phoenix.

“I knew help was there when I needed it and all I had to do there was pay rent – meals and everything else were done for you.

“But I have to stand on my own two feet one day. And it is brilliant here. I love it.”

• Lisa’s story

Lisa Hayler, 24, moved to Phoenix House following family problems and is now settling in to her new flat at Beaconsfield House. She is studying maths at Seetec in Lowestoft and hopes to become a care worker.

She said: “I have been waiting since October for this place. We have all been excited for it. Before I was at Phoenix House. The staff have been very supportive and then they said I could come to Beaconsfield House to be independent, see how it goes from there and hopefully move on.”

• Remell’s story

Remell Davis, 19, moved to Beaconsfield House this month. Born in London, he lived with his uncle before moving to a hostel in Ipswich and eventually to Phoenix House in Kirkley, Lowestoft.

He said he had fallen out with his uncle and “messed up” at a number of hostels in Ipswich so Phoenix House had been his last option.

Since moving to Lowestoft and receiving support from Access Community Trust (ACT), Remell has secured an apprenticeship coaching children at Lowestoft Town Football Club.

The striker was also signed to the club’s first team in November.

He said staff at ACT, including senior support worker Janice Garvey, had helped him turn his life around.

“People have helped me, like Janice,” he said.

“Phoenix House was a good stepping stone for me. I probably would have been up to mischief otherwise. I don’t know what I would have been doing. I probably would have done something wrong.”

He added that he had been ready to move on from Phoenix House and Beaconsfield House had been what he was looking for.

“It is about having my own space,” he said. “I can go to bed when I want and it is more grown up.”

• There are still a number of vacancies at Beaconsfield House. Email Mrs Ratzer at Emma.Ratzer@accessct.org for further details.

• Have you got a Lowestoft story? Email kathryn.bradley@archant.co.uk