CHATTANOOGA, Tenn.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Bret S. Bissey, FACHE, senior vice president of Compliance Services of MediTract and a nationally recognized veteran in healthcare compliance, will address healthcare compliance officers, risk managers, legal counsel and other senior executives attending HCCA’s 19th Annual Compliance Institute, the pre-eminent healthcare compliance conference, in the breakout session “Compliance Post Affordable Care Act: Even More Important?” The breakout session, which takes place Tuesday, April 21, from 1 p.m. to 2 p.m. ET, will also feature former Assistant U.S. Attorney (Northern District of Texas) Sean McKenna, now partner in the Dallas office of Haynes Boone LLP, as well as experienced healthcare compliance attorney/consultant Kenneth Zeko, director of Navigant, Healthcare Disputes, Compliance and Investigations practice.

This session will focus on helping healthcare organizations more effectively manage risk through their compliance programs in the changing healthcare reimbursement landscape. The session will discuss the Affordable Care Act’s new and expanded tools to detect and prevent fraud, waste and abuse.

Attendees will learn tips to ensure their organization’s compliance program is effectively adhering to applicable rules and regulations. The speakers will share best practices and steps to avoid and mitigate enforcement action.

“Healthcare continues to be one of the most complex business models ever created. Understanding best practices to manage specific areas of high risk is critical to all components of today’s healthcare industry,” said Mr. Bissey.

“Compliance Post Affordable Care Act: Even More Important?” is included in the General Compliance and Hot Topics session track, which provides the basics of Compliance 101 to hot topics, such as healthcare reform. The track is geared toward healthcare compliance officers, regulators, outside counsel, in-house counsel, auditors, providers and industry experts.

About Bret S. Bissey

Mr. Bissey is a nationally recognized veteran in healthcare compliance. He began his career in healthcare compliance in 1997 and joined MediTract in September 2013. From 2010 to 2013, Mr. Bissey was the senior vice president, chief ethics and compliance officer of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, where he is credited with successfully re-engineering the nation’s largest sector compliance and ethics program under a rigorous Corporate Integrity Agreement (CIA) with the Department of Health and Human Services Office of Inspector General (DHHS OIG). He is the author of the Compliance Officer’s Handbook, published in 2006, and has presented at more than 100 regional and national industry conferences and meetings on numerous compliance topics. He has over 30 years of diversified healthcare management, operations and compliance experience.

Mr. Bissey was the chief compliance and privacy officer at Deborah Heart and Lung Center for nine years where he was responsible for overseeing the institution’s successful adherence to the defined requirements of a three-year (1999–2001) CIA with the DHHS OIG, which resulted in the nation’s first settlement using the voluntary self-disclosure protocol in October 1998. Under Mr. Bissey’s leadership, the Deborah Heart and Lung Center’s Compliance Program was recognized by The Health Care Compliance Association (HCCA) as best practice in 1999.

Mr. Bissey was the administrative director of Medicine at Lehigh Valley Hospital for nine years. He also served as the vice president of compliance and physician services for Cabot Marsh and the director of the IMA Consulting regulatory compliance practice.

Mr. Bissey earned his Master of Business Administration from Wilkes College in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania. He is a Fellow of the American College of Healthcare Executives (FACHE), certified by the Health Care Compliance Association and a member of the Healthcare Financial Management Association. He is a past president (2001-2003) for region two (New York, New Jersey, Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands) of the HCCA and has taught at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.

About MediTract

Founded in 2000, MediTract provides expertise, technology and consulting to assist in the management of contracts and other critical business documents in support of healthcare organizations’ compliance programs. MediTract is trusted by over 1,400 hospitals across the United States and creates contract management solutions and strategies for clients in services ranging from critical access to enterprise healthcare systems and more.

MediTract’s team is highly trained in the field of medical contract compliance. MediTract’s healthcare experts hold Certified Healthcare Compliance (CHC) certifications, enabling them to better guide their clients to the solutions they seek for healthcare compliance. By having these CHC certifications, the company is prepared from top to bottom to help deliver successful contract life cycle management solutions.