MOREHEAD CITY — State residents now have a better idea of what federal health care reforms are going to cost, in terms of individual coverage.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina, the only insurer in the state that has applied to serve all 100 North Carolina counties on the Affordable Care Act’s health insurance exchange, announced on Thursday pricing information for its ACA-compatible products for individuals.

Starting Oct. 1, those who don’t have health care coverage on the job can go to new online insurance markets in their states to shop for a private plan and find out if they qualify for a tax credit. An estimated four out five individuals in the new markets will be eligible for some level of tax credit.

Come Jan. 1, virtually all Americans will be required to have coverage, or face fines. At the same time, insurance companies will no longer be able to turn away people in poor health.

More than 30,000 or about 20 percent of the population 64 and younger in Carteret, Craven and Jones counties are now uninsured, according to Enroll America, a nonprofit health care-enrollment coalition. About a third of that total reside in Carteret County alone.

BCBSNC plans to offer 26 plans on the exchange, including plans at every metal level and catastrophic options for those who qualify.

Catastrophic plans have higher deductibles and will be available for consumers under age 30 and those who receive “hardship exemptions.”

Bronze plans cover 60 percent of health care expenses; silver plans 70 percent; gold 80 percent; and platinum 90 percent.

All plans cover the same benefits, but bronze features the lowest premiums, paired with higher deductibles and copays. Platinum plans would have the lowest out-of-pocket costs and the highest premiums.

Mid-range silver plans are considered the benchmark, because the tax credits will be keyed to the cost of the second-lowest-cost silver plan in a local area.

Statewide average rates for those plans range from about $185 per month for a 25-year-old under BCBSNC’s bronze plan to $947 per month for a 60-year-old under the platinum plan.

Catastrophic plans will range from $145 for a 25-year-old to as much as $431 for a 60-year-old.

Consumers can visit bcbsnc.com/bluemap for a summary of how the ACA might impact them, including whether they might qualify for a subsidy.

Blue Map will be available online until Sept. 15.

Consumers can also speak directly to BCBSNC representatives at one of a number of ACA informational events being held across the state.

“Health reform is complicated, and it affects everyone differently. We want to help North Carolina consumers understand how they will be affected and provide information to support them in making the best decision for their personal situation,” said Barbara Morales Burke, BCBSNC vice president of health policy and chief compliance officer.

Meanwhile, a study released Thursday by the nonprofit Kaiser Family Foundation found that government tax credits would lower the sticker price on a benchmark “silver” policy to a little over $190 a month for single people making about $29,000, regardless of their age.

By pairing their tax credit with a stripped-down “bronze” policy, some younger consumers can bring their premiums down to the range of $100 to $140 a month, while older people can drive their monthly cost even lower – well below $100 – if they are willing to take a chance with higher deductibles and co-pays.

A separate study released Wednesday from Avalere Health, a private data analysis firm, took a wide-angle view, averaging the sticker prices of policies at different coverage levels.

Before tax credits that act like a discount, premiums for a 21-year-old buying a mid-range “silver” policy would be about $270 a month, the Avalere study found. List-price premiums for a 40-year-old buying a mid-range plan will average close to $330. For a 60-year-old, they were nearly double that at $615 a month.

The Obama administration, which is running the markets or taking the lead in 35 states including North Carolina, is not expected to release final premiums until close to the Oct. 1 launch date. But the two private studies provide an early look at the emerging market.

Caroline Pearson, lead author of the Avalere study, said it will be competitive, but there will be big price differences among age groups, states and even within states.

The bottom line is mixed: Many consumers will like their new options, particularly if they qualify for a tax credit. But others may have to stretch to afford coverage.

“We are seeing competitive offerings in every market if you buy toward the low end of what’s available,” said Ms. Pearson, a vice president of Avalere.

However, for uninsured people who are paying nothing today, “this is still a big cost that they’re expected to fit into their budgets,” Ms. Pearson added.

The Obama administration said consumers will have options that are cheaper than the averages presented in the Avalere study.

“We’re consistently seeing that premiums will be lower than expected,” Ms. Pearson said. “For the many people that qualify for a tax credit, the cost will be even lower.”

The Kaiser study found that while premiums will vary significantly across the country, they are generally coming in lower than forecast by the government’s own experts. It cautioned against comparing premiums under President Obama’s law to what individually insured people currently pay, because the new coverage is more robust.

Avalere crunched the numbers on premiums filed by insurers in 11 states and Washington, D.C. Kaiser analyzed 17 states and the District of Columbia. Both studies included a mix of states running their own insurance markets and ones in which the federal government will take charge.

The states analyzed by Avalere were California, Connecticut, Indiana, Maryland, New York, Ohio, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Vermont, Virginia and Washington.

In addition to those, Kaiser included Colorado, Maine, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico and Oregon.

No data on premiums were publicly available for Texas and Florida – together they are home to more than 10 million of the nation’s nearly 50 million uninsured people – and key to the law’s success.

However, Ms. Pearson said she’s confident the premiums in the Avalere study will be “quite representative” of other states, because clear pricing patterns emerged.

People with modest incomes may come out ahead by sticking with a silver plan instead of going for the lower premiums with bronze. Additional help with out-of-pocket costs like co-pays will only be available to people enrolling in a silver plan.

Although the sticker price for premiums rises dramatically above age 40, the tax credits are shaping up as a powerful equalizer for older consumers. That’s because they work by limiting what you pay for premiums to a given percentage of your income.

For example, someone making $23,000 would pay no more than 6.3 percent of his or her annual income – $1,450 – for a benchmark silver plan. The amount you pay stays the same whether the total premium is $3,000 or $9,000.

However, those tax credits taper off rapidly for people with solid middle-class incomes, above $30,000 for an individual and $60,000 for a family of four.

The Avalere study also found some striking price differences within certain states, generally larger ones. In New York, with 16 insurers participating, the difference between the cheapest and priciest silver premium was $418.

For those who get their health insurance through an employer, the impact will be depend on your employer’s company size and whether they have a grandfathered or non-grandfathered health insurance plan.

Talk with your employer’s benefits administrator to find out whether they have a grandfathered or non-grandfathered plan.

In 2014, all employers with more than 51 employees will be required to offer health insurance that supplies minimum essential coverage.

Smaller employers won’t be required to offer coverage, but if they do, it will need to provide new and expanded essential health benefits. These benefits meet the minimum essential coverage requirements.

Health care reform means new and expanded health benefits in 2014. For example, small groups providing essential health benefits will now include dental and vision care for a child, as well as habilitative care, which involve services that help people acquire, maintain or improve skills and functioning for daily life. Plans will have an annual cap on out-of-pocket expenses, estimated at $6,350 for individuals and $12,700 for a family, the maximum allowed by the ACA. This doesn’t include premium costs.

Note that the changes for 2014 become effective when employers renew their coverage in 2014 and not necessarily on Jan. 1, 2014.

If your employer coverage isn’t “affordable,” meaning the cost is more than 9.5 percent of your salary, you may be eligible for subsidies.

Some small group employers may elect to offer coverage though a small group exchange called the SHOP (Small Business Health Options Program).

SHOP is simply a place to enroll in qualified health plans offered by your employer. In 2015, you’ll have the ability to select between insurance carriers and compare benefits if your employer chooses to use SHOP.

For more information, go to www.healthcare.gov.