Amnesty supporters have followed a very particular playbook. Like drug legalization activists, their argument is about legalization as the only alternative to the 'impossibility' of enforcing the law.

Now enforcing the law isn't impossible. Or at least it wasn't until judicial activists, assorted left-wing activists and politicians conspired to make it as difficult to enforce as possible. This is fairly typical of the left's pro-crime policy approach.

The argument now being trotted out is that we can't possibly deport 11 million illegal aliens (let's skip over the debate over what the actual number is for the moment). It's not logistically impossible, as some are claiming, but that argument is also a distraction.

To understand that, let's imagine that instead of talking about outlawing cocaine, we assemble the number of people who use cocaine. That current number is around 2 million.

The argument then shifts from the danger of cocaine to the "impossibility" of locking up 2 million people. Why if we lock up all the cocaine users in the country, we would double the prison population. Clearly the only thing to do is legalize cocaine and let the drug dealers come out of the shadows.

Obviously this is a silly argument.

The emphasis in criminal matters is not arresting and locking up every single person who is guilty of X. It is investigating and punishing known violations, and, more importantly, dismantling the infrastructure that makes them possible.

The issue isn't deporting 11 million people in one night. It's enforcing the law. Once that's done, the number of illegal aliens will drop significantly through self-deportation and there will be a mechanism for dealing with those who continue to break the law.

There will never be zero illegal aliens in America, or zero murderers, rapists, crackheads, bicycle thieves or campaign consultants. Zero evil is not a realistic prospect in human nature.

Zero crime is a strawman. The argument that if we can't achieve zero cocaine use or zero illegal aliens, then the whole thing is doomed and we ought to legalize is a dishonest argument. Flip it around and we can just as easily direct it to murderers or rapists. We can never get rid of all of them, so why prosecute any?

This should not be in any way confused with an amnesty argument. The whole point is that there is no reason to split the difference when we're enforcing the law. It doesn't mean that we deport some and legalize others. It means that we deport those we can on an ongoing basis as part of an enforcement process the way that we do with most sorts of crimes. And, it means we get serious about fighting illegal migration, the way that we got serious about fighting drugs.

It means that we enforce the law.

Yes it's going to mean a bigger government. But what exactly do you think legalizing and putting tens of millions on social welfare does? The "libertarians" arguing against amnesty don't have a problem with all the extra bureaucrats who will be hired on to process their EBT cards, ObamaCare and Earned Income Credit payments. And securing the border, unlike handing out freebies to Democrats, is a legitimate function of government.