Berlin--German Chancellor Angela Merkel may have won another decisive four-year term yesterday in Berlin, but not everyone in the Eurozone is happy about it

The 59-year-old Merkel is only the third person since the end of World War II to occupy Germany’s highest office three times. Although she was expected to win, the size of her victory is a ringing endorsement of her policies, credited in Germany with saving the eurozone.

RELATED: ‘MAMA’ MERKEL MAY WIN GERMANY BUT NOT THE EUROZONE

Merkel came close to winning an absolute majority of German voters, falling just short of a threshold that would allow her center-right Christian Democratic Union to govern on its own. In the coming weeks, it will form a grand coalition with another party, most likely the left-leaning Social Democratic Party.

Appearing jubilant by her modest standards Merkel said last night in Berlin, “We are waiting for the final results. . . but we can already celebrate today, because we really did well. This is a fantastic result.”

THE GERMAN JUGGERNAUT

Unemployment in Germany was close to 12 percent when she took office in 2005. Now, it hovers at 5 percent. Germany is by far the strongest economy in Europe – and Merkel is Europe’s undisputed leader.

Her austerity policies and her pragmatic leadership style are also credited with saving the European Union. In debt-plagued countries like Greece and Portugal, she’s been vilified for forcing economic hardship. But her refusal to take radical stimulus action to stem the crisis and her insistence on treading the middle road are seen by many as the reason the European Union still exists.

Still, her pragmatism, along with her refusal to lead forcefully, is seen by many as her greatest weakness. Her failure to firmly grasp the mantle of European leadership leaves the eurozone vulnerable to the same kinds of problems that caused the crisis in the first place. Many prominent thinkers within her own country also believe she is leading Germany down an unsustainable path.

Here are three reasons Merkel’s victory is bad not just for Europe, but for Germany as well: