After constructing a modest homestead cabin, the Spragues decided to go into the resort business leading up to the construction of this three-story log hotel. The covered wagon was used to bring tourists to the resort and was operated by Sprague's brother, Fred. ( Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park )

Abner Sprague and his wife, Alberta, were photographed shortly after their marriage. Sprague was 38 years old at the time. (Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park)

During his 91 years, Abner Sprague lived many lives, at least as defined in normal human terms. He was an explorer, pioneer, homesteader, rancher, civil engineer, resort owner, mountaineer and author.

Sprague's work was significant to the development of both Rocky Mountain National Park and to the town of Estes Park.

After constructing a homestead cabin in Moraine Park, he and his wife Alberta began to offer food to passing tourists. They built a rental cabin and one cabin grew into several as overnight accommodations were added to his ranching and sawmill operations.

Sprague constructed a large, log hotel as tourism became their primary source of income. The Spragues sold their ranch to J.D. Stead in 1904 and moved to Loveland.

Using his education in civil engineering, Sprague served three terms as Larimer County surveyor.

He and his wife Alberta missed the mountains and in 1908, purchased property in Glacier Basin where they constructed a summer cabin. Operating a resort was apparently irresistible, and in 1914, they complete a magnificent lodge located at the present-day site of the Sprague Lake parking lot. Sprague Lake was built as an added attraction to lodge guests.

As a young man, Sprague first came to the Estes Park area in 1868 when with two schoolmates. Heading into the unknown with 10 days of food, a roll of blankets, several firearms and fishing tackle, they rode their ponies toward Bald Mountain west of Loveland up to Rattlesnake Park (present day location of Pinewood Reservoir). Their adventure took them up Quillan Gulch and over the divide to the Little Thompson River drainage. They spent the night in a cabin constructed by Dave Likins, the only settler in that area.

Advertisement

They traveled to Little Elk Park and turned up the Little Thompson River into Muggins Gulch on the fourth morning. Sprague described this place as ringed with spruce trees and covered with wild flowers.

They came across the old wagon road built by Joel Estes and followed the ruts wondering where the road led. At the top of Park Hill, they saw the rugged mountains that would become part of Rocky Mountain National Park.

Sprague returned to this valley four years later with a large group of young men and women using three covered wagons.

When they reached Park Hill at the head of Muggins Gulch, those on horseback rode on to the cabin of Griff Evans. They asked Evans where they could camp, and he said anywhere for all was open land void of fences.

After riding around, they camped at the foot of Prospect Mountain. This would become the future site of the town of Estes Park and Sprague probably would find it impossible to imagine that he would survey the town in 1905.

Abner Sprague's first ascent of Longs Peak was in July 1874. With Alson Chapman, the two men carried a two-week supply of food plus bedding consisting of quilts. The food was supplemented by an abundant supply of trout from area streams.

This is the cottage in Moraine Park, constructed to replace the homestead cabin and provide a more livable abode for the newly married Abner Sprague. (Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park)

They rode horses up Wind River, past the present-day site of the YMCA of the Rockies, to the north side of Battle Mountain. They continued around the east side of Longs Peak continuing to ride to timberline. As night came, Sprague and Chapman built a fire at the base of a grove of stunted trees common at this elevation. Their beds consisted of pine boughs covered by a quilt. Wind-driven rain during the night and problems with their fire made sleeping difficult. By morning, they and their quilts were soaked. The men stretched their quilts out on the side of Battle Mountain hoping they would dry by the time they returned.

Jim Pickering, Estes Park historian laureate, points out the spring where Sprague's homestead cabin once sat. It was removed after J.D. Stead took over Sprague's Moraine Park resort. (Kenneth Jessen / Special to the Reporter-Herald)

At the Boulder Field, their horses could go no farther. High winds forced the two men to scramble up to the Keyhole on their hands and knees. After a little over three hours from their camp, they reached to flat expanse of the summit of Longs Peak.

On the summit was a tin can left by the Hayden party in 1871. They also found a tin can scratched with the name Anna E. Dickinson, the first woman to ascend the peak. Another can contained the names of the 1868 Powell party, the first Euro-Americans to climb Longs Peak. This ascent was made in 1868. Also included was a photograph of Major Powell, a Civil War veteran who had lost one arm. They discovered the name of Rocky Mountain News editor William Byers who was with Powell.

The names of the Hayden party had been pin-pricked on a tin plate and mounted to a stick. The stick was set into a mound of rock. Sprague and Chapman followed suite with their own tin plate with their names and the date of their ascent.

Abner Sprague, still in good health at the age of 74, decided to climb Longs Peak once again to mark 50 years since his first ascent. He knew it would be the last time he would reach the summit.

With a dozen others, they left in a fog from Sprague's Lodge in Glacier Basin at 6:05 a.m. They broke through the fog at timberline and looked down on a sea of clouds as far as they could see. When they reached the final phase of the climb, the party let Sprague be the first to reach the summit.

Later Sprague reflected on the climb and speculated, "I could not help looking at the top of old Longs in a new light. I saw the possibility of landing aircraft on the top." He concluded, "I hope they will leave old Longs to the hiker."

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years. For the coming year, his columns will focus mainly on the history of Rocky Mountain National Park.