Reprinted from THE AIS REPORT ON BLUE CROSS AND BLUE SHIELD PLANS , a hard-hitting independent monthly newsletter on new products, market share, strategies, conversions, financing, profitability and strategic alliances of BC/BS plans. (Not affiliated with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association or its member companies.)

In a lawsuit filed May 6, a former Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Dakota medical director contends he was wrongfully terminated in February in retaliation for pointing out insurance compliance problems and violations of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA). The suit was filed against Noridian Mutual Insurance Company, which operates the North Dakota Blues plan. In an unrelated development, a day after the suit was filed, Noridian’s board of directors voted unanimously to fire CEO Paul von Ebers after the company reported nearly $80 million in losses for 2013. The board appointed Tim Huckle, chief operating officer, to serve as interim CEO.

In the complaint, Kenneth Fischer, M.D., contends that the Blues plan regularly made overpayments to providers from self-funded employer group accounts. But instead of trying to recoup the overpayments, the insurer instead boosted premiums and increased out-of-pocket costs for employers and members. The suit also contends that previously denied claims were paid and that claims staff used “workarounds” to avoid fixing the root problem.

Recovering the overpayments is seen as “too big of an administrative chore,” according to Fischer’s attorney Patricia Monson. She tells The AIS Report that “they don’t have the claims processing system or desire needed to collect overpayments.”

Noridian dismissed the allegations as “baseless” in a seven-page response to the suit. The health plan operator wrote that elements of Fischer’s job performance were “concerning and unsatisfactory” prior to his termination. His “unprofessional, disparaging, arrogant and condescending treatment of his coworkers led to substantiated complaints about him,” the carrier wrote in its reply. In an email statement to The AIS Report, BCBSND spokesperson Denise Kolpack wrote the company “is confident that the claims made by the former employee contesting his separation from employment have no merit.” The preferred method of offsetting the overpayments was to increase premiums. However, Monson asserts that her client received the “highest possible performance evaluation” even after the complaint.

Monson says she has been contacted by attorneys for some of the Blues plan’s large self-funded employers. “They are very interested in having audits done of their accounts to see if overpayments were made from their money,” she says. Noridian denies the allegations.

The alleged violations were brought to the attention of North Dakota Insurance Commissioner Adam Hamm (D). Hamm’s office declined The AIS Report’s request to comment on the pending litigation or on Fischer’s allegations.

Monson says that some providers knew they were being overpaid. Mental health providers from one hospital reported that overpayments were being held in an escrow account with the expectation that the Blues plan would eventually ask to be reimbursed. “So they know they are sitting on money that they don’t deserve.”

Fischer had no prior experience with an insurance company and was hired by the Blues plan on Jan. 1, 2011, to serve as medical director of behavioral health, and by mid-2012 became actively involved in implementing elements of the Affordable Care Act within the company. One of his early responsibilities was to develop behavioral health guidelines that complied with the Affordable Care Act. Monson says her client faced a backlash when he tried to implement the 90-page guidelines that he had developed.

Interestingly, Fischer’s wife, Eunah Fischer, M.D., was hired by the Blues plan in 2010 as internal chief medical officer, and became chief medical officer in 2013. She is still with the company. The North Dakota Blues plan provides coverage to more than 400,000 North Dakotans and nearly 100,000 people outside of the state.

Noridian CEO Fired Over Exchange Debacle

Fischer’s lawsuit against Noridian was filed just one day after the company’s board of directors voted unanimously to fire CEO Paul von Ebers, effective May 2, after the company reported substantial losses for 2013. The May 5 decision came less than a week after the company reported that it lost more than $72 million last year. The loss is closely tied to the failed launch of Maryland’s public insurance exchange where subsidiary Noridian Healthcare Solutions LLC was the lead contractor. Maryland dropped Noridian Healthcare Solutions LLC as a vendor, and the state said it would adopt Connecticut’s exchange technology from Deloitte.

“The board felt it was necessary to make the change at the CEO level in order to ensure confidence in the future financial direction of the organization,” said Ann McConn, Noridian board chair.

Von Ebers was appointed CEO in 2009 after the company’s top executive, Mike Unhjem, was dismissed following a quagmire related to a company-sponsored island retreat (The AIS Report 8/09, p. 12). According to BCBSND, von Ebers was executive vice president and chief operating officer at Excellus Blue Cross Blue Shield and Univera Healthcare, both subsidiaries of Lifetime Healthcare Co., until 2009. He joined Excellus in 2005 as senior vice president of marketing. Tim Huckle, executive vice president of health operations, has served as interim president and CEO.

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a $50 discount on The AIS Guide to Blue Cross and Blue Shield Plans: 2014. (Not affiliated with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association or its member companies.)