The Air Force Academy Band will perform in Loveland on Dec. 6. Admission is free, but tickets are required. Pick up tickets at the Loveland Reporter-Herald. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: United States Air Force Academy Band. When: 3 p.m. Sunday, Dec. 6. Where: Thompson Valley High School auditorium, 1669 Eagle Drive, Loveland. Cost: Free. More info: Doors open at 2 p.m. Pick up free tickets (limit four per person) at the Loveland Reporter-Herald, 201 E. Fifth St. Call 669-5050 for details about tickets.

A group of men and women serve their country by playing music all over the country with the United States Air Force Academy Band.

The concert band and Falconaires jazz band from the Academy Band directed by Lt. Col. Daniel Price will perform in Loveland at 3 p.m. Sunday, Dec. 6, at The Thompson Valley High School auditorium, 1669 Eagle Drive.

Tickets are free and can be picked up starting Monday (Nov. 22) at the Loveland Reporter-Herald, which is sponsoring the stop in Loveland. The limit is four tickets per person.

"This is our holiday show," said Staff Sgt. Adam Porter. "We do everything from Santa coming up and kids coming on stage to a video from people that are deployed and sending messages home."

The unique concert will feature a variety of holiday tunes and jazz music.

"We pretty much have something for all ages," Porter, who plays tuba with the band, said.

Children will be invited on stage to meet Santa and have a story time with him about the Polar Express.

Advertisement

Porter said that service people from Colorado who are deployed overseas are invited to send video messages home, which will be displayed on a projector.

"We pay a tribute to them in part of our show and have them broadcast on screen," he said.

Fifty people make up the concert band, who are all active duty in the Air Force.

The concert band does about 30 shows a year, which is part of the more than 400 shows that the other ensembles in the Academy Band do throughout the year. In total, nine ensembles make up the band.

Porter said that the band is self-sustaining and everyone has their role to play. Porter himself is operations manager and puts together the tour.

"Our main job is to perform, to be Air Force ambassadors," he said.

Porter said that to be part of the Academy Band applicants must audition, be accepted, and then go to basic training, like any other potential candidate for the Air Force.

Unlike other candidates, however, these applicants go to basic training knowing the job they will have when they complete training.

"They start yelling from the second you get off the bus," said Airman 1st Class Jamie Teachenor about the experience of going to basic training. He added that the yelling is a training tool and is always for a reason.

"They're trying to put you in a high pressure environment away from your friends and family with 50 people you've never met," he said.

He said he missed his family — he has a wife and two children — but enjoyed his training instructors and the impact they have on airmen's lives. "They're making it so you turn to each other, that's what makes you stronger. It's not a malicious-type thing," he said. "You have a lot of intense training; running, pushups and situps. There's a lot of educational training about your role in the Air Force."

He said they stressed the core values of the Air Force; integrity first, service before self and excellence in everything they do.

"I made close friends; walked away more focused and determined," Teachenor said.

Teachenor lived in Nashville for several years and had songs recorded by other country artists.

He saw that there was an opening for a vocalist in the Academy Band and was intrigued by the idea of being able to serve his country and do what he loved.

Teachenor said that ensembles do get deployed overseas, but to perform rather than go to war.

They provide morale support to troops and public relations.

"There is a lot of power in music," Teachenor said.

The bands also perform nationally and serve as a recruitment tool and to raise awareness of the Air Force.

"I'm really excited because I've been hearing the rehearsals and it really is beautiful. It is going to be a beautiful concert," Teachenor said. "I hope a lot of people come out and support us."

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.