Topics: 2016 Elections, Elections 2016, GOP debate, GOP primary, Government shutdown, The Republican Party, News, Politics News

It’s official: the Republican party has truly become the party of infantile children. The second GOP debate was full of blatant lies, petty mockery, and infighting, with attacks especially directed at the new king of the GOP, Donald Trump (faithful “conservatarians” may not like this reality, but their crippling of Congress helped to create this monster).

At the very start, Trump decided that the most “presidential” thing to do was attack Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul (who, unlike every other person on the stage, actually made some very good points throughout the night), saying that he shouldn’t even be on stage because of his poll numbers — which is odd, considering Paul is on average ahead of Walker and Christie.

Paul responded:

“I think really there’s a sophomoric quality that is entertaining about Mr. Trump, but I am worried, I’m very concerned about having him in charge of the nuclear weapons, because I think his visceral response to attack people on their appearance — short, tall, fat, ugly — my goodness, that happened in junior high. Are we not way above that? Would we not all be worried to have someone like that in charge of the nuclear arsenal?”

Sensible people would be extremely worried, Senator Paul, but Republicans are no longer very sensible people. Calling each other names is what gets an applause these days. Making fun of people is “entertaining,” and Republican voters are apparently swayed by the entertainment factor.

Of course, with Trump way ahead in the polls, other candidates decided that their best option was to go on the offensive. Bush called him out as a special interest who basically tried to bribe him to allow casino gambling in Florida, Walker attacked him as being nothing but an entertainer (and on his four bankruptcies), while Fiorina said: “I think woman all over this country heard very clearly what Mr. Trump said (on his comments about her facial appearance),” which he responded to condescendingly, saying “I think she’s got a beautiful face.”

Apparently nobody but Paul got the memo that they’re no longer in Junior High.

Meanwhile, over at Congress, where elementary school seems to be a better analogy, right-wing extremists are throwing a hissy fit and trying to shut down the government (which would likely cost the economy billions, as it did last time) because of a measly $500 million in funding for Planned Parenthood. Even Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is trying to talk sense into Congressional Republicans — but again, a sensible Republican is a rare breed these days.