2013 was an eventful year for Fort Stockton. However, that could probably be said about most years. So how does one make this year seem significant? By simply reporting the facts.

There are so many good and bad choices made in a community throughout any given year, that news just creates itself-or more accurately, those choices made by the citizens produce the news-with the exception of various obituaries. Though it could be argued that any death is still the result of choices made. A sampling of some of this news-

We had a county clerk pass and a new one appointed, vandals who had their way at historic sites, thieves who stole Paisano Pete’s clothes, drug traffickers indicted, water agreements, authors published, tax hikes, healthcare coverage increases, the bribing of a law enforcement official, a bond passed, and a rodeo champion. Now you can catch your breath. What would we do without news? Summarized below are many of the stories we ran in 2013.

Jan. 3, 2013

The year-end meeting of Commissioners Court was a combined meeting with the Pecos County Memorial Hospital (PCMH) Board of Managers to discuss the acquisition of Mallik Rural Health Care Center. “If the acquisition is allowed to follow through, Mallik’s clinic will be the fourth clinic acquired within the last two years,” says PCMH CEO Jim Horton, “the other clinics were George Rural Health Clinic, Dr. Boone’s clinic in the hospital and Sanderson Health Clinic.”

Jan, 17, 2013

Judge Carl Pendergrass was appointed to the 83rd District Court on Dec. 1, 1999. Pendergrass was born in 1943 in Victoria, Texas. Pendergrass was from Del Rio where he lived with his wife, Carol. Pendergrass would make trips to Fort Stockton to conduct court. Pendergrass passed away on

Jan. 13, 2013.

In speaking with Trish’s coworkers, all said Trish was well liked by everyone who knew her. Trish was very devoted to her family and to Pecos County. Trish worked for the county for 22 years and in 2010 she was appointed County Clerk, a job she took very seriously. Trish passed away Jan. 10, 2013.

Jan. 24, 2013

It’s the story of a Fort Stockton man and his varsity blue bird bus, but it’s more than that. It’s the story of his legacy. Baldomero Quilo opened his bus doors to students for nearly 20 years. “He always did for others before he did for himself,” said granddaughter Jennifer Castillo. Quilo passed away last Thursday at age 69 after battling cancer. His casket was covered with sports memorabilia and a very special gift from one young man he drove to the Special Olympics.

Jan. 31, 2013

Elizabeth (Liz) Chapman has been appointed to the position of county clerk by the Pecos County Commissioners. On Mon., Jan. 28, the court voted unanimously in favor of Chapman. The position of county clerk was left vacant with the recent passing of Trish King in Dec. Chapman has worked as a Chief Deputy Court Coordinator for 22 years. According to Chapman, she worked closely with King, who was a good friend.

Feb. 21, 2013

Pasadena, Texas - A Pasadena ISD teacher has been charged with engaging in improper relationships with four students. LaShawn Simmons (Bailey), 41, was a math teacher at Beverly Hills Intermediate School for 14 years. She has resigned from the school district in lieu of termination. She’s a 1988 graduate of Fort Stockton High School.

Feb. 28, 2013

The City of Fort Stockton is in pretty good financial shape for a city its size. The Fort Stockton City Council on Monday night heard a presentation by Eli Mendoza of Garza/Gonzalez and Associates out of San Antonio on the city’s final audit for fiscal year 2012. The city had gotten behind on its annual audits, but with the current audit performed in December, the city has caught up.

March 07, 2013

Fort Stockton prides itself on its historic sites and long frontier history. But a closer look at some of the city’s historic sites reveals just that-a long history. Age, weather and vandals have taken their toll on some of the city’s historic sites.

March 14, 2013

A woman is in need of a job and responds to a newspaper ad for an assistant property manager. She gets the job, but it turns out to be a scam. A few weeks later, she’s out more than $7,000. It’s an unfortunate fact today that scam artists are on the prowl. And while newspapers like The Fort Stockton Pioneer are on the lookout for potential scams, the scammers themselves are getting more savvy.

March 21, 2013

Paloma Barraza, Abriana Murphy, Kathryn Garza, Grace Kalka and Raquel Singh represented the Prowlers in Corpus Christi at the Texas High School Women’s Powerlifting Championships. Coach John Gossett congratulated the Prowlers in the “great meet by all finishing higher than their state ranking coming into the meet.”

March 28, 2013 A 112th District Pecos County Grand Jury last month handed down an indictment of Fort Stockton resident Paul Robert Weyerts following an October incident in which he allegedly fired a shotgun at two Texas-New Mexico Power employees. The incident took place Oct. 8, 2012 when TNMP employees Talon Cacy and Frederico Duran were working on land near Weynert’s home.

April 18, 2013 The City of Fort Stockton in a special meeting on Friday entered into an agreement with the City of Odessa for a water monitor well to be drilled into the Capitan Reef on city property off Old Alpine Highway, about 10 miles southwest of town. The city council also approved Hydro Resources Inc. of Lupton, Colo. to drill the monitor well. If the water is deemed viable, the cities will drill a test well. The goal is to eventually build a pipeline from Fort Stockton to Odessa to service Odessa’s growing water needs. Fort Stockton would also benefit financially, and would also use the water from the well.

May 2, 2013 Once again, Tom Whalen’s a winner. The Frisco, Texas racer took first place in Unlimited Division at the 2013 Big Bend Open Road Race on Saturday with a winning average speed of 172.696 mph on the 118-mile round trip course from Fort Stockton to Sanderson and back. Whalen’s win was his third BBORR title in four years in his 2002 Corvette.

May 16, 2013 Evan Card, a 6-foot-3, 230-pound Senior at Fort Stockton High School competed last week in the 3A State track meet in Austin and finished better than his last two trips to the state meet. As a sophomore, Card qualified and competed in the state meet in the discus finishing 8th out of 9, a year later Card would qualify in discus again while also qualifying in shot put.

May 23, 2013 The 34-year-old ringleader of a Fort Stockton based drug trafficking organization, Noe Torres Ortega, was sentenced to 262 months in federal prison followed by five years of supervised release, according to United States Attorney Robert Pitman and Drug Enforcement Administration Special Agent in Charge Joseph M. Arabit. Ortega is the last of 24 indicted defendants who pleaded guilty and was sentenced for their role in a cocaine trafficking conspiracy that was responsible for the distribution of over 50 kilograms of cocaine since 2009. Sentences handed down in this case range from 262 months in federal prison to three years probation.

June 6, 2013 At 91 years of age, Madge Weatherby of Fort Stockton is a sharp, vibrant lady, full of life. Madge has lived in the Pecos County area for 60 years, but it was her early years in Oklahoma that helped shape her into the woman she is today. Madge was born in 1922 in Guymon, Okla., and is one of the few remaining survivors of The Dust Bowl. She can still recall the struggle for life at a time when her hometown was not only gripped by drought and choked by dust, but the country as a whole was in the midst of the Great Depression.

June 27, 2013 It has been said that a dream can be too tired to come true. In the case of local writer, Jody Day, no exhausted aspirations or muddled convictions were residing in her ambition. Only a slumbering dream in the back of her mind, which awoke and became born again. On Friday, June 28, Day’s dream, “Washout Express,” will be released. The book has been published by Harbourlight Books and will be released in electronic format.

July 11, 2013 A 24-year old woman is facing two counts of manslaughter and one count of injury to a child after allegedly attempting to switch drivers of a vehicle while the vehicle was traveling eastbound on I-10 near the Pecos-Reeves County line west of Fort Stockton on July 1. According to the Terrell County News Leader, DPS reported Nicole Antoinette Hathaway, 24, of Allen, Texas, was riding in an SUV on the interstate when she allegedly attempted to switch seat positions with Sydney Taylor Hathaway, 19, of Beaumont, who was driving the vehicle.

July 18, 2013 Claud Cockburn once said, “Never underestimate the effectiveness of a straight bribe.” But Odessa resident Huy Nguyen discovered that the sentiment of a long-dead British journalist doesn’t hold true for Fort Stockton Police Chief Art Fuentes. Nguyen was arrested July 8 after a 6-month undercover investigation involving the Fort Stockton and Odessa police departments and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

July 25, 2013 Mikayla Baker was named Miss Fort Stockton 2013 and the runners up were Ellie Gonzalez and LeeAnn Losoya.

Aug. 8, 2013

Jim Hammond, the Annie Riggs Memorial Museum Director for the past six months, resigned from his position on Friday, July 19. “I’m a historian. Historical research, that’s what I want to do,” Hammond said. “That job is not designed as that.” Hammond, a keen and educated historian of Texas history, felt his tenure at the ARMM was marked with tasks not pertaining to history and ones he was not prepared for.

Aug. 29, 2013

The Pecos County Commissioner’s Court on Monday held its second and final hearing on the fiscal year 2014 proposed budget and a tax hike of 5.98 percent over last year’s rate. And while that might sound like a big hike, commissioners said that with revenues $61,707 less than last year, the bark is worse than the bite because of new 2014 exemptions that have to be deducted from 2013. “We’re raising taxes but still, revenue is going to be less,” said commissioner George Riggs.

Sept. 05, 2013

Last Tuesday Fort Stockton resident Aaron Gonzalez Ramirez, 42, was sentenced to 18 years in Midland County District Court for sexually assaulting three juveniles. Ramirez is well known for his participation in local sports, coaching little league, and traveling with teams all over the state.

Sept. 12, 2013

Inspiration and expiration aren’t just the equivalent of encouraged feelings or a deadline for the unprocessed. They aren’t simple actions that define physical life. They are part of a dynamic process that interprets chemical subtleties and gives life another chance, second after second after second. When the ability to interpret becomes compromised, those seconds begin to fall away and a deterioration of the lungs ensues. One such pair of degenerating lungs belongs to Linda Alvarado. Alvarado, a 55 year-old native of Fort Stockton and in dire need of a double lung transplant, lives each day with a bit of uncertainty.

Sept. 26, 2013

The violent clashing of faiths in Nigeria has been a topic regularly examined by the media and distilled for your American audio-visual pleasure. But out of the polarizing chaos in a distant land, has come a messenger with something important to say… “Unguarded Moments (Outskirts Press),” a recently published book written by Okolo, was an inspired endeavor that took two months of fervent and absorbed scribing. But to gain perspective on “Unguarded Moments,” you need to know some things about its author.

Sept. 26, 2013

At the Fort Stockton regular city council meeting Monday night the big topic of conversation, which turned into a very spirited and heated debate, was about garbage, or rather the dumpsters used by retail, commercial and industrial concerns about town. During a heated exchange between Councilmen Billy Jackson and Allan Childs, with occasional remarks from Councilman Chris Alexander and Code Enforcement Officer Warren Oakley, the discussion centered on an ordinance, which if passed, would require businesses in the city limits of Fort Stockton to erect structures to house dumpsters, preferably behind locking gates of some kind, to cut down on the illegal dumping of garbage, and refuse that ends up on the ground instead of inside the dumpsters.

Oct. 3, 2013

Since 1984, the Texas Association of Schools Boards has sponsored the Superintendent of the Year (SOTY) award program, and has honored outstanding Texas administrators for achievement and excellence in public school administration. Each of the 20 Region Service Centers select one candidate for the award, who then competes for State Superintendent of the Year. Ralph Traynham was presented his award by Fort Stockton native and TASB Board member Lee Harris Lentz-Edwards at the Texas Association of School Administrators/Texas Association of School Board Convention in Dallas on Sept. 28.

Oct. 24, 2013 The Middle Pecos Ground Water Conservation District met Tuesday to decide the fate of Randy Braden, and several wells that were drilled illegally on his property. When he originally purchased the land, there were four legacy wells already established. Since then, he has had four more drilled, without going through the permit process, and neighboring landowners were worried that the water from those wells would co-mingle or contaminate aquifers and ultimately, neighboring wells.

Nov. 7, 2013

The Fort Stockton Independent School District bond election on Tuesday, Nov. 5 resulted in a semi-lopsided victory for the FSISD. The numbers reflected the growing desire for new and improved schools. 481 votes for the bond and 301 against it, or 62 percent to 38 percent, indicated that the needed changes were not lost on the residents of Fort Stockton.

Nov. 14, 2013

You’ve heard of the Emporer’s new clothes? Well, for Fort Stockton’s Paisano Pete, he really did receive a new set of Christmas duds, which he was wearing until just recently, when the Grinch, in the guise of an innocent individual, apparently decided to rob him of his new outfit. Paisano Pete has become somewhat of an icon in this part of Texas, luring motorists traveling through the area off the highway, into Historic Fort Stockton. For most, he is the closest most tourists will ever come to a roadrunner, so when his Christmas finery goes missing, that’s a big deal in Fort Stockton.

Nov. 21, 2013

Approximately 550 persons who are either employees of Pecos County, or are included in the county's insurance roles, could be looking at significant increases in the cost of healthcare coverage due to the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. Recently, the Commissioners' Court received an update from Blue Cross/Blue Shield representatives about how Obamacare, which is scheduled to be fully implemented by Oct. 1, 2014, is going to affect Pecos County. There are about 500 county employees, as well as employees of the City of Iraan and water districts, who receive insurance benefits from the county. This accounts for approximately five percent of the county's total population. However, when the spouses and children who are also included in the coverage are taken into consideration, the effects of Obamacare on the county's government insurance plan could affect nearly 10 percent of the county's population.

Nov. 28, 2013

It’s that time of the year when people and organizations try to find ways to make Christmas nicer for the less fortunate, and the congregation of First Baptist Church is at the top of the list. Each year, for the past several years, members of the FBC congregation, along with their children, have filled boxes for Operation Christmas Child. This year they filled 115 boxes.

Dec. 5, 2013

The Pecos County Commissioners’ Court met Nov. 25 for their regular meeting, and to discuss repayment of the $423,694.28 in grant money to the Texas Agriculture Department. (TAD) The county received the money, according to County Judge Joe Shuster, to drill a new well in Coyanosa.

Dec. 12, 2013

“It takes two to quarrel, but only one to end it” -Spanish matador proverb Such is the duel between man and bull. Be it a bull rider from Cheyenne, a matador from Madrid or a ninth grader from Fort Stockton. The bell has rung and the crowd has roared. Will man or beast prevail? Which will tap out and submit? It’s on…and the seconds begin to burn. Von Milliner, a freshman at Fort Stockton High School, knows the duress, eustress and rush of that final countdown. Here is a rodeo sportsman that attained the 2013 AYBR Pee Wee Bull Riding Champion title at the AYBR National Finals in Ignacio, Colorado by accumulating the most points during the season, and who has competed in multiple divisions at the InVinci Youth Bull Riders World Finals in Abilene, Texas.

Dec. 19, 2013

The winners of the 2013 Pecos County 2013 Pecan Show were announced. This year one person won both the Grand Champion and Reserve Grand Champion in each of the three categories. Eddie Sullivan was Overall Grand Champion for best Kiowa pecan, and Overall Reserve Grand Champion for best Cheyenne pecan. In the Adult Food Division winners were: Pies Stacy Pasqua, first place, Lemon Pecan Pie; Cullene Heritage, second place, Salted Carmel Chocolate Pecan Pie; and Rosie Lloyd, third place, Best Ever Pecan Pie. Miscellaneous Stacy Pasqua, first place, Three Layer Cheese Spread; Ann Bennett, second place, Pecan Wraps Pinwheels; and Stacy Pasqua, third place, Pecan Pimento Cheese Sandwiches. Candy Stacy Pasqua, first place, Butter Pecan Brittle; Ann Bennett, second place, Pralines; and Vea Ann Hooker, third place, Pecan Coconut Praline. Cakes Stacy Pasqua, first place, Preacher Cake. Bread Glenda Bonham, first place, Orange Cranberry Bread Braid; Stacy Pasqua, second place, Orange Nut Bread; and Karisha Landrum, third place, Pecan Pumpkin Bread. Cookies Ann Bennett, first place, Joyce’s Christmas Cookies; Glenda Bonham, second place, Coconut Pecan Cookies; and Cassandra Sanchez, third place, Chocolate Pecan Brownies. In the Youth Division, Ronnie Tucker took first place in Cakes and Cookies for his Pecan Pie Snacks, and first place in Pies and Candy with his Candied Pecans. Grand Champion Reserve Grand Champion In the food divisions, Stacy Pasqua took both the Grand Champion and Reserve Grand Champion honors in the adult division. In the youth division, Ronnie Tucker also took both the Grand Champion and Reserve Grand Champion ribbons. Best Pecan Participants in the best pecan competition who placed were Reserve Grand Champion/Grand Champion Eddy Sullivan, Belding Farms, Wild Horse, Al Haney, Hope Davis, Ken Gray, Viola Duarte and Ray Falcon.