Avoiding a government shutdown, for now

With help from Paul Demko, Brett Norman, Jennifer Haberkorn and Sarah Karlin

AVOIDING A SHUTDOWN AFTER PARIS, FOR NOW — Republican leadership in both chambers have produced a remarkably coordinated and efficient response to the crisis in Paris, sidestepping "the messy, charged fights that have come to split the Republican Party and typify the modern-day Congress," write POLITICO's Jake Sherman and Seung Min Kim. But as they point out, it could all fall apart. The migrant problem could get worse. President Barack Obama and congressional Democrats could still reject the GOP’s plans to step up background checks of Syrian and Iraqi refugees. “Or hardline Republicans might demand its consideration as part of the government funding bill — which could threaten a shut down,” they write. For now, the details on the GOP plan, here.

Story Continued Below

TODAY: WAYS AND MEANS MUSICAL CHAIRS — The Ways and Means committee will meet today to iron out subcommittee chairmanships. Sources on and off the Hill still expect the health gavel to go to Rep. Patrick Tiberi, whose office tells us he's "thoroughly considering his options." More today, of course.

GOOD WEDNESDAY MORNING and welcome to PULSE, where we want to applaud President Barack Obama for keeping his promise to quit smoking. He tells GQ it's because he pledged to do so if health care passed, though we recall that two years ago he said he quit because he's scared of Michelle. The interview: http://bit.ly/1HUkrYa. And of course, send those tips and comments: emershon@politico.com and behley@politico.com.

"Oh yeah, all right. Take it easy, baby. Make it PULSE all night. She was an American girl."

SCOOP: LAWMAKERS CALL FOR NIH FUNDING BOOST — A bipartisan group of more than 100 House members, led by Rep. Suzan DelBene, are urging House Appropriations Committee leaders to provide at least $32 billion to NIH in any forthcoming funding legislation. That's nearly $2 billion above 2015 levels. “If we are serious about breaking new ground in our understanding of complex diseases like Alzheimer’s and cancer, and if we hope to accelerate the speed with which new cures, treatments and vaccines are developed, then it’s absolutely essential that we increase funding for medical research at NIH,” the group wrote in a letter going out today. The letter: http://politico.pro/1PMxN9Z

GOP LEADERS: YES, RECONCILIATION WILL DEFUND PLANNED PARENTHOOD — Senate leaders are doubling down on their promise to include a provision defunding Planned Parenthood in the reconciliation package they're hoping to pass after Thanksgiving. They had previously mulled dumping the provision in an effort to win over moderates like Sens. Mark Kirk, Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski to get 51 votes. But that would have infuriated social conservatives on and off the Hill. Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said he's confident the provision will stay in. The full story, here.

SCOOPLET: SJC WILL REVIEW CORNYN’S MENTAL HEALTH BILL — The Senate Judiciary Committee in January is set to review John Cornyn’s mental health legislation, the No. 2 Senate Republican told PULSE. “We’re looking forward to having that hearing. There seems to be a lot of interest in the topic generally within the criminal justice system and how jails have essentially become warehouses for people with mental illness,” Cornyn said. His measure is one of a handful of mental health bills cropping up in the Senate. Unlike the other bills, Cornyn’s includes a divisive gun provision intended to keep firearms out of the hands of the seriously mentally ill. The NRA supports it, while gun control activists don't.

THIS AM: WE'RE TALKING BIOSIMILARS — Pro Health Care’s Joanne Kenen and Sarah Karlin host a discussion on biosimilars this morning, along with Amgen's Kimberly Greco; the FDA's Janet Woodcock, Foley & Lardner's David Rosen, the Biosimilars Council's Bert Liang, and Harvard's Seoyoung Kim. Expect a thought-provoking conversation that will delve into issues surrounding labeling, naming, safety, pricing and reimbursement, legal hurdles, and other important topics that affect this cheaper group of biologic medicines. The webcast: http://politi.co/1NCgFiW

** A message from PhRMA: Coinsurance. Copay. Deductible. Do you know the out-of-pocket costs your insurer requires to access the medicines you need? High out-of-pocket costs can be burdensome and prevent you from getting your medicine. Know the questions to ask about your coverage. Learn more at AccessBetterCoverage.org - http://onphr.ma/20OMheI **

JINDAL AND HIS REPLACEMENT PLAN ARE OUT — Bobby Jindal dropped out of the race for the GOP presidential nomination last night — taking with him the most detailed Obamacare replacement plan in the 2016 field. POLITICO's got more on his decision, here: http://politi.co/1NCi7lp. Your health team, meanwhile, is already taking bets on which future Republican administrations would make Jindal HHS secretary.

KAISER: SHOPPING KEY TO COST CONTAINMENT — Obamacare customers will need to shop around if they want to avoid serious sticker shock in 2016. That’s because in roughly three quarters of the counties that utilize HealthCare.gov, the cheapest silver plan will change next year. If individuals remain in their current plans, premiums will rise by an average of 15 percent. But if they’re willing to switch plans, average premium increases fall to 7 percent. The Kaiser analysis: http://kaiserf.am/1HUyVHH

SCOTUS SETS LITTLE SISTERS BRIEFING SCHEDULE — The justices on Tuesday established a combined briefing schedule for the seven related nonprofit birth control cases. The seven petitioners will file briefs in two groups. The opening written arguments will be due Jan. 4. The government must reply by Feb. 10, and petitioners can reply by March 11.

ONDCP RELEASES DRUG CONTROL STRATEGY — The White House Office of National Drug Control Policy released an update of its strategy Tuesday and it’s asking Congress to give Medicare the authority to “lock in” at-risk patients to single primary care doctors and pharmacies to prescribe and fill their medications. Medicare has an Opioid Overutilizer program that allows Part D plans to contact doctors if they suspect a patient is at-risk of receiving the drugs from too many providers or pharmacies, but unlike many Medicaid programs and private insurers, Part D can’t restrict the patients to receive services for a single provider and pharmacy. That would require Congress to act, the ONDCP report states. The strategy: http://1.usa.gov/1PMWweq

WORLDWIDE PHARMA SPENDING TO HIT $1.4 TRILLION BY 2020 — That's an increase of about 30 percent from 2015, per new data from the IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics. Most of that spending will be concentrated in developed countries, driven by new products and price increases primarily in the U.S., which IMS predicts will account for 41 percent of worldwide costs. The full report: http://bit.ly/1HUH5j

COMING IN HOT: COMMENTS ON MACRA — Midnight was the deadline for comments on how CMS should design new physician payment models as it implements MACRA. Your PULSEr surveyed a smattering of the comments filed early, and boy, are they wide ranging. Providers groups touched on everything from specific quality measures they want included to exceptions CMS should make for individual physicians or small practices. And of course, there was plenty of discussion on what should constitute an eligible alternative payment model. (The risk-based payment structures that lets physicians skip the new MIPS payment system.) We'll have more as it comes, but ICYMI, a whole host of providers groups outlined their broad hopes, here: http://politico.pro/1NChNTJ

AN END-OF-LIFE PLANNING BILL BACKED BY NRL — Anti-abortion groups have dug in their heels against advance care planning bills in the past, but Sen. Chris Coons got them on board for his latest legislative effort: a bill to pay Medicare beneficiaries for using an advance directive to spell out the care they'd like to receive at the end of their lives [delete: they age in an advance directive]. Coons has backed similar legislation in the past, but he tweaked the legislation this year to bring on board anti-abortion groups and a new House co-sponsor, Rep. Diane Black, along with Mike Thompson. Sen. Bill Cassidy is the sponsor of companion legislation. More details to come today.

NORM ORNSTEIN ON MURPHY’S MENTAL HEALTH BILL — In a deeply personal op-ed in the New York Times, AEI’s Norm Ornstein writes about his late son who struggled with mental illness and how legislation like Rep. Tim Murphy’s bill in the House Energy and Commerce Committee could help people with similar conditions. “The bill is not perfect. But it does many things to improve the financing, treatment and delivery of services across the range of mental illnesses, and in particular it has provisions aimed directly at helping those like my son,” he writes, specifically noting one provision of the bill that incentivizes states to implement assisted outpatient treatment (AOT) laws. Murphy’s bill awaits markup in the full E&C committee. The op-ed: http://nyti.ms/1SWLoM2

LAWMAKERS TO OBAMA: LET'S SIT AND TALK CADDY TAX — A bipartisan, bicameral group of the lawmakers who have sponsored legislation to repeal the Cadillac tax — Sens. Dean Heller, Martin Heinrich, Sherrod Brown and Reps. Joe Courtney and Frank Guinta — are asking for a meeting with the president to press their case. Their letter: http://1.usa.gov/1NCdMyC

CSRxP: IOWA VOTERS WANT ACTION ON DRUG COSTS — Ninety percent of likely Iowa voters believe it’s important for presidential candidates to address high drug costs, and almost 70 percent say the government should ensure drug price increases are limited, per new polling from the Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing. Large majorities also supported transparency proposals, including requiring companies to disclose research and development costs and marketing and sales data.

— The group, led by John Rother with backing from insurers and hospitals, among others, has been driving attention to the issue. It plans to release additional polls from New Hampshire, Nevada and South Carolina in coming days. The Iowa poll, conducted by Morning Consult, has a margin of error of 4 percentage points: http://bit.ly/1j6cGT6

ICYMI: CALIFF GETS BIPARTISAN LOVE, BUT SASSE IS STILL HOLDING — It was a bipartisan love fest for FDA nominee Robert Califf at Tuesday's Senate HELP hearing, and that committee is expected to vote next month on his nomination. But Sen. Ben Sasse says he’ll place a hold on all HHS nominees until he gets answers about the failed Obamacare-funded co-ops.

WHAT WE'RE READING

ProPublica looks at HIPAA and how it fails to protect a lot of the health data that consumers consider sensitive, like paternity test results:http://bit.ly/1HUgUZR

Self-induced abortions have been rising in Texas since the state passed new legal restrictions, Slate reports: http://slate.me/1NCgjsu

Former Senate staffer Chris Condeluci thinks that despite the current Cadillac tax politics, whomever wins the White House will still want to limit the exclusion for employer-sponsored health insurance. His replacement plan, at CFO.com: http://bit.ly/1NCg8NS

The WSJ reports on a significant drop in the number of men with prostate cancer: http://on.wsj.com/1PNzZOv

The newly-approved pill for women's libido isn't selling nearly as well as Viagra did in its early days, Bloomberg reports: http://bloom.bg/1PNA5FX

** A message from PhRMA: Are you asking the right questions about your health coverage? Understanding the out-of-pocket costs your insurer may require to access the care and treatments you need is important. Here are some questions to ask before picking your plan: (1) Are the health care providers, pharmacies and hospitals you prefer in the plan’s network? (2) How much will you pay per month for coverage? (3) How much do you have to pay out of pocket before coverage kicks in? (4) Are you aware of the other costs required to access care? (5) Are your regular prescriptions covered by your plan? Get the check list at AccessBetterCoverage.org - http://onphr.ma/20OMheI **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **