This year was both a tough time for reproductive rights and a banner year for women fighting back. Clinics across Texas closed down, but providers stood up and women's rights advocates went to court across the country from Mississippi to Ohio to Alabama. The elections didn't put many new pro-choice women in office, but voters did reject personhood amendments. And across the country, women spoke out about their abortions like never before. Planned Parenthood president Cecile Richards spoke with Cosmopolitan.com about 2014's victories and losses, and where the pro-choice movement is headed next year.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

What were the pro-choice movement's biggest accomplishments this year?

We're obviously really proud of defeating two personhood initiatives in Colorado and North Dakota. When we actually have an opportunity for voters to directly vote on issues of women's rights, they come down in support of women, even in the most conservative states. If I look at the overarching takeaways from the midterm elections, one was there was more conversation about women's rights and women's access to birth control, and some beginning connections to the fact that women's access to health care and rights are directly related to women's economic opportunities and educational opportunities. We need to make that even more explicit.

Most Popular

But it was pretty amazing to me that in all the competitive races across the country, I didn't see any candidate, Republican or Democrat, proudly running as an opponent of legal abortion or birth control or even Planned Parenthood. That's a pretty big change. We clearly want to move the needle away from the idea that these issues are partisan, because I don't believe they are, and we want to make it completely unacceptable to run for office as someone who opposes women's rights or wants to take us backward. To see candidates sending direct-mail pieces about their support for birth control, particularly candidates who never supported birth control before, was really interesting.

What could pro-choice advocates have done better?

I really want to learn more about what how we could do a better job of motivating people to vote. There is overwhelming support in this country for both the work of Planned Parenthood and these agenda items. What we have to do a better job of is helping voters understand why voting or not voting will have a direct impact on their lives. Women can't do that on their own — we have to have candidates and parties doing that as well, but that's something we're focusing on. We have 3 million patients a year, and I think understanding how better to link voting to their day-to-day lives is really important. I'm eager to learn more about who did and didn't vote. On the Planned Parenthood Action Fund side, we knocked on more doors, we made more phone calls, and we gained more supporters than ever before, in any election, so I want to make sure we are now building on that for elections two years from now and four years from now.

We want to make it completely unacceptable to run for office as someone who opposes women's rights or wants to take us backward. Share

Tweet

Abortion-story-sharing seemed to have a moment this year, and even you shared your story. What was the reaction to your own story?

It was really awesome. It's interesting, I just talked to my kids the other day, and they knew I'd had an abortion, and they were sort of like, "Mom, it was no big deal," but I could also tell it was important to them that we talked about it. I look at the positive response from Planned Parenthood employees, from members of the public who I don't know, from folks around the country, and I feel like, if there's anything that I as an individual or as the president of Planned Parenthood can do to take away any kind of shame that women have, then that's incredibly important to me.

A lot of important abortion cases are hitting the circuit courts. Any thoughts on whether the Supreme Court is going to take on abortion rights again?

I don't know what they will take up. I've been talking to the litigation folks every day because we are waiting to hear. One piece we're concerned about is the challenge to the Affordable Care Act, because that's something we and a lot of other folks put a lot of time and effort into, and [it] has made such an impact on women's ability to access reproductive health care and get economic parity when it comes to health insurance coverage. We're very concerned about that and what it could mean, depending on what the court decides. We're in court all over the country, and there are any number of cases that the Supreme Court could take up. The important thing here is that we have to make sure all of our 8 million members and supporters are vocal about how much support there is for women's access to safe and legal abortion in this country. That is our best hope for the Supreme Court, to make clear this country does not want to go backward on the promise of Roe and that states like Texas have been a real cautionary tale about what the actual, not theoretical, impact is on women when you pass the kind of restrictions that shut down providers and take away access to care — that it makes it a two-tier heath care system.