Medical non-adherence is one of the major factors damaging the potential revenue of the pharmaceutical industry. In recent years, a surge in the intrusions are observed in medical adherence by the pharmaceutical companies. Some of the major pharmaceuticals companies are predicting that an increase of 10% of medical adherence rates will benefits billions of dollars of healthcare market opportunity in the US alone.

Explore more at: https://www.psmarketresearch.com/market-analysis/medical-adherence

The development of smartphone adherence apps is one of the new trends in the medical adherence market. The app based medical adherence offers designed and features that can help healthcare providers to improve patient’s non-adherence. Currently, the medical adherence app is supportable to all major smartphone operating systems, such as Apple, Android, and Blackberry. Various other designs based advancements, such as attractive and convenience packaging, medication education, reduce readmissions, and patients counseling, are some of the other advancement in the medical adherence market.

The growing market of Electronic Health Record (HR), and E-Prescription is driving the medical adherence market in developed countries. The access to real time data in healthcare monitoring increases the medical adherence in patients. Moreover, the technology also engages patients in more frequent and efficient ways, which in turns drive the medical adherence in patients.

The speculation over the inefficiency of the methods used for the measurement of adherence is one of the major factors hindering the widespread acceptance of medical adherence. The accuracy of patíent’s self-reports depend largely on memory and prone to the high degree of inaccuracy. Similarly pill counts are also unreliable if patients failed to return the bottle or packaging material used.

Two types of medical non-adherence are found in the healthcare industry, unintentional and intentional. In unintentional medical non-adherence, patients are intended to take medicine but fail to do so for some unobvious reason; whereas, in intentional medical non-adherence patents are making an articulate decision about avoiding the medication and clinical trials based solely of their perceptions, and feelings.

Based on the various disease types, the global medical adherence market can be segmented as diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia (high cholesterol), and depression. Patients suffering from depression had the lower adherence rates, whereas, patients suffering from hypertension have the highest adherence rate.

There are basically two types of approaches used in the medical adherence market, hardware centric offerings and software-only offerings. Further, hardware centric offering can be segmented as devices and packaging. The devices segment includes smart pill bottle, automated pill dispenser, electronic tray, smart cap and others. Packaging includes single dose and multi dose. The software centric approach includes mobile medication management applications, patient portal, and others.

Request for Table of Content: https://www.psmarketresearch.com/enquiry-form.php?enqid=222&title=TOC

North America is the largest market of medical adherence. The market dominance of North America is attributed to the stringent government regulation towards patient’s safety and wellness, such as The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, The Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act and American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. Europe is the second largest market of medical adherence and growing at a significant rate. The medical adherence market in Europe is mainly driven by the need of medical monitoring among growing elderly patients in this region. In Asia Pacific, the market is still in its nascent stage; however, some of the major countries such as Japan and China are showing considerable opportunity for the medical adherence market. County wise, the U.S. is the largest market of medical adherence in the world. The U.K., Germany, and France are some of the major market for medical adherence in Europe; whereas, Japan is the largest market of medical adherence in Asia-Pacific region.

Some of the major players operating in the global medical adherence market include, Philips, AdhereTech, CleverCap, Medvantx, Proteus Digital Health, Mango Health, MTS Medication Technologies, Med-In-Touch, Adherence Solutions LLC, and Voxiva Inc.

About P&S Market Research

P&S Market Research is a global market research and consulting company. We provide market research reports, industry reports, business intelligence and research based consulting services across a range of industries.

With the help of our professional corporate relations with various companies, our market research offers the most accurate market forecasting. Our analysts and consultants interact with leading companies of the concerned domain to substantiate every single data presented in our publication. Our research assists our client in identifying new and different windows of opportunity and frame informed and customized strategies for expansion in different regions.

Contact:

Ms Somya

347, 5th Ave. #1402

New York City, NY – 10016

Email: enquiry@psmarketresearch.com

US/ Canada Toll-Free: 1-888-778-7886

Web: https://www.psmarketresearch.com