WARE - If approved, Baystate Health plans to turn Baystate Mary Lane Hospital into a regional center for outpatient services. It is also proposing to integrate the facility into a single-license regional hospital network with Baystate Wing Hospital, in Palmer, with that facility becoming the regional center for inpatient services.

The two facilities are part of Baystate Health's Eastern Region, and their integration is expected to cause more than two dozen job losses, including among management staff, at Mary Lane.

Health care reforms are pushing for such managed and more cost-effective networks of care delivery where services remain local and accessible to community populations.

Baystate Mary Lane is a 25-bed community hospital that serves the residents of Hampshire, Hampden and Worcester counties. Baystate Wing has 74 beds. Both hospitals have 24-hour emergency departments.

"Providing the right care in the right place at the right time is the notion that's driving our efforts to evolve and succeed for our patients in the era of healthcare reform," said Dr. Mark A. Keroack, president and CEO of Baystate Health, in a release announcing the proposals.

"Transitioning inpatient services to a single campus allows us to provide the safest and highest-quality hospital care at a single site. And it's part of an important step forward in our approach to care: a growing focus on keeping people well and out of the hospital, rather than just treating them when they're ill."

In the announcement, Dr. Charles E. Cavagnaro III, president of Baystate Health's Eastern Region, said that on average "fewer than 10 patients" are being cared for in the hospital's inpatient unit.

"Consolidating the region's inpatients in one location would be a more efficient use of our limited resources at a time when all healthcare organizations need to receive and deliver the greatest possible value for every healthcare dollar spent," Cavagnaro said.



"The larger facility allows for continuous critical-care monitoring, and the change allows a more effective provision of specialist care in the region. It also enables us to evaluate opportunities for new services at Baystate Mary Lane to continue to meet community needs."

In an interview, Cavagnaro added that the proposed changes are part of the ongoing evolution of healthcare where providers seek to avoid duplication of services and sometimes partner with other networks to expand services and deliver better care more efficiently.

"We delivered good inpatient care for the longest time at Mary Lane," Cavagnaro said. "We will continue to focus on Baystate Health's four compasses that are health safety, quality, patient experience and value."

Pending the approval of state regulatory bodies, the change would be expected to take place in spring 2016, according to the release. Baystate Health will begin the application process next month.



Baystate Health will continue to provide outpatient services for the Ware community at Baystate Mary Lane. The region's primary care network would not be affected by this change, according to the release.



The move of inpatient services would lead to a reduction of jobs at Mary Lane, according to the release. While Baystate Health is still finalizing its determination of ultimate job impact, this change is expected to affect 25 to 30 full-time positions.

Baystate Health, which has an overall employment of 12,000 people and a overall system revenue of $2 billion, has a workforce transition policy that supports employees displaced by these changes, including offering placement into open positions within the health system for which they are qualified. Management and front-line employees would be affected, according to the release.

Healthcare reform and mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act has lead many community hospitals to become part of larger networks to stay solvent. Baystate Health acquired Wing Memorial in August 2014, and this summer Noble Hospital in Westfield. Northampton's Cooley Dickinson Hospital became an affiliate of Boston-based Mass General Hospital in 2013 and this fall the Mass General Cancer Center opened at Cooley.

The Sisters of Providence Health System, whose hospitals include Mercy Medical Center in Springfield, became part of Michigan-based Trinity Health when Catholic Health East merged with Trinity in 2013. It is now forming, along with Hartford-based St. Francis Care, also part of the Trinity network, the new not-for-profit regional health system Trinity-New England.