Reprinted from INSIDE HEALTH INSURANCE EXCHANGES , a hard-hitting newsletter with news and strategic insights on the development and operation of public and private exchanges. Sign up for a $62 two-month trial subscription today .

In a Feb. 29 letter to issuers, CMS indicated that a one-year moratorium on the health insurance tax (HIT) should help carriers keep 2017 premiums in check. While carriers collectively would have contributed $13.9 billion in fees to CMS this year, the tax on premiums won’t do much to counter rising medical trend, expensive specialty drugs, the end of the reinsurance program or exchange-based plans that weren’t priced high enough to offset medical expenses.

The HIT, called for by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), helps cover the cost of insurance subsidies. The omnibus budget bill enacted late last year suspended the fee carriers would have paid for 2017, and delayed for two years the so-called Cadillac tax on high-cost plans (e-News Alert 2/10/16). The 2017 payment would have been based on 2016 premium volume. Health insurers had pushed against the fee, which they contend has forced them to boost premiums.

“CMS isn’t necessarily saying that the moratorium is going to translate to lower premiums in the absolute, but [premiums] should be lower than what they would have been with the fee,” explains Cori Uccello, senior health fellow at the American Academy of Actuaries.

For most carriers, the fee has pushed premiums one or two percentage points higher than they would have been without it. But not all carriers pay the same fee. Carriers with low premium volume might have received a partial or complete waiver. Similarly, not-for-profit carriers, as well as those that have a high percentage of government business, also can get some relief from the fees, says Hans Leida, a principal and consulting actuary in Milliman, Inc.’s Minnesota office. “Eliminating the fee will cause some downward adjustment in rates versus where they would have been, but it’s not going to overwhelm the other factors that will place upward pressure on rates,” he says.

Helaine Fingold, senior counsel in the Health Care and Life Sciences practice at the law firm Epstein Becker Green, agrees and says that regardless of the fee, “plans will continue to feel pressure from higher-than-anticipated enrollee health costs side-by-side with efforts to keep premiums and cost sharing at a competitive level.”

Without congressional action, 2017 premiums would have been about 3% higher due to the tax. Under the provision, health insurers collectively paid $8 billion in 2014. The tax increased 40% for 2015 and was slated to nearly double over four years to $14.3 billion in 2018, according to data from the trade association America’s Health Insurance Plans.

Health plans that intend to sell coverage through public exchanges for 2017 must submit proposed rates between April 11 and May 11.

© 2016 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a $50 discount on AIS’s Health Insurance Exchange Database: 2016 Plans and Premiums.