I recently read Clean Disruption of Energy and Transportation, a book by Tony Seba that claims solar energy has become affordable and accessible through companies like NRG. A $14 billion owner of power plants, Princeton, N.J.-based NRG is turning away from fossil fuels to focus on renewables such as wind and solar.

"If you evaluated rooftop solar a year ago, or even three months ago, you are way out of date," said David Crane, NRG Energy's CEO, in Mr. Seba's book.

Inspired, I went to NRG's website, watched an exciting animated video narrated by Hollywood star Matthew McConaughey, and filled out an application to get a solar array on the roof of my Brooklyn home.

I already buy wind-generated power through a company called Community Energy, but it is more expensive than the petroleum-fueled electricity delivered to my home by Con Ed. NRG's plan promised a free installation and a 20-year lease of the equipment, and a reduction of my monthly Con Ed bill.

A few minutes later, I saw the same animated NRG video on my television during the 6 o'clock news. Wow, I thought, this company is really going after New York City.

Within hours, I received a phone call from NRG. It had assessed the adaptability of my rooftop through Google Maps. Sorry, said the NRG caller, your roof is not big enough for our minimum 300-square-foot installation. The New York City Fire Department requires a six-foot perimeter around any installation in case of emergency. And there are some vents and skylights and a chimney on my roof.

But my roof is 900 square feet. Isn't there some way I can get solar? Sorry, said the NRG rep. She assured me she would call back if a way could be found. There are thousands of New York City residents calling us, she said. No doubt.

What a bummer. Just last month, Mayor Bill de Blasio set a goal of reducing the city's emissions by 80% by 2050, a substantial increase from Mayor Michael Bloomberg's goal of 30% by 2030. I was excited to find a way to do my part, particularly on the verge of a winter that would elevate my heating bills.

How is New York City going to reduce emissions without some way to get solar to millions of homeowners like me? Why can't the solar array be elevated above my roof? Why can't it be customized to fit my roof?

I put these questions to Erik Linden, a spokesman for NRG's home solar program. He said NRG has installed arrays on nearly 10,000 homes in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Massachusetts and California.

Mr. Linden assured me that NRG would send a technician to look at my roof and determine whether a custom system could be installed. But I would have to pay for the system and the installation. It wouldn't be a no-cash-down lease, as it would be for NRG's main residential product, the 300-square-foot array.

I'm going to take the next step.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments