With a national debt clock at $18,416,169,278,121 - and counting upwards - as a backdrop, two-term Ohio Gov. and Republican Presidential hopeful John Kasich holds a town hall Friday with the Manchester business community. (PAT GROSSMITH/UNION LEADER) With a national debt clock at $18,416,169,278,121 - and counting upwards - as a backdrop, two-term Ohio Gov. and Republican Presidential hopeful John Kasich holds a town hall Friday with the Manchester business community. (PAT GROSSMITH/UNION LEADER)

Kasich: Business regulation review, balanced budget needed



— With a backdrop of a national debt clock at $18,416,169,278,121 that's counting upwards, two-term Ohio Gov. and Republican Presidential hopeful John Kasich held a town hall Friday with the Manchester business community, saying he would get the nation to a balanced budget within eight years if he is elected President.



Kasich addressed a small, packed room in the historic Carpenter building with the event billed as a “Balanced Budget Town Hall & Discussion with Business Leaders.”



He proposed a plan that calls for the reduction of individual and business taxes, cutbacks to both Medicare and Medicaid, with only the military seeing a budget increase over eight years.



Kasich said he believes those changes would result in a balanced budget through economic growth, which would offset the tax cuts. He said he would shift federal programs – 104 from the U.S. Department of Education alone – back to the states and review all regulations affecting businesses with an eye towards eliminating those that are small-business killers.



Kasich said the budget must be balanced because continuing to operate with a federal deficit results in a slowed economy and currency devaluation.



Currently, he said, the debt amounts to $57,204 per citizen.



One man asked him what he would do about Obamacare, saying there was a local sheet metal company that had 49 employees and could hire 10 more, but the cost of the Affordable Care Act was holding it back.



“I would repeal Obamacare,” Kasich said, although he then acknowledged that he couldn't do it as President.



He said, however, he would push Obamacare changes through Congress, which he says is something Congress wants but needs a leader to show them how to do it.



Kasich is open to campaign finance reform, he told one individual, but said he doesn't “give a rip” who gives him money for his campaign.



Donors, he said, have no influence on him. He said when he was in Washington, a lot of people didn't like him but now, when he goes there, they do, because they know he can get things done.



Jeanne Peschier, 53, of Manchester, asked questions concerning poverty and why politicians aren't talking about it.



She said she wants to work but has health problems and, because she is partially disabled, she cannot collect Social Security disability. She asked Kasich to commit to having the U.S. funding the Global Fund to Fight Aids, TB and Malaria.



Kasich said he wasn't going to do that, because he doesn't know enough about it.



She asked him why he wasn't in the lead in Presidential polling.



Kasich said he is doing well in New Hampshire and come February, the numbers will show that.



"I need you to help," he told Peschier. But she told him since he couldn't commit to her, she was unable to commit to him.



"Well, then, good luck with President Trump," Kasich quipped, drawing laughter.



Peschier, after the event, said she has lived on $12,000 a year in the poorest area of the city, where people have been stabbed and shot. She said politicians need to address the issue of poverty, especially how it affects children.



Kasich, asked how he thought Hillary Clinton did before the congressional committee on Benghazi, said he couldn't comment about it because he hadn't watched it.



He said he had been busy campaigning in the Granite State.



To improve the chance of seeing your comment posted here or published in the New Hampshire Union Leader:



Identify yourself. Accounts using fake or incomplete names are suspended regardless of the quality of posts.

Say something new, stay on topic, keep it short.

Links to outside URLs are discouraged, if used they should be on topic.

Avoid comments in bad taste, write well, avoid using all capital letters

Don't cite facts about individuals or businesses without providing a means to verify the claim

If you see an objectionable comment please click the "Report Abuse" button and be sure to tell us why.

Note: Comments are the opinion of the respective poster and not of the publisher.

Post a comment