Topics: Ben Carson, Christianity, Elections 2016, Islam, Muslims, Paris, Religion, Religious Right, Washington Post, Sustainability News, News

Ask a Russian arms dealer if the world would be better off without Kalashnikovs, and what do you think he would say? Ask a heroin addict if the war on drugs should be intensified, and how do you believe he would respond? And query Republican 2016 contender and die-hard Seventh-Day Adventist Ben Carson if the doctrine about Jesus’ imminent return to Earth originated by his sect’s crackpot founder in the 1840s should be revered any less after having been proved entirely bogus, and what would he answer?

No, no and no, of course. Self-interest, addiction and delusions are perennially powerful factors in motivating human behavior, with victims of religion managing to both sustain the most damage from all three banes and repeatedly inflict grief on the rest of us. In truth, such pathetic souls merit swift and hermetic quarantining, for their sake as well as ours. Yet because their self-interest (really, greed for tax-exempt donations or a reluctance to admit they’ve been wrong about the most essential questions imaginable), addiction (to childish, falsely comforting fables) and delusions (that God has bestowed upon them a status higher than that of other humans, which gives them the right to dictate how the rest of us should behave) fall into the grossly ennobling category of “religion,” we find ourselves compelled to tolerate their presence. We remain, now as ever, subject to their daft, yet to-be-respected-at-all-costs, thoughts on sundry manner of subjects, thoughts drawn from a dung hill of rotten ideas, even if their propagators dwell atop the ivory towers of academia.

The Islamist attacks in Paris on Nov. 13, and the charged atmosphere of menace and fear that, so far, shows no sign of abating in the French capital (where I am now), have afforded us incontrovertible evidence in favor of abandoning the darkness that is religion, and should have, at the very least, allowed us a much-needed respite from religious palavering. After all, after having suffered through such a horrific, God-inspired tragedy, the last people we should have to hear from are those afflicted with the malady of faith. Yet, in fact, precisely because they are “people of faith,” they continue to enjoy widespread respectability, even among the editors of our land’s most renowned newspapers.

Thus it happens that this week I find myself obliged to address an essay, “In Light of the Paris Attacks, Is It Time to Eradicate Religion?” published in the Washington Post by Miroslav Volf, who teaches theology at Yale and runs that institution’s Center for Faith and Culture. Volf’s bio, which informs us that he has a book coming out titled “Flourishing: Why We Need Religion in a Globalized World,” gives us a hint about the answer he will offer to the headline’s question. No rationalism to be forthcoming from him. In any case, we certainly don’t expect theologians to denounce the (scandalously) “sacred cow” that nurtures them. But now is no time to shy away from attacking ideas that have led to the murder of innocents once again — and will surely kill multitudes more.

Volf shows he’s aware of how tough his case will be to make after the Paris attacks, feigning sober evenhandedness by opening with words about religion’s “long trail of blood and tears” and the “terror” spread by “God’s crazy-eyed followers,” which is “threatening lives, peace and prosperity of everyone on the planet.” All this should lead us, he suggests, to conclude that “The sooner humanity either eradicates or quarantines off religion, the better our world will be.” But, not surprisingly, as he has it, “This conclusion would be too hasty.”

Volf notes the spectacular rise of the religiously unaffiliated (from 0.71 billion in 1970, with 1.2 billion expected in 2050), but contrasts it with even faster growth in the numbers of the faithful (mostly Hindus and Muslims, but also Christians, surely in Latin America and the Philippines) who are turning “increasingly politically assertive.” (In this regard, one thinks immediately of Islamists, of course, but also of India’s recently elected prime minister, Narendra Modi of the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party, as well as of the frustrating dominance of evangelicals among Republican 2016 contenders.) Which all means that eradicating religion “would result in far more bloodshed than religious people have perpetrated throughout their long histories.”

Let’s stop right here. Just who advocates “eradicating religion” by any means that could lead to bloodshed? No one. Volf is hereby trying to pass off a straw-man fallacy (that unnamed actors would be inclined to use force against believers) and, in doing so, hopes to leave us with no choice but to accept his conclusion: Religion Must Live.

But even before we get to such a conclusion, Volf subjects us to opinions regarding faith as purportedly understood by skeptics: that religion is “inherently violent” because of its binary dogma, pitting believers in the Truth Faith against sectarian rivals enamored of “imperfect, misguided, or even wicked” ways; that the “positive revelation” vouchsafed to “Moses, Jesus, or Muhammad” does not suffice, with “reason stop[ping] at some point . . . and giv[ing] way to mere conviction, so all world religions are marked by irrational certainty”; and that, according to a work published almost a decade ago by a sociologist who happens to be a Methodist preacher turned Anglican, religion goads its votaries to violence predominantly when it intersects with politics. In the hands of “a revolutionary or a statesman . . . even the most peaceful religion will become ready to ‘take up the gun.'”

This is untrue: Religions are not all the same, with some being more peaceful than others. As Sam Harris has pointed out, the doctrines of Jainism and Buddhism cannot be readily pressed into the service of violence in the way, say, Islam’s calls for jihad can be. And believing that the Good Lord telegraphed intelligence concerning the nature of the cosmos and mankind’s role in it to a select few — revelation, in other words — involves accepting the veracity of non-verifiable, unsubstantiated propositions laid out in ancient texts and thus epitomizes the antithesis of reason. “Mere” — that is, ungrounded — “conviction” that such bizarro propositions are true is the only sort of conviction possible, with rational thought simply a no-show in any mise-en-scène devised by the faithful.