There they were: George and Martha snarling, snapping, gnawing on each other’s emotional limbs.

And here we were: on a lazy Sunday afternoon, at the Spark Theater, a micro theater on Santa Fe Drive, almost sitting in the living room of Edward Albee’s “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf.” We were nearly as close to the bruising married couple as they were to the liquor bottles and their guests, young professor Nick and Honey, his deer-in-the-headlights wife.

Who’s afraid indeed.

Turns out spending time recently with 40-year-old Maureen Folan and her spiteful mum, Mag, in their small cottage in Connemara, Ireland, was nearly as uncomfortable.

It doesn’t get much more intimate than this. And, thanks to Emily Paton Davies’ and Emma Messenger’s stout and anguished performances, it seldom gets more upsetting and thrilling.

Days after the Edge Theatre Company’s production of Martin McDonagh’s “The Beauty Queen of Leenane,” mother and daugh-ter still possessed those who’d come to the 80-seat Lakewood theater.

“I don’t like necessarily mainstream stuff,” said Edge’s artistic director Rick Yaconis. “I’d love to find more comedies, but I’m attracted to plays where people come out of the theater saying ‘Omigod.’ “

When the Colorado Theatre Guild holds its annual Henry Awards gathering at the Arvada Center on July 21, Edge will be among the five companies vying for Outstanding Season. Its fellow nominees: The Arvada Center, Aurora Fox, Curious Theatre Company and the Denver Center Theatre Company.

The Lakewood theater has seven other nominations, most for McDonagh’s bitter pill of a dramedy and two for the company’s reprise of John Guare’s “House of Blue Leaves.”

The Denver area boasts big houses. No, not jails but places bent on liberating the imagination: the Buell, the Arvada Center, the theaters in the Helen Bonfils Theatre Complex.

But for intrepid theatergoers, there are more and more opportunities to witness some of the region’s most rewarding theater in intimate venues of 100 seats or fewer.

Here are five smaller theaters offering consistently expansive theater experiences.

The Betsy Stage

1133 S. Huron St.

Vibe: This canny experimental theater company shows off its smarts and fondness for the Bard (and other Elizabethan fare) in a 50-seat house tucked away in a southwest neighborhood more industrial than residential.

Recently: With “Beth,” the all-female cast pile-drove Shakespeare’s tale of the Thane of Cawdor, recounting the story — end to beginning, no less — of a female painter in Paris during the Roaring Twenties.

Up next: Desdemona is not quite dead yet in this company’s comedic take on “Othello,” set in Greece amid gods and demigods. (Fall) betsystage.com or 720-328-5294

Boulder Ensemble Theatre Company at Dairy Center for the Arts’ Carsen Theatre

2590 Walnut St, Boulder

Vibe: BETC takes advantage of the Dairy Center’s smallest house — which feel larger than its 80 seats — offering steady opportunities to see some of the area’s most compelling actors up close: John Ashton, Chris Kendall, Sam Gregory, Rachel Fowler for starters — typically taking on regional premieres of off-Broadway works.

Recently: In March, the company held the successful world premiere of best-selling history of science author Dava Sobel’s new play “And the Sun Stood Still.”

Up next: BETC opens it 2014-15 season in the Dairy’s 100-seat East Theater with the regional premiere of Anthony Clarvoe’s “Ambition Facing West.” (Oct. 9-Nov. 2) betc.org or 303-444-7328

Cherry Creek Theatre

in the Shaver-Ramsey Showroom, 2414 E. Third Ave.

Vibe: Shows unfurl amid the gorgeous wares of this rug emporium. Pretty sure the carpets make for the warm acoustics in the 70-seat theater.

Recently: Its annual musical featured local luminary Megan Van De Hey and up-and-comer Casey Andree in this two-hander about familial grief and reckoning “John & Jen.”

Up Next: In Joe DiPietro’s comedy “Over the River and Through the Woods,” a grandson announces plans to move. His Jersey grandparents have other ideas. (Oct. 3-26) cherrycreektheatre.org or 303-800-6578

Edge Theatre Company

1560 Teller St., Lakewood.

Vibe: Artistic director Rick Yaconis brings in plays that make good on the company’s razor-sharp name.

Recently: A fit and coolly ferocious Mrs. Robinson put the moves on a rather undone Benjamin Braddock in “The Graduate.”

Up Next: Edge is in the midst of “On the Edge: A Festival of New Plays.” The winner of the three-play competition will get a full production during the 2014-15 season. (Through Aug. 3) theedgetheater.com or 303-232-0363

Germinal Stage

7287 Lowell Blvd. at the 73rd in Westminster

Vibe: For those familiar with this institution’s former North Denver home, the pervasive scent of pipe smoke hasn’t yet taken hold in the new, smaller digs. What has is co-founder and artistic director Ed Baierlein’s tenacious commitment to “plays of substance.”

Recent: Substance in no way excludes comedy. Germinal’s collection of three — “Victorian Garden Romance” — ends July 20.

Up Next: Germinal enters the dystopian fray when it closes its summer season with George Orwell’s “Animal Farm.” (Aug. 22-Sept. 14) germinalstage.com or 303-455-7108

Lisa Kennedy: 303-954-1567, lkennedy@denverpost.com or twitter.com/bylisakennedy

COLORADO THEATRE GUILD’S 9TH ANNUAL HENRY AWARDS. Cocktails, silent auction, awards show and after-party to celebrate the achievements of the Colorado theater community. July 21. At the Arvada Center, 6901 Wadsworth Blvd. Arvada Ceremony begins at 7 p.m. Tickets $23-$50 available by phone only 720-898-7200