Graduates toss their caps during the Broomfield High commencement in May. ( David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer )

State graduation guidelines Local school boards and districts select from this menu to create a list of options that their students will use to demonstrate competency to graduate from high school beginning with the graduating class of 2021. Competency/English/math ACCUPLACER/62 on reading comprehension/61 on elementary algebra ACT/18 on English section/19 on math section ACT Compass/score of 79/score of 63 ACT WorkKeys/bronze or higher/bronze or higher Advanced placement test/score of 2/score of 2 Concurrent college enrollment/passing grade/passing grade District capstone/determined by district/determined by district Industry certificate/determined by district/determined by district International Baccalaureate test/score of 4/score of 4 SAT/score of 430/score of 460 Standards-based performance assessment/statewide scoring criteria For more details, go to the Colorado Department of Education's website. Source: Colorado Department of Education

Recent final approval of new state graduation guidelines means local school districts are starting to talk about reworking their own requirements to earn a high school diploma.

Advertisement

A state law passed in 2007 required the development of statewide high school graduation guidelines. A task force developed initial recommendations in 2008, then the Legislature extended the deadline to 2013 so state standards could be developed first.

The state Board of Education adopted an initial menu of options in 2013 as recommended by a Graduation Guidelines Council. But the initial guidelines were widely criticized, so a task force of educators tried again.

The state board adopted the final guidelines earlier this month but included a plan to convene a committee of parents, educators and industry representatives in 18 months to see if other additions are needed — and to repeat that process every two years.

The graduating class of 2021 — current seventh-graders — will be the first class that will need to meet the new requirements.

"The sooner we make decisions around graduation requirements, the better," said Boulder Valley Superintendent Bruce Messinger. "When they start ninth grade, we want them to have a good understanding of what they need to graduate."

Most of the state options require students to earn a certain score set by the state on a test, including the ACT and SAT college entrance exams and advanced placement and International Baccalaureate tests.

There's also an option to demonstrate competency through concurrent enrollment at a college, a capstone project or an industry certificate.

Districts must choose one or more of the state's measures for both English and math, then can add their own requirements. Districts can make the scores students need to achieve on a measure higher, but not lower.

The guidelines also allow districts to request waivers "that meet the intent of the law."

'Rigorous and attainable'

Now, Colorado's districts generally require that students pass a specified list of classes and accumulate a total number of credits, but they don't require them to attain a specific score on a test.

Boulder Valley requires a total of 22 credits, including four years of language arts, two years of math that must include algebra, two years of science, a year of a world language, a semester each of fine arts and practical experience, and a money management class.

St. Vrain Valley requires a total of 24.5 credits, including four years of language arts, three years of math and science, and a semester each of fine arts and practical experience.

St. Vrain Assistant Superintendent Connie Syferd said the district is in a good place to move forward with graduation requirements, especially given the work on post-secondary readiness and high school focus programs.

Most St. Vrain high schools now offer focus programs, including a medical and bioscience program at Longmont High, an energy academy at Mead High and a leadership academy at Silver Creek High.

Some programs already include internships, mentorships and capstone projects, Syferd said, while many St. Vrain high school students participate in concurrent enrollment programs with community colleges.

The district also wants to start an IBM's Pathways in Technology Early College High Schools, or P-TECH, program.

P-TECH schools combine high school and two years of community college, with students graduating with a no-cost associate degree in applied science, engineering or computers within six years.

Syferd said St. Vrain plans to finalize new graduation requirements next school year. Before they're finalized, she added, the district will seek input from students, parents and the community.

"We want it to be rigorous and attainable and for kids to have a number of options," she said.

Defining success

In Boulder Valley, Messinger said the district first wants to analyze how many students would meet the new requirements today, then look at what the district could do to increase success.

He added that Boulder Valley was one of the districts pushing for the inclusion of a capstone project, with a goal of making sure there are alternate pathways so passing a test isn't the only option — with the reliance on standardized tests a main criticism of the new guidelines.

"That will give us more flexibility," he said.

He noted that capstone experiences have yet to be defined by the state or developed by the district, but that Boulder Valley may be interested in working with other districts on developing them.

Asking for community input, including from students and parents, is another priority, he said.

Evaluating graduation requirements also is one of Boulder Valley's priorities for the implementation of its "Success Effect" strategic plan. A group focused on the district's goal of graduating "curious, lifelong learners" is tasked with developing graduation recommendations.

Centaurus High Principal Rhonda Haniford, who's in that group, said she wants to balance the external test requirements of the state with "empowering students to define success for themselves."

She said one idea she wants to explore is a more open-ended measure that could include leading a community service project. A capstone experience, she added, should be based on student work throughout high school, not just a single project senior year.

"I'm looking forward to having flexibility in the options," she said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa