In his sixth State of the Union address on Tuesday, President Obama plans to propose his third costly mandate for low-wage employers — up to seven days of paid sick leave per year.

If you count both proposals for minimum-wage hikes ($9 an hour in 2013 and $10.10 in 2014), this year’s will be No. 4. The first was ObamaCare, with its employer mandate to offer affordable health coverage or pay a fine.

Together, they could raise the cost of employing a full-time minimum-wage worker by as much as $5.06 an hour — a 65% jump vs. base compensation in states aligned with the $7.25 federal minimum. That includes:

The proposed minimum-wage bump of $2.85 an hour, plus another 22 cents in employer payroll taxes.

The ObamaCare mandate penalty in 2015 of $2,080 per worker for large employers who don’t offer coverage. The fine is nondeductible, so it equates to about $3,420 in wages for a profit-making employer paying a combined 39.2% state and federal tax rate. That comes to $1.69 an hour for a 40-hour worker.

Up to seven days of paid sick leave, adding 30 cents per hour to compensation (assuming a worker takes that time off).

Heaping on mandate after mandate without paying heed to the growing demands that government is putting on low-wage employers comes with a risk that workers will be priced out of some of those jobs.

The Congressional Budget Office expects that “employers will probably pass along the cost of (ObamaCare employer mandate) penalties to their workers in the form of reduced wages.”

When CBO estimated that raising the minimum wage to $10.10 an hour could cost a half million jobs, it noted that combining such a hike with ObamaCare fines would put more jobs at risk.

The combination “further boosts the likelihood that employers’ savings from reducing the size of their workforces would exceed their adjustment costs,” such as the cost of shifting to labor-saving technology.

Adding a sick-leave mandate would further tip the scale against low-wage jobs.

The idea of sick pay isn’t without logic: Everyone would be bet ter off — including restaurant diners who don’t want waiters to sneeze in their soup — if people who were really sick stayed at home, which they could afford to do if it didn’t mean losing a day’s pay. Parents would also be able to take care of sick children.

Yet prospects for a GOP-led Congress considering this proposal seem slim while the costs of other more exacting mandates strain low-margin businesses that rely on low-cost labor.

Several states have adopted paid sick-leave mandates. California provides three days and Connecticut five. The Healthy Families Act embraced by Obama would expand that to as much as seven days, with 1 hour off earned for every 30 hours of work, capped at 56 hours.

Many employers who voluntarily provide sick pay roll a portion of unused time into paychecks at the start of the next year. But workers given mandated paid sick days would use them or lose them. Employers wouldn’t have to let earned sick time accumulate beyond seven days, nor pay workers for unused sick time.

That could result in employees taking more time off than they would otherwise, leaving employers a choice of getting by with fewer work hours, paying overtime or adding additional workers. But paying workers for unused sick time has a downside too. Under the ObamaCare employer mandate, the IRS treats any paid leave earned as time at work. Thus, the law’s full-time threshold would be lowered by an hour, to 29 hours, for employers who pay one hour of sick leave per week.