admin |

By PAUL CRAIG

Special to the Gazette

MARTINEZ, Calif. – County Administrator David Twa gave much good news and some bad news at the last meeting of Martinez Rotary. The good news is that county government will remain important to Martinez. As the county recovers from the recession and property tax revenues stabilize, Standard & Poor’s has raised its rating to AAA status. The bad news involves retirement and pension liability, the cost of fire protection, and Doctor’s Hospital debt.

For those of us living in Martinez, perhaps the most interesting news is that the county building on Pine Street – that tall monstrosity built in the 1960s – isn’t going away anytime soon. Nor is the finance building, with its beautiful facade on Court Street. It’s getting much needed major repairs.

The tall building is full and will remain so. David Twa says his office will remain there as far ahead as he can look. That’s good news for Martinez. Despite the movement of some departments out of downtown, there’s a lot of county activity that will remain here.

From the point of view of downtown business, the most important county activity is the legal system. County employees have short lunch breaks, while jurors often have lots of time on their hands.

Labor costs are a big deal for Contra Costa County. The county employs almost 10,000 people, represented by 21 unions.

Unsurprisingly, this makes negotiations complex. The county has an aging workforce and a lot of retirees. To put this in context, each worker supports three-fourths of a retiree. Back in 2006, each worker supported just 0.6 retirees. Membership in the firefighters union is 283. Total cost of the Contra Costa County Fire Protection District is $68.8 million, or $243,000 per member. The county is working hard to control pension liability.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) will have a large positive impact on the county. There are currently about 140,000 uninsured persons in the county. Under ACA, David Twa expects this to drop by about two thirds, to 50,000. That change has huge positive implications for our health care system.

Overall, David Twa foresees a bright future for the county, and a bright future for the relation between the county and Martinez. And that’s good news for all of us.

Category: General News