Any time we can get Michelle Obama, Marco Rubio and at least one billionaire Koch brother into the same sentence, well, we’ve got ourselves a PolitiFact Oregon Roundup.

And judging by the contents of the above sentence, that’s just what we’ve got today. So let’s get rolling.

1. Michelle Obama and those suspicious-looking communist flags

A chain email circulated recently showing First Lady Michelle Obama waving a red flag in each hand during a March 2014 trip to China. A reader wanted PolitiFact National to gauge the accuracy of a superimposed caption reading, “Michelle Obama waves red communist flags on her taxpayer-funded visit to China.”

Snopes.com beat us to the check, but PolitiFact’s own investigation showed that Obama’s “flag-waving” took place innocently enough during a folk-dancing demonstration. The flags turned out to be long red banners and the claim was rated Pants on Fire.

2. All those carriers, suspiciously together again



A second chain email labeled President Barack Obama irresponsible for ordering five aircraft carriers into Norfolk Naval base together – purportedly the first time this has been done since World War II.

The rendezvous, it turned out, took place in 2012, a similar grouping that took place at the base in 1997. The reason for the group? So naval personnel could spend time with their families. The claim earned a False.

3. The Kochs show off their environmental cred



The once-reclusive Koch brothers suddenly seem to be everywhere these days. Charles Koch, in a recent Wall Street Journal op-ed, defended Koch Industries and their subsidiaries from attacks, saying, “EPA officials have commended us for our ‘commitment to a cleaner environment’ and called us ‘a model for other companies.’”

PolitiFact’s check showed that the EPA was focusing on very limited aspects of Koch Industries and not the company as a whole. Further, Koch Industries has a history with the EPA that was completely glossed over, and it includes multiple violations of rules. Koch’s claim was rated Mostly False.

4. Rubio on Obamacare: It's coming up short

Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Florida, recently proclaimed that the Affordable Care Act was falling short of its goals. It was supposed to cover 30 million people, he said, not the six or seven million who have signed up so far.

Rubio does have a point that many Americans will remain uninsured under the reform, but the White House did, indeed, hit its stated goal of 7 million enrollees by the March 31 deadline. Many millions more are expected to enroll in Obamacare in months and years to come.

5. Florida and its two dueling governors



Former Florida Gov. Charlie Crist adores Obamacare and isn’t afraid to say it. In the same breath, he alleges that his Republican opponent, incumbent Gov. Rick Scott, wanted to go back to denying coverage for pre-existing conditions.

PolitiFact Florida could not find many comments from Scott about pre-existing conditions, but he does support tax breaks that would leave those who end up uninsured for more than a few months in danger of being denied coverage for pre-existing conditions. The story’s diagnosed the claim as Mostly True.

So there you have it, today’s roundup. Thoughts? Anything we missed? Toss your comments our way and let’s start talking.

-- Dana Tims