WASHINGTON, D.C. -- The Obama administration has approached Dr. Delos "Toby" Cosgrove about running the troubled Department of Veterans Affairs, according to the Wall Street Journal.

It is unclear whether the White House is also considering others for the VA secretary's job. The job became vacant last Friday with Secretary Eric Shinseki's resignation amid the growing scandal over patient treatment delays.

The VA medical system has been plagued with delays lasting weeks and even months in examining and treating veterans. The system is challenged by the number of veterans returning from the war in Afghanistan as well as those who served in Iraq and even Vietnam. But as documented in Phoenix and under an inspector general's ongoing investigation elsewhere, some VA hospitals have tried to cover up the true number of weeks that veterans have had to wait before even seeing a doctor, hoping to fend off what became a scandal anyway.

There are claims of dozens of deaths resulting from the delays. Members of Congress have called it a disgrace. President Barack Obama says he agrees but is facing a political firestorm over it.

Tapping Cosgrove, a renowned heart surgeon and Vietnam veteran with a Bronze Star, to take over the VA would signal how serious Obama is about fixing the problems.

"He obviously has experience in successfully managing a large, important health care network," said former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland. "He knows medicine and he obviously knows organization and management and leadership when it comes to the delivery of quality health care. I think he would be an intriguing choice."

In a recent column for U.S. News & World Report, Dr. Michael F. Roizen, chairman of the Clinic's wellness institute, mentioned the VA delays and wrote, "I do know how to solve the problem. Just get Toby Cosgrove to lead the VA. (And those of us at the Cleveland Clinic hope he doesn't accept.)"

The Clinic would not confirm that Cosgrove, 73, was approached about filling the position of secretary of veteran affairs. The Wall Street Journal reported that it had three sources, none of them named, saying that Cosgrove was asked by the administration about the job.

Cosgrove, who holds 30 patents for medical innovation, has been the Clinic's CEO since 2004. Obama has praised Cosgrove and the Clinic as innovators in the delivery of medicine and the use of technology in health care. Under Cosgrove, the Clinic has offered same-day appointments and more fully integrated its medical care across specialties. It has expanded its presence not only in Ohio but also worldwide, with a center in Las Vegas and another slated to open in Abu Dhabi, and has aggressively marketed itself and its brand as one of the world's top medical centers. The clinic's patients have included sheiks, rock stars and thousands of Ohioans.

Obama has used the Clinic to try to promote some of its innovations as models for health care reform. Yet Cosgrove has not embraced the Affordable Care Act, a signature Obama achievement, in all its elements. The act has resulted in Medicare reimbursement cuts, some of which the Clinic has had to absorb, and demands for greater efficiency. Cosgrove has said it is shifting the health care landscape and further prompting consolidation in an industry that was already feeling strains in some ways.

Cosgrove is not known to have criticized the ACA outright. But he told Clinic employees in February that "these are difficult times. Here and across the nation, this is going to be the theme."

Last September, the Clinic announced it would offer early retirement to 3,000 employees in an effort to cut $330 million from the 2014 budget. The ACA was not entirely to blame, according to healthcare analysts and others, and Congress has passed additional Medicare reimbursement cuts that were unrelated to the ACA.

Yet Cosgrove also said that the clinic had a record $6.5 billion in total operating revenue in 2013, up 4 percent from the year before. He told employees that it was "a fabulous year, and better than expected."

Reported with Brie Zeltner and Sabrina Eaton