Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

WINNIPEG, Manitoba (AP) — The head of U.S. Soccer defended the federation’s handling of goalkeeper Hope Solo’s domestic assault case in a letter to U.S. Senator Richard Blumenthal on Friday night.

Solo was charged with two misdemeanor counts of fourth-degree domestic violence assault stemming from an altercation last June with her sister and 17-year-old nephew at a family gathering in Kirkland, Washington. A judge dismissed the charges earlier this year.

Blumenthal (D-Conn.) wrote to U.S. Soccer President Sunil Gulati on Thursday regarding Solo, calling domestic violence “unacceptable, particularly for an athlete representing the United States of America on the global stage.”

Solo is currently starting for the U.S. women’s national team at the World Cup in Canada. The U.S. played to a 0-0 draw with Sweden in a group-stage match on Friday night. She did not speak to reporters following the match.

Gulati’s response said U.S. Soccer investigated the matter as thoroughly as it could at the time, but its approach was guided by limited access to information and contradictory accounts of the incident, as well as legal concerns.

“The federation has been a long-standing leader in the pursuit of gender equity in sport — a role of which we are quite proud,” Gulati wrote. “Accordingly, rest assured that the federation considered domestic and family violence a very serious matter. The federation understands its role and obligation as the national governing body for the sport of soccer and will continue to investigate and address such issues as they arise.”

Blumenthal’s letter came in the wake of an ESPN report that brought new information about Solo’s arrest to light, including allegations that the goalkeeper was combative with police officers. Solo pleaded innocent to the charges.

ESPN said the report was based on police records, two sworn depositions obtained by the network program “Outside the Lines,” other documents and interviews with one of Solo’s alleged victims. It said Solo had been drinking when she arrived at the home of her half-sister, Teresa Obert, and was the aggressor in the altercation, including slamming the teenager’s head into the floor.