Missouri State Rep. Paul Wieland filed a lawsuit to stop his daughters, two of whom are adults, from having birth control coverage.

Wieland his wife Teresa sued the Obama administration over the mandatory contraception coverage in the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

The Wielands claim that Obamacare is forcing them to violate their religious beliefs because their daughters are covered on their insurance plan and could get birth control at no cost, noted MSNBC in 2014.

Under Obamacare, children can stay on their parents plan until age 26. The Wielands' daughters are 13, 18 and 19 years old.

During a speech to an appeals court in 2014, Timothy Belz, a lawyer with the conservative Thomas More Society representing the Wielands, compared birth control coverage to the federal government passing "an edict that said that parents must provide a stocked unlocked liquor cabinet in their house whenever they’re away for their minor and adult daughters to use, and Mormons came in and objected to that. It is exactly the same situation.”

According to ThinkProgress, the appeals court ruled this week that the Wielands' lawsuit could continue after previously being derailed by another court.

The Wielands want a newly-created health care plan without birth control coverage.

Like Hobby Lobby, a privately-owned company that sued successfully to deny its female employees contraception coverage, the Wielands claim they are acting on their sincerely-held religious beliefs.

If the Wielands win, their victory could force health insurance companies to create new data bases to track each family's sincerely-held beliefs and what those beliefs forbid and allow.

Noticeably absent are the Wieland daughters' positions are regarding their parents' lawsuit to control their reproductive organs/activity.

In a 2014 campaign commercial (video below), Wieland bragged about voting against "Obama's Common Core scheme in Missouri," but Common Core has never been a federal program, nor was it created by President Obama.

Sources: MSNBC, ThinkProgress / Photo Credit: YouTube Screenshot