Brothers building complex of commercial kitchens, with some of the county's brightest organic food companies signing leases

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

East of Longmont on Highway 119, surrounded by car dealerships and auto shops, two brothers are putting the finishing touches on what they hope will become the new epicenter of natural foods in Boulder County.

Of course, the building that will eventually house six local companies isn't actually in Boulder County — it's 200 yards over the line, in unincorporated Weld.

But the businesses who have divvied up the nearly 50,000 square-foot former post office sorting facility are Boulder County through and through.

Keen One Quinoa was born out of a Leeds School of Business class at CU; both Pie in the Sky and Simply Dara got their start in Boulder — even Boulder staple Bhakti Chai has moved its manufacturing operations to 1845 Skyway Dr., though the company maintains administrative offices in Boulder, as does Naked Edge, maker of Veggie Go's.

"We still consider ourselves a Boulder company," said John McHugh, founder of Naked Edge, the first building's first tenant, after the owners.

'A blank slate'

The lack of adequate, affordable space was what pushed brothers Jarrett and Ross Eggers, owners of Fiona's Natural Foods, out east.

"When we bought (Fiona's), it was being produced out of a facility in Longmont," said Jarrett Eggers. "We decided it was time to make a move, and we started looking around Boulder, Longmont, Denver and just were not finding any quality food production spaces."

Security, cleanliness and amenities such as loading docks were a necessity, and the ideal space would have to be cheap enough for a small company but large enough to allow for growth. After a fruitless search, the duo decided their only option was to buy something they could turn into the perfect space.

Advertisement

That's when they found the Skyway building: A mile from I-25 and right off Highway 119. Perfect for shipping. Twenty thousand square feet of potential.

"It was a blank slate for us to do whatever we want to do with it," said Ross Eggers.

So they went to work, adding 7,8000 square feet of warehouse space and more than 10,000 square feet of refrigerated storage space — a hot commodity in the food business. They planned for six separate manufacturing areas, with shared break rooms, locker rooms and conference rooms.

It was an 'If you build it, they will come' approach, prepping a space before hunting for tenants. And it worked.

McHugh was the first to hop on board, in January, right after construction began. Keen One followed in April; Bhakti signed on in late September. Leases for Pie in the Sky and Simply Dara's were signed in December.

'Very limited options' in Boulder

Working with a co-packer in Denver while hunting for a space of his own, McHugh came up against the same problems the brothers Eggers had — too few options for too much money.

"We just couldn't get the caliber of production facility we were looking for (at a good) price," McHugh said.

Fiona's Natural Foods packager Anitra Schlieker (CQ) boxes up retail packages of granola in the production facility at Skyway Foods on Tuesday. Go to dailycamera.com for more photos. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

There are "very limited options" for industrial space in Boulder, said Scott Crabtree of The Colorado Group.

Vacancies for that type of space are below 5 percent, and typically lease for $10 to $16 a square foot. Smaller spaces (like those sought after by nascent food companies) command even higher rates.

"Longmont's market is not as tight" — closer to 10 percent vacancy for "quality space," Crabtree said. And rates are more affordable: roughly $8 to $10 per square foot.

Those savings make the long trek to east Longmont more attractive, particularly for a quality space.

"I initially told (Jarrett) he was crazy: It was so far out there," McHugh said. "But (the planned building) was so much nicer than anything we'd seen. We decided on the spot" to move in.

Tim Conarro, owner of Longmont Commercial Real Estate, said that the "slim pickings" among industrial space are motivating more of his clients to buy vacant land and build, noting that a number of lots are available in Weld County, between County Line Road and I-25.

"People are not finding what they need," Conarro said. "The existing inventory is so low that more people are looking into buying land and building."

The Eggers already have plans for another, smaller facility on an adjacent two-acre lot. And they have eyes on surrounding land for future expansion.

"Hopefully, there's five more buildings in the next five years," said Ross Eggers. "The natural food (trend) seems to be continuing, and we hope it does."

Fiona's Natural Foods packager Anitra Schlieker (CQ) boxes up retail packages of granola in the production facility at Skyway Foods on Tuesday. Go to dailycamera.com for more photos. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

Natural and organic products have always been big business in Boulder County, but the allure of clean eating has spread throughout the nation, growing the industry to a $60.7 billion venture.

According to Nutrition Business Journal estimates, consumer sales of natural and organic foods and beverages grew 12.7 percent in 2014, and double-digit growth for is anticipated for 2015, though data for the year is not yet finalized.

"To put that in comparison, the total food and beverage industry grew barely just 2 percent in 2014, so it's really strong growth for natural and organic compared to the industry overall," said Carolotta Mast, executive director of content and insights for New Hope Natural Media.

'Building a community of like-minded people'

Boulder County has become the epicenter of that growing category, and local businesses remain central to that — whether they're in downtown Boulder or just outside Longmont city limits, said Bill Capsalis, president of trade group Naturally Boulder.

"Where people make their food is only a relative concept," he said. "How good it is and if are they growing is what matters most.

"Commercial kitchen spaces have always formed the basis for small communities to develop. When you have manufacturers who are all mission-aligned working out of the same building, it seems to create a lot of good energy."

Sharing space also paves the way for most cost savings when speciality equipment is needed. When Veggie Gos needed a metal detector, it borrowed time on Fiona's instead of buying its own.

"We're all at different stages and have different strengths, so we can crowd source a solution," McHugh said. Plus, he added, "It's really good to have landlords that are on the same page as your company."

The Eggers love their new role as lessors.

"As we've gotten into this more and more, we decided we like servicing this industry and providing space that doesn't exist," said Jarrett Eggers. "We're building a community of like-minded people that have the same interests."

If things go according to plan, that community will keep on growing.

"There's so many entrepreneurs in this industry coming out of the area," Ross Eggers added. "Just to be able to pull them into one area would be incredible."

Shay Castle: 303-473-1626, castles@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/shayshinecastle