Vaccine will be used on babies at risk for mosquito-borne disease

The world's first malaria vaccine is a go with European drug regulators after it was recommended safe and effective for babies at risk of the 'mosquito-born disease' in Africa.

Mosquirix must first win agreement from African governments as the vaccine only offers only partial protection. Highlights By Catholic Online (NEWS CONSORTIUM) Catholic Online (www.catholic.org) 7/27/2015 (9 months ago) Published in Health Keywords: Malaria, vaccine, African babies, World Health Organization, Mosquirix

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - Called Mosquirix, the vaccine was developed by British drug maker GlaxoSmithKline and the PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative. It's the very first licensed human vaccine against malaria, which continues to plague Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia.



Mosquirix must first win agreement from African governments as the vaccine only offers only partial protection.





"it would begin a review in October on when and where it could be used. The WHO aims to make a recommendation by November," according to Reuters.



"We will look at the vaccine from the point of view of public health,

We need to think closely about how best to add - and if to add - a malaria vaccine across certain malaria endemic areas."



Part-funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the vaccine will now be assessed by the World Health Organization, or WHO. The organization says" WHO representative Gregory Hartl says. "

Malaria continues to claim the life of one child every minute. Infecting around 200 million people a year, Malaria kills "an estimated 584,000 people in 2013, the vast majority of them babies in sub-Saharan Africa," according to Reuters.



"While RTS,S on its own is not the complete answer to malaria, its use alongside those interventions . such as bed nets and insecticides would provide a very meaningful contribution to controlling the impact of malaria on children in those African communities that need it the most," Andrew Witty, GSK's chief executive says. He says that the European Medicines Agency's positive opinion was an important step towards making the world's first malaria vaccine available.



Assessed for quality, safety, and efficacy the vaccine was analyzed "under a special procedure that allows the EMA to evaluate a product even if it will not be marketed in the European Union," according to Reuters.



In spite of these high hopes, "Mosquirix would still have to be reviewed by national regulatory authorities in any country wishing to use it." It remains unlikely that the vaccine will be rolled out anywhere until at least 2017.

---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.