As well-intentioned as it may have seemed on the drawing board, the launch of the Affordable Care Act has been anything but what it was intended to be. The rollout has been peppered with carve-outs and exceptions for special interest groups, delays in key provisions decided not by the lawmakers who passed the law but by the president himself, and a near $1 billion website that has become the poster child for government inefficiency and waste.

According to an article on The Daily Caller website, more people have lost their company-sponsored health insurance than have signed up for the federal program. Businesses have reacted to the big-government takeover by reducing full- time positions to part-time and trimming their overall workforces. The possibility of a government bailout of insurance companies whose policy holder profiles are out of balance for profitable operation is already being discussed.

Critics of Obamacare have long predicted that the rollout of the government-driven health program would have a profound negative effect on business and employees. Supporters of the program have frequently pointed to a lack of hard data to support that criticism. Now all of that has changed.

On Feb. 3, the Congressional Budget Office, a well-respected and historically neutral agency of the federal government announced that it projects that due to Obamacare, millions of workers will reduce their hours worked, which when totaled is the equivalent of more than two million FTEs.

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, its Free Enterprise program and the International Franchise Association now have the answers, too - in cold, hard data. The data demonstrate how Obamacare will result in increased costs for employers, reduced coverage for employees and cuts in full-time employees.

A survey by Public Opinion Strategies documents that 31 percent of franchise businesses and 12 percent of non-franchise businesses have already trimmed workers’ hours as a result of the enactment of Obamacare. An interesting aspect of these reductions is that they have been made more than a year before the delayed employer mandate provision in the law goes into effect in January, part of which has now been delayed for another year. One can only wonder what more will change between now and that date.

Other data document that 27 percent of franchise and 12 percent of non-franchise businesses have already replaced full-time positions with part-time positions as a direct result of the law. Another huge red flag is a survey finding that 28 percent of franchise and non-franchise businesses plan to eliminate their health insurance altogether in favor of simply paying the penalty associated with doing so.

If you haven’t grasped the disastrous impact of Obamacare on business yet, consider yet another job-crushing finding from the survey. ACA’s employer mandate will have a major impact on companies with 40-70 employees. More than half of companies in this category (57 percent franchise, 52 percent non-franchise) say they are already making personnel plans to stay below the 50 full-time equivalent employee threshold by cutting staff and hiring more temporary help.

The full effects of the Affordable Care Act have yet to be realized. If current trends continue, it is highly likely that its full rollout will result in more negative outcomes than positive ones.

The unintended consequences of what looked good on the drawing board are likely to outweigh any positive outcomes. Obamacare appears to be what many perceive it to be: more government intrusion and over-regulation. Where this massive shift in health care policy will ultimately lead us is still unknown, but one thing is certain: Change is again in the wind.

Mike Varney is the President and CEO of the Metropolitan Tucson Chamber of Commerce.