One girl squeezes out the pus that's been collecting in her ear for years, but she may still need to see a dermatologist to keep it from coming back.

One girl squeezes out the pus that's been collecting in her ear for years, but she may still need to see a dermatologist to keep it from coming back. Screen shot, YouTube.com

Popping a zit or pimple is already pretty satisfying, but what about popping zits you’ve unknowingly had for years? Kris Honey’s 11-year-old daughter did exactly that after figuring out bumpy tissue on her ear was really a cyst, BuzzFeed reported.

Honey explained that her daughter has had this “ear zit” for 6 years, since she was about 2 or 3 years old. The two thought it was scar tissue until her daughter grew curious and tried to pop it like any ole zit. In the video Honey posted to YouTube (copied below), viewers can see everything that ensues, including the years-worth of pus that one YouTube commenter described as silly string.

“She’s been self-conscious about it for years,” Honey said. “She’s so very happy it’s gone!”

Further in the video’s comment section are several concerned users claiming to be registered nurses — if Honey's daughter doesn’t see a dermatologist to “get the cyst wall out,” it’s likely it will come back. According to Everyday Health, this may be a valid concern.

Cysts are a sac-like structure that fill with various materials, but when they specifically fill with pus, they become an abscess. The National Institutes of Health cites abscesses occur when an area of tissue becomes infected, and the resulting pus is "the buildup of fluid, living and dead white blood cells, dead tissue, and bacteria or other foreign substances." These abscesses have a distinct cell wall, which secrete proteins that smell terrible when they're drained. You can drain them on your own (here's how to do it safely), but often times surgery is required to completely drain and remove any materials to prevent further infection or inflammation.

Really, it all depends on where the cyst or abscess is located, as well as how it feels. Given the amount of time Honey's daughter had her zit, it may be a good idea to visit the doctor, just in case.