CLEVELAND, Ohio - Only the United States and Papua New Guinea made this list -- but bragging rights are not in order.

They are the only two countries where paid maternity leave is not required by law. Absent a paycheck, a new mother is often faced with only two unpromising options: Drain savings or other resources to stay home with her newborn or return to work sooner than she wanted.

The merits of requiring most employers to grant paid medical and family leave and make sick time mandatory have periodically been debated as policy issues for years. Now they are again coming to the fore.

During his State of the Union address in January, President Barack Obama pushed for extending paid medical leave and sick days to more American workers. In February, U.S. Rep. Rosa DeLauro, of Connecticut, introduced the Healthy Families Act, which would require employers to allow workers to earn paid sick time.

A report last year by the International Labour Organization in Geneva, Switzerland placed the U.S. and Papua New Guinea on that very short - and what many would say unenviable -- list. The report looked at 185 countries and territories. That means that the U.S. is not only an outlier among most of its economic peers, but also generally among most nations.

Natalie Grabowski of Cleveland Heights, a licensed professional counselor, said paid maternity leave should be mandatory. When her son was born last year, Grabowski took off 12 weeks. Even though she got some disability pay and used sick days and vacation time, combined they didn't equal all of her missed paychecks. So, she ended up raiding her retirement savings. The federal Family and Medical Leave Act, passed in 1993, guarantees workers up to 12 workweeks off, but it doesn't require that employers pay them for the time they are away from work.

"It angers me that the United States does not offer mandatory paid maternity leave," she wrote in an email. "We claim to be a nation that values family, and that has political parties that tout being for families and the working people, but we do nothing to support what families, or in particular, working families, have to do to make ends meet."

In the State of the Union, Obama called on Congress to pass legislation allowing workers to earn up to seven days of paid sick time per year. He also proposed more than $2 billion in new funding aimed at encouraging states to develop paid family and medical leave programs. The Healthy Families Act would require employers to allow workers to earn up to seven days of paid sick leave to address either their health needs or those of their families.

Grabowski said new laws are needed to reflect the economic realities many American families face.

"We are no longer a nation where one income can support a family of four or more," she wrote in an email. "Incomes have remained stagnant, but expenses have climbed exponentially. We claim to be a first world country, but Third World countries (to which we claim to be better off than) offer paid maternity leave."

Randy Johnson, senior vice president of labor, immigration, and employee benefits for the U.S. Chamber Of Commerce in Washington, D.C., said it should remain the role of employers - and not government - to determine whether workers should receive paid leave.

"Mandating paid leave is consistent with this (Obama) administration's view of imposing burdensome requirements on businesses without doing adequate preparation or outreach," he wrote in an email. "Employers recognize the desirability of paid leave and many of them currently provide it when it is feasible and consistent with their resources.

"Saddling America's smallest employers with a new inflexible mandate, enforced by private law suits and the Department of Labor, at a time when they are already struggling with the intricacies of Obamacare, is the wrong approach," Johnson wrote.

Supporters of the Healthy Families Act said it is neither good for businesses, workers, nor society, in general, when people come to work sick or can't take off to care for sick children or other relatives.

"The American Productivity Audit completed in 2003 found that lost productivity due to illness costs $226,000,000,000 annually, and that 71 percent of that cost stems from presenteeism, the practice of employees coming to work despite illness," the bill states. "Studies in the Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, the Employee Benefit News, and the Harvard Business Review show that presenteeism is a larger productivity drain than either absenteeism or short-term disability."

The bill also says that nearly 40 percent of private sector employees, and 11 percent of those in the public sector, don't have paid sick days. Obama has instructed federal agencies to offer up to six weeks of paid sick leave for parents with a new child. He has also asked Congress to pass legislation giving federal employees an additional six weeks of paid parental leave.

Low-wage workers are those least likely to have paid sick days, the bill said. It said that 70 percent of private sector workers with wages in the bottom 25 percent didn't have paid sick time. Only 13 percent of workers with wages in the top 25 percent didn't have paid sick time.

A Healthy Families bill was introduced in the last session of Congress, but never came up for a vote. Many -- proponents and opponents, alike - are making early predictions that this bill will meet a similar demise.

Johnson said it is hard to take the bill as an earnest attempt to expand paid sick time to more workers.

"This legislation was first introduced almost a decade ago," he wrote in an email. "The Democrats made no effort to move legislation when they had large majorities in both the House and the Senate, and President Obama ready to sign it after the 2008 elections. If the administration was serious about this they would have tried to negotiate a deal."

Although Obama called for Congress to pass a paid sick days bill in his State of the Union, he also stressed the role states should play in fulfilling such a mission. In addition to the more than $2 billion the president is proposing for states to develop paid family and medical leave programs, he said $1 million in existing Labor Department funding would be used to help states and municipalities conduct feasibility studies for issuing such benefits.

"Forty-three million workers have no paid sick leave -- 43 million," he said in the address. "Think about that. And that forces too many parents to make the gut-wrenching choice between a paycheck and a sick kid at home.

"So, I'll be taking new action to help states adopt paid leave laws of their own," Obama continued. "And since paid sick leave won where it was on the ballot last November, let's put it to a vote right here in Washington."

Perhaps this is a strategy fashioned after what has happened in the campaign to raise the federal hourly minimum wage, which is currently $7.25, to $10.10. That bill remains stalled in Congress. However, such campaigns shifted to cities and states, many of which have raised their minimum wage. Ohio could be next. A bill in the state legislature proposes raising Ohio's minimum wage, which is currently $8.10, to $10.10.

Some cities have passed mandatory paid sick days legislation, including Tacoma, Washington, which in January, passed a bill requiring employers to offer at least three days of paid sick leave beginning next year.

Grabowski, the new mom from Cleveland Heights, said not having paid leave is aiding in the erosion of the American dream for many families. She said not having such leave contributes to threatening low-income families with poverty and keeping "middle-income families scrambling to pay the bills."

Though back to work, Grabowski said she is still feeling the effects of not having paid maternity leave. For example, she doesn't know when she will be able to restore her retirement savings, especially given the high cost of daycare for an infant.

"We wanted to have another child in the future, but we don't know if we can afford to," she wrote in an email. "I am the breadwinner of my family. If I don't get paid, we don't eat, have a roof over our heads, or have heat and water. Unpaid leave isn't an option for us."