Something truly remarkable happened in Jefferson City last week as the House Committee on Emerging Issues moved toward a vote on Senate Joint Resolution 39 — SJR 39. There was inspirational agreement as to “what the world needs now.”

The sponsor of SJR 39, Sen. Bob Onder of St. Charles, argued that Missouri needed more religious freedom. He proposed a constitutional amendment that would have allowed legal discrimination toward same-sex couples by some individuals and broadly defined “religious institutions.” He especially sought to create a right for those who work in wedding-connected industries (bakers, photographers, florists, etc.) to refuse to sell their services to same-sex couples.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

But during the debate over SJR 39, we were pleased to hear several members of the committee, some who voted “yes” and some who voted “no,” say what we really need is more love. Rep. Jack Bondon, a “yes” vote, made this point eloquently and strongly, saying the General Assembly must be able to discuss difficult issues “without demeaning and demagoguery.” He closed by saying what matters most is that you “love your neighbor.”

We strongly endorse a politics of love. We need more loyalty, the kind of love that stands by the loved one when disagreements emerge, continuing to respect and trust.

Freedom, liberty and independence are fine, but they are not a sufficient foundation for a nation. For every flag proclaiming “Don’t Tread on Me,” we need a flag that says “Join, Or Die” — Benjamin Franklin’s famous cartoon showing how essential it was for the American colonies to join to fight together. Loyalty is as important as freedom.

Many same-sex spouses have religious convictions as deep and sincere as those of Sen. Onder’s dissenting baker — and belong to churches that honor their marriages. That is the beauty and the challenge of living in these United States.

SJR 39 divorced liberty from love, independence from interdependence. We are glad that SJR 39 failed in the end (in a 6-6 tie) because it ignored the necessity for us to coexist amicably in spite of deep-seated differences.

We need laws that do a better job of balancing freedom and loyalty. We especially need the respectful and thorough periods of study and discussion that Rep. Bondon has recommended.

We hope to see the politics of love break forth in 2016 electoral campaigns and the 2017 legislative session of the Missouri General Assembly. A great place for the kind of respectful and thoughtful discussion that Rep. Bondon has endorsed is the income guidelines for our Medicaid program. What does it mean to love our neighbor when more than 300,000 low-wage workers in Missouri cannot afford an insurance plan through the Affordable Care Act Marketplace but also make more than $300 per month so cannot get into Medicaid?