The Democrat-controlled Senate voted 72-26 Thursday to pass a $1.1 trillion “omnibus” spending bill to keep government operations funded until Sept. 30.

All 26 “nay” votes came from Republicans. Two Republicans, Sens. Saxby Chambliss (Ga.) and Tom Coburn (Okla.), did not vote.

Here are the 17 Republicans who voted to pass the bill:

Lamar Alexander (Tenn.) Kelly Ayotte (N.H.) Roy Blunt (Mo.) John Boozman (Ark.) Dan Coats (In.) Thad Cochran (Miss.) Susan Collins (Maine) Mark Kirk (Ill.) Lindsey Graham (S.C.) Orrin Hatch (Utah) John Hoeven (N.D.) Johnny Isakson (Ga.) Jerry Moran (Kan.) Lisa Murkowski (Alaska) Richard Shelby (Ala.) David Vitter (La.) Roger Wicker (Miss.)

Here are the 26 Republicans who voted against the bill:

John Barrasso (Wyo.) Richard Burr (N.C.) Bob Corker (Tenn.) John Cornyn (Texas) Mike Crapo (Idaho) Ted Cruz (Texas) Mike Enzi (Wyo.) Deb Fischer (Neb.) Jeff Flake (Ariz.) Chuck Grassley (Iowa) Dean Heller (Nev.) James Inhofe (Okla.) Mike Johanns (Neb.) Ron Johnson (Wis.) Mike Lee (Utah) John McCain (Ariz.) Mitch McConnell (Ky.) Rand Paul (Ky.) Rob Portman (Ohio) Jim Risch (Idaho) Pat Roberts (Kan.) Marco Rubio (Fla.) Tim Scott (S.C.) Jeff Sessions (Ala.) John Thune (S.D.) Pat Toomey (Pa.)

Having already passed the Republican-controlled House of Representatives, the bill now heads to President Barack Obama’s desk for final approval.

The House passed the bill Wednesday with an overwhelming 359-67, bipartisan majority.

The 1,582-page bill funds every agency of government, pairing increases for NASA and Army Corps of Engineers construction projects with cuts to the Internal Revenue Service and foreign aid. It pays for implementation of Obama’s health care law.

Shortly before the final vote, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, attacked Senate Democrats, accusing them of ignoring the problems caused by the health care law.

“It is abundantly clear that millions of Americans are being harmed right now by this failed law,” Cruz said.

Unlike last fall, when he spoke for 21 straight hours and helped force the government shutdown over defunding “Obamacare,” this time he clocked in at 17 minutes and simply asked the Senate to unanimously approve an amendment to strip out Obamacare funding. Democrats easily repelled the maneuver.

The 1582-page bill is really 12 bills wrapped into one in negotiations headed by Rep. Harold Rogers (R-Ky.) and Sen. Barbara Mikulski (D-Md.) respective chairmen of the House and Senate Appropriations committees, and their subcommittee lieutenants.

They spent weeks hashing out line-by-line details of a broad two-year budget accord passed in December, the first since 2009.

The bill increases spending by about $26 billion over fiscal 2013, with most of the increase going to domestic programs. Almost $9 billion in unrequested money for overseas military and diplomatic operations helps ease shortfalls in the Pentagon and foreign aid budgets.

“The Internal Revenue Service, a pariah agency for Republicans after revelations that it targeted tea party groups for tough examinations, would get $500 million less than last year,” the Associated Press reported.

“Democrats won extra money for Head Start’s preschool programs, enough to serve another 90,000 young children. The Federal Aviation Administration would get less than Congress enacted last year, but enough money was included to avoid 2013′s furloughs and hiring freezes for air traffic controllers,” the report adds.

“The FBI won extra money, including almost twice as much to help it conduct background checks on firearms purchasers. The National Institutes of Health would get $29.9 billion, about $1 billion above last year’s budget.”

The bill also halts $20 billion in automatic cuts that would have been applied to the Pentagon’s budget (this would have been in addition to the $34 billion in sequester cuts put in place last year).

The Associated Press contributed to this report.



–

Follow Becket Adams (@BecketAdams) on Twitter

This post has been updated.