Breitbart News has spent most of the past decade assaulting what it sees as the sacred cows worshiped by liberals in government, journalism, and Hollywood. Now it’s turning to Big Tech. On Tuesday the right-wing news site is launching Breitbart Tech, a new section of its website focused on technology.

The man in charge of the effort is Milo Yiannopoulos, a British journalist and provocateur who co-founded the Kernel tech site before moving to Breitbart. The site has hired six full-time staffers dedicated to subjects such as e-sports and free speech on the Internet. Expect not to see much coverage on, say, the economics of venture capital, but a lot on the simmering culture wars that happen in the far corners of Reddit. There will also be plenty of Yiannopoulos himself. His writing generally casts him as the protagonist, and his articles tend to start off with phrases like, “I’m a slut, and I have been shamed,” or “I am always right.” A Fusion profile referred to him as the “ultimate troll.”

To judge by Yiannopoulos’s writing for Breitbart so far, the biggest issue in tech isn’t government spying or overvalued startups. It’s women. Most of Yiannopoulos’s tech reporting for Breitbart has focused on Gamergate, the yearlong controversy over gender in gaming. The mainstream media has mostly covered the movement as a semi-organized campaign of harassment against prominent women in video games (Bloomberg Businessweek ran a cover story on the controversy last November). On Monday, organizers of the South by Southwest conference canceled two panels on gender in gaming, citing unspecified threats of violence.

Yiannopoulos rejects the view that women in gaming are under siege. He claims that harassment comes from trolls looking to ruin any online conversation, and dismisses any threats of real-life violence as noncredible. To him, Gamergate devolved into an example of how the politically correct mores of mainstream American society infringe upon free speech. “Gamergate is the culmination of every other fight you’ve ever heard of on the Internet,” he said in an interview with Bloomberg. “Every big controversy on the Internet is about libertarians vs. authoritarians.”

He mostly sees technology companies as hamstrung by their own progressive ideologies. Feminists are attacking tech and gaming companies because the awkward men who run them are easy targets, Yiannopoulos said. He stresses that he loves women but maintains they are underrepresented in tech because of basic differences between the sexes.

His views on another hot-button issue—immigration—are much closer to the standard Silicon Valley line, albeit in more bombastic language. He proposes unlimited immigration for high-skilled tech workers: “Instead of hollowing out the middle class by importing millions of cheap, unskilled workers, America should focus on the top talent of foreign countries,” he wrote on Breitbart earlier this month. “Tough luck for China and Russia if they can’t offer an American level of quality of life for geniuses.”

Yiannopoulos is against net neutrality, offers a general unease with government spying, and says the basic underlying theme of the site’s coverage is supporting the right of people to say whatever they want. “We’re totally going to get into this stuff,” he said. “Breitbart is going to be free-speech central.”