HEMET: Retirees offered cash to switch health plans Share Pin It More Galleries Related article » BY THE NUMBERS 239: Number of retirees receiving health care benefits from the city of Hemet 293: Current Hemet employees $4.2 million: Cost of retiree health care in 2015-16 $3 million: Cost for employee health care in 2015-16 $17,405: Annual per capita cost of retiree health care $41,951: Annual cost of most expensive plan

Healthcare costs for retirees have become such a burden in Hemet that interim City Manager Gary Thornhill said they could bankrupt the city if not kept in check.

“Nobody ever saw the costs escalating like they have recently,” Thornhill told the City Council on Tuesday night, Sept. 8. “If the city were to continue down this path, we’d probably be out of business within two years.”

In an effort expected to save the city millions of dollars, the Hemet City Council approved offering incentives to some retirees to switch their health insurance plan.

Of 239 former employees and family members who still have their healthcare costs paid for by the city, about 60 are enrolled in two Aetna plans that are not only costly, but subject to a massive price hike in coming years, according to city officials.

It is estimated up to $13 million over the next five years can be saved by moving retirees out of the plans, finance director Jessica Hurst said.

“It will be a huge savings for the city, and help us on our path to fiscal solvency,” Hurst said.

Former workers are not being asked to give up a benefit they earned.

“These plans are equal to or better than what they have now,” councilwoman Bonnie Wright said. “It was never our intent to take away what was promised to them.”

Hurst said meetings were held with retirees, who were positive about the change.

“It’s been a good, productive kind of process,” Hurst said. “They’ve been very, very receptive.”

Until 1998, employees of retirement age with a specified number of years working for the city were offered healthcare for life when they stopped working.

The council voted 4-0, with K. Paul Raver absent, to offer retirees $5,000 to switch plans or accept a monthly stipend or cash buyout.

Hemet continues to struggle with its finances, dipping into its reserves to balance the budget for the seventh consecutive year.

The city is budgeted to spend $4.2 million on retiree healthcare in this fiscal year, Hurst said. That number could grow to more than $9 million in 2020 under the current plans, which will be subject to a 40 percent excise tax under the Affordable Care Act.

The city will spend around $3 million on healthcare costs for its almost 300 current employees, the majority of whom are not eligible for lifetime healthcare at retirement.

Hurst estimates the incentives would cost $325,000 if all retirees switch plans, but that will be more than offset by the savings of $700,000 to $1.2 million in the first year alone.

In lieu of the incentive to switch out of the Aenta plans by Sept. 30, retirees may opt for up to $1,028 per month or a lump-sum cash payment to seek their own health insurance as the city will discontinue offering the Aetna plan in one year.

“It makes the program more sustainable,” Hurst said. “We need the city to be fiscally healthy.”

Contact the writer: 951-368-9086 or cshultz@pe.com