LOS ANGELES — It was about this time last year when Rockies manager Walt Weiss started thinking he had found a starting center fielder and leadoff hitter in Charlie Blackmon.

Blackmon, a doubles machine at the time, was named the National League player of the week for Sept. 16-22, 2013. In Blackmon, Weiss saw a smart, fast player with power potential and a tireless work ethic.

When the Rockies traded Dexter Fowler to Houston during the winter, Weiss figured he already had Fowler’s replacement in hand. Blackmon has proved him right.

Blackmon entered Friday night’s game against the Los Angelese Dodgers with 19 homers and 47 extra-base hits.

From the leadoff spot, Blackmon is hitting .288 with 69 RBIs, the most among major-league leadoff men.

True, his .333 on-base percentage ranks just fifth among NL qualifiers, but throw in Blackmon’s 28 stolen bases — the most by a Colorado player since Willy Taveras set a team record with 68 in 2008 — and he has fulfilled Weiss’ expectations.

Rather than bulking up for power during the offseason, Blackmon focused on improving his speed and ability to get a quick jump.

“It’s paid off,” Weiss said. “He’s turned into a very good base-stealer. I think it’s about increased confidence. He started thinking like a base-stealer.

“And he’s a student of the game. He studies a lot of video of opposing pitchers, so he knows who he can run on. He goes into a game very prepared.”

Dickersons expecting. Corey Dickerson’s breakout season with the Rockies is over. He has returned to his native Mississippi to be with his wife, Beth Anne. The couple is expecting their first child.

Dickerson hit .312 with a .364 on-base percentage and has a team-high 24 home runs.

Though still not a refined outfielder, he’s made significant strides in left field. He’s improved enough that Weiss recently said he feels comfortable leaving in Dickerson to play left field during the late innings of tight ballgames.

Kershaw for MVP. The most recent National League pitcher to win the NL’s MVP award was St. Louis’ Bob Gibson in 1968.

Dodgers ace Clayton Kershaw, who no-hit the Rockies in June at Dodger Stadium, is on the verge of matching Gibson’s feat.

He has earned Weiss’ vote.

“I think in only extreme cases should a pitcher win an MVP, but I think he’s making a case for that with the season he’s put together,” the manager said. “Unfortunately, I’ve witnessed it firsthand. If a guy dominates at the level he has, he has to be in the MVP conversation.

“I don’t have an issue with Kershaw being the MVP. I think he’s been that dominate this year.” Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post