PR Web

New York, NY (PRWEB) May 25, 2014

Insurance claims handling, previously a labor-intensive process, has been transformed over the past decade by the Insurance Claims Processing Software industry. According to IBISWorld Industry Analyst Sarah Kahn , "Industry operators market their products, which are used to process insurance claims and manage policies, primarily to the Property, Casualty and Direct Insurance industry ( IBISWorld report 52412) and the Life Insurance and Annuities industry (52411a)." Property and casualty (P&C) insurers and life insurers actively seek to differentiate themselves in their competitive environments with these products, designed to streamline operations, reduce process complexity and costs, manage compliance with new regulations and increase customer satisfaction. Over five years to 2014, industry revenue is expected to increase an average annual 4.0%, to reach $5.4 billion .

Claims processing software publishers are affected by the investment capabilities of P&C and life insurance companies. The performance of P&C insurers is reliant on several factors, including growth in the number of motor vehicle registrations and the homeownership rate. Moreover, life insurance margins are affected by per capita disposable income levels, as households with rising wealth protect their assets, as well as the overall state of employment, as an increase in the number of workers stimulates demand for employer-sponsored group insurance; the yield on the 10-year Treasury note affects both these drivers since a majority of insurance investment income is related to fixed-income securities, severely impacted by interest rate movements. With all these conditions showing signs of recovery and benefiting downstream customers, revenue for claims processing software publishers is expected to grow 1.2% in 2014.

The next five years will bring fresh changes to the young industry, including new business models and predictive analytics. "Software publishers are expected to continue rapidly shifting toward cloud computing, a technology that will expand software capabilities on platforms previously limited by hardware," says Kahn. Furthermore, companies will strive to make data more accessible and are expected to invest heavily in new security measures. The shift will likely accelerate the adoption of new business models, such as software as a service. The race to find an analytical tool that predicts the likelihood of individual claims to cause financial loss to insurance companies will stimulate industry growth; industry revenue is expected to grow in five years to 2019.

The Life Insurance and Annuities industry operates with a low level of market share concentration. The top four companies are estimated to account for less than 8.0% of total industry revenue in 2014. The combination of high demand, increasing industry revenue and profit, along with low barriers to entry, has created ample opportunities for new entrants. In the past five years, industry operators have also found it easy to create specialized products for niche insurance markets. Increased demand for product innovations, such as predictive analytics, telematics-based data collection and mobile applications has also enabled new players to enter the industry.

For more information, visit IBISWorld's Insurance Claims Processing Software in the US industry report page.

Follow IBISWorld on Twitter : https://twitter.com/#!/ IBISWorld

Friend IBISWorld on Facebook : http://www.facebook.com/pages/IBISWorld/121347533189

IBISWorld industry Report Key Topics

The Insurance Claims Processing Software industry develops and sells software that is used to process insurance claims and manage policies.

Industry Performance

Executive Summary

Key External Drivers

Current Performance

Industry Outlook

Industry Life Cycle

Products & Markets

Supply Chain

Products & Services

Major Markets

Globalization & Trade

Business Locations

Competitive Landscape

Market Share Concentration

Key Success Factors

Cost Structure Benchmarks

Barriers to Entry

Major Companies

Operating Conditions

Capital Intensity

Key Statistics

Industry Data

Annual Change

Key Ratios

About IBISWorld Inc.

Recognized as the nation's most trusted independent source of industry and market research, IBISWorld offers a comprehensive database of unique information and analysis on every US industry. With an extensive online portfolio, valued for its depth and scope, the company equips clients with the insight necessary to make better business decisions. Headquartered in Los Angeles , IBISWorld serves a range of business, professional service and government organizations through more than 10 locations worldwide. For more information, visit http://www.ibisworld.com or call 1-800-330-3772.

Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/2014/05/prweb11882796.htm