Courtroom apologies lead to embrace between defendant's, victim's mothers

Baxter (file photo)

The mothers of two teenagers — one a defendant accused in the hit-and-run that badly injured the other — embraced in Boulder District Court on Friday afternoon following an emotional plea and sentencing in the case.

Gabriel Baxter, 19, pleaded guilty to felony vehicular assault and misdemeanor third degree assault in a July 2, 2013, accident that left Luke Collier bleeding in the street. Collier suffered a traumatic brain injury.

Boulder District Judge Andrew MacDonald gave Baxter a two-year deferred sentence on the felony charge, which means it can be dismissed if he completes the time with no new offenses. He was given two years of probation on the misdemeanor count, including a requirement that he complete 250 hours of community service for an organization that benefits those with traumatic brain injuries.

"I really think it is important that you understand what your senseless actions that day have done to this young man," MacDonald told Baxter.

According to police, Baxter was visiting his friend Joshua Stegmeier in Longmont after meeting through a service organization online and the pair videotaped themselves prior to, during, and after a confrontation with Collier. According to court documents, the teens went to Collier's home, knowing he was angry at them from an ongoing dispute over text message, to coax him into chasing them and to record the incident. When Collier gave chase after finding them at his home, Stegmeier and Baxter reportedly fled to Stegmeier's parents' red Prius and Baxter got into the driver's seat while Stegmeier continued to record.

Advertisement

Baxter, police reported, sped away and Collier, who had jumped onto the car during the confrontation, fell off and suffered the head injury. Video clips recovered from Stegmeier's camera chronicled the plan and aftermath, according to report.

Boulder District prosecutor Catrina Weigel read excerpts in which Baxter said he didn't care if Collier had been hurt.

During the hearing on Friday, Baxter said he did not intend what he said. He turned to Collier and his parents in the courtroom and apologized, adding that he did not immediately learn the true nature of the injury. He said after he returned to Pennsylvania, the Stegmeiers told his family that Collier was OK and did not need visitors.

"We had been lied to countless times about how badly you had been injured," Baxter said.

His mother, Ellen Baxter, also spoke in court and to the Collier family.

She, too, said the Stegmeiers deceived her family about Collier's injuries.

"One of the most disgusting parts of this to me is we were not told the truth of Luke's injuries," she said.

She said they told her he suffered "bumps and bruises." The misinformation, she said, kept them from reaching out and apologizing and offering prayers.

"We're so sorry this happened and, actually, Luke, I am a pastor and you have no idea how many people around this world have been praying for you," she said, turning to address Collier, his mother and his father.

MacDonald said the apparent sincerity of Gabriel Baxter's apology gave him pause about jail time. He suspended a jail sentence and added that the teen does not appear to be the same as he was on the video. He also noted that he received many letters in support of Baxter and his character.

"You are getting an unbelievable break here by getting a deferred sentence on the felony charge," the judge told him. "This is an incredible opportunity for you."

Following the public apologies and after the sentencing, Ellen Baxter accepted a hug from Collier's mother before they all left the courtroom.

Stegmeier pleaded guilty in February to felony first-degree criminal trespass and was sentenced to community service, work crew, and a two-year probationary period.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Pierrette J. Shields at 303-684-5273 or pshields@times-call.com