It felt like an out-of-body experience, the day I looked down at my hands and didn't recognize them.

The thick scar across my right middle finger was still there, a reminder to never hand-wash wine glasses after you've been refilling them all night. But my palms were thickly calloused and the backs were lined with puffy veins.

These hands had been used. They were strong. They also were aging, just a little bit.

I don't remember noticing the first wrinkle on my face, but I remember the first thin, crepe-papery wrinkles on my hands, because they were unexpected. I'd never thought about my hands before, even though they'd brought me so much happiness: writing, playing the piano, aerial dance, snarkily tweeting about "Pretty Little Liars" (seriously, #PLL; it's a blast).

Joyful Skin client Barbara Gifford receives the finishing touches on a facial. (Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer)

The abuse was showing. Whose old, ratty hands were these?

I didn't seek out Diana Witherspoon to help my hands. I wanted to see her unique, only-in-Boulder spa.

With an address up Sunshine Canyon, I'd buckled down with a full bottle of water, a Pandora station and the expectation to go on a mini-road trip. Up, up, wait, I was there, awkwardly early. It had taken less than 10 minutes from downtown Boulder, yet when I stepped out of my car, I felt 100 miles deep into the forest.

Witherspoon greeted me in the driveway of her mountainside cottage that she and her husband built 26 years ago. I walked through the door, yet I still felt outside, as nearly the entire west side of the house was floor-to-ceiling windows with pristine panoramic mountain views.

This was the location for Joyful Skin, Witherspoon's in-home skin care and mini-spa business.

I rarely feel comfortable at in-home businesses. This was different, maybe because I didn't feel like I was in a home as much as I felt like I was in the middle of nature.

We walked out to the large wooden deck, with a hot tub, fire pit and cushioned outdoor furniture. This is where the mobile nail artist does the mani-pedis. Amid unbroken silence and a universe of pine trees. Quite different than the stinky, white-walled nail businesses in the mall.

In true Boulder style, a golden retriever puppy is Witherspoon's coworker.

Back inside and down a few stairs was the skin care room, again lined with airy windows and streaming peaceful music. All my favorite facial goodies filled the room: machines for microdermabrasion with LED light therapy, a microcurrent (which is said to lift your skin and improve circulation using barely perceivable electrical stimulation), a high-frequency machine whose claim is that it kills bacteria (including those underground zits before they emerge).

The room felt like a traditional esthetician's office, with both medical and natural lines and treatments. (Before opening Joyful Skin, Witherspoon worked in a med spa.) One shelf held Rhonda Allison products (I may or may not have tried to lick the pumpkin cleanser) and another contained Obagi. Above Obaji: a rack of locally made jewelry.

Witherspoon says she set up her spa to be different, to inspire full rejuvenation, inside and out. Guests may use her hot tub, bring food, read a book on the deck or even get treatments while watching TV, if that's their thing.

"The privacy and serenity of the space itself is what makes it so different," she says. "It's different than going to a spa where there are other people."

Here, you are the only client. Unless you invite a friend.

Every facial includes microdermabrasion, and every treatment includes a hand treatment. She uses the derm machine on the backs of your hands, pumps an enzyme on them, wraps them in hot mitts and finishes with lotion and a hand massage.

After all they've done for you, it's only fair that your hands get a spa day, too.

Somehow, even amid the scenery, the machinery and even the puppy, this realization is what hit me hardest up Sunshine Canyon. The eyes might be the window into the soul, but the hands are the road map of your life.

And it's nice to take the slow, winding, quiet road sometimes.

Learn more about this oh-so Boulder destination at joyfulskin.skincaretherapy.net.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay