School gardens have waxed, waned in popularity since 1890s

Teachers from Boulder's Creekside Elementary traveled to California in the summer of 2008 to learn more about the burgeoning school garden movement and participate in workshops on gardens as learning tools.

Creekside, with the help of a new nonprofit founded by Bryce Brown, had planted a garden in 2005 as part of a larger wellness program. At the time, Brown said, it was the only public school garden in the Boulder Valley School District.

"There's so much you can do with a school garden," said Creekside teacher Mary Strine, who went on the California trip and oversaw the garden for many years. "Everybody wants to go to the garden."

Now, 10 years since that first garden was planted at Creekside, 29 Boulder Valley schools have gardens, and another two schools — Columbine Elementary and Arapahoe Ridge High School — have greenhouses. Most gardens are at elementary schools, though Casey and Platt middle schools and Arapahoe Ridge, Fairview and New Vista high schools all have gardens.

The St. Vrain Valley School District counts nine school gardens, including one at a preschool and two at elementary charter schools. The other six are at neighborhood elementary schools.

St. Vrain Valley's gardens are supported by schools and parents.

Advertisement

In Boulder Valley, some school gardens were built using money from a $98,000 USDA Farm to Table grant the district received in 2013, some were supported by The Kitchen Community and some were paid for through parent fundraising.

Francis Smits, a seventh-grader at Platt Middle School in Boulder, helps Lisa Turner put in some beet plants Thursday at the school. Students planted the school garden with help from Wholly Bites and volunteers through a USDA grant, adding another garden to the growing number in the Boulder Valley School District. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

And 18 of the district's gardens are part of the Garden to Table program supported by Brown's Growe Foundation, which reaches about 7,700 students.

"When I started, I thought we might be able to use gardens to bring the community together to create a healthier future for kids," Brown said. "It reflects the values parents want their children to have, of healthy eating and caring for the planet."

Goal: A garden at every school

A recent national census of farm-to-school activities in 2011-2012, conducted by the USDA's Farm to School Program, found that 31 percent of responding districts had schools with edible gardens.

School gardens have waxed and waned in popularity, getting their start in the United States in the 1890s and booming during World War I and II as part of the victory garden movement. In the 1970s, school gardens became a way to teach about environmentalism. More recently, they've become part of the push for healthier school lunches.

Ann Cooper, Boulder Valley's food services director, said her goal is a garden at every elementary school.

"We want kids to grow their palates and eat more fresh, delicious food," she said. "One of the best ways to do that is get them to participate in growing their own food. When kids see what comes out of the earth and taste the fresh bounty of the garden, they're much more likely to try things."

Hayden Niederhauser holds a toad found in the garden plot at Red Hawk Elementary School in Erie while students were planting seeds and clearing weeds April 29. The St. Vrain Valley School District has nine school gardens. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Boulder Valley's newest garden was added last week at Boulder's Platt Middle School through the USDA grant.

Teachers from Platt attended an April "Garden as a Classroom" workshop in preparation, while Boulder Valley staff members and volunteers from a company called Wholly Bites built the beds.

Arapahoe Ridge High School students installed the irrigation, and Arapahoe Ridge and Platt students planted the seeds. Wholly Bites also "adopted" the garden, agreeing to help maintain it over the summer and in future years.

At the elementary level, students at Garden to Table schools planted lettuce in April that's now being harvested and served as lunchtime salads.

Tate Franz, a Crest View Elementary School fourth-grader, looks at a bug on the lettuce at the Boulder school's garden last month. (Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer)

In conjunction with the lettuce harvest, Boulder Valley hosts elementary school "rainbow" days — letting students try the salad bar for free and encouraging them to eat veggies and fruit in a multitude of colors.

'You clean it and pick it and eat it'

Brown, of the Growe Foundation, said gardens provide hands-on learning along with encouraging healthy eating. In conjunction with teachers, Growe created 45-minute lessons at each grade level that mesh with state standards. First-graders, for example, will collect seeds in the fall as part of a seed unit.

"It's a way to make learning real," Brown said.

In Boulder, Crest View Elementary fourth-graders recently compared a "natural" garden bed of lettuce — no cold protection, no extra water — with a bed that's watered and protected by plastic-covered hoops.

They checked the temperature and humidity, then made observations about the health of the plants and talked about the importance of water.

"It's cool to see the vegetables getting bigger," said fourth-grader Tate Franz.

Added classmate Ella Smith, "It's fun to plant them and see what happens."

She said the garden produce is healthier and tastes better because "you know what's been done to it. You clean it and pick it and eat it."

Brown described the program as a community effort, with parents leading the garden efforts at each school, Boulder's Cure Organic Farm growing the seedlings and businesses providing monetary support and volunteers.

"When we started out, we set the whole model up to be collaborative so it would be sustainable," he said.

He said he pulled ideas from California because there wasn't much happening with school gardens in Colorado, but he had to make adaptations based on state education standards and climate.

"One of the biggest challenges for us was to sync with our very different growing season," he said.

To make it easier on schools, the nonprofit program provides the heavy lifting, including preparing the beds for planting and maintaining irrigation systems. The program also provides custom-designed, protective hoop houses so the gardens can be planted early enough in the spring to harvest before the school year ends and can keep going longer in the fall.

'Kids can really change things'

Although there are fewer gardens in the neighboring St. Vrain Valley School District, parents at schools with gardens are equally passionate about their value.

The design plans for Erie's Red Hawk Elementary, which opened in 2011, included a small space for a garden. At the urging of the community, the garden was expanded to 1,500 square feet.

Parent Chad Niederhauser, who volunteers as the garden coordinator, said maintaining a school garden is labor-intensive, but worth it.

"I have a desire to get this generation in a different mindset about where their food comes from," he said. "It's worthwhile for them to know how food is grown, where it's coming from and that the soil is the lifeblood of everything. Kids can really change things."

To get the garden started, the school partnered with Whole Foods, raising about $8,000 through a reusable bag credit. A landscaper helped with materials and irrigation, and teachers and community members provided labor.

To extend the growing season and involve more students, every classroom has a grow station with lights and timers for seedlings.

In the garden itself, students in the garden club are the most involved.

Carmen Mendoza and Lauren Wong, twin sisters who both have children at Red Hawk, took over teaching the garden club lessons after a teacher left the school after the first year. They create the lessons and host a garden open house before school starts that includes releasing some 2,000 ladybugs.

"It helps our kids understand where our food comes from and how to make healthy choices," Mendoza said. "They try new foods because they get to touch and taste. It's so much fun."

Over the summer, parent volunteers and students in the school's summer program help with the garden. In the fall, the garden club harvests the bounty, making and eating a big salad and taking veggies home.

On a recent day, the 25 or so students in the club planted chard and flower seeds and added about 90 worms to the garden. They also learned worm basics, from the fertilizing power of worm poop to how their tunnels loosen soil.

The school's garden club fills up fast each year and has a wait list.

Second-grader Jacob Wieczorek said he signed up because he wants to help more with his family's garden.

"I like watering plants and dirty things," he said. "I like worms and frogs."

Third-grader Katherine Alvarado said she's most looking forward to seeing the flower seeds they planted in bloom.

"It's fun," she said. "You get to get your hands dirty."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa