Condoleezza Rice is a beautiful, accomplished woman. However, her legacy in the eyes of many, is tainted by her association with the Bush Administration. While that administration was marred with controversial moments, it is debatable if Ms. Rice should be forever linked to it by detractors.

Nevertheless, her appointment to the Dropbox board of directors has sparked an outcry of disappointment from users of the cloud service. Users seem concerned that her government associations will taint the integrity of the company and its stance on security. But is the furor warranted? As stated in a new blog posting, Dropbox does not seem to think so.

"There's nothing more important to us than keeping your stuff safe and secure. It's why we've been fighting for transparency and government surveillance reform, and why we've been vocal and public with our principles and values. We should have been clearer that none of this is going to change with Dr. Rice’s appointment to our Board. Our commitment to your rights and your privacy is at the heart of every decision we make, and this will continue", says Drew Houston, CEO of Dropbox.

Houston further explains, "we're honored to have Dr. Rice join our board -- she brings an incredible amount of experience and insight into international markets and the dynamics that define them. As we continue to expand into new countries, we need that type of insight to help us reach new users and defend their rights. Dr. Rice understands our stance on these issues and fully supports our commitments to our users".

Dropbox users are understandably wary in the current security climate. After all, between the NSA and Heartbleed bug, it is hard to trust anything or anyone. She served within a controversial administration in the midst of a very confusing and scary time in American history. Yes, that administration allegedly supported warrantless wiretapping -- an arguably horrible thing. However, it is debatable if this makes Condoleezza unfit to sit on the Dropbox board.

What do you think? Tell me in the comments.

Photo Credit: 360b/Shutterstock