Bad things are said to happen in threes.

It wouldn't take a great flight of imagination to apply that old saw to the volatile financial markets of the early 21st century. First came the global banking crisis in 2008. A few years later, the 19-country eurozone nearly broke apart. And this summer's China-related correction in stocks may foreshadow a third and final Act of the Terrible Trilogy, this time in emerging markets.

As with most dramas, the three acts flow from a single storyline: debt.

The financial crisis in the United States, of course, was triggered by dicey mortgage loans gone bad. Europe's flirtation with economic crisis also was related to borrowings that reached unserviceable levels in the context of economic stagnation. Though developed economies have stabilized, now emerging markets are threatened by suffocating corporate and sovereign debt that was enabled by ultralow interest rates in the rich world.

Growing up, slowing down

Compared with their aging counterparts, developing economies often seemed like fast-growing teenagers — impetuous, vulnerable and mistake prone, but a good long-term bet nonetheless. After recovering from a series of financial crisis in the 1980s and '90s, emerging markets did indeed leave their elders in the dust beginning with the U.S. recession in 2001.

Recently, however, economic growth and productivity in emerging markets have fallen sharply, mostly due to weak commodity prices, tepid export markets and backsliding corporate governance. Ominously, some of the buildup of emerging market debt is denominated in U.S. dollars, and thus may prove unserviceable if the dollar rises as the Fed raises interest rates.

But while the case for another emerging-market collapse is plausible, there are several reasons to think it won't happen, at least on the scale of previous meltdowns.

Many key developing countries have abandoned the hard currency pegs that once prevented gradual accommodation to economic reality and market forces. China's growth recession also may be bottoming, delaying what seems to be a near-certain day of reckoning for that country's debt-soaked financial system. And equity market valuations have dropped to levels that, while perhaps cheap for a reason, at least won't require a severe haircut.

Most importantly, developing economies have amassed $9 trillion in foreign reserves, or about nine times the amount authorities had on hand to defend their currencies in the 1990s.

Surprisingly, past upheavals in emerging markets have had a mostly benign impact on U.S. stock and bond prices.

Latin American crisis

A full-blown Latin American debt crisis erupted in August 1982, but that same month U.S. stocks took off on one of the strongest bull markets in history. Treasury prices also soared, though the rally in U.S. bonds was in response to the Fed taking its lead foot off the monetary brake.

When Mexico scrapped its currency controls in December 1994, the peso went into free-fall and took other Latin American markets down with it. Not to worry; over the next 12 months, U.S. stocks gained 38% and 10-year Treasury yields fell 2 percentage points.

The Asian currency crisis that began in July 1997 — and the subsequent Russian devaluation and default in August 1998 — also coincided with a surge in U.S. stock prices. Two years after Thailand's abrupt devaluation of the baht ignited the first wave of turmoil, the S&P 500 was trading 55% higher and 10-year Treasury yields about half a percentage point lower.

Every crisis is unique, and the inevitable fallout from the next round of turbulence in the emerging world is certain to be different as well. This time, U.S. bond yields might rise as foreign central banks sell Treasuries — a primary repository of reserves — to defend their currencies. Meanwhile, the hit to global growth from financial distress overseas also could be a strong headwind against stock prices, especially if China is at the epicenter of the slowdown.

Federal Reserve policy will be key as to whether there is an Act 3.

If benchmark interest rates in the U.S. rise too far too fast, it's likely that some emerging markets will lapse into crisis mode. How the Fed responds to that potential threat then would determine if the drama has a Hollywood ending.

Tom Saler is an author and freelance financial journalist in Madison. He can be reached at www.tomsaler.com.