Topics: day care safety, Editor's Picks, religious exemptions, Religious Freedom, Religious Right, Life News, News

In recent years, the right has put a lot of resources to expanding the concept of religious exemptions to the law, mostly as a weapon to stymie progress for women and LGBT people. Unable to stop federal laws requiring insurance plans to cover contraception or states to offer marriage licenses to same-sex couples, conservatives have turned their energies instead to making it as hard as possible for people to exercise their rights by arguing that businesses, non-profits and even state employees should be able to cite religion as an excuse not to obey laws protecting gay people from discrimination or securing women’s access to contraception services.

It’s an alarming push to expand the idea of religious exemptions past the right for an individual to practice their own faith to the “right” to impose that faith on others. However, this is far from the first time that conservatives have used religion as an excuse to offer broad exemptions from state and federal laws meant to protect people’s health and wellbeing. Many states have religious exemptions on all manner of health and safety regulations, even when it comes to those regulations meant to protect children from harm.

As investigative journalist Amy Julia Harris, writing for Reveal, has discovered, the mania for religious exemptions for regulations on day cares has led to a rash of children getting lost, hurt and in some cases, killed.

Most day cares operate under understandably strict regulations to keep the children safe, such as having training requirements for workers in first aid, and perhaps most importantly, limiting how many children that a single worker can look after at a time. But 16 states relax the requirements and six states — Alabama, Indiana, Missouri, Florida, North Carolina and Virginia — waive nearly all the health and safety standards, so long as your day care is affiliated with a church.

Unfortunately, this leads to quite a few religious day cares cutting corners in appalling ways, with an eye towards saving money. And children are paying the price.

Harris chronicles two very sad cases, involving 1-year-old Carlos Cardenas and Dylan Cummings, who was just a few weeks old. Both boys were sent to church-affiliated day cares that took full advantage of the religious exemptions from state day care regulations. Both boys died, in incidents that would have likely been prevented if the states held church day cares to the same standard that secular day cares are held.

These incidents are just the worst in a series of horror stories that Harris turned up in these states that have huge religious exemptions for day cares: babies left in dirty diapers so long their skin got infected, toddlers frequently running off from lack of supervision, children suffering from serious injuries due to lack of supervision.

On top of the accidents and neglect, Harris found the religious exemption situation being exploited even more deliberately. Day cares who call themselves religious are exempted from regulations barring corporal punishment in four states, and many take advantage, beating children with a ferocity that should chill any decent person.

“In Alabama, children were whipped with belts and locked in closets for so long that they peed their pants,” Harris writes. In many day cares, hildren were paddled and pinched and hit so hard it left bruises.