Photo

The $1.1 trillion spending bill for the 2016 fiscal year, agreed to by congressional leaders on Tuesday night, is good for what it does not contain.

In a victory for Democratic leaders, it omits hundreds of ideological and special-interest provisions that House and Senate Republicans hoped to attach to the appropriation measure. Among the rejected “riders” were restrictions on abortion, barriers to refugees, rollbacks of clean water rules and other environmental safeguards, curbs on financial and consumer reforms in the Dodd-Frank reform law as well as constraints on the regulation of health hazards, labor conditions, campaign finance and investment advisers.

Although some House Democrats have voiced opposition to a tax package negotiated along with the spending bill, the entire deal is an acceptable compromise. The deal fulfills a Democratic priority by making permanent the earned-income tax credit and other tax breaks for low-income working families that were scheduled to expire at the end of 2017. It meets a Republican goal by making permanent several temporary business tax breaks, including the research and development credit and bolstered writeoffs for investments by small businesses.

In an unseemly bow to campaign contributors, both parties agreed to postpone taxes that help finance the Affordable Care Act. Democrats supported a two-year delay in the 2018 effective date of the “Cadillac tax” on high-cost, employer-sponsored health care plans because labor unions oppose the tax; Republicans wanted the delay to weaken health reform.

The package also includes a two-year suspension of an excise tax on medical device makers and a one-year delay in an annual fee on health insurers. The delays cannot derail the health care law, but they do indicate that battles over health care reform will continue long after President Obama has left office.

The entire deal, in fact, raises larger issues that will have to be resolved later. Discretionary spending levels for next year, in both defense and nondefense programs, will be somewhat higher than this year, though still below their levels in 2010, after adjusting for inflation and population growth. That shortfall is one of many signs that government spending is not keeping up with the nation’s needs.

In addition, some objectionable riders did make it into the spending bill. The Securities and Exchange Commission will be barred from working on rules to require disclosure of political spending by publicly traded companies. The Internal Revenue Service will be barred from developing rules to ensure that social welfare organizations are not used to promote political agendas.

Perhaps most controversial, the final package is coupled with a Republican provision to lift the 40-year-old limit on exporting American crude oil. To help offset the potential negative effect of exporting oil, the deal renews tax credits for wind and solar power and reauthorizes the Land and Water Conservation Fund, which uses revenue from oil and gas leases to create and protect natural areas.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The deal is not perfect, but it is adequate. And it will let the White House and Congress focus on longstanding problems rather than another budget crisis.