WHEN the Citizens United decision came down in 2010, 80% of Americans were unhappy to learn that political speech by corporations was protected under the first amendment. Three years later an effort to undermine Obamacare by expanding the constitutional rights of corporations is quietly gaining ground in the courts. The campaign, summarised here, includes some 73 cases challenging the law’s requirement that health-insurance plans provided by large employers include coverage for birth control. (A limited exemption—which Republicans are trying to expand—applies to religious organisations.) This contraceptive mandate, detractors say, presents organisations owned by religious individuals opposed to certain forms of birth control with a dilemma: abandon their beliefs or pay a hefty fine of up to $100 per employee per day.

Conestoga Wood Specialties, a cabinet manufacturer with 950 employees in Pennsylvania, is one of the plaintiffs challenging the mandate. Conestoga is owned and run by the Hahns, a Mennonite family that considers two forms of birth control—the emergency contraceptives known as Plan B and ella—to be the sinful taking of embryonic life. The family has objected to Obamacare's mandate on constitutional grounds and under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), a 1993 law requiring that “substantial burdens” on religious exercise be justified by a compelling state interest. (RFRA reimposed the “strict scrutiny” standard for federal incursions on religious liberty after the Supreme Court deserted it in its Employment Division v Smith decision in 1990.)

This past July, the third circuit court of appeals rebuffed the Hahns’ claim, insisting that religious free exercise is a "purely personal" right:

We accept that the Hahns sincerely believe that the termination of a fertilized embryo constitutes an intrinsic evil and a sin against God to which they are held accountable...and that it would be a sin to pay for or contribute to the use of contraceptives which may have such a result. We simply conclude that the law has long recognized the distinction between the owners of a corporation and the corporation itself. A holding to the contrary—that a for-profit corporation can engage in religious exercise—would eviscerate the fundamental principle that a corporation is a legally distinct entity from its owners...

Earlier in the opinion, Judge Robert Cowen of the third circuit wrote, “Since Conestoga is distinct from the Hahns, the Mandate does not actually require the Hahns to do anything. All responsibility for complying with the Mandate falls on Conestoga.”

Corporations may have mission statements. They may advance political positions and, since Citizens United, may spend freely to advocate for particular candidates. Corporate entities can even be said to have a "conscience" in the sense of acting responsibly and with regard to moral principles. But, citing a previous ruling, the court said corporations "do not, separate and apart from the actions or belief systems of their individual owners or employees, exercise religion. They do not pray, worship, observe sacraments or take other religiously-motivated actions separate and apart from the intention and direction of their individual actors."

Few groups, religious or otherwise, take actions separate and apart from the intention and direction of their individual actors. And corporations do tithe, donate to religious charities and act in accordance with religious principles, say opponents of the mandate. In a case in Michigan the court noted how Thomas Monaghan, the plaintiff, incorporated his religious beliefs into the daily operations of his Domino’s Farms (DF) business by providing tenants with a Catholic chapel, a Catholic bookstore, a Catholic credit union, and food service providing Catholic menu options. In that case the court tried to side-step arguments over corporate-personhood by finding that DF is "merely the instrument through and by which Monaghan expresses his religious beliefs. Accordingly, DF may assert an RFRA claim on Monaghan’s behalf. The Court takes no position as to whether DF has an independent right to freely exercise religion."

To some that may seem like a distinction without a difference. In its petition requesting Supreme Court review of the third-circuit decision, Conestoga presented the question as follows: "Whether the religious owners of a family business, or their closely-held, for-profit corporation, have free exercise rights that are violated by the application of the contraceptive-coverage Mandate of the ACA." It then noted that the court has repeatedly allowed corporations to bring free-exercise claims.

This Court has allowed an Amish business owner to raise a free exercise defense to nonpayment of Social Security taxes... It has also let Jewish merchants challenge Sunday-closing laws on the same ground... These rulings were indisputably correct as neither RFRA nor the Free Exercise Clause contains an exception for activity carried out for profit. On the contrary, “religious exercise” under RFRA includes “any exercise of religion.”

The Obama administration disagrees. In its own petition the administration notes that Congress reined in the courts with RFRA, bringing them back to pre-Smith standards. "Entirely absent from that pre-Smith jurisprudence is any case affording free exercise rights to for-profit corporations," says the administration. Nor were for-profit corporations mentioned when RFRA was being debated in Congress.

Of course, even if the court finds that Conestoga enjoys a right to religious liberty, this right, like all constitutional guarantees, is limited. The administration implies that the promotion of public health, "unquestionably a compelling governmental interest", outweighs the corporation's free-exercise right (if it exists). It argues that increased access to contraceptive services leads to positive health outcomes for women and children. This is difficult to deny. The incorporators' religious beliefs do not, the administration writes, "trump the rights of the corporations’...full-time employees and their family members to receive the health coverage to which they are entitled by federal law." If Conestoga wins, what would prevent other corporations from demanding custom-tailored exemptions from federal laws? Could a business owned by Jehovah's Witness members refuse to purchase health plans that cover blood transfusions?

Matters of faith to one side, the question now facing the Supreme Court is rife with politics. Obamacare is enduring attacks on all fronts, and some portion of the conscientious objection to the contraceptive mandate is undoubtedly motivated by opposition to the health-care law in general. How the Supreme Court will sort this out is difficult to parse. The five conservative justices appear sceptical of Obamacare's underpinnings, while the four liberals on the court are unlikely to ratchet up constitutional rights for corporations. But it was Antonin Scalia who penned the 1990 Smith decision holding that courts should not carve out exemptions for people with religious objections to neutral, generally applicable laws. "To say that a nondiscriminatory religious practice exemption is permitted, or even that it is desirable," Mr Scalia wrote, "is not to say that it is constitutionally required, and that the appropriate occasions for its creation can be discerned by the courts."