Douglas Jacobs and Robert Restuccia

June 11, 2015

After two open enrollment periods for insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), millions of Americans with preexisting conditions now have access to health care coverage — many for the first time. One of the law’s most popular provisions is the ban on preexisting condition exclusions and denials.

But while ending preexisting condition exclusions is a major step towards ending discrimination in health care, the job is not done. Insurers still have an incentive to discriminate, and some insurers are continuing to do so by making medications for those with chronic health conditions unaffordable.

To prevent these discriminatory policies and others, it has become clear that the Obama administration needs to take a stronger stance.

Adverse Tiering

As a recent paper published in the New England Journal of Medicine revealed, some insurers are placing all drugs used to treat HIV on the highest cost-sharing tiers (>30 percent coinsurance) of health plans. The authors call this practice “adverse tiering” and its financial impact on consumers can be dramatic. Researchers estimate that treatment could cost an additional $3,000, on average, for an HIV-positive individual who is enrolled in such a plan. In essence, some health plans are signaling to those with HIV to take their business elsewhere or else they will face prohibitive out-of-pocket costs.

Roger Thompson, a middle-aged, HIV-positive freelance artist who lives in Washington, DC, experienced adverse tiering when he enrolled in an Aetna plan on DC Health Link, the DC health insurance marketplace, in 2014. To his surprise, after he enrolled in an Aetna plan, he was told HIV medications would cost over $20,000 annually. Unable to afford this, he opted not to take HIV medications for four months. Ultimately he traveled to Canada to purchase medications at a significantly lower cost to avoid ending up sick and in the hospital. Unsurprisingly, Roger decided to change plans in 2015.

In addition to being expensive for consumers, adverse tiering puts insurers that don’t engage in the practice at a competitive disadvantage — an influx of sick enrollees could reduce profits. As a result, adverse tiering is increasing in popularity among insurers. Avalere Health, a research and consulting firm, conducted a separate analysis of silver plan formularies across eight states and found adverse tiering was more prevalent in 2015 compared to 2014 for conditions like Multiple Sclerosis, HIV, Hepatitis, and various cancers. The data shows that for some insurers, the “race-to-the-bottom” has begun.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is taking note. It recently finalized a regulation that categorizes adverse tiering as discrimination. This is an important step forward, because plans would be forced to cease adverse tiering or risk being dropped from the marketplaces. Perhaps in response to this new legal pressure, Aetna recently agreed to make its HIV medications significantly less expensive for enrollees. Even with these positive developments, the language of the regulation would allow a loophole for insurers to justify adverse tiering when the drugs are “expensive.” This is particularly problematic, because the treatment of many of the conditions mentioned here—HIV, Multiple Sclerosis, and many cancers—requires expensive drugs.

Eliminating All Insurance Discrimination

Stopping adverse tiering will not completely eliminate discrimination in the insurance marketplace. The fact that adverse tiering exists means insurers are still trying to dissuade high-cost enrollees like Roger from joining their plans. Invariably, insurers will continue to think of new ways to discourage the sick from enrolling. With adverse tiering banned, insurers could instead increase the cost of wheelchairs, or even restrict access to certain physicians who treat high-cost patients. Passing regulations that categorize certain practices as discrimination only after insurers are caught means regulators will always be one step behind.

Individuals with chronic conditions deserve more than a giant game of “whack-a-mole” between regulators and insurance companies. The system should prospectively ban discrimination, no matter what form it may take in the post-ACA environment.

The Obama Administration has a tremendous opportunity to do just that. The Affordable Care Act designated enforcement of the “Prohibition of Discrimination” clause to the Office of Civil Rights in HHS. (The much-anticipated regulation out of that office now sits with the Office of Management and Budget, which has 90 days to make changes or put its stamp on it.)

To enforce this part of the law, the final regulation should broadly define discrimination in health care: insurers should not be able to discourage enrollment by increasing costs for certain populations, or restricting access to necessary medical services. A standard for discrimination with broad jurisdiction over these issues would send a powerful message to insurers that discrimination will not be tolerated and would also create a mechanism of enforcement through the justice system.

The prohibition of discrimination on the basis of preexisting conditions is a hallmark of the Affordable Care Act. But to truly realize this vision of a more equitable system for Roger and others with chronic conditions, we need vigilant, proactive oversight. With strong anti-discrimination regulation, the Obama Administration can help us get there.

Authors’ Note

The name of the HIV-positive beneficiary described here was changed to “Roger Thompson” to protect his privacy.