A few weeks ago, my daughter’s boyfriend called me to ask for my blessing before proposing to her. While thinking of my daughter as a bride brings me great joy, it also brings up concerns about the confusion that Affordable Care Act requirements may cause her, her future husband and our family.

What can I say? Once in benefits, always in benefits. However, the reality is that mandates and marriage are more closely intertwined than employers might realize.

Currently, my daughter is a student, not yet 26 years old. She’s covered by my employer’s medical plan, allowable under ACA rules. However, she’s working 40 hours per week, and she could soon be eligible for coverage at work. After she’s married, she’ll have three coverage options — my employer, hers, and her husband’s — and may fluctuate between all three options throughout 2016.

As her coverage changes, the way she files her taxes to comply with the ACA only gets more complicated. To avoid the individual mandate penalty, my daughter may need information from three different employers next year to submit Form 1095 when she files her taxes.

Although her particular situation is just one example, it isn’t an uncommon one. More and more Americans face confusion over health benefits: Statistics show that just 14 percent can correctly define copay, coinsurance, and deductible — never mind the complexity that now surrounds the tax implications of those benefits. My daughter’s coverage dilemma underscores why ACA compliance — and employee education — matters so much for employers.

First, in January, my employer is obligated to send me a Form 1095 that lists my daughter as one of several dependents, and includes her Social Security number as well as the months of the year she was on our group plan.

This task isn’t so simple. Providing an accurate Form 1095 requires access to detailed coverage information on all dependents. That information needs to come from someone tracking benefits administration data.

Payroll vendors simply aren’t up to the job, since employees’ payroll deductions can’t capture dependents’ months of coverage. For example, a payroll vendor wouldn’t know how many months my daughter has been covered because I have other children covered.

So, my plan deduction is the same with or without her. Employers have to make sure they partner with firms that can compile the necessary data securely and accurately.

Then there’s the question of how my daughter will get the necessary tax-filing information from my plan. Employees might assume that all relevant tax forms would be sent to them — and their employer might not suggest otherwise. However, it will be my obligation to share a copy of my Form 1095 with my daughter so she can avoid the individual mandate penalty if she stays on my plan.

Even when my daughter obtains what she needs from me, her employer will need to track her work history and determine when to make her eligible under the 30-hour rule. If she hits the 30-hour average mark according to the employer’s measurement period, they will need to send her a Form 1095 even if she waives coverage. Tracking these nuances compound the need for expert compliance help for employers.

Then there are communication challenges. My daughter may be confused about why she’s getting a Form 1095 from her employer (which shows her as not covered), and why she needs to use two different versions of the Form 1095 (one from my employer and one from her employer) to report on the same time period.

Fortunately, this bride-to-be has a dad who understands the topic and can offer some fatherly advice about how to proceed. But how many employees out there understand the need to share Form 1095 with other family members, especially adult children? An even bigger question is: How many employers are helping their employees with this?

Employers that help their workers understand how the ACA affects their coverage and empower them to make the best decisions, will have an engaged — and grateful — workforce. There’s no time like the present to get up to speed on the ACA and new rules governing employers. As any good employer or bride-to-be will tell you, planning ahead ensures smoother transitions in the long run.

Don Garlitz is senior vice president at bswift, a Chicago-based HR technology company.