Top 5 Highest cost regions Employer provided insurance 1. Santa Cruz 2. Huntingon, West Virginia 3. Charleston, West Virginia 4. Gulfport, Mississippi 5. Wausau, Wisconsin Lowest cost regions Employer provided insurance 1. Honolulu 2. Bronx, New York 3. Buffalo, New York 4. Rochester, New York 5. Takoma Park, Maryland Lowest cost regions Medicare 1. Honolulu 2. Stockton, California 3. San Francisco 4. Sacramento 5. Santa Cruz Highest cost regions Medicare 1. Miami 2. Monroe, Louisiana 3. Alexandria, Louisiana 4. Lafayette, Louisiana 5. Baton Rouge, Louisiana Source: Niagara Quality Health Coalition

SANTA CRUZ >> Santa Cruz County has the highest cost for employer-provided health insurance of 274 U.S. metro areas, according to a study by a consumer nonprofit in New York that concludes the reason is lack of competition.

Monterey County was 12th highest, while Honolulu ranked the least costly, followed by Buffalo and the Bronx area of New York.

“People are paying a lot more out of pocket for same bucket of goods and services than other regions,” said researcher Bruce Boissonnault, who founded the Niagara Quality Health Coalition in 1996 and maintains independence by not accepting funding from hospitals or insurance companies.

“We can infer that providers in those regions charge more,” according to his study, which came out in June.

For some, those costs will skyrocket in 2016.

“I am already delivering 75 percent to over 100 percent rate increases to small business group plans that now have to move to the new Affordable Care Act ‘metal’ plans,” said Pamela Fugitt-Hetrick of DCD Financial and Insurance Services in Santa Cruz.

“In areas like ours where there is little competition, the providers are not likely to cut their rates to get insurance patients,” she said.

Consolidation has intensified nationwide since the Affordable Care Act became law in 2010. Requirements for costly electronic health records and accompanying red tape have pushed doctors in solo or small group practices into larger groups or to retire and driven acquisitions involving insurers and health systems to cut costs and gain leverage in contract negotiations.

In Santa Cruz County, the consolidation goes back 25 years when Dominican Hospital took over Community Hospital in 1990 and closed it.

Only two hospitals have emergency rooms, Dominican in Santa Cruz and Watsonville Community Hospital in South County.

Sutter Maternity & Surgery Center competes with Dominican on obstetrics and surgeries but all three hospitals are pieces of much larger organizations.

Dominican is part of Dignity Health, which operates in 17 states and recently has been building its own group of doctors in Santa Cruz.

Watsonville Community Hospital, part of Community Health Systems Inc. in Tennessee, is being spun off to a subsidiary, Quorum Health Resources LLC.

Advertisement

Twenty years ago, the Santa Cruz Medical Clinic affiliated with the Palo Alto Medical Foundation, growing from 130 to 200-plus doctors in the county, and Sutter Health, a network of hospitals and physicians covering 20 counties in California. Since 1998, the Visiting Nurse Association and the MidCoast VNA have been Sutter Health affiliates as well.

Asked about the Boissonault study, Dr. Nanette Mickiewicz said Dominican is working with the Santa Cruz Women’s Health Clinic and other partners that provide health care at lower cost.

Watsonville Community Hospital staff look at ways to operate more efficiently, according to spokeswoman Cindy Weigelt.

Dr. Larry deGhetaldi of Sutter Palo Alto Medical Foundation Santa Cruz said Sutter “has removed hundreds of millions from our cost structure,” but he noted wages for health care workers in Northern California are among the highest in the nation.

DeGhetaldi contends that because Medicare and Medi-Cal reimbursement doesn’t cover all the costs, the shortfall is shifted to people with employer-provided insurance, an explanation Boissonnault said doesn’t hold up when regions are compared.

“Why have prices gone up?” asked Boissonnault. “People don’t realize the prices they pay are negotiated by the insurance company ... You are reliant on your insurance company to negotiate effectively.”

His study ranked Honolulu the lowest of 274 regions for Medicare spending, with Santa Cruz County fifth lowest and Monterey 60th lowest.

Prices for Medicare patients are set by the federal government, and Boissonnault said studies have not found correlation between Medicare spending and cost of employer-provided insurance.

His study is based on two sources, each constituting at least 68 million in claims from 2007-2009 in 274 hospital referral regions of which Santa Cruz County is one.

He recommends studying regional variation in provider competition intensity and health insurer competition intensity in detail and learning from regions with low costs.

He is disappointed the Institute of Medicine has no plans to replicate the study with newer data as a tool for policymakers.

“Government leaders need to demand information about where competition is working and not working,” he said. “It needs to be public every year.”

Highest cost regions

Employer provided insurance

1. Santa Cruz

2. Huntingon, West Virginia

3. Charleston, West Virginia

4. Gulfport, Mississippi

5. Wausau, Wisconsin

Lowest cost regions

Employer provided insurance

1. Honolulu

2. Bronx, New York

3. Buffalo, New York

4. Rochester, New York

5. Takoma Park, Maryland

Lowest cost regions

Medicare

1. Honolulu

2. Stockton, California

3. San Francisco

4. Sacramento

5. Santa Cruz

Highest cost regions

Medicare

1. Miami

2. Monroe, Louisiana

3. Alexandria, Louisiana

4. Lafayette, Louisiana

5. Baton Rouge, Louisiana

Source: Niagara Quality Health Coalition