It was a sellout crowd at the Pepsi Center, although about half the sales to the 18,007-seat arena seem to have gone to Chicago Blackhawks fans, judging by all the bright red sweaters. In the end, the large portion of Chicago transplants went happily into the night, as the Blackhawks beat the Avalanche 3-2 on Wednesday.

Bryan Bickell’s goal late in the third period against valiant goalie Calvin Pickard broke a tie game, one that was close in final score but not otherwise. Chicago dominated in puck possession and shots on goal, as an injury-ravaged Avs team just didn’t have enough key personnel to compete for 60 minutes.

And, especially, Avs coach Patrick Roy said, when Chicago was getting all the calls. The Blackhawks had nine minutes, 17 seconds of power-play time to 2:45 for Roy’s team.

“I thought 5-on-5 we were the better team. It’s kind of funny how this game goes; the last few games we’ve had one or no power plays,” Roy said. “Tonight, we gave them five in (the first) 33 minutes, and that’s all they needed to score those first two goals. I just thought that they got away with things.”

So did Avs veteran Alex Tanguay.

“I thought the game was pretty even at 5-on-5. But certainly they had more power-play chances than we did,” Tanguay said. “Usually it’s pretty tight on the penalties when it’s like that, and I thought there were a couple calls that could have come our way.”

The Avalanche had one really good stretch in the first two periods, from about the two-minute mark of the second to the 10-minute mark. The Avs got a 1-0 lead out of it, on Max Talbot’s bang-bang goal in front of the net, after some good forechecking pressure from linemates Cody McLeod and Marc-Andre Cliche.

But the rest of the time, Chicago mostly carried the play, with only the strong early netminding of Pickard keeping the Avs in it. Then, when the Avs took a couple of penalties, the potent Chicago power play made them pay.

Avs defender Nick Holden carried on his season of regressed play with a costly penalty at 12:51 of a 1-1 game. He got beat around the corner by Chicago’s Andrew Shaw and was forced to grab him from behind. That earned Holden a holding violation, and Shaw scored as power-play goal at 14:21, a short-side shot that he didn’t get a lot on, but it fooled Pickard nonetheless. Pickard was tremendous otherwise, making 42 saves in his second career start.

Tomas Vincour’s high stick led to Chicago’s first power-play goal, by Jonathan Toews at 11:50. Nathan MacKinnon should have tied it late in the second, staring at a wide-open net following a set-up pass from Ryan O’Reilly, but MacKinnon had to put the puck to his forehand from the left side, and that little delay allowed Bickell to backcheck and break up his shot.

Holden, however, did make a good play in the third. He helped keep a puck alive in the crease after Corey Crawford had stoned the Avs on some good chances. After Holden put a shot on net that was stopped, Ryan O’Reilly backhanded the rebound home to tie it 2-2. It was O’Reilly’s first goal since Nov. 1 at St. Louis.

Holden was the main defender beaten on the game-winning Chicago goal, though, scored by Bickel. Patrick Kane cut inside the slot area past Holden, coming down the right side, and got a shot on net that Pickard got a piece of, but not enough, and Bickell swept into the net.

“With 10 injured players, I think our players certainly deserve a lot of credit for that performance,” Roy said.

Adrian Dater: adater@denverpost.com or twitter.com/adater