Clinicians treating women of reproductive age should use every patient encounter to ask patients about reproductive life planning -- or their plans about the timing and spacing of their children, according to a new committee opinion from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG).

These discussions should address not only the importance of pregnancy planning, but also the range of contraceptive methods available in order to reduce unwanted pregnancies, reported ACOG's Committee on Health Care for Underserved Women, writing in Obstetrics & Gynecology.

To that end, they recommend initiatives such as the One Key Question Initiative, which proposes that clinicians ask every woman of childbearing age (defined as 18-50) at every patient encounter if she desires to become pregnant in the next year. That way, the conversation can either focus on contraception or preconception care.

Many obstetricians and gynecologists will have these conversations about planning a pregnancy either during a patient's regular checkups or when she makes an appointment to specifically discuss contraception. But lead author Wanda Nicholson, MD, of ACOG, said that having ongoing conversations with patients about planning a pregnancy promotes patient-centered care and gives patients opportunities to ask questions and express their needs and preferences.

"There are a whole host of different opportunities where we engage with women -- they may be coming in for some acute problem, they may be coming in for a flu shot, they may be coming in for a prenatal care visit," she told MedPage Today. "We want to encourage clinicians to take advantage of every patient encounter, to go beyond the traditional times when we discuss this."

Unintended pregnancy is a burden that falls disproportionately on minority and low-income women, and the authors recommend that clinicians talk to patients about the contraception coverage provisions of the Affordable Care Act or suggest community initiatives that educate women on how to access low or no-cost contraception. Patients should also be educated about contraceptive methods, as studies show that more than 40% of unintended pregnancies are due to incorrect use of contraception.

This is the first time ACOG has addressed this issue in a committee opinion. Nicholson said the impetus came from the 2013 presidential address of former ACOG president Jeanne Conry, MD, who encouraged clinicians to have ongoing conversations with their patients about reproductive health choices at every patient encounter.

"I think this conversation around reproductive life planning is something that should permeate conversations across multiple demographics," said Nicholson. "It fit into our mission and vision as part of the Committee for Underserved Women. But Dr. Conry's initial presidential address is kind of what spurred us on to engage in this new document."