Brookings, SD

The 76th meeting between the Coyote and Jackrabbit women was as entertaining as advertised. USD was unable to clinch the top spot in the Summit League, making for an interesting final week of the regular season.

Jackrabbit senior Megan Waytashek didn't play in her team's 82-78 loss in Vermillion a month ago. She made up for it in round two by scoring 18 points propelling SDSU to a 77-67 win in Brookings.

"It was definitely hard for me to sit there and watch that game from my computer, but it was fun to be back with my teammates and help us get the win," Waytashek said.

The Jackrabbits were also paced by freshman Macy Miller. She followed up her 25 point outing in the Dakota Dome by collecting her first career double-double with 16 points and 10 rebounds at home. Needless to say USD Head Coach Amy Williams wasn't surprised.

"No shocker. She handles herself with such poise and it is uncharacteristic of a freshman. She is a tremendous player that we are going to find a way to deal with over the next three and a half years," Williams said.

The Jackrabbits are currently in second place behind the Coyotes in the Summit League standings. With two games remaining, Miller believes that this win against their rivals puts them in a good position.

"This really helps us moving forward. We are building momentum and just from this game our defense is playing really well. I feel like this is going to push us the next two games and we're going to play our best basketball." Miller said.

Nicole Seekamp led USD with 18 points in the loss. She knows her team still controls their own destiny with a one game lead over SDSU. The only question now is can these Coyotes handle being the leader of the pack, rather than chasing the Rabbits.

"We're not really trying to think about that. If it happens it happens. We don't want to put that much pressure on ourselves thinking about that. The last couple of years we haven't had a title to go for and we still did well, so I think we are going to be fine," Seekamp said.

Both the Jackrabbit and Coyote women will finish the regular season with two home games with a lot in common. They are both this Thursday and Saturday and each team will play IUPUI and Western Illinois.



College {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.