Human Services minister Manmeet Bhullar is sworn in during the swearing in of Premier Alison Redford's new cabinet at Government House in Edmonton, Alta., on Friday, Dec. 13, 2013. Ian Kucerak/Edmonton Sun/QMI Agency

Alberta’s new Human Services minister admits he was annoyed the impact his turban had on some of his electorate 12 years into the 21st century.

Some arguments on the doorsteps of his Calgary-Montrose riding during last year’s provincial election weren’t as enlightened as he’d hoped, said Manmeet Bhullar.

“I had some people who wanted to discuss whether Sikhs had the right to wear turbans in the RCMP,” said practising Sikh Bhullar.

“That was a debate back when I was in Grade 4 or 5 or 6.”

Fortunately, he said, that decidedly federal issue wasn’t one to derail an electoral win with a considerably more comfortable margin than the 35% of the vote he’d garnered in his debut victory in 2008.

Since that baptismal election, Bhullar’s gone on to become the youngest ever to be elected MLA and be appointed to cabinet in Alberta — at ages 28 and 31 respectively.

His youth sends an important message to younger age brackets least likely to cast a vote, he said.

“They may not like what they see of the system but it’s that system that can make the most meaningful changes in the world,” he said.

The parents of Calgary native Bhullar came to Canada from India’s Punjab region in the early 1970s, seeking a better future on a host of fronts — from health care and education to democracy, said the Tory MLA.

Born at the city’s General hospital in 1980, he grew up and attended school in northeast Calgary at a time when the area wasn’t nearly as multicultural as it is now.

He recalls being bullied by classmates relentlessly for his appearance.

“There weren’t many of us kids in school wearing turbans — it wasn’t always the most pleasant experience,” he said.

Alberta’s attitudes towards diversity have progressed, he says, “but we’ve got a long ways to go and it’s not just about tolerance towards turbans.”

He also differed from most of his contemporaries with an early love for politics that had him delivering election fliers in the 1980s for Calgary Tory mainstay Rick Orman, a friend of his father’s.

“I was one of the few people who used to enjoy it — I’d try to find a way to get to the campaign office and help out,” said Bhullar.

While garnering a law degree from the University of Windsor, Bhullar’s political bug led to the office of Calgary Centre-North MP and cabinet minister Jim Prentice for whom he worked as a special assistant.

Prentice, he said, served as a mentor and encouraged him on his own political odyssey.

Upon winning by a 617-vote margin in a crowded field in 2008. Bhullar was named parliamentary assistant to the minister of advanced education, followed by a similar post in municipal affairs.

He admits engaging in the rough and tumble of politics has had its disillusioning moments.

“Why would I want to devote time to something so vicious and difficult? Because it’s worth it,” he said.

It was a determination he shared with colleagues that saw him boosted in October, 2011 to the post of Service Alberta Minister.

From then, he said, there have been few Manmeet Bhullar days off.

He wasted little time, he said, in going beyond provincial boundaries in advocate for wireless customers on roaming costs, an effort that ultimately saw the CRTC crafting a new industry conduct codes.

Empowering condominium owners, he said, has been another priority in the process of being realized with the advent of so-called condo tribunals designed to resolve conflicts between tenants, boards or developers.

Now, the youthful, bearded cabinet minister has been assigned the post of Human Services minister in the wake of a firestorm over the province’s underreporting of the deaths of children in its care.

Bhullar said he knows he’s been handed a tough assignment on a daily razor’s edge.

“This an extremely sensitive portfolio, one that touches the lives of many Albertans, particularly the most vulnerable Albertans,” he said.

He defended his predecessor Dave Hancock’s handling of the portfolio, saying he deftly melded a number of departments to offer more comprehensive services.

The way ahead, he said, is more ensuring more effective intervention and prevention.

As well, “increasing the number of affordable day care spaces in Alberta,” is another priority.

“Quality day care has a great impact on a child.”

Bhullar was sworn in to his new cabinet position on Friday.

bill.kaufmann@sunmedia.ca

On Twitter: @SUNBillKaufmann