“Epic fail” was one of the most common phases used to describe the Hot Air Balloon Glow Festival that was hosted by the Tubac Golf Resort and Spa Saturday night. According to Patti Todd, the resort’s public relation director, in past years about 3,000 people showed up to the event. This year Border Patrol and DPS estimated between 15,000-20,000 people made the trip to the festival, and that caused lots of chaos and confusion.



“To be completely honest we were thinking about having our wedding there, but with this experience, probably not. We had a pretty rough experience just getting through the gate,” said Christian Galaviz. He was attempting to celebrate his aunt’s birthday at the festival but never made it there.



He said he was stuck in traffic for about hour waiting to reach the exit to get off the freeway. He said tensions ran high among the drivers and things began to get a little out of hand.



“Road rage that’s what it is. No one likes getting cut off and someone just got out and pulled out a gun, pointed it, and that’s about it,” he said.



At that point, he and his family decided to turn around and spend his aunt’s birthday somewhere else. From what he heard from people who made it inside, the traffic was not the worst part.



“There was just one food truck, a dessert truck that sold out in 45 minutes and 30 minute wait for the bathroom,” he said.



In response to dozens of complaints about the event, Todd released the following statement:



"Tubac Golf Resort & Spa has hosted July 4th events for many years and the Hot Air Balloon Glow for four years very successfully. In the past we have received 5 to 7000 people for the July 4th Festival and 2 to 3000 for the balloon glow events.

We have a system for marketing that we have used for the past 5-years that has worked well and included print and social media.

The attendance last night was far beyond our highest expectation and certainly more than we have had at like events in the past. We are personally responding to all comments both good and bad. Planning for future events will be very different as far as traffic control and infrastructure. We sincerely apologize."



Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.