You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Message: * A friend wanted you to see this item from High School OT: http://wral.com/14277003

— In a highly-contrasting clash between two different styles, the East Lincoln Mustangs proved their heavy pass attack was tougher than the Washington Pam Pack’s run-heavy offense as the Mustangs won their second-ever state championship Saturday night at BB&T Field in Winston-Salem.

The Pam Pack amassed 309 rushing yards in the game but finished with only six pass yards while East Lincoln gained just 57 yards on the ground but 212 through the air on the way to a 14-13 championship win. Football: Washington vs. East Lincoln (Dec. 13, 2014)

The Mustangs scored the go-ahead touchdown with more than eight minutes remaining in the game. After punts by both sides, East Lincoln had the ball inside the Washington five yard line with just a few minutes left.

Rather than score immediately, the Mustangs and head coach Mike Byus elected to stay out of the endzone and take time off the clock.

“If we get in the endzone, there’s an eight-point difference and you have to kick off to them and risk a kick return,” Byus said. “If they score and go for two, you’re in overtime. I preferred having them down one but with 99 yards to go.”

After turning the ball over on downs, Washington had one final chance to drive 99 yards with 56 seconds on the clock. They moved about 40 yards but failed to get out of bounds on several run plays and the Pam Pack ran out of time.

“You can practice it and you can talk it, but experience is valuable and we had not had a game this tight since, I don’t know when,” said Washington Head Coach Mike Byus. “If we played this week under these circumstances, our guys would do something totally different. We just got the short end tonight.”

The championship is East Lincoln’s second in school history. The first came just two years ago when the team defeated the Tarboro Vikings for the 2-A title, 24-20.

Washington was making its first trip to the final game in the history of the program.

East Lincoln was led by dual-threat quarterback Chazz Surratt, who ran for 75 yards and a touchdown and completed 15 of 28 passes for 212 yards and another touchdown. Surratt was named the Most Valuable Player of the game.

Demarius Valentine and Cameron Dollar had 65 receiving yards each for East Lincoln while Coleton Banks had 36 yards and Sage Surratt picked up 34 yards.

Washington was led by 111 rushing yards from Markel Spencer, while Xzavier Clark ran for 100 yards and a touchdown and Stepfon Rodman ran for 83 yards and a touchdown.

The first quarter of the game was scoreless after Washington began with a six-minute drive that ended with a turnover on downs. East Lincoln then got the ball and missed a field goal after five more minutes.

The Mustangs got on the board first in the second quarter when Surratt got his team down to the red zone thanks to a connection with Dollar. From six yards away, Surratt took the ball in himself.

Washington responded on the next play with a seven-yard touchdown run from Rodman. The game was tied at 7-7 at halftime.

East Lincoln gave up a fumble near midfield midway through the third quarter and Washington took advantage to seize its first lead of the game. The Pam Pack went ahead 13-7 on a two-yard touchdown from Clark, but the extra point was blocked.

On Washington’s next possession, the team fumbled inside its own 20 yard line. East Lincoln took over at the 16 and a few plays later, Surratt found Banks for a nine-yard score. The blocked Washington extra point proved important as the Mustangs went ahead 14-13.

“We generally don’t turn the ball over,” Sawyer said. “Tonight, those couple of plays were costly.”

With East Lincoln leading by one point, the teams punted back and forth to each other before the Mustangs got the ball deep in Washington territory and watched the clock tick away.

After the game, Byus praised his defensive unit and its coaching staff for giving up yards to the Washington running attack but not giving up too many points. He was proud of his defense’s ability to stop the Pam Pack in the final minute.

“I’m so proud of the kids because they have found a way to win no matter what type of team they ran up against, whether they had speed or they had power,” Byus said.

Washington had not lost since the first week of the year, falling 37-6 to Havelock. The team gave up just 24 points through four postseason games entering the championship.

East Lincoln finished the season with a perfect 16-0 record, solidifying the many regular-season accolades the Mustangs had collected. The team was the top seed in the 2-AA west bracket and the top-ranked team in the final Associated Press regular-season 2-A poll.

Follow Zach Mayo on Twitter at @ZachMayoHSOT