Regional manufacturers report a good year and optimism for next year, according to WIRE-Net's 3rd quarter 2014 manufacturing outlook survey.

The report is in line with national data that shows gross domestic product, the broadest measure of goods and services produced across the economy, grew 4.2 percent in the second quarter, with spending that included new buildings and machinery. Regionally, about 64 percent of survey participants said shipments are growing compared to last year, while 25 percent expected them to stay the same.

About half of the 89 manufacturers surveyed reported improved profits this year, and 31 percent projected similar profits as last year. While 45 percent of the firms added jobs in the last six months, 43 percent plan to hire by the end of the year.

John Colm, WIRE-Net's president and executive director, said growth is coming from tried and true strategies of penetrating markets that manufacturers already know and new product development. However, he said that companies are concerned about issues that they have relatively little control over.

"Materials pricing, cost of the Affordable Care Act, electricity prices are tough for a single company to affect," said Colm, of the membership-based manufacturing advocate organization he runs. The group's 360 members employ 21,000 people throughout Northeast Ohio.

Respondents listed these top three constraints for growth: 61 percent said materials pricing; 62 percent said finding skilled workers; and 55 percent said costs of the Affordable Care Act. Nearly half of the respondents also said rising electricity prices is a major growth constraint.

Randy Solganik, chief executive officer of City Plating in Cleveland, said as long as automotive stays strong, his business will thrive. About 75 percent of his sales come from coatings for the automotive market.

But it's been a challenge since the recession. Companies like his have become extremely lean, and operating efficiencies are harder to come by.

"As material and electricity prices increase, we'll have to consider whether we'll need to increases our prices to offset those costs," he said. "Overall, I'm optimistic. The average age of a car in the United States is 11 years old, and that means people are going to have to buy new cars. And I believe the loan market for cars is going to stay strong."

Most of the survey respondents are small businesses, with an average of 43 employees. About 66 percent had sales under $10 million, 18 percent reported sales between $11 to $75 million and 4 percent had sales higher than $75 million.

Survey respondent Tom Schumann, general manager at Kitzel & Sons in Cleveland, said his cutting tool manufacturing company has had a significant pickup in new orders and quote requests since the second quarter.

"Customers in aerospace, automotive and small appliances are optimistic about future business conditions," he said. "One trend that we see gaining traction in the last year or so, is our customers bringing work back from overseas manufacturers, especially China."