The historic Monroe Station in Collier County was destroyed by fire early Sunday, turning nearly 100 years of memories into ash.

Built in 1928 and once serving as one of the original outposts of Tamiami Trail, the station was located on US 41 in the Big Cypress National Preserve. It was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2000. As of July 2007, it was boarded up and abandoned.

For many people traveling to Miami, the route through Big Cypress almost always included a stop at the Monroe Station.

The building has been vacant for almost 30 years, but it managed to stay relevant by the memories of every visitor.

Today, even after its destruction, its memory lives on.

"This building meant so much to all of us who have grown up here. I have lived here my whole life and it was more than a historic site," said Tina Osceola of Naples.

Ken Arguelles of Miami was camping nearby when the blaze happened.

"I heard intense fire; I thought it was our campfire. I looked outside; it happened across the road and it had to be up four stories, five stories high of flame."

Serving as one of only two of its kind remaining, Monroe Station was everything from a gas station to a diner - and even served as the site for several marriage ceremonies.

"This place had a voice. It represented times and people who are no longer here," Osceola said.

Famed photographer Clyde Butcher said he's not surprised to see that even in its destruction, the building still brings people together.

"A lot of these people here are crying about it now. A lot of people were kids here; they were having lunch here, dinner here."

Like Butcher, dozens are bringing their cameras to capture one last glimpse of what once was.

"This building was kind of like the last heart of Tamiami Trail. It was the last gasp of the old vision of this whole trail. It's just sad to see it go."

The Facebook group Save Monroe Station, which had been working to secure funds to revive the site, said in a statement, "The history and the memories will live on forever, but the sadness of what should have been a cherished part of the heritage of the Tamiami Trail through the designated National Historic Monroe Station will last a long time."

A fire marshal is investigating the cause. No one was injured.