WASHINGTON — The Senate has reached a bipartisan deal that would provide $1.1 billion in funding to fight the Zika virus, breaking a monthslong standoff over how much spending is needed to address the growing public health threat.

The funding package was introduced as an amendment to a spending bill that is expected to be considered this week.

Advertisement

Senators will also have the opportunity to vote on an option that would fully fund White House’s $1.9 billion request and a separate GOP-backed proposal that would use $1.2 billion in cuts to an Affordable Care Act program to offset the cost of $1.1 billion in Zika spending.

House Republicans are preparing to unveil their own proposal this week that is expected to provide less than $1 billion in funding. It is not expected to have the support of Democrats.

The Senate compromise option, sponsored by Senators Roy Blunt, Republican of Missouri, and Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington, is expected to get widespread support from Democrats and Republicans, despite falling short of the White House request. The Senate is scheduled to vote on all three amendments Tuesday.

Democrats, including Murray, are expected to vote for the full funding option as well as the compromise to register their support for the White House proposal. Murray told reporters that her deal with Blunt is a good compromise.

‘‘I continue to urge my colleagues to support the president’s full request, but I am very encouraged that Democrats and Republicans will be able to come together,’’ she said.

Advertisement

The underlying spending bill, which combines funding for military construction and veterans programs with transportation and housing spending, is expected to easily pass the Senate late in the week.

The legislation faces a less certain outcome in the House where Republicans have struggled to reach any agreement on a spending blueprint and have resisted White House calls for immediate action on its Zika request.

House Republicans say the White House should be able to use funds leftover from battling the Ebola virus to combat Zika. The administration has already tapped that account but says more funds are needed.