Buy Photo Parker Templeton is the CEO of Iberia Medical Center in New Iberia. (Photo: Paul Kieu, The Advertiser)Buy Photo

NEW IBERIA — At 38, Parker Templeton has already landed his dream job.

In the 18 months since he assumed the roles of president and CEO of Iberia Medical Center, the hospital has been recognized for excellence in patient care, for patient experience for women, as a top hospital in Louisiana and made the annual list of “100 SafeCare Hospitals.”

Templeton himself has earned recognition in Becker’s Hospital Review, which named him a “Rising Star” in hospital administration, the only Louisianian on the list.

No small achievements, but no great surprises, either, from a health care administrator who has worked his way up from graduation at LSU — he studied accounting, then made a quick change in majors to cardiopulmonary science at LSU Health Science Center. After he earned a master’s degree in healthcare administration from Trinity University and served as an assistant administrator at Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas and St. Mary’s Hospital in Decatur, Illinois, he returned to his native Louisiana, where he served as CEO at the 22-bed Franklin Foundation Hospital in St. Mary Parish.

So what’s next on the list for this rapid riser in the health care field? More of the same.

Templeton has earned the Rising Young Business Leader award from the Junior Achivement of Acadiana Business Hall of Fame 2015. He’ll receive his award May 6 in an event at The Victorian in Broussard.

Born in Pensacola, Florida, Templeton’s family moved to his mother’s hometown of New Iberia at age 5, where he grew up and graduated Catholic High. New Iberia is home: “Part of my passion is being from New Iberia,” he said.

“I have the privilege of leading an organization that provides caring and compassion to New Iberians,” he said. “I interned here in the summer. I spent time in the ER.”

There’s another reason why he feels he has set roots in his hometown: He and his wife, who is a hospital administrator in Lafayette, are giving the same environment and quality of life to their children that he relished while growing up.

Templeton’s goal of being a hospital administrator was set early in college. He set out to study accounting — his dad is an accountant — but quickly realized that accounting did not provide him with the excitement he wanted in a job. He changed majors to gain more clinical knowledge of health care — that would enable him to have more intelligent conversations with physicians and staff, he said — but the goal was always health care administration.

The excitement of the job rests in its business complexity, he said, as well as in its service to others. Health care “drivers” include the Affordable Care Act and Medicaid reimbursement, challenges that must be met to keep hospital doors open and staff — he has about 500 employees at the 99-bed IMC — working.

Along the way, he said, he served under great mentors and developed a simple philosophy: Put the patient first.

Although he said IMC will push past 100 beds — there are financial advantages to breaking 100 — he said patient care itself is shifting from keeping patients at the hospital to keeping people “out of the hospital.” The old model of financial success used to be a full parking lot, he said. Someday, it may be measured by how few patients need in-hospital care.

Meanwhile, IMC continues to serve the community with myriad services. There are no heart surgeries or transplants, but the hospital delivered 600 babies last year and sees 36,000 patients a year in the Emergency Room. There are state-of-the-art surgical suites and top-notch labs.

He was fortunate, he said, to inherit a hospital that was already in good shape and has a board of commissioners with a “proper vision” for the future.

So why would he ever leave, he said, as long as he and the board believe he is doing good work?

He’ll continue a focus on recruiting and retaining good employees — “We have an exceptionally strong medical staff here,” he said — and keeping those good employees happy. Strategy, operations and people are what makes good leaders, and most important among these is people.

“If we as leaders are caring and supportive of our workers, they will care for our patients,” he said.

Good performance is rewarded, he said. Thank-you notes from patients are saved and treasured, he said, because “what gets rewarded gets repeated.”

“I feel like I’m doing a good job,” he said. “This is where I want to be.

“It’s a privilege to work here every day.”

Iberia Medical Center, by the numbers

•Beds: 99

•Emergency Room visits: 36,000 a year

•Employees: 500

•Medical staff: More than 100

Source: Parker Templeton, president and CEO

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/money/business/2015/04/04/young-leader-privilege-every-day/25263849/