Glenn Beck spent the first hour of his radio program Thursday “setting the record straight” on the Affordable Care Act, saying those in power have “no idea how the free market system works” and the members of the press who have carried water for the administration absolutely “disgust” him.

“You were called a liar,” Beck told his audience. “For five years you have been called crazy, and now what was called ‘crazy’ has become America’s reality.”

Beck played multiple sound bites of what those in power claimed would happen, what he and members of his audience said would actually happen, and the final result according to the latest report from the Congressional Budget Office.

Beck highlighted a number of ramifications of Obamacare, including whether it would contribute to the nation’s outstanding national debt. He noted that President Barack Obama swore to the American people that the bill would be deficit-neutral over the next 10 years, before pointing out that the CBO projects the law will cost about $1.8 trillion over the next decade alone.

Beck also reminded listeners of former House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s assertion that millions of jobs would be created as the result of Obamacare, before noting the CBO has estimated the bill will cause 2 million fewer American workers starting in 2017, and millions more after that.

“You knew we were being lied to,” Beck said. “I want somebody to finally recognize that the American people have been onto this for a long time. Trust yourself, empower yourself. Don’t you listen to the press, don’t you listen to the government, because they are wrong. And you know what? The government gets something out of it. The press has no excuse. They are lazy and ignorant.”

Beck re-read emails from listeners from 2009, all of whom said they would be unable to expand as planned, or would have to lay people off as the result of the new taxes, fines, and thousands of pages of regulation imposed by Obamacare.

“All these people in Washington, they are all responsible,” Beck said hotly. “All of them are responsible for the death of this economy, and you need to know.”

Beck said those who are opposed to Obamacare may be “powerless” over the Democrats, but they are not powerless over the Republicans.

“You want to continue the “transformation” and go along happily, or do you want to stand and correct the aberration of history, that we are nothing more than dependents on some government parent?” Beck asked. “That’s the rest of the world — that’s not America.”

Your browser does not support iframes.

The full episode of The Glenn Beck Program, along with many other live streaming shows and thousands of hours of on-demand content, is available on just about any digital device. Get it all with a FREE TRIAL.