Chelsea Clinton joined her mom on the campaign trail for the first time this week. Strangely, one of her first orders of business was to attack Bernie Sanders' health care aims.

"Sen. Sanders wants to dismantle Obamacare, dismantle the CHIP program, dismantle Medicare, and dismantle private insurance," Clinton said in New Hampshire Jan. 12. "I don't want to empower Republican governors to take away Medicaid, to take away health insurance for low-income and middle-income working Americans. And I think very much that's what Sen. Sanders' plan would do."

PolitiFact rated Chelsea's summary of Sanders' health plan " mostly false ."

The fact-checking website conceded she had a point in that Sanders' American Health Security Act would strip insurance benefits from the Affordable Care Act and that states would be the main administrators. Yet, she was incorrect, they noted, in the following claims:

However, the assertion that it would empower Republican governors to take away individual’s health insurance is misleading. Sanders’ plan requires states to set up the specifics of their health care system, though they must meet federal standards for various administrative details. For example, states must identify a single agency to manage the program. If a state does not set up a system, or if they refuse to meet the federal standards, the federal government will step in and run that state’s program.

Hillary herself, noticing how much ground her opponent has gained in the early voting states, also chose to target Sanders' health plans. His campaign responded with this little blast from the past.

"To Bernie Sanders with thanks for your commitment to real health care access for all Americans..."-@HillaryClinton pic.twitter.com/XMVPEx8fT8 — Bernie Sanders (@BernieSanders) January 13, 2016

As Sanders' name and passionate liberal values become more familiar with Democrat voters, he has been earning their support. A new Gallup poll showed him gain his highest net favorable rating yet.

Are these new attacks from the Clintons just desperate ploys to try and slow down Sanders' momentum?