Permira’s exit of Hugo Boss was part of a wave of distributions European firms made during the first quarter. Reuters/Danish Siddiqui

Eleven of Europe’s largest private equity firms returned about $15 billion to their investors in the first three months of the year, as they took advantage of a strong exit environment.

Apax Partners, BC Partners, Charterhouse Capital Partners, Cinven, CVC Capital Partners, Electra Partners, EQT Partners, Montagu Private Equity, PAI Partners, Permira and Phoenix Equity Partners distributed at least €13.8 billion, or $14.9 billion in the first quarter of 2015, according to people close to the situations.

The industry has been able to use rising asset valuations and a strong exit environment to give back large chunks of capital to investors.

Apax and Permira were among those that produced the largest returns, distributing 4.2 billion euros and €2.2 billion respectively, while CVC’s European funds distributed €4 billion, according to people familiar with the matter.

Among some of the significant exits for private equity firms were Apax’s initial public offering of publishing group Auto Trader on the London Stock Exchange in March with a market capitalization of 2.3 billion pounds. CVC sold online payments company Skrill to Optimal Payments for about €1.1 billion, more than doubling its investment, while Permira generated the bulk of its distributions from its exits from fashion house Hugo Boss and Arysta LifeScience.

The firm made a return of 2.3 times its initial investment on Hugo Boss, which it exited in March. Permira agreed to sell Arysta for $3.5 billion to Platform Specialty in October.

Speaking at a recent conference, Tobias Eichner, a partner at consultancy Oliver Wyman, said that public markets were increasingly a popular option for private equity firms.

“The IPO is back,” said Mr. Eichner. “It’s a great time to sell – either to other buyers or to the stock market.”

He added: “The IPO is not necessarily the preferred exit [but]… the current stock markets are wild. It’s also a matter of reputation – to list something on the stock exchange [is good for a buyout firm’s brand].”

Ian Bagshaw, a partner at White & Case, previously told Private Equity News that the current exit market is what “everyone has talked about for the past decade” and that “exit routes are probably at their broadest since the crash.”

According to data provider Preqin, private equity fund managers distributed $597 billion globally to investors in the first three quarters of 2014, of which $127 billion came from Europe-focused funds.

Write to Ayesha Javed at ayesha.javed@wsj.com

This article originally appeared in Private Equity News, a U.K. trade publication owned by Dow Jones & Co.