Sioux Falls, SD

The South Dakota Department of Health confirms that there's a new case of measles here in Sioux Falls. This is just weeks after the reports of multiple cases in Davision County.

This latest case involves a child under the age of ten. Like the other cases in the state, the child was not vaccinated against Measles.

After the announcement today, the the Sioux Falls Health Department hosted a measles vaccination clinic this afternoon. Health officials offered free measles vaccinations as well as checking the records to see whether people are up to date on their shots. Sioux Falls Public Health Director Jill Franken says the goal is to get as many people vaccinated as possible. That clinic ended just two hours ago and officials say 106 people were screened, and 85 received the vaccine.

“The Sioux Falls Health Department really is working with conjunction with the state. We're the ones that are performing this clinic today but the state has been really good to provide us with the free vaccines being used today,” Franken said.

The child attended Holy Spirit Elementary, and was there on Thursday. If your child attends that school you should check their vaccination records. The President of Sioux Falls Catholic Schools says 99 percent of students are vaccinated, and that school will continue as usual on Monday.

Of the 13 other measles cases reported, nine are Mitchell area residents and four out-of-state residents. All of those cases were unvaccinated and members of the same extended family group. We will have more information tonight on KELOLAND Weekend News at 10.

HealthBeat

What's Going Around {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.