Senate challenger Ed Gillespie makes whirlwind stop in Hampton Roads

Ed Gillespie, the Republican challenging Sen. Mark Warner for his Senate seat this fall, made a whirlwind stop at Tubby's Tavern in Virginia Beach to stump with Rep. Scott Rigell, R-Virginia Beach.

VIRGINIA BEACH — The campaign stop by a Republican Senate hopeful Saturday in Virginia Beach felt more like a block party or family reunion, with hot dogs and hamburgers to compliment the short, sweet campaign messages from a couple of national politicians.

Gillespie got big reactions from the crowd of about 100 gathered at Tubby's, saying that big changes would follow if he were elected to the Senate.

"Not only will Mark Warner become the former senator from Virginia, Harry Reid will become the former Senate Majority Leader," Gillespie said. Republicans will need to gain six seats during the midterm elections this fall to take control of the Senate.

The stop was part of Gillespie's "Ease the Squeeze" tour, which started Friday on the Eastern Shore and highlighting Gillespie's desire to roll back what he calls burdensome tax and regulatory requirements on businesses and citizens.

"We know that too many of our fellow Virginians are feeling squeezed between lost jobs, lower take home pay, stagnant wages and higher prices for health insurance, energy and food," Gillespie said.

During his brief turn at the microphone, Gillespie took aim at "Obamacare," wasteful federal spending and moratoriums on offshore drilling, which he said would bring jobs to Hampton Roads and drop the price at the pump.

Republicans recently seized control of the Virginia State Senate after a special election, which Gillespie portrayed as both a good omen and a precursor to the changes to come if he's elected.

Gillespie spoke for about five minutes and had to run to catch a plane — he was going to help move his daughter into a dorm at NYU, where she will start as a freshman this week — and Rigell took the stage to voice his support for Gillespie and ask for some support of his own. Rigell is up for re-election in the fall as well.

Also on the ballot this November along with Gillespie and Warner will be Libertarian candidate Robert Sarvis, who made an unsuccessful bid for governor last year, also as a libertarian.

Attendees were bullish on Gillespie and his chances on wresting the seat, and thus the Senate, from his Democratic opponent.

Gale Bush from Newport News said voters are "ready for some change." He cited Mark Warner's voting record as a Senator, which Gillespie and Rigell both took pains to highlight as one in lockstep with President Barack Obama's agenda.

"We don't have politicians in Washington," Bush said. "Ed's a guy that can go both ways. He can compromise."

Steve Groce, a former chairman of the Republican Party of Newport News, said he worked with Gillespie when the candidate served as chairman of the state Republican Party and that he likes his business background.