Health care costs rise an average of 3% for midsize companies Lowest rate rise in more than 10 years

Despite ongoing concerns that the Affordable Care Act will lead to higher insurance costs, midsize employers this year are enjoying historically low health care cost increases, averaging 3 percent after making plan changes.



That is the lowest rate in more than 10 years and less than the national average of 4.6 percent, according to a new survey by Troy-based Marsh & McLennan Agency LLC. The surveyed companies ranged from 100 to 10,000 employees.



To lower costs, employers are using high-deductible health insurance plans, wellness programs tied to incentives, telemedicine programs and aggressive prescription drug management, according to more than 450 employers that participated in Marsh & McLennan's 12th annual Southeast Michigan Mid-Market Group Benefits Survey.



Shifting costs to employees through higher deductibles, co-insurance and co-payments appears to have picked up this year, although not all companies increased cost shifting to employees, said Rebecca McLaughlan, vice president with Marsh & McLennan.



For example, monthly employee contributions to benefit plans for family PPO coverage increased as a percent of premium to 28 percent this year from 27 percent last year, and up to 26 percent from 23 percent for single PPO coverage, the survey found.



Family HMO coverage rose slightly higher to 30 percent of premium, up from 25 percent in 2014. Single HMO coverage also rose to 23 percent this year from 21 percent.



"HMO and prescription drug plans saw the greatest change," McLaughlan said. For example, 68 percent of HMO plans now include a deductible, up from 59 percent in 2014.





Cost containment strategies

One of the main strategies used by employers to slow costs continues to be consumer-directed health plans, such as health care savings accounts, or high deductible plans, McLaughlin said.



In 2015, 43 percent of employers are offering high-deductible health plans, up from 38 percent in 2014. Nationally, high-deductible plans jumped to 48 percent of employers compared to 39 percent last year.



During the early 2000s, Farmington Hills-based Logicalis Inc. experienced double-digit rate increases for its fully insured plans, said Mark Jenkins, vice president of human resources.



During this period, Logicalis began offering lower cost high-deductible health plans. It also began to roll out cost-containment programs, including a wellness program and higher copayments for prescriptions and emergency care.





Related Links