The man who led police on a chase down Ajo Way Friday afternoon, resulting in three crash scenes that damaged 13 vehicles, as well as three officers firing at him in what they say was an attempt to prevent further danger to the public, has been released from the hospital and is facing several felony charges related to the incident.

The Tucson Police Department also announced that four citizens were taken to the hospital with non-life-threatening injuries because of Friday's events, and one remains hospitalized with "significant injuries."

According to TPD, the trouble began when police attempted to pull over Donald Terry, 30, because the truck he was driving was related to an ongoing felony investigation. Terry initially pulled into the Walgreens parking lot at East Ajo Way and South 12th Avenue before throwing the vehicle into reverse and allegedly ramming several other vehicles, one of which was occupied, before squealing out of the parking lot, police say.

While this was going on, according to TPD, three officers from the traffic stop -- later identified as Sgt. Brian Knight, a 13-year-veteran and Officer Michael Cuestas, a three-year veteran as well as an undercover officer -- were on foot in the parking lot and opened fire at the truck Terry was driving in an attempt to stop him. Instead, Terry allegedly reversed all the way out of the parking lot, got onto Ajo Way and collided with a vehicle in the intersection at 12th Avenue as he continued east toward South Sixth Avenue. There, he allegedly caused another collision of at least nine vehicles including a police cruiser. He tried to run away but was caught and transported to the hospital, initially with life-threatening injuries.

He was released late Saturday night and booked into the Pima County Jail for two outstanding warrants in addition to the following new charges:

Two counts of aggravated assault, a class 3 felony

Two counts of aggravated assault, a class 4 felony

Misconduct involving weapons, a class 4 felony

Possession of narcotic drugs for sale, a class 2 felony

Possession of dangerous drugs for sale, a class 4 felony

Unlawful flight from law enforcement officer, a class 5 felony

The investigation is ongoing, and police say additional charges may be added later.

Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.