Dogs are removed from 52 Spruce Street in Lakewood on Friday. About 40 dogs were rescued from the abandoned home overnight by animal control officials. (Photo: Provided by Eli Somekh)

All of the dogs rescued Thursday from a rancid, feces-filled home on Spruce Street in Lakewood are expected to survive, according to Susan Nestor, adoption coordinator for Husky House, a rescue that is housing several of the neglected animals.

That doesn't mean these dogs, whose fur was matted with dung, urine and gunk when they were rescued, are healthy. Skin conditions and bacterial infections will need to be treated, she said.

"In speaking with the other rescues, I think we're very lucky," Nestor said at the Husky House rescue facility in Matawan.

Animal control officers and volunteers spent much of the day Thursday and part of Friday removing 40 golden retrievers, border collies, huskies and mixed breeds from the home at 52 Spruce St. Conditions were so derelict that rescuers had to extract the dogs through a window because the front door was blocked by "a foot of poop."

The New Jersey Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals was critical of the township's response to the home, which at least three neighbors told the Asbury Park Press that they had complained about weeks ago. The township says they were unaware the home contained that many dogs until Thursday.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Animal control officers removed 40 dogs from a Spruce Street home in Lakewood that were living in squalor in the abandoned building. STAFF VIDEO BY THOMAS P. COSTELLO

The owner is identified in tax records as Tal Spruce LLC, a business entity that was first registered in June 2011. Township manager Thomas Henshaw said a woman at the home, who he declined to name, had met with an animal control officer.

Nestor said Husky House now has a total of eight of the dogs at their facility after they added two more earlier this morning from the Ocean County Animal Facility in Jackson.

All the dogs, which were groomed, bathed and looked over by a veterinarian, are responding positively, she said.

"They're rolling over, giving their bellies, initiating contact with us, running around in the backyard," she said, over the sound of an occasional bark in the background. "The new dogs are much more skittish, but they're all friendly. There's not a mean bone in their bodies, which is amazing given what they've been through."

Nestor said they've had a strong response to their requests for donations to care for the dogs. A GoFundMe campaign had raised more than $6,500 as of Saturday evening.

She said they are still in need of cleaning supplies, food and treats. Popcorn Park Zoo Animal Rescue and Sanctuary, Eleventh Hour Rescue, Seer Farms and Second Chance Rescue are also sheltering dogs from the home.

The plan is for the dogs to be fostered and then made available for adoption, Nestor said.

"We'll spend two weeks getting to know them and then, as long as they're medically cleared, we'll take the next step," she said.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1bGNIpO