.

A group at the University of California-San Diego School of Medicine could have an impact on Arkansas and Oklahoma with an online program launched last year to retrain doctors from other fields to help fill the growing demand for primary care physicians.

Dr. Leonard W. Glass, M.D., president of Physician Retraining & Reentry through the UC-San Diego School of Medicine, notes that more than 30 million Americans are projected to obtain health insurance through the Affordable Care Act and every day about 10,000 baby boomers turn 65 and become eligible for Medicare.

“I started this program because I realized that unless someone does something, the entire health-care delivery system is going to come to a screeching halt in about five or 10 years because of the shortage of family doctors,” Glass said by phone recently.

He went on to say that most experts “conservatively estimate” the shortage of primary care physicians in America today to be about 33,000, and that number will double in the next 10 years because of the increased demand.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced in mid-March that about 16.4 million Americans have obtained health insurance since the passage of the ACA in March 2010.

While organizations like the Arkansas Colleges of Health Education are building a $32 million osteopathic medical college in Fort Smith’s Chaffee Crossing to help fill the need of family doctors, the 150-per-year graduates will make only a “small dent” in the demand, according to ACHE President Kyle Parker.

The Physician Retraining & Reentry online program, which went live in May 2014 after a yearlong testing period, is designed to function at the doctor’s own pace and allow people from “all other medical specialties” to be converted into family doctors. Most doctors finish the program in four to five months, Glass said, but a year is allowed. No one has taken that long.

So far, 13 physicians have made the conversion using the program, and there are 80 doctors currently in the program. Another 20 doctors are preparing to undertake the curriculum soon, Glass said. Tuition for the 15-course online curriculum is $8,500.

Although no physicians outside of the United States have signed up for the program through UC-San Diego, “there’s no reason they couldn’t,” Glass added.

Doctors, including psychiatrists and obstetricians, who may be “burned out in their specialties,” and want to continue practicing medicine have joined surgeons who have been slightly injured and no longer have the manual dexterity to operate, in making up about two-thirds of the Physician Retraining & Reentry program, Glass said.

“The’re exhausted physically from the night work and the day work and they can’t keep doing it,” Glass said. “We’re recycling them and bringing them back as family doctors.”

Initially, 75 percent to 95 percent of program participants were expected to be retired physicians. That group wound up making up only about one-third, Glass said. A doctor who spent 17 years in the corporate setting of an Atlanta-based insurance company was one of the program’s first participants.

“He wanted to go back to patient care,” Glass said. “This is the thing that drove many of us to go to medical school in the first place; to help those in need. Although it sounds a little corny, it really is alive and well in the minds of many physicians.”

After completing the accredited physician retraining program, that Atlanta doctor went on to work for the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Glass said.

“It’s not for wimps,” Glass said. “This is not something where you just go and sign your name to some sheet and get continuing medical education credits. You have to go to work, but we make it easy for them if they put in the time.”

Curriculum management is made easier, Glass added, with a link to an electronic source called UpToDate, which is used by 700,000 physicians worldwide as a medical resource. Hyperlinks in any of the Physician Retraining & Reentry program’s 15 courses are linked to UpToDate, he said. The online program is “designed to give experienced, medically licensed physicians and specialists, retired or otherwise, the opportunity to practice adult outpatient primary care in understaffed clinics across the country.”

Like many leaders in the health-care industry Dan Parker, CEO of Fort Smith-based IMWellHealth, feels that anything being done to stem the tide of a primary care physician shortage is a worthy undertaking. IMWellHealth specializes in custom on-site and multi-employer primary care clinics.

“Anything that enhances a physician’s ability to return to a clinical position in primary care will ultimately improve the ongoing shortage of primary care providers,” Parker wrote by email. “Accessing care via emergency rooms or urgent care centers does very little to improve the ongoing health status of a patient. Having timely access to a consistent primary care provider results in better outcomes. That’s an undeniable fact.”

Customizing treatment to modern medical needs is another goal of physician retraining.

“We like to think that we have covered everything,” Glass said. “Because UpToDate is continually updated, and we are subscribers, we like to think we are right there at the cutting edge of everything.”