You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Message: * A friend wanted you to see this item from WRAL.com: http://wral.com/14939971

When her first child was born five years ago, Morgan Beeson left her job as a high school home economics teacher to stay home.

But Beeson, a crafter since she can remember and a college fashion major, got a little antsy. So focused on caring for her newborn, Beeson got caught up in the day-to-day of being a new mom.

"I lost a little bit of myself," she said. She needed a change.

So Beeson started creating. She ordered jewelry lots from eBay, making hair accessories for friends and family. Custom orders came in too. Brides would bring vintage jewelry from their grandmother's collection. Beeson would turn them into head pieces and other items for the big day. It was just the kind of creative outlet that Beeson needed.

When she moved to Raleigh a few years ago, her work took an unexpected turn when her aunt suggested she sell items at Sanderson High School's annual Holly Days craft and gift market. Beeson was ready for the challenge. She sold her handmade jewelry and accessories, but she also bought soft, stretchy fabric online and turned it into infinity scarves.

The Vintage Bee was born.

"I sold out of everything," she said. "That was incredible."

Today, Beeson, now a mom of two, can be found monthly at the Midtown Farmers' Market, selling her jewelry made from vintage items and infinity scarves. She's added something new to her line: Big button scarves made of incredibly soft flannel and secured with a big button in the front.

I met Beeson at the Midtown Farmers' Market last month and loved the feel, colors and texture of her scarves. She's at the market monthly and also plans to sell items at Wakefield High School's Mistletoe Market on Nov. 14; North Hills' Christmas event and tree lighting on Nov. 21; and Holly Days on Dec. 5 and Dec. 6.

Customers also find her on Facebook and Instagram where they can connect with her and order items that she's posted or set up a custom project. (Matching scarves for moms and daughters are popular).

The business is a family affair. Her kids, now 5 and 2, love to help. They like to hold the foot pedal on the sewing machine. Her two-year-old will sit on her lap while she works.

"You just find the time," she said.

Beeson isn't sure how The Vintage Bee will grow or change over time. Always a lover of fashion, Beeson follows the latest trends and colors to keep her line current. As tastes change, she expects that she'll add new items and take away others.

She's hopeful that once both her children reach school age, The Vintage Bee will turn into a full-time job.

"It was a fun hobby that's turned into sort of work," she said. "... If it can keep me from returning to the traditional work field, I'd be very happy. But I'm really happy with where it is now."

Go Ask Mom features local moms every Monday.