WASHINGTON – Even many Democrats are stepping back from Obamacare, Sen. Ted Cruz said today during an interview with Fox News’ Chris Wallace at the Washington Ideas Forum.

“I think they’re in a lot of trouble,” Cruz said about Democrats. Cruz cited Bill Clinton’s call to Obama to make sure Americans are able to keep health insurance plans under the ACA. “Bill Clinton has extraordinary political instincts. It’s a little bit like the canary in the coalmine.”

Cruz said other Democrats will take cues from the former president.

Cruz said Republicans have alternatives in the works. He compared Obamacare’s insurance standards, which many current policies don’t meet, to requiring all drivers to buy a Ferrari. He said Congress should scrap the law, which he said has cost five million people their health insurance policies.

Cruz once again placed blame on the White House and Democrats for the government shutdown in October that resulted from the fight over the healthcare law.

“I didn’t want the shutdown,” he said. “Repeatedly, I voted to keep the government open.”

To Cruz’s consternation, the assertion drew laughs from the crowd. The forum is a partnership between The Atlantic, the Aspen Institute, and the Newseum, where the two-day event drew newsmakers from both parties.

Cruz also shrugged off questions about a 2016 presidential bid and criticism over his role in the shutdown.

Many, including fellow Republicans, have criticized the tactics he used in his fight against the health care law, which culminated in a 21-hour filibuster and played a central role in the government shutdown.

Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., who has consistently criticized Cruz over his role in the shutdown, displayed some of that ire in an appearance just before Cruz’s.

“Where I disagreed with Sen. Cruz was with shutting down the government,” McCain said. “It hurt my people. When we have to fly food from food banks to people in Tucson because they’re on minimum wage and they’re hungry, I have to say ‘stop, you’re crazy.’ There was no chance of success, and anyone who thinks there is is very naive about the Constitution of the United States.”

“If a Republican in Washington attacks Republicans from the left, that’s a very popular thing in Washington.” Cruz said, jabbing back during his interview. He said he’s more concerned with representing Texas than engaging in politics.

Wallace asked Cruz if alienating those in his own party over his tactics was worth it.

“Absolutely,” Cruz said. He would not rule out a similar strategy in the future as he continues to fight Obamacare. Another possibility for shutdown comes in January, when the temporary continuing resolution currently funding the government expires.

“I think there’s going to be plenty of time to focus on the particular tactics,” he said.

Cruz denied his fight against Obamacare is part of a bid for presidency.

“For someone who’s focused on the Senate, you’re spending a lot of time in Iowa,” Wallace noted.

Cruz said he’s traveling across the country in his quest to defeat Obamacare, not to campaign for office.

“I’m very much working to keep my focus on the Senate,” he said.

“Our country is working very hard to turn things around. It’s my hope that we see a thousand flowers bloom,” Cruz said, indicating his hopes that the grassroots movement that swept him into office continues to gain steam and generate candidates.