Buy Photo Students getting off of the school bus at Cochran Elementary are greeted by Americorps volunteer Rachel Lacer. The Americorps program, in several JCPS schools, is called REACH. It aims to reduce chronic absenteeism in younger students by having a dedicated Americorps volunteer working as mentors to students who have been identified as chronically absent. (Photo: By Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

As bundled-up Cochran Elementary students trundled off their yellow school buses one Friday morning, Rachel Lacer was there to greet them with a warm smile.

Helping kids off the bus and offering hellos, the AmeriCorps volunteer scanned the students for certain ones she knew would need extra attention that morning.

Lacer pulled aside one girl she knew was having surgery over the weekend, giving her a hug and a reassuring word before sending her off to class. Another girl, whose mom had just been released from prison, also got an extra-special hello from Ms. Rachel and a word of encouragement about making it to school that day.

Lacer is one of 18 AmeriCorps volunteers who spend their days in Jefferson County Public Schools as part of the REACH Corps program. The hope of the program, which stands for Ready to Extend a Caring Hand, is that creating a connection between the volunteers and chronically absent students will help stymie students' out-of-school days.

"We were hoping a lot of things would improve just by mentoring truant students," said Ben Langley, a specialist with Jefferson County Public Schools who directs the REACH Corps program. He said the goal of the program is to get to students at a younger age with interventions in the hopes they will be more successful. "We're finding the kids we're serving, they're more engaged in school, their attendance has greatly improved."

The number of days students are absent from school has come into increasing focus across the country as study after study shows that, unsurprisingly, students who are missing seat time tend to score lower on exams and fall behind their peers.

Buy Photo Americorps volunteer Rachel Lacer talks with a student in the hallway at Cochran Elementary. (Photo: By Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)

Generally, chronic absenteeism is defined as missing 10 percent or more of the school year, regardless of the reason or whether the absence is excused. Studies have shown that students who fall into that characterization are at a higher risk for not graduating on time and that chronic absenteeism in lower grades is correlated to lower reading performance by third grade.

In JCPS, 6,882 students - or about 7 percent of the total population - missed 25 days or more of school in the 2013-14 school year, according to district data.

JCPS partnered with AmeriCorps to create the REACH program about a decade ago, using the premise that having a meaningful connection with an adult at a school can make students more engaged in classes.

The REACH program started in 10 schools but has expanded now to 18, with one AmeriCorps member in each school mentoring 20-25 students who had been identified because they'd missed seven to 15 school days the previous school year. Like other AmeriCorps members, volunteers in the REACH program receive a living stipend and can be eligible for an award to help pay for education.

Lacer, the AmeriCorps member stationed at Cochran Elementary, stressed that REACH is not a behavior program, and she said many of her students don't show behavior issues at schools.

"I'm here to be the friend every child wants to have in an adult," Lacer said. "Whatever they need, I'm that."

Buy Photo Americorps volunteer Rachel Lacer shows off a filing cabinet drawer filled with alarm clocks that she gives to children who have trouble getting up and ready for school. (Photo: By Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)

Lacer makes a point every day to greet each of the students in her charge. She has one-on-ones with four or five of them every day to see how they are doing, to get updates, to share lessons. Some, she said, need help expressing their feelings, so she teaches them emotional vocabulary. Some are embarrassed about falling behind, so she works with them and translates some of their concerns to their teachers.

For students who were missing school because their parents weren't getting them ready in time for the school bus, Lacer hands out alarm clocks and tells students to be in charge of their own wake-up schedule. She calls home if a student is missing, not to talk about truancy laws, but just to check in with the family, or to remind them that skipping school even at a young age can be detrimental. Sometimes she'll just call a child's home to share good news.

"AmeriCorps is one of the few positions that legitimately has the time to just be with our kids," said Sue Wagner, coordinator of Cochran's Family Resource and Youth Services Center.

Data from the 2014-15 REACH program shows that, of 419 students who completed the program, two-thirds had lower rates of unexcused absences than the prior year. The decrease in absences for those students meant an average of 2.4 days more of school per child, or a total of 653 more days of school. However, 139 students last year in the program had more unexcused absences than the prior year.

Cori Seelye, whose daughter, Autumn, participated in the REACH program at Cochran for two years, said "Ms. Rachel" helped Autumn be excited about coming to school.

Seelye said her daughter ended up in the REACH program because she was often missing school for health-related reasons. But Seelye said her daughter also used to miss a lot of extra time in classes because she'd beg not to have to go to school.

"We would have a (doctor's) appointment and she would fight me against going to school after the appointment," Seelye said.

Buy Photo Rachel Lacer greets students arriving early at Cochran Elementary. (Photo: By Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)

Seelye attributes her daughter's attitude in part to the fact that Autumn's father was in prison and in and out of Autumn's life.

"She was having issues about feeling abandoned and feeling angry," she said.

But once Lacer and Autumn bonded, things changed, Seelye said.

Some of the anger issues seemed to go away. Autumn suddenly began looking forward to going to school, to the point of being impatient with Seelye if she was running late getting Autumn to school.

"To my daughter, Ms. Rachel was a friend and a mentor," Seelye said. "She could talk to me, but I'm her mom. With Ms. Rachel, she ... could be honest with another adult."

Seelye said Autumn's grades improved and her absences declined after Lacer began working with Autumn. Autumn used to like to come early to school to help Lacer with small tasks and to just hang out.

Seelye said she thinks every school should have the REACH program, saying that school counselors are often too busy to have such meaningful, close relationships with students.

"Ms. Rachel really helped out my child and I'm sure she helped out other mothers' children, too," Seelye said.

Reporter Allison Ross can be reached at (502) 582-4241. Follow the Courier-Journal’s education team on Facebook at Facebook.com/SchooledCJ.

Buy Photo Americorps volunteer Rachel Lacer greets students getting off of the school bus at Cochran Elementary. (Photo: By Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1OqUUZF