Obama shoots for the moon, ignores health care on Earth

With help from Sarah Karlin, Brianna Ehley, Rachana Pradhan, Erin Mershon, Brett Norman and Paul Demko

Tuesday’s State of the Union may have felt oddly familiar: Remember that “West Wing” episode on whether the State of the Union should call for a cure to cancer?

Story Continued Below

Made-for-TV President Jed Bartlet ended up cutting the "cure cancer" line from his speech. It wasn’t practical.

Our very real president kept the section in.

“Last year, Vice President Biden said that with a new moon shot, America can cure cancer,” Obama said on Tuesday.

“Tonight, I’m announcing a new national effort to get it done. … For the loved ones we’ve all lost, for the family we can still save, let’s make America the country that cures cancer once and for all.”

ALLIES FROM ACROSS THE AISLE — Fellow Democrats hailed Obama’s aspiration as inspirational — and it even won allies from across the aisle.

“[W]e have an incredible opportunity before us in 2016 to make a positive and lasting difference in paving the way for more life-saving cures and treatments,” House Energy and Commerce Chair Fred Upton said in a statement, touting his 21st Century Cures legislation. “The talk of a ‘moon shot’ is the exact mindset we need — America can and should lead the way.”

PROMISE OR PATIENCE? But where politicos saw promise, scientists were more cautious. For one, Obama’s “moonshot” will be more like “many shots,” empowering numerous organizations and researchers. And the White House isn't guaranteeing a swift cure — just a swifter pace of research and innovation.

And other presidents have begun similar battles, with mixed results. Richard Nixon may have gotten the United States out of Vietnam, but he declared a “War on Cancer” in his own 1971 State of the Union address — a war that we’re still fighting.

Vincent DeVita’s recent book, “The Death of Cancer,” explains some of the institutional problems behind America’s stalled war, including inflexible regulators and siloed institutions. (DeVita would know: He ran the National Cancer Institute for most of the 1980s.)

As my POLITICO Pro colleagues report, Obama’s moonshot could catalyze cancer research by cutting through red tape, pouring in new funds and encouraging public-private partnerships. The administration will make a big push for data-sharing and collaboration — as well as an effort to ensure more patients get access to costly tumor-sequencing and the chance to take part in clinical trials. Our story.

It's heady stuff. Of course, health care's always full of big, exciting pronouncements. Time will tell if this one leads to real changes — or another stalled war.

MEANWHILE, BACK ON EARTH — By shooting for the stars, Obama skipped over some pressing issues down here on Earth.

He didn’t call on nearly 20 holdout governors to expand Medicaid. He didn’t talk about prescription-drug costs. And for all the recent attention and even tears, the president didn’t discuss gun violence as a public health issue.

Could the president have dwelled on those health care topics? Consider that his relatively brief speech left time on the table, and most of his previous State of the Union addresses went far deeper into his domestic health policy initiatives. In 2010, Obama spent nearly three times as long talking about health care as he did on Tuesday night, as he tried to jump-start the legislation that became the Affordable Care Act.

Perhaps Obama’s said all that he needs to say about the ACA. But in his final State of the Union address, it was notable that the president stayed away from trying to ground his signature health initiative — and instead tried to launch a new one.

Good Wednesday morning — And welcome to Pulse 2.0, as we start moving to a slightly different beat.

I’m your new author, formerly the editor of the Advisory Board Daily Briefing and a writer for Forbes and Vox. And I’m thrilled to join POLITICO’s incredible health care team, including my amazing Pulse predecessors Brianna Ehley and Erin Mershon. I’d love your feedback on Pulse — how would you tune it up? — and to get your tips and takes. Find me at ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

AETNA REMAINS COMMITTED TO EXCHANGE MARKETS — Some news from the J.P. Morgan Healthcare Conference: Aetna expects to sustain “mid-single digit” losses on its Obamacare exchange business for 2015. But Pro's Paul Demko tells us that the insurer is taking a very different tack from UnitedHealth Group, which has threatened to bolt the exchanges because it’s losing too much money. “It is too early to give up on this process,” Aetna CEO Mark Bertolini told investors on Tuesday, pointing out that the exchange business accounts for just 5 percent of the company’s members and 6 percent of revenues. “From a tactical standpoint this is not breaking the bank one way or the other.”

GRASSLEY ADDS HEALTH DIRECTOR — Karen Summar will join the office of Sen. Chuck Grassley on Jan. 19, after serving since 2011 as a health policy adviser in the House of Representatives for Reps. Cathy McMorris Rodgers and Marsha Blackburn.

** A message from PhRMA: Coverage does not necessarily mean access to care. More medicines are being excluded from coverage, deductibles and copays are going up and insurance companies are increasingly imposing other barriers to access. Know the 5 reasons you may not get the medicine you need. Learn more at AccessBetterCoverage.org -http://onphr.ma/1UzbZPw. **

ARE CLINICAL PATHWAYS ABOUT DOLLARS OR SENSE? — I wanted to flag an important story from Pro’s Sarah Karlin, about clinical pathways — which are typically designed and used by health systems and payers to direct patient care and control cost, prescriptively outlining the steps a physician should take in treating a patient based on their disease. But pushing oncologists to focus on pathways may be taking away from their focus on patients, an American Society of Clinical Oncology task force warned, adding that “there is a growing sentiment in the oncology community that this trend is eroding both the doctor-patient relationship and the overall quality of cancer care.” ASCO rolled out nine suggestions to improve the pathway process. Pros can read Sarah’s story here.

DOCTORS SAY THEY’RE GETTING CRUSHED — Clinical pathways are just one reason why doctors are raising red flags: The new Medscape Lifestyle Report warns that "burnout among US physicians has reached a critical level.” More than half of physicians in at least nine specialties say they’re burned out, topped by doctors who practice in critical care, urology, emergency medicine, and family medicine. The number one cause of burnout, according to the survey? Too much bureaucracy. Read the survey here.

POLL: DOCS WANT CDC’S OPIOID GUIDELINES — A new survey by SERMO finds that 87 percent of its social network of doctors welcome CDC’s forthcoming opioid prescribing guidelines. The public comment period on the agency’s draft guideline ends today. More than eight in 10 of the 1,600-plus physicians surveyed supported mandatory registration and use of state prescription drug monitoring programs, while 63 percent reported being registered with their PDMPs. SERMO’s infographic of the results: http://bit.ly/1W4VhsG

LOUISIANA GOV MOVES ON MEDICAID — Newly elected Democratic Gov. John Bel Edwards wants to have the expansion in place by July 1, but it's not a done deal, Pro’s Rachana Pradhan writes. The Republican-led legislature has control over certain funding decisions, including the appropriation of federal funds into the state budget. Sources tell Rachana that they don’t think expansion is likely to be thwarted, but it’s unclear if GOP lawmakers will cooperate with Edwards. The Pro story.

THE STATE OF THE STATES ON MEDICAID — Louisiana would be the 31st state to opt into the expansion. Who's next? I asked Rachana and she rattled off three state debates she's watching this year: South Dakota, Wyoming, and Alabama.

HOUSE COMMITTEE GREENLIGHTS MENTAL HEALTH MEASURE — The House Judiciary Committee Tuesday approved a bipartisan Senate-passed mental health and criminal justice reform measure sponsored by Sens. Al Franken and John Cornyn that will now awaits consideration by the full House. The bill provides crisis intervention training, funding for mental health courts, veterans treatment courts and training for state and federal law enforcement officers. It focuses primarily on law enforcement and criminal justice reform unlike more comprehensive mental health legislation sitting in the Senate HELP Committee and the House Energy and Commerce full committee.

A SOLUTION TO SOCIOECONOMIC RISK ADJUSTMENT? NOT YET — The Institute of Medicine is out with the first in a series of five reports on how socioeconomic risk factors like race, gender and financial resources affect value-based payment in Medicare. But anyone hoping they'd wrap up the debate on the controversial issue quickly is out of luck. This first report — which, like the rest, was requested by HHS as it prepares its own mandated reports on the topic — simply sums up existing research and outlines a framework for addressing it. Future reports, the IOM committee promises, will tackle how to measure risk factors and adjust or account for them. Read more: http://bit.ly/1mVjENE

PERRY BRUSHING UP ON DENTAL LOBBYING — The top donor to Rick Perry's now-abandoned presidential campaign? MCNA Dental. While the Florida-based dental benefits company won't get to see Perry in the White House, they have secured a consolation prize: Perry is now serving as MCNA's “chief strategist," a spokesperson confirmed on Tuesday.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Rachana Pradhan

More hospitals are trying to purchase meat raised without antibiotics, NPR reports. http://n.pr/1P8am74

State measures to cut drug prices are facing big obstacles, STAT writes. http://bit.ly/1l3bnFN

In a Wall Street Journal op-ed, Thomas Stratmann and Matthew Baker criticize state certificate-of-need programs as stifling health care competition. http://on.wsj.com/1W2YVmI

Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel will propose raising the minimum age for buying tobacco products to 21 from 18 years old, the Chicago Tribune reports. http://trib.in/1Q42kRT

The Atlantic examines past usage of LSD in treating mental health issues, and therapists who are advocating for such an approach. http://theatln.tc/1Zs81Pi

** A message from PhRMA: Everyone has a story. We want to hear yours. Whether you are a patient like 9-year-old Ellie, a caregiver like Diane, or a general supporter, we want to hear your story about the positive & transformational impact that medicines have had on you or your loved ones. Submit your story to be part of the “I’m Not Average” campaign today at http://onphr.ma/1PI5n1T. **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **