"Are you stupid?"

That’s the sort of question one might expect to hear in the run-up to a bar fight or maybe as part of some exchange of tweets or anonymous comments on a news website. It is not generally the sort of question one would hope to hear from a member of Congress, let alone by the chairman of a House committee during a public committee hearing. Yet that is what House Oversight and Government Reform Committee Chairman Darrell Issa, R-Calif., asked embattled health care consultant Jonathan Gruber on Tuesday. Issa added, “Does MIT employ stupid people?”

Gruber, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, answered Issa's first question, “I don’t think so, no." And to Issa's follow-up, he replied, "Not to my knowledge.”



[READ: Jonathan Gruber Stirs Up the Obamacare Debate Again]

This was an embarrassing display all the way around. There was Gruber, answering for the very offensive and insulting remarks he made about the Affordable Care Act – in which he said the administration was able to get the law passed because the American people were too “stupid” to know what was in it – and there was Issa, using his position as chair of the committee to ask Gruber, who is obviously quite smart but capable of showing terrible judgment, whether he, too, is stupid.

This is what congressional oversight amounts to in the House, these days: It’s not about using Congress’s role to sincerely and aggressively oversee and evaluate government programs, but rather about having theatrical hearings meant to insult the Obama administration and rally the base against it. There was an aggravating factor Tuesday as well – while the House was playing a game of gotcha, the Senate was discussing a very serious oversight report on the very serious issue of CIA torture after 9/11. The report is over 6,000 pages long, the product of years of work and the examination of millions of documents. The declassified executive summary was more than 500 pages. There was intense debate and discussion about whether the report should have been made public, but at no time did a senator from either party, or on either side of the debate, ask if the other side was “stupid.”



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Obamacare]