Arizona State Capitol. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

PHOENIX — The House is set to debate two state sovereignty bills that block Arizona from funding and enforcing federal rules including proposed changes to the Clean Water Act.

Rep. Bob Thorpe, R-Flagstaff, said he sponsored the bills to stop federal overreach.

"It's time that we start pushing back and reaffirm that its congress and the president who should be enacting laws," Thorpe said in committee.

One bill blocks state funding for any federal rule, policy or regulation that Congress has not passed.

Another stops state and local governments from enforcing or cooperating with the Environmental Protections Agency's proposed changes to U.S. waters under the Clean Water Act.

READ MORE: 6 noteworthy Arizona bills that are still alive

The Republican-dominated Federalism and States' Rights Committee approved the bills pushing back against the federal government last week including House Bill 2058 and House Bill 2055.

In committee, the Sierra Club opposed the bill that would block proposed changes to the Clean Water Act.

"Here in Arizona it's very important where our waters that don't flow year around, the ephemeral and intermittent waters, have protections under the clean water act," said Sandy Bahr, director of the Sierra Club's Grand Canyon Chapter.

The proposed changes clarify types of water covered under the act and help states protect their waters, according to an EPA document.

Bruce Wheeler, D-Tucson, said both of Thorpe's bills violate the U.S. Constitution's supremacy clause.

"The people that voted to pass the civics test that the governor introduced should know that," he said.

Wheeler said that if the governor signs the bills into law, it will result in lawsuits paid for by Arizona taxpayers.

"There is no question that if this legislation passes and if the governor is shortsighted enough to sign it into law, that there will be lawsuits and it will cost the taxpayers' money," he said.

Two other federal pushback bills approved by the Federalism and States' Rights Committee are still awaiting House approval.

Thorpe's House Bill 2368 will block state funding for executive orders and policy directives from the U.S. Department of Justice.

House Bill 2643 by Rep. Justin Olson, R-Mesa, will stop state and local governments from using financial resources to enforce and implement the Affordable Care Act.

6 noteworthy bills still alive

Copyright 2015 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1BBWjWW