Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump went after primary rival Ben Carson last week in unusually personal terms, suggesting he was either a "vicious criminal" or a "pathological liar." REUTERS/Rick Wilking

KNOXVILLE, Tenn. — Though Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump took the stage here in Knoxville Monday to the University of Tennessee's fight song, “Rocky Top,” the candidate that showed up was a toned-down version of the rummaging quarterback that last week unleashed a torrent of tackles against his primary rival Ben Carson.

Yes, Trump knocked Hillary Clinton on her e-mail controversy. And he hit President Obama and John Kerry on their “weak” foreign policy. He mocked former New York governor George Pataki for raising “zero money." And he criticized former Florida governor Jeb Bush and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio for accepting donations from millionaires and billionaires.

But nowhere in his 60-minute stump speech to an estimated 10,000 people gathered at the Knoxville Convention Center was any mention of his less-theatrical foil Ben Carson, who has emerged as his chief rival for front-runner status in national polls. That was a drastic change in tune since last week when Trump ignited critics when, during a highly unusual 95-minute speech in Fort Dodge, Iowa, he called Carson's biography into question and said he has a "pathological disease."

"A child molester, there's no cure for that," Trump told the Iowa crowd Thursday, which grew quiet as the attacks became more personal. "If you're a child molester, there's no cure. They can't stop you. Pathological? There's no cure."

[Donald Trump begs Iowans not to believe Ben Carson: ‘Don’t be fools, okay?]

Trump toned down his attacks against all his rivals Monday — but in particular Carson — instead homing in on Obama and Clinton, tying their foreign policy approach to the terrorist attacks in Paris on Friday and criticizing the administration for its plans to accept Syrian refugees displaced by their country’s bloody civil war.

“We have a president that wants to take hundreds of thousands of people and move them into our country. And we don’t even know who they are,” said Trump, eliciting huge boos. “There’s no paperwork. There’s no anything. And all they have to do is look at the Web site for Obamacare to know we’re never going to figure it out.”

(For its part, the administration has said it will accept as many as 10,000 refugees in the next year and will require a screening process.)

But although the flamboyant businessman showcased the unique brand of political discipline he has honed since he announced his White House bid in June, he was at no risk of being boring or traditional.

"I predicted Osama bin Laden," Trump told the energetic crowd. “In my book, I predicted terrorism. Because I can feel it. I can feel it like a good location."

The real estate mogul also repeated his previous suggestion to build a "safe zone" in Syria for the would-be refugees rather than allowing them to emigrate to various different countries: “What I like is: build a safe zone in Syria. Build a big, beautiful safe zone. And you have whatever it is so people can live, and they’ll be happier," Trump said. “It’ll cost you tremendously much less, much less, and they’ll be there and the weather’s the same."

In another instance, he cited the attacks in Paris to speak about his support for the Second Amendment.

[With torrent of attacks, Donald Trump moves back into center of race.]

“Let me give you an example: France, they have a horrible attack — and by the way Paris is one of the places in the world that’s toughest on guns,” he said. “So you had all of these people sitting in this different places, no protection whatsoever, there was nothing they could do. I know in this room that’s a different story.”

Trump also recycled one of his most forceful applause lines from Thursday on how he would handle the Islamic State terrorist organization:

“Somebody criticized me the other day because they asked me what I’m gonna do,” he recounted. “I said, ‘I’m going to bomb the s--t out of them.’”