Photo

As thousands of women across the country are engaged in lawsuits against manufacturers of pelvic mesh implants, a Texas group is trying to get the state to also take action against companies that make the medical devices.

The Texas group, a coalition of “pelvic mesh survivors,” has asked Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott, who is also the state’s Republican nominee for governor, to pursue legal action against Johnson & Johnson, one of the largest implant makers.

The women say Johnson & Johnson violated a state law that prohibits deceptive business practices, citing the company’s “knowledge of the inherent danger” of the mesh implants and the cost to Texans of subsidizing care for women treated at taxpayer-funded facilities.

Jerry Strickland, a spokesman for the attorney general, declined to comment specifically on the matter, citing a continuing investigation. He said the state had been “engaged in the issue” since 2012 and that representatives from the attorney general’s office were serving on the executive committee of a coalition of states working on litigation against implant manufacturers.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Representatives for Johnson & Johnson did not respond to a request for comment, but company lawyers have argued in court that the implants were effective and that the company properly warned consumers about related risks.

But patient advocates say mesh manufacturers are not doing enough to warn women about the severe complications they may experience, including extreme pain, bleeding and infections.

Photo

“There’s risks with any surgery, and that’s no different with mesh surgery,” said Aaron Leigh Horton, founder of the Dallas-based Mesh Warrior Foundation for the Injured . “Most of the patients that I come in contact with as a patient advocate were not given the reality of those risks before surgery.”

The state’s investigation could benefit the women who have filed lawsuits because it may encourage the company to settle, said Jane Akre, who has organized patients who have had pelvic mesh implants for more than five years.

In its letter to the attorney general, the coalition said it was seeking action by his office because it has the “sole authority to conduct a comprehensive and thorough investigation” into whether Johnson & Johnson violated Texas’ consumer protection laws.

The attorney general’s office has requested a vast amount of information on surgical mesh devices from Johnson & Johnson, according a document obtained by The Texas Tribune.

Pelvic mesh implants are used to correct pelvic organ prolapse, which occurs when the reproductive organs or the bladder falls into a woman’s vagina because of weakened pelvic muscles. For years, surgeons have used plastic mesh to strengthen the pelvic wall and treat the condition, which is common among mothers and older women.

Through the foundation, Ms. Horton organizes support groups for women injured by their implants, including her mother, who suffered from complications related to an implant that she received in 2009 and eventually had surgically removed.

Texas women have also filed dozens of individual lawsuits against mesh manufacturers in federal courts. Stephen Blackburn, a lawyer with the Dallas firm Baron & Budd, which represents several women in mesh-related lawsuits, said he was “cautiously optimistic” that they would receive monetary compensation from manufacturers whose products had left some of them unable to sit or stand comfortably. But he said that would not be enough for women whose personal lives had been “destroyed” by the implant.