Luis Jimenez Credit: Associated Press

Phoenix — It has become something of an inside joke among reporters who cover spring training.

Having written endlessly about topics and Brewers' players over the course of the six-week camp, we find ourselves spending considerable time in the final days chronicling the battles for the last spots on the bench. Players who've never had much written about them, such as Luis Jimenez, Matt Clark and Hector Gomez, find reporters eagerly waiting at their lockers to interview them.

And here's the punch line: Invariably, one or more of those players are back in the minors before Memorial Day, unable to find a comfort zone with the irregular playing time that often constitutes life as a bench player in the majors.

That doesn't make it any less important for a team to select the right fits for their bench as they prepare to break camp and begin the long 162-game regular season. Several meetings already have been conducted in the Brewers' conference room at Maryvale Baseball Park to discuss the pros and cons of candidates for the final spots on the roster.

And more will be held with less than a week remaining in camp.

"I hate to say it, but I'm a little baffled about which way to go," manager Ron Roenicke admitted Saturday. "Every one of them makes sense in a certain way."

Fair or not, performance isn't always the most important criteria in filling the final spots on the bench. Elian Herrera, a multi-talented player who can man positions in the infield and outfield, is batting nearly .400 this spring but because he isn't on the 40-man roster, his chances of making the club aren't that great.

On the flip side, Jimenez, who struggled at the plate all spring until a two-homer, seven-RBI spurt on Wednesday and Thursday, is almost a lock to make the team. Why, you ask? Because he fits exactly what Roenicke is looking for in a backup third baseman/first baseman.

Roenicke, like most if not all managers, values defense first in a utility infielder. If a reserve can't field the position, games can be lost no matter how well he swings the bat.

Roenicke knows Aramis Ramirez, who will be 37 in June, has had trouble staying on the field over the last two seasons with leg and knee issues. Should Ramirez need a few days off, or spend a couple of weeks on the disabled list, Roenicke doesn't want his defense compromised at the hot corner.

As advertised, Jimenez is an above-average fielder at third base and has made himself into a dependable first baseman. A big factor in Jimenez's favor is that he is out of minor-league options, meaning he would have to be exposed to waivers to be sent to the minors.

Another bench candidate out of options is Gomez, a natural shortstop who has been given the opportunity in camp to prove he can handle second base as well. Every team needs a backup middle infielder who can handle those positions deftly when a starter is out of the lineup.

Gomez hasn't hit a ton in camp, either, but has handled himself well at second base, doing what was asked of him. So, as with Jimenez, Gomez is almost assured a spot on the roster barring the unforeseen.

The last spot on the bench is where much of the intrigue remains in camp. Because fourth outfielder Gerardo Parra can play any of the three spots if necessary, there is no real need for a true fifth outfielder.

Thus, Roenicke has the luxury of going with a bat instead of a defender for the 25th spot on the roster. Both Matt Clark and Jason Rogers are making strong cases for being that bat. Clark is a left-handed hitter and Rogers bats from the right side, and each has power, a coveted commodity on the bench. Better yet, both are on the 40-man roster, so it's simply a matter of deciding between the two.

That doesn't mean either would succeed in a pinch-hitting role in the majors, however. Minor-leaguers are accustomed to playing every day, and when placed in the unaccustomed role of coming off the bench cold a few times a week, they often look like they've never held a bat in their hands.

Remember Brad Nelson? The powerful prospect tore it up in spring training in 2009, virtually forcing the Brewers to bring him north. But Nelson went hitless in 21 at-bats off the bench, was released in mid-May and hasn't played a day in the big leagues since while toiling for four other organizations.

"It's always better to have somebody that's experienced in that role because you know what you're going to get from them," Roenicke said. "Guys can come out here and hit .500. That doesn't mean they're going to be able to hit off the bench.

"You're not going to be sure if they can do it or not. You just have to go by what you see."

And hope that one or two pan out in the long run.

Send email to thaudricourt@journalsentinel.com