Young crusader: Kirsty Albion is leading the charge of youth against climate change. Photo: Penny Stephens

(WHO) Kirsty Albion, national co-director of the Australian Youth Climate Coalition, which has 120,000 members

Our mission is to build a movement of young people to solve the climate crisis before it is too late. We recognise is it is our generation that is going to face the costs of climate change and the impact of climate change if we do not act now. Kirsty Albion

(WHAT) Young people, backed by scientific evidence, are driving action against human-induced climate change

Solutions: Dr Shane Murray, Dean of Art Design and Architecture at Monash University, believes denser city living is the answer. Photo: Michael Clayton-Jones

(HOW) Spreading knowledge and organising community pressure on businesses and politicians to replace fossil fuels with renewable energy

Advertisement

Young people are not engaged with political parties but are passionate about political issues.

And there is no more galvanising issue for young people than climate change. They know they are the generation most threatened by the dangerous atmospheric warming the overwhelming majority of the world's climate scientists have established beyond reasonable doubt is being caused by human activity, particularly the burning of fossil fuels.

The Australian Youth Climate Coalition (AYCC), which started as recently as 2006, has about 120,000 members – far more than the combined national total of the Liberal Party and the ALP, which have existed for many years. Its co-director, Kirsty Albion, is today's guest in The Zone.

She was raised in Tasmania, was that state's finalist in the 2011 Young Australian of the Year, studied environmental science in Melbourne, with her co-director Lucy Manne won the Prime Minister's Young Environmentalist of the Year award last year, and has emerged as one of the nation's most effective campaigners for action to mitigate global warming.

She describes climate change as the defining issue of her generation, of whom so many have joined the AYCC.

"Our mission is to build a movement of young people to solve the climate crisis before it is too late. We recognise is it is our generation that is going to face the consequences of climate change and the impact of climate change if we do not act now.

"When you look at the social change required, our inspiration comes from the past. It has always been people coming together and organising and campaigning that has led to the massive changes of the past, such as women's rights, civil rights, the end of apartheid and slavery, all of these sorts of things. So we looked back at history and saw that we needed a movement and saw that young people have a really important role to play in that."

A video statement by Albion, who joined the AYCC in 2008, and the full transcript of our discussion are at theage.com.au/federal-politics/the-zone. She will be online today for an hour from noon to respond to questions and comments, which can be submitted from this morning.

"We are a non-partisan organisation. We want all politicians to do better on climate. This is not about ideology. We have young people from Young Liberals to Young Greens and everything in between. We have people from diverse religious backgrounds and cultural backgrounds, geographic locations, and the one thing that unites us is that we want a safe climate. Like every young person, we have dreams for our future and climate change threatens everything we care about. The science is very clear. There are really not any trusted or respectable institutions worldwide that do not accept the science of climate change."

One way the AYCC builds its base is by sharing knowledge. Last year for example, it reached as many as 20,000 students through its Start the Switch program, a 20-minute animated presentation about climate science, the impacts of climate change, solutions including renewable energy. It informed students about how to start a group in their school to run sustainability projects.

"Part of what we do is about building that movement and building that power and educating young people on the issue of climate change and empowering them to make a difference. The other part of what we do is then mobilise that power to create change."

It works. The AYCC has mobilised against the development of coal mining, as well as coal-seam gas exploration, in the Galilee Basin in Western Queensland, where Clive Palmer has extensive interests. Nine mines are proposed, and the federal and Queensland governments have given the go-ahead for the first mine in what is one of the world's biggest coal deposits. Should the development proceed, coal ports on the Great Barrier Reef would be required.

"If the Galilee Basin were to be opened up, it would create more emissions than the entire nation of Canada. Two years ago when we were looking at this issue no one had heard about it, no young people really knew about what was going on."

A lot of people, young and old, know about it now. The AYCC launched a grassroots campaign, starting with raising awareness about the basin in schools and universities and TAFE collages. It partnered with community and environmental groups along the Great Barrier Reef, as well as with tourism organisations.

Albion says the result has been astounding. "What we have seen is the community standing up: millions of Australians participating in action to say that they want to see the Great Barrier Reef protected from coal expansion. We have seen BHP pull out, Rio Tinto pull out, and about six months ago we started a campaign asking Lend Lease to withdraw their proposal to build the world's biggest coal port on the Great Barrier Reef."

Lend Lease has listened. After the AYCC publicly campaigned at the massive construction company's annual meeting and got staff to lobby management, Lend Lease's chief executive and chief operating officer met with Albion and her co-director Lucy Manne. The company, which markets itself as a supporter of environmental sustainability, has pulled out of building the port. Another huge coal company, Anglo American, saw what was going on and also pulled out of Galilee.

The pressure is now on the banks that would finance the mines and the ports. Having observed the effects on the miners and port builders of the community backlash the AYCC helped engineer, community groups and tourism operators have teamed up to call on international banks to protect the reef from coal exports. Five major investors have publicly ruled out funding these ports, including HSBC, Deustche Bank and Royal Bank of Scotland.

That leaves the big four Australian banks. "Now it is really up to the banks to decide whether or not they are going to fund it. So we have started a campaign asking all four of the big banks to not invest in these coal ports on the reef. In particular, we have been asking Westpac recently because it is the most sustainable of the big four banks. They were named this year as the world's most sustainable business. So as young people we're asking them please protect our future, please protect the reef and do not invest in these coal ports."

In the past month, the AYCC has met with 275 Westpac branch managers, and Albion says the staff say they do not want their company to finance Galilee projects. She is confident Westpac and the other big local banks – ANZ, NAB and Commonwealth Bank – will not back Galilee projects, not only because of the risk to their reputation, but because of financial risk.

"The economics of energy is changing so fast – the cost of renewable energy has dropped so fast that it is now cheaper than coal in many countries. This is making new coal projects in Australia financially unviable and the financial sector has a really important role to play in shifting investment to clean, reliable, cheap renewable energy."

Another AYCC campaign harnessing community concern about climate change is happening in Port Augusta, a city 300 kilometres north of Adelaide that has two ageing coal-fired power stations. Even though the economy of Port Augusta has long been based on coal, the AYCC has managed to garner the support of more than nine in 10 residents for the power stations to be replaced by solar thermal power. The federal government has committed $3 million to a feasibility study for a project that every local candidate at the last election said has become the number-one issue.

Albion and her coalition believe neither side of politics has sufficiently robust climate change policies, and are particularly disappointed by the policies of the Coalition Government, which has repealed the price on carbon emissions.

"It is really hard as a young person to see our Prime Minister go overseas and talk about trying to build a coalition of governments to take us backwards on climate change. It completely feels like he is choosing a dying fossil fuel industry over the future of our generation."

She believes Australia, which has one of the biggest carbon emissions per person and is one of the windiest and sunniest nations, has a moral imperative as well as a massive opportunity to replace fossil fuels with renewable energy.

"There are few other more important places where action needs to occur in the world right now."

It is happening. Acting with enlightened self-interest, businesses and households are making the transition.

In the past four years, emissions from power generation have fallen by 13 per cent and big industrial companies have cut energy consumption by the equivalent of that used by 800,000 households in a year. More than 1 million homes, or one in 10, have solar panels. New offices use a third less energy than was the case a decade ago. Electricity generation by renewable sources has grown by two-thirds in the past decade. Wind generation now makes up almost a third of all renewable generation, sufficient to power 1 million homes.

The fundamental question, though, is whether it will happen fast enough to prevent irreversible damage. Albion and the AYCC believe politicians must help much more, rather than take us backwards on climate change. "We think every politician has a responsibility to protect the future of young people."

aycc.org.au

Last week's guest was Professor Shane Murray, Dean of Art Design and Architecture at Monash University, who argued we need to provide more housing options for Australia's ageing and rapidly growing population by opening up suburbs close to the centre of our capital cities to much more medium-density developments. Below are excerpts of his online chat session:

QUESTION: I recognise the immediate need to address the housing issues for the ageing population. However, as a young person, I am also concerned about the housing options for my cohort - home ownership seems like an impossible dream. What do you think should be done to better cater for the housing needs of this age group? EdiS

SHANE MURRAY'S RESPONSE: I certainly agree that home ownership is increasingly difficult for younger generation. Some of our suggestions for our elderly cohort also apply to providing more housing options for young people entering the housing market. We are examining alternative low- rise high density dwelling designs that enable housing to be delivered more affordably in appropriate locations for young people entering the housing market. However, there are also many issues around the marketing and financing of housing which design cannot solve. Internationally governments have looked to various financial mechanisms to support young people entering the housing market some of these include housing bonds and partial mortgage structures.

QUESTION: If redevelopment at worthwhile densities is to occur in middle suburbs, how do we preserve heritage, and, in some respects, special character? The latter term has long been tainted by conformist aesthetic ideologies, but there is much more to our suburbs than period colour schemes and gable roofs. How do we avoid them losing their identity? Also, some have suggested that to persuade home/land owners in the middle suburbs to push back against protectionist zoning we need to communicate the reduced value of their land if greater restrictions on development yield are adopted. However, land value is affected by scarcity as well as redevelopment potential. If there's only a set amount of housing in well serviced suburbs, this will drive prices up in itself, exacerbating affordability and inequality issues. Is there research/evidence around this and how do we get an informed, genuine public debate around these complex issues? Cream Brick - Melbourne

SM: For residents, more effective community engagement conducted early on in development processes would be a good start. If designed well, urban change can in fact offer benefits for existing residents while presenting acceptable levels of change to the neighbourhood's identity. Instead of thinking of development of only one block at a time, if we thought about a co-ordinated approach where we redeveloped a number of blocks across an urban neighbourhood as one development we would have a much better chance of preserving and establishing appropriate character – particularly landscape character. The impact of zoning on property prices is also a real concern for infill redevelopment and the complexity of the supply/demand issues involved span so many disciplines - design, construction, consumer demand ... some of these I can't pretend to have an answer for. But there is some public debate and information around this surfacing.

Try these: futuremelbournenetwork.org/

ahuri.edu.au/publications/projects/p50593

QUESTION: The planning laws introduced to lock new residents out of Liberal suburbs are going to backfire as other councils also succumb to knee-jerk pressure and lock up their areas as well.

This is all and well for opportunistic politicians seeking a few votes in one election; it's not a solution for Melbourne's housing crisis. When the chickens come home to roost in a few years we will find ourselves not only behind the eight ball but also off the pool table. Socrates - Hawthorn

SM: Long-term leadership around planning, housing and new design alternatives is definitely needed - one that can hopefully be separated from election cycles. We really do need a range of housing types that diversify the current offering that is predominantly apartment towers and single dwellings.

ONLINE: The full session is at: theage.com.au/federal-politics/the-zone