Just compare Stewart with his fellow American comedians, especially when it comes to taking on sacred cows. The late, great Joan Rivers was an equal-opportunity offender (including of the Obamas), while Stewart limits his targets. Jerry Seinfeld denounces political correctness, while Stewart operates within PC confines. Chris Rock says today’s college students are ‘way too conservative in their social views and their willingness not to offend anybody’, yet many of them would feel perfectly comfortable laughing along with Stewart. Bill Maher, a self-proclaimed liberal who is perhaps the closest to Stewart in combining politics and comedy, has, unlike Stewart, proven willing to take stands that are unpopular among the liberal set, such as when he criticises Islamic terrorism and defends free speech.

Sometimes it appears that Stewart wants to be seen as a political pundit. He consistently offers a political take on the news, and with his screed on Crossfire and his organising of a ‘Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear’ in Washington in 2010, he appeared to want to play more than the role of the TV jokester. And, as many have noted, his resort to ‘Hey, I’m only a comedian’ when his political views are challenged looks like a convenient escape clause.

But that said, I do think Stewart is first and foremost a comedian, and a pretty good one at that. His job is to get laughs, and, by that yardstick, he still has it, at least for a certain segment of the population. Last year he made an estimated $30 million for telling jokes – he must be doing something right. I mostly blame his fans for trying to endow Stewart with the status of a great political sage, for seeing him as the voice of a generation or group. Much of what superficially looks like political allegiance today is really just a badge of one’s identity rather than an engagement with ideas – and being a fan of Jon Stewart has been, for many, a readymade element of their identity.

In some circles, Stewart’s popularity has waxed while his comedy edge has waned. In recent years, he has appeared fed up and exhausted. He will frequently mention a Republican or Fox News commentator, pause, and say ‘Fuck you!’, and great hilarity ensues. Or he’ll just call people names, as in ‘Why is [New Jersey governor] Chris Christie such a dick?’. The opposite of clever. And yet it seems that, the more that Stewart’s comedy has scraped the barrel, the more that his videos are circulated on news sites and social media like Facebook. Stewart’s fanbase let his viral videos speak for them. These videos have become a caricature, delivered with overblown captions like ‘Watch Jon Stewart DESTROY Republicans’, ‘See Jon Stewart DEMOLISH Fox News’. They are a veritable Groundhog Day of the same in-jokes and groupthink, over and over again. It is the suddenly video-bereft folk who will miss Stewart most.

Over time, the lasting impression left by Stewart is not much more than snark. As the critic David Denby explains, snark ‘is a teasing, rug-pulling form of insult that attempts to steal someone’s mojo, erase her cool, annihilate her effectiveness, and it appeals to a knowing audience that shares the contempt of the snarker and therefore understands whatever references he makes…. Snark often functions as an enforcer of mediocrity and conformity. In its cozy knowingness, snark flatters you by assuming that you get the contemptuous joke. You’ve been admitted, or readmitted, to a club, though it may be the club of the second-rate.’

Stewart certainly wasn’t forced to step down, but the format has become really stale, and you can tell the show has lost its own mojo. Of course, Stewart is just one comedian moving on for personal reasons, and, being a very talented guy, there’s a pretty good chance he’ll return with something new and successful. But I can’t help think that his departure also represents something more than one individual’s story, that it marks the end of an era. It’s a time when not only is the Obama administration running out of gas, but the pop culture mashup of comedy and politics epitomised by The Daily Show seems to have reached its limits as well. If this is a sign that snark has jumped the shark, it would be even better.

Sean Collins is a writer based in New York. Visit his blog, The American Situation.

Picture by: PA

For permission to republish spiked articles, please contact Viv Regan.