WASHINGTON -- The Obama administration will grant a waiver exempting volunteer emergency departments, mainly fire departments, from the Affordable Care Act's requirement that employers with more than 50 workers working 30 hours or more per week provide health coverage.

The announcement came from a Treasury Department official in a blog posted during the weekend. It means that on Jan. 1, 2015, when employers with 50 or more workers are required to provide health coverage to their workers, volunteer fire department and ambulance companies will be exempted.

Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., who joined some other congressional members in asking for the waiver, said the administration's announcement ensures the continuation of voluntary emergency services throughout Louisiana and the nation.

"This is a common-sense clarification that will allow local fire departments to continue utilizing the skills and services of local volunteer firefighters and emergency responders to keep providing critical and life savings services across Louisiana," Landrieu said. "Without these brave individuals, many Louisiana communities would not have the peace of mind that their communities are protected and safe."

Landrieu, whose vote and support for the Affordable Care Act has been criticized by Republicans trying to defeat her in the 2014 Senate race, has said the law will bring peace of mind to millions of Americans who previously couldn't afford health care, often because of pre-existing conditions. But she said that modifications ought to be enacted to fix problems with the law.

Republican Rep. Bill Cassidy said, "I'm pleased this was done, but what about other charitable organizations that may still be impacted? One Louisianan, Jeff Gleason, the former executive director of community resource coordinators, tells me that this charity which helps the elderly was forced by Obamacare to lay off employees last June. This is a consequence of the president's health care law."



Mark Mazur, the Treasury Department's assistant secretary for tax policy, announced on the department's blog that a waiver would soon be granted.

"This guidance strikes the appropriate balance in the treatment provided to traditional full-time emergency responder employees, bona fide volunteers and to our nation's first responder units, many of which rely heavily on volunteers," Mazur wrote.

The National Association of Counties (NACO) said that 69 percent of U.S. firefighters are volunteers. If municipalities and counties were required to provide health care coverage to volunteers, it would have forced some communities to close fire departments, the association said.

"NACO would like to express its appreciation to the Administration for being responsive to the concerns of counties and adopting a common-sense solution to avert an unintended consequence of the Affordable Care Act," the association said in a statement.