Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton said Monday that she has used her first few months on the campaign trail to connect with voters.

Click to watch News 9's coverage.

Clinton gave her first televised interview of her campaign when she spoke with News 9's Josh McElveen. She has taken some heat from the media during the first months of her campaign for keeping the press at arm's length and holding closed events, but she said there was a reason for that.

"I hadn't been in politics since I became secretary of state," Clinton said. "I had certainly followed closely what was happening in our country because of the Great Recession, but I wanted that touch and that feel that you can only get by sitting and talking and looking at somebody."

Bio: Hillary Clinton

Clinton didn't apologize for the initial soft launch of her campaign and said she is now happy to take on any question she gets, be it her plan for the economy or questions surrounding foreign donations to the Clinton Foundation while she was secretary of state.

"I don't know if we have enough time in this interview to debunk all of the allegations that were made by people who were wielding the partisan ax," Clinton said.

Clinton said she should be evaluated on her record and her plans for the future.

"I say judge me on my whole record, and in fact what people in New Hampshire talk to me about is the cost of child care, about their student loans, about how they can start and grow a new business," she said.

Clinton also said she isn't sold on the Trans Pacific Partnership deal President Barack Obama wants but failed to get through Congress last week.

"I'm still going to judge the deal at the end of the day with whether I think it's good for America," Clinton said, saying she thinks it needs work. "I think the questions that were raised are ones that have to be answered."

Clinton said she will continue to answer questions that have been raised over the past couple months, and she said voters in New Hampshire will see plenty of her moving forward.

Clinton also held several packed-house events in New Hampshire on Monday. She began with a roundtable discussion on early childhood education in Rochester.

Later, Clinton gave a speech before a large gathering at a midday “Launch Party” at the Carter Hill Orchard in Concord.

Click to watch raw video of Clinton's speech at the party.

Clinton also spoke in Manchester Monday night. She was the keynote speaker at the Manchester City Democratic Committee’s Flag Day Dinner at the Puritan Backroom Conference Center.

Click to watch video of Clinton speaking to reporters.

Challenging Clinton on the Democratic side are U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont, former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley and former Rhode Island Gov. Lincoln Chafee.