“I loved her first.”

On her wedding day, the father of the bride gave her and her new husband a surprise they’ll never forget. Have a hankie handy when you watch this. You’ll need it:

More about that special moment here.

This next father and daughter broke with tradition on her wedding day when Daddy took his little girl into his arms for the Father-Daughter dance. Watch! (They really get going at about the 5-minute mark.) Read more about it at Little Things.

And this paraplegic groom surprised his bride on their wedding day with a very special first dance. Still have that hankie handy? Watch the video.

Wedding anniversaries can be just as memorable. Witness these two brothers who decided to give their parents a hilarious anniversary gift when Matthew and James Houghton took several of their childhood photos and reenacted them as adults. Here’s one of them:

Speaking of weddings and anniversaries, how’s this for a wedding coach?

Looks more like a hearse, doesn’t it? One Facebook commenter noted: “That car says, ‘Wanna get married? Hey, it’s your funeral.'”

Funeral? Did someone say funeral?

Did you know that beginning right around the time of the Civil War, families who could afford it had photographs taken of their dead? I know, sounds pretty creepy, doesn’t it? But postmortem photography was a way for loved ones to remember those who had passed on.

The photographer would be called out shortly after the loved one died. The deceased was propped up and dressed in their finest. It is said that postmortem photos or “memento mori” of children and babies were common, especially during the Victorian era when mortality rates were high. Read more about it and view more photographs here.

From postmortem photos to hidden heads. Oleg Shuplyak’s paintings contain more than meets the eye. Take a look at the double images created by his paint and brush.

While we’re into metamorphosis, here’s how one Texas community transformed an empty big-box retail store into something else altogether. Hint? It’s a play on words.

Sand art

Lending new meaning to playing in the sand, artist Andres Amador creates masterpieces with a rake only to see them washed away with the incoming tide. Seems self-defeating, so why does he do it?

“Its fun. I get to be at the beach,” he says.

Visit his Facebook here. Amador’s website has more beach murals.

The good, the bad, the Gruber

Jonathan Gruber, MIT economics professor and Obamacare architect, is now part of the common lexicon.

As reported in WND, last week “tapes surfaced that Gruber had said he and his Democratic colleagues had hid the health law’s true costs from the public to take advantage of the ‘stupidity of the American voter’ and pass the bill. In another speech, Gruber said ‘Americans were too stupid to understand’ Obamacare’s main tax hike. In yet another, he boasted of Obamacare’s ‘exploitation of the lack of economic understanding of the American voter.'”

Urban Dictionary has added a new word and definition: Grubered: (Verb) To mislead the public into believing lies to achieve personal ideological laws pass. Example: “The President really grubered us on that healthcare bill.”

Gruber also was the subject of an online Twitter hashtag #ReplaceMovietitleWithGruber contest, resulting in titles like “Midnight in the Garden of Good and Gruber.”

Gruber has also inspired online jokes and photoshops:

Related tweets (courtesy of Twitchy.com): “Guy who never worked on Obama’s staff worked on Obama’s staff.”

How times have changed: What the White House said about Gruber in 2009

David Axelrod calls Gruber the definition of ‘stupid,’ gets asked one ‘great question’

‘Well briefed’ Obama tells Ed Henry ‘I just heard about’ Gruber

2012 OFA ‘Truth Team’ video features Jonathan Gruber touting O-care development role

‘Grubered again!’ If you like your plan, you can pay more for your plan in 2015

‘Don’t Democrats have like an island they send this guy to?’ Gruber admits to ‘mislabeling’ in latest video

Obamacare architect Jon Gruber calls voter ‘adolescent child’ in 5th video

Pity the poor guy who shares the same name! Being Jon Gruber on Twitter right now must be really awkward!

Tim Young at The Clash Daily posted photos of Gruber’s comic book to promote Obamacare, explaining:

By now we all know who Jonathan Gruber is … and if you don’t, turn on the news. The quotes this “architect” of Obamacare gave us on his work were golden:

“This bill was written in a tortured way to make sure [the Congressional Budget Office] did not score the mandate as taxes,” and, “If CBO scored the mandate as taxes, the bill dies, OK? … Lack of transparency is a huge political advantage, and basically, you know, call it the stupidity of the American voter or whatever, but basically, that was really, really critical to getting this thing to pass.”

After those quotes, it makes perfect sense that Gruber’s greatest treatise for the stupid American voters is a comic book … and when I heard this, I had to find a copy and read it for myself so that you, the stupid American voter, wouldn’t have to.”

We leave you with this one. More at The Clash.