Topics: chuck todd, face the nation, Jake Tapper, John Dickerson, meet the press, State of the Union, The Sunday Shows, Media News

It was hard to be especially angry when the news broke last week that Jake Tapper would be taking over as host of CNN’s Sunday show “State of the Union,” replacing Candy Crowley, who stepped down as anchor last year. Tapper is, after all, one of the more interesting, sharp and watchable people on television. He could actually inject some much-needed life into the eternally dismal Sunday current affairs landscape.

If his ascension to the Sunday throne isn’t a cause for outrage, though, it still provides a depressing look at the cringeworthy lack of diversity in much of our elite media. Taken together with the recent promotion of John Dickerson to replace Bob Schieffer at “Face the Nation,” the Tapper news means that all five major Sunday shows will now be hosted by white men.

Here’s the breakdown:

“Meet the Press” (NBC) — Chuck Todd

“Face the Nation” (CBS) — John Dickerson

“This Week” (ABC) — George Stephanopoulos

“State of the Union” (CNN) — Jake Tapper

“Fox News Sunday” — Chris Wallace

If you throw in the big three newscasts on CBS, NBC and ABC, that’s seven out of eight highly prestigious jobs in TV news currently being occupied by white guys. The lone exception to the rule is Lester Holt, currently serving as the interim anchor of “NBC Nightly News,” meaning if the network brings Brian Williams back from his time in purgatory (however unlikely that eventuality might now be), white newsmen could make it a clean sweep.

By my rough calculation, the five big Sunday shows have been on the air a combined 187 years. In that time, women have hosted or co-hosted for 26 of those years. “Meet the Press” hasn’t had a female host since 1953. Racial diversity? Forget about it. They’ve also all been straight (unless there’s something we don’t know about). And—well, you get the picture.

You could ask if this matters so much these days, when the fracturing of the media landscape has left both the nightly and the Sunday news shows with nothing like their past influence, and when the true network money centers — morning shows like “Good Morning America” and the “Today” show– are light-years ahead in terms of both racial and gender diversity. The biggest star in morning TV, Robin Roberts, is an African-American lesbian, about as potent a symbol of media progress as you’re likely to get.