GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump waves during a rally in Biloxi on Saturday. Trump took on the current Washington leadership, ISIS, immigration and took about 10 minutes during his speech to attack ‘corrupt media’ covering the event. (Photo: AP)

BILOXI – Donald Trump shifted briskly from one topic to another and back again Saturday night during his rally at the Gulf Coast Coliseum in Biloxi.

“It’s like a love fest,” he said of the event. “People are so tired of the incompetence. They’re so tired of stupidity.”

Trump railed against current Washington leadership, ISIS, illegal immigrants and took about 10 minutes during the hour-long speech to attack “corrupt” media covering the event.

The rally was his first public appearance in the Magnolia State since the 1990s, when he had attempted to build a casino and aquarium in Gulfport.

Trump has regularly expressed opposition to Syrian refugees settling in the United States, and the rally in Mississippi was no exception.

“We have no idea who they are and where they come from,” he said. “I think maybe it is the ultimate Trojan horse.”

Trump’s appearance in Biloxi followed reports that Al Shabaab, a Somali al Qaeda affiliate, issued a recruitment video that shows a clip of the presidential candidate speaking after the shooting in San Bernardino, California, last month. The video includes Trump’s statements in support of banning Muslims from entering the United States.

That position has drawn criticism from Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton, who had said before the video’s release that ISIS was using his statements in propaganda videos.

Trump took a milder approach than he has in the past, making no mention of the videos, the Islamic faith or Muslims when discussing ISIS and Middle Eastern countries. He simultaneously was critical of the Iraq War and advocated for increasing the country’s military.

“I’m going to build our military so strong, so powerful. … We’ll never have to use it hopefully,” which transitioned into, “I’m someone who believes in the military, but you’ve got to know how to use it.”

He touched on his plans he announced Tuesday to begin spending millions on television advertising in Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina. Thus far, he has spent $300,000, compared to former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, who has spent more than $40 million.

“I’m going to start spending quite a lot of money, because I want to be sure,” Trump said. “Until now I’ve loved it because I’ve spent less than anyone else and had the best results. That’s what should happen with our country.”

At one point, Trump interrupted his speech to criticize video photographers at the event for not panning their cameras to show the crowd.

“Spin the camera,” he told one cameraman, and at one point, “They’re really dishonest people. I might fire his a-- right now.”

“The people are really smart,” Trump said. “They get it. They know how crooked the system is. They know how crooked these reporters are, many of them.”

Trump was unavailable for questions before or after the event.

Trump also attacked his rivals, particularly Clinton, Democratic frontrunner.

“Everyone knows she should be in jail,” he said. “What she did with the emails was a disgrace. She shouldn’t be allowed to run.”

Trump mentioned goals to get rid of both the Affordable Care Act and Common Core, and returned to his plans to build a wall between the United States and Mexico — even bigger than the Great Wall of China.

“This will be a real wall,” he said.

“Let people come into the country, but they’re coming into the country legally.”

Trump has been described as a polarizing figure, but the same positions that have drawn criticism have attracted admirers, who say they support his “tell it like it is” attitude.

“He’s not trying to be politically correct,” Kathy Rogers of Hattiesburg said. “He brings up issues and what he believes in and doesn’t care about what anyone else says.”

Hjalmberi Shytox of Purvis also favors Trump’s lack of political correctness.

“The state is more or less dead,” he said. “I see Trump as a way to get back to where we were. … I believe in my heart if Hillary Clinton is elected, we might as well put a tombstone on this country.”

Trump is the second presidential candidate to campaign in Mississippi this election season after Ohio Gov. John Kasich’s visit last year. The state’s primary will take place on March 8.

Read or Share this story: http://hatne.ws/1OBApDe