Grave error to gag the media, says head of Ofcom: Idea of statutory regulation leaves her feeling 'very nervous'

Colette Bowe outgoing head of Ofcom said press 'should not be subjected to statutory regulation in any form'

Labour, the Tories and Lib Dems agreed a Royal Charter last October

Outgoing Ofcom boss Colette Bowe, said statutory regulation of the press would be a 'grave error'

The outgoing head of Ofcom has warned that any form of statutory regulation of the Press would be a ‘grave error’.

Colette Bowe, who is due to stand down from media standards watchdog this month, said Lord Justice Leveson’s idea of underpinning an independent press regulator with legislation made her feel ‘very nervous’.

Addressing the Oxford Media Convention she said: ‘I would say I do not think the press should be subject to statutory regulation in any form whatsoever. I would regard that as a grave error for this country and this society.’

Asked if her views encompassed the Government’s current plans on regulation - as agreed by the three main political parties last October - she said: ‘Again, speaking totally personally I am very, very nervous about any form of regulation near our press.’

In its written evidence to the Leveson inquiry, Ofcom said the principles of effective regulation of the Press ‘could be achieved within a self-regulatory, non-statutory model’.

But the chair of Ofcom was more emphatic in her criticism when speaking at last week’s event.

She said: ‘I think what needs to happen with our press is that journalists and editors need to know the law, need to make sure that it is being complied with and there needs to be a very good system for handling complaints but I am instinctively very uncomfortable with the idea of regulating the press.’

Labour, the Tories and Liberal Democrats agreed a Royal Charter last October to set up a new body to oversee regulation of the Press.

Controversially, the basis for the deal was thrashed out in late-night talks with the celebrity-backed pressure group Hacked Off, from which newspapers were excluded.

Newspapers warned the new proposals were neither ‘voluntary nor independent’ and could give politicians too much power.

Under Leveson¿s original proposals, Ofcom would have played a key role in press regulation and would have acted as a 'backstop' regulator if publishers refused to sign up to the new body

More than 90 per cent of the industry, including the Daily Mail, have instead signed up to Ipso, an independent press regulator.

Under Leveson’s original proposals, Ofcom would have played a key role in press regulation.

The quango - run by ex-New Labour adviser Ed Richards - would have acted as a ‘backstop’ regulator if publishers refused to sign up to the new regulatory body.

It would not only have certified the new Press regulator but reviewed how the new body was working after two years and then at three-yearly intervals.

David Cameron rejected the involvement of Ofcom little more than 90 minutes after the Leveson proposals were published.