An Air Force dentist treats an unidentified patient. (AP Photo/File) Obamacare’s 10 essential health benefits have given brokers and agents plenty to chew on during the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. While they are intended to improve care covered under health plans across the nation, essential health benefits have been shown to drive up the cost of some plans — a side effect largely unknown to many new plan purchasers thanks to the law’s subsidies — and has led to cases to coverage incongruity. For example, men are now required to pay for prenatal care. Childless individuals are required to pay for pediatric care. And people who don’t take pills have to pay for prescription coverage. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

“I would say with PPACA, you’re going to find employees very confused over the rules around the dental benefit,” says Dani Fjelstad, president of Wellpoint Dental in Minneapolis. “They’re going to ask questions like, ‘If I don’t have it through my medical carrier, do I need to get it on my own? Am I going to be penalized? And, gee, I’m an adult; why do I have to have the pediatric coverage?’ No matter what kind of press is out there and how good the insurance companies explain it, I just think it’s going to be confusing.” A shift to voluntary

The options Options run the full spectrum. Some employers are offering plans that ask employees to shoulder more of the cost through higher deductibles. Others are moving to a self-funded model while a few others are referring employees to exchanges or the federal marketplace. Some industry sources say some employers are even taking the wait-and-see approach.