John Shinkle/POLITICO POLITICO Pro Gruber: I'm not 'the architect' of Obamacare

Beleaguered Obamacare adviser Jonathan Gruber declared he was not “the architect” of the health law as House Republicans on Tuesday hit hard at a pair of scandals that have overshadowed an otherwise successful launch of the second sign-up season.

“I was not the ‘architect’ of President [Barack] Obama’s health care plan,” the Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist told the House Oversight committee. He repeatedly apologized and dismissed as “mean,” “glib” and “arrogant” a series of controversial remarks about the passage of Obamacare and the “stupidity” of the American voter.

Story Continued Below

“I am not a political adviser nor a politician,” said Gruber, who was a key economic adviser during the drafting of the law. And in his most pointed mea culpa, he allowed: “It was inexcusable that I tried to appear smarter by insulting others.”

Gruber also drew the ire of committee Republicans for not disclosing all his income from state and federal consulting contracts, and Oversight Committee Chairman Darrell Issa threatened to subpoena information on how much Gruber was paid for all of his Affordable Care Act work. Gruber, who has been a sought-after speaker in recent years, advised Washington and a number of states.

( Also on POLITICO: McConnell's Obamacare gambit)

Gruber would only confirm he received close to $400,000 under a contract with HHS and referred the committee to his attorney to determine what other payments may be released.

Tuesday’s hearing was the GOP’s last best shot at Obamacare this Congress, and even Democrats showed their annoyance with Gruber’s videotaped comments attributing Obamacare’s passage to a lack of transparency and voter ignorance. Those tapes have become a conservative media sensation and created a highly unwelcome distraction for the White House. Fox News carried the opening portions of the hearing live.

“Are you stupid? … Does MIT employ stupid people?” Issa said to Gruber, before asking him to explain his remarks as a “smart person” at a respected institution. Later Gruber was asked if he understood what a “tax” was, as the Republicans tangled with him about the health care law’s individual mandate penalty.

CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner was the other key witness, and she also spent her time on multiple apologies — in her case, for giving the committee inflated Obamacare enrollment numbers earlier this fall. The Obama administration included nearly 400,000 dental plans in that count, giving the false impression that it had surpassed its 7 million enrollment goal.

Tavenner said that was an error arising from counting all payments to health plans instead of tallying the number of people with medical coverage.

( POLITICO Magazine: Will Jonathan Gruber topple Obamacare?)

Issa called Gruber and Tavenner “a perfect pairing, a pairing of individuals who are responsible for what we know and don’t know before during and after the passage of the Affordable Care Act.” But he and his fellow Republicans reserved most of their ire for Gruber, leaving Tavenner — a senior administration official with broad authority over the law’s implementation — sitting virtually unnoticed for long stretches of the four-hour hearing.

The “stupidity” remarks have fueled “Grubergate” but a different videotaped statement has been quoted in a lawsuit that threatens a central pillar of Obamacare. In that tape, Gruber seemed to endorse the argument in King v. Burwell, the case before the Supreme Court that contends Obamacare subsidies, designed to make insurance more affordable, are illegal for people who use the federal marketplace HealthCare.gov.

Thirty-seven states are using HealthCare.gov in 2015, either because they decided not to set up their own health insurance exchanges or because they tried and failed.

Gruber — who did crucial economic analysis while the bill was being written but said he was not among its drafters — repudiated any support for that lawsuit and said the remarks on the video lacked context. He said his own economic model, which was the basis for his work on the health law, had always assumed that the subsidies would be available in all states, whether they ran their own exchange or used the federal option.

“I have a longstanding and well-documented belief that health care reform in general, and the ACA in particular, must include mechanisms for residents in all states to obtain tax credits,” Gruber said.

Issa called on Tavenner to account for the inflated enrollment numbers provided Congress in September. The exaggeration continued in another estimate last month.

Tavenner said the inclusion of nearly 400,000 dental plans in the total sign-up count — a break with past practice — was “an inexcusable mistake.” Federal officials later dialed back the estimate to 6.7 million people with Obamacare medical coverage as of Oct. 15.

But she did clarify, in response to a question from Oversight Ranking Member Elijah Cummings, that she did not know at the time the number was inflated with dental plans. She also said repeatedly that it was an error and that she didn’t believe anyone on her staff was trying to dupe lawmakers or the public.

“I do not believe anyone tried to deceive the American people, and I believe the error was inadvertent,” Tavenner said. She said that the revised figure “was a large number that we are pleased with” and again apologized for the mistake.

The GOP has demanded details, however, and Issa said that CMS has not been forthcoming.

He said that a “huge data dump”of 19,000 pages — delivered Monday night on the “misleading” enrollment numbers — did not include documents on the talking points that allowed Tavenner to use “careful language so that you didn’t lie, but you did deceive.”

Tavenner pledged to work with the committee to provide those documents.

Cummings said he was “sorry” both for Gruber’s comments and the mistaken enrollment numbers.

“What it does is it distracts,” he said. “It distracts from all the good things that are being done by this law. And that’s the most painful part about all of this.”

The hearing Tuesday was Issa’s last as chairman of the Oversight Committee. Later this week, Congress is expected to pass a bill that will fund nearly all of the government through this fiscal year and then recess until January, when the new Congress will be sworn in.

Rachana Pradhan contributed to this report.

Follow @politico