Sioux Falls, SD

Henry Johnson and his family have had a lot of hurdles to tackle in his lifetime. Seven years ago, his doctors said Henry suffered from Shaken Baby Syndrome. His day care provider was charged with child abuse, but found not guilty. He now is blind and has developmental issues.

Saturday's 5K race and walk wasn't about racing to the finish line. It's about Henry.

"We had a pretty bleak diagnosis but he surpassed all goals," Mother Marissa Johnson said.

The seven-year old is the star of Saturday's event. Mother Marissa Johnson says Henry is doing better everyday.

The proceeds from the event go towards the Child Advocacy Centers of South Dakota and Child's Voice. The organizations provide preventive materials to parents and daycares that deal with newborns.

"We don't focus on anything on the negative. We don't dwell on it. We just do whatever we can to make sure he can be the best he can be," Johnson said.

More than 225 people stepped up to the starting line. It's the highest turnout in the four years of the event.

Molly Maas was the first runner to cross the finish line, but says today isn't about the best time.

"It feels good. You're running for a good cause and it helps get the message out there," Maas said.

Aside from the runners and walkers, Sioux Falls Fire Rescue was on hand. So was a motorcycle group, Bikers Against Child Abuse. Its a nationwide organization that just recently started in Sioux Falls.

"Help empowered abused children, not to live in fear of the world they live in because no child deserves to live in fear," President "Blackjack" said.

Johnson says she's amazed how many people were touched by her son's story.

"People come from all around to come and help us out and support our cause and they know what we're doing is a good thing, a good fight, and we want to do whatever we can to protect our children," Johnson said.

A race where the finish line is ending child abuse.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.