Topics: Central America, Central American refugees, Honduras, Life stories, Murder, Violence, Life News

I had never seen a newly dead body before. I wasn’t sure what to say or do as the trickle of bleach cut through the pool of blood on the tile floor and puddled around my favorite boots. “You’re ruining your shoes,” my sister-in-law pointed out as we swept the bleach across the floor, desperately trying to remove all signs of the bloodshed that had happened only hours earlier, when my husband’s surrogate father had been fatally shot by a neighbor during a late-night poker game in his home in Tegucigalpa. A man was just murdered here, I muttered to myself. Who cares about shoes? But that’s how it always was in Honduras at times like this. The daily murders, the constant violence, the unspoken threats at every turn had become so routine that I almost never saw anyone get upset by it. Shoes, on the other hand, cost more than a day’s wages. They were worth getting riled up over.

I moved to Tegucigalpa in June 2013. I had recently suffered a miscarriage after several years of trying to get pregnant and the idea of living closer to my husband’s oversize and close-knit family, loaded with plenty of toddlers to play with, lured us both to Central America. I figured I would work on my Spanish, learn to make homemade tortillas, travel to pristine beach towns unsullied by American tourists and bond with the in-laws all while trying to avoid getting kidnapped or murdered.

Even before the move, the country’s unparalleled violence wasn’t just a headline for my family. Only a year earlier, my husband’s youngest sibling had been kidnapped from his job as a bus fare collector and then brutally beaten before the criminals rolled his body down a hill and left him to die in the street. There was no justice in Honduras, which has the highest murder rate in the world. The death was never investigated and my Honduran family soldiered on by debating the likely cause of his murder. He had had many girlfriends, someone noted. He probably messed with the wrong woman and that was it. Someone else theorized that the culprits had been motivated by the bus fare earnings. I tried to estimate how much money he might have had in his pocket when he died. Bus rides cost roughly 50 cents and the buses held at most 30 people at a time. Why would someone murder another person over so little, I asked my in-laws. They practically laughed in my face. To them, I was always the naive gringa.

Still, despite the murder, my husband and I landed in Honduras a year later with a few suitcases and a desire to live within walking distance of our relatives, even though they resided in one of the poorest, most dangerous areas of Tegucigalpa. We rented a one-bedroom apartment with a large balcony where I would sit in the evenings and watch the saffron-hued sunset before the sound of gunfire filled the night. I was comfortable in my new home, but there was nothing remarkable about it by U.S. standards. To my Honduran relatives, however, it was practically Versailles, with its indoor plumbing, new kitchen appliances and ample space for only two people. In comparison, they got by with limited running water, outhouses and cramped rooms usually shared by multiple generations. Nearly everyone we met in Honduras struggled to survive on wages that averaged about $5 a day. They ate beans, homemade tortillas and little else.

Life in Honduras was an immediate minefield of illness, violence and death. My 15-year-old neighbor’s cellphone was snatched by other teenagers as she walked over the bridge near our home. Another young woman close to our family casually recounted the time a stranger yanked her hair on a public bus before running off with her purse. A fellow teacher at the affluent private school where I taught English arrived to work in a panic one day because the thugs in her neighborhood had decided to charge her an exorbitant “war tax” each month for the privilege of continuing to live in her home. An elderly relative traveled from one of the rural mountain villages that bordered the city to visit us and returned to a ransacked house. The thieves left nothing behind, not even the rags in the kitchen. The teenage daughter of the woman who ran the bodega on our street was murdered after befriending too many gang members. A friend’s brother was kidnapped and then safely returned after his family paid the ransom. A taxi driver who lived in our neighborhood was killed in a dispute over a fare.

The local public hospitals couldn’t afford medicine or certain equipment, and many of the women I encountered told me about a child they had lost to the healthcare system. Armed guards stood outside nearly every business and police officers occasionally combed the streets, stopping to demand identification from every man in sight.

It seemed the 24-hour news channel had a fresh corpse to showcase every few hours. Mutilated limbs, mud-streaked carcasses and beheaded bodies were regularly broadcast into our home. Occasionally the victim would be a child, and I would muster my usual outrage. Why murder someone so young, I would ask anyone within earshot. My Honduran relatives and friends responded with their usual lack of emotion. He probably got involved with the wrong people, they would say of the victim, before moving on to prepare lunch or the afternoon coffee or some other mundane task.

There are so many ways to die in Honduras, it wasn’t enough to simply be wary of the people all around you. The government declared a state of emergency that summer after a particularly bad outbreak of dengue fever sickened more than 12,000 people. I knew the mosquito-borne illness was not contagious, but whenever I saw someone who looked flush with fever or coughing on a public bus, I irrationally imagined my family in the United States receiving a call informing them that in the end I had not succumbed to Honduras’ widespread violence, but it was the damn killer mosquitoes that had done me in.

It wasn’t my first time in such close proximity to brutal violence and startling poverty. My parents fled communist Cuba as teenagers and when I later returned to visit my cousins and uncle, the half-empty grocery stores and crumbling homes explained more than my father’s angry stories about Fidel Castro ever could. I traveled through Israel as a teenager, shrugging off the bombings in the nearby Jerusalem markets over Christmas. I grew up in the worst neighborhoods of Miami, where a man once attacked me with a gun and demanded my backpack as I walked to high school one morning. As an adult, I became a journalist and willingly traveled to neighborhoods teeming with drug dealers and murderers.