EAST FLAT ROCK — Hendersonville showed some rust on Tuesday night, coach Marvin Featherstone said, but used its fast-paced style of play to pull away from East Henderson in the second half for a 67-57 win in the Bearcats' first game of the season.

The first half was a stalemate. Both teams would go on spurts to pull away, but neither could get any distance for long. For East Henderson, Lane Justus led the way in the first half. The senior guard scored 11 of his game-high 25 points to lead the Eagles (0-1).

For most of the first half, Hendersonville's top two returning players were forced to the bench. Brothers Michael and Bradley Schmidt were in foul trouble in the fourth quarter before returning halfway through the second quarter.

Hendersonville pushed through the foul trouble and looked like it'd take a 29-26 lead into the half. Wesley Culbertson had other plans. The junior took off down court and just past the halfcourt line, he launched a 3-pointer that banked in as the buzzer sounded.

That momentum, however, didn't carry over into the second half. Hendersonville came out in the third quarter with an 11-4 run to stretch the lead to double-digits.

East fought back. Justus scored a basket on one end to start the fourth quarter with the Eagles down 50-42. On the other end of the court, East's Gunnar Harris blocked a shot that started a fast break and ended with Justus getting a layup.

The Bearcats (1-0) answered with a basket from Colin Mesa. Justus, however, came right back with a 3-pointer on the other end. The Eagles were with three at that point at 52-49.

Hendersonville, however, turned up the pressure and had a 10-2 run that sealed the deal. That pressure, East coach Bruce Gilliam said, turned the game around.

"Hendersonville's press and its physicality really took it to us," Gilliam said. "We turned the ball over and didn't rebound. They made better decisions than we did with the ball."

For Featherstone, it wasn't perfect, but there were bright spots. Freshman guard Tykel Landrum proved he was ready for varsity basketball. He finished the night with 13 points, four steals, six rebounds and three assists.

"He did a bunch of great things," Featherstone said. "He's going to be a special player for us down the road."

Featherstone was thrilled with his bench. With foul trouble in the first quarter, he got valuable minutes from his depth, the coach said.

Aside from Landrum, the Bearcats had Michael Schmidt also score 13 points. The junior also added six rebounds and five steals. He was happy with the way Hendersonville came out of the gates.

"It felt really good," he said. "We've got great chemistry. It can only get better from here."

In the earlier game, the East Henderson girls beat Hendersonville 36-16.

Lilly Blankenship led the charge for the Lady Eagles with 11 points. Micayla Rose chipped in nine points. Tiara Gray led the way for Hendersonville with seven points.

East and Hendersonville will play again next Tuesday.