Paul Ryan fell apart on Fox News Sunday and when pressed refused to say that he would guarantee Obamacare subsidies for the people who might lose them.

Video:

Chris Wallace asked if Republicans would come up with a way to keep the ACA subsidies going? Ryan answered, “We will have an answer. We will have a solution. We don’t want people to fall victim because of this bad law, and we want to give people freedom from Obamacare.”

Ryan listed a series of Obamacare lies, and Chris Wallace come back at him by asking if he was guaranteeing that people will be able to keep their subsidies. Ryan tried to dodge the question, “Well, we will have a solution that address this law that gives people a bridge from Obamacare.”

Wallace asked, will you demand an end to the mandates, the employer mandates, the individual mandates, and Ryan refused to answer again, “Well, I’m not going to get into all that, because we want to see what the ruling is. We want to give people freedom from Obamacare. We want to actually let them buy what they want to buy.”

Paul Ryan refused to answer the simple question of whether House Republicans are going to screw millions of people out of their health insurance. Ryan’s answers were an admission that the Republican Party has no backup plan because Republicans can’t agree on what to do if the Supreme Court strikes down the subsidies.

If the Supreme Court gives conservatives the ruling that they want Republicans are in deep trouble. Most of the states where people will lose their subsidies are Republican controlled red states.

Fox News doesn’t want to see Republicans held accountable by voters if the subsidies are taken away, which is why Chris Wallace was pushing Ryan so hard to guarantee the subsidies.

Instead of honestly answering the question, Paul Ryan ducked and dodged while doing his usual deer in headlights schtick. Reality is knocking on Paul Ryan’s door, and the Wisconsin Republican is about to discover that life isn’t an Ayn Rand fantasy novel.