Photo

Welcome to the Morning Briefing on NYT Now. (Download us for iPhone.)

Here’s what you need to know to start your day:

Updated: • Impromptu U.S.-Russia meeting.

President Obama and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia held a private talk today while in France during a commemoration of the 70th anniversary of D-Day.

Mr. Obama attended a ceremony this morning at the American cemetery near the beach where the U.S. military landed in Normandy 70 years ago today.

Updated: • Job growth six years in the making.

U.S. employment returned to 2008 pre-recession levels with the addition of 218,000 new jobs last month, the Labor Department said today. The unemployment rate was flat at 6.3 percent.

But analysts saw the report as more slow, steady progress and noted that the labor participation rate remains at lows not seen since the late 1970s, a sign that many Americans have given up the search for work entirely.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• Revisiting the ‘90s.

The National Archives is releasing 2,000 pages of documents from the Clinton administration this afternoon.

The topics include Vice President Al Gore’s 2000 presidential campaign, gays in the military and the Supreme Court nominations of Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer.

• A victory for Catholic groups.

A federal judge in Oklahoma City on Thursday granted a group of 200 Catholic employers nationwide an injunction to prevent the government from forcing them to provide insurance coverage for contraceptives.

In the lawsuit, the group’s members, who are seeking an exemption, said that the Affordable Care Act forced them to violate their religious objections to contraception and abortion-inducing drugs.

• North Korea detains an American.

The country said today that the man was visiting as a tourist and was being investigated on charges of violating its laws.

North Korea is still holding at least two other American citizens. It is often suspected of detaining visitors as political bargaining chips.

• Shooting suspects captured.

A man was arrested early this morning in the fatal shootings of three police officers in eastern Canada two days ago.

In Seattle, a man armed with a shotgun opened fire on the campus of Seattle Pacific University on Thursday, leaving three people wounded and one dead before being taken into custody, the police said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

MARKETS

• Wall Street stocks are gaining. European shares closed moderately higher, and Asian stocks ended mixed.

• Walmart’s new C.E.O., Doug McMillon, faces shareholders at the company’s annual meeting today in Arkansas.

A union-supported group called Walmart Moms will be there asking the company to agree to $25,000 annual salaries for full-time workers.

NOTEWORTHY

• Not your usual cancer story.

“The Fault in Our Stars” was first a best-selling young-adult novel about two teenagers who meet and fall in love at a cancer support group, but it moves to the big screen today.

“The film sets out to make you weep,” writes our film critic A. O. Scott. “Not just sniffle or choke up a little, but sob until your nose runs and your face turns blotchy. It succeeds.”

• A sizzling basketball court.

Tim Duncan had 21 points and 10 rebounds to lead the San Antonio Spurs to a Game 1 victory over the visiting Miami Heat, 110-95, in the N.B.A. finals.

A failure in the arena’s air-conditioning pushed temperatures to 90 degrees in the second half on Thursday night.

• Glazed? Powdered? Plain?

It’s National Donut Day. That may sound frivolous, but it began in 1938 as a way for the Salvation Army to raise money and care for the needy during the Depression.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Today you can pick up a free doughnut at many Krispy Kreme or Dunkin’ Donuts locations and other outlets (with a beverage purchase).

• Thirty years of falling tetrominoes.

Tetris was born on this day in 1984, created by a researcher at the Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow.

Sometimes voted the top video game ever, the famed game of falling blocks has sold more than 170 million copies on more than 65 kinds of electronic devices since then, most notably Nintendo’s Game Boy.

Gamers are gathering in various cities today to mark their addiction to the four-celled polyominoes (dominoes are the two-celled version).

BACK STORY

Two months after Michael Lewis’s book “Flash Boys” shined a new — and unfavorable — light on Wall Street’s high-frequency trading, the head of the S.E.C. proposed a raft of rules to address the issue.

Among Thursday’s recommendations from the Securities and Exchange Commission chairwoman, Mary Jo White, are safeguards against any distortions in stock prices caused by this millisecond-fast trading.

High-speed traders say they are doing nothing illegal. So why are they a target?

Critics, including prosecutors, contend that the traders are exploiting technical advantages and private trading that have nothing to do with efficient markets.

Superfast computers and close access to stock exchanges’ data centers let traders execute orders instantaneously, often without visibility, to get the best prices.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. White’s proposals call for more transparency about the operations and trading volume.

Victoria Shannon and Joseph Burgess contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m.

Don’t miss Your Evening Briefing at 5 p.m.

What would you like to see here? Email us at NYTNow@NYTimes.com.

Follow us on Twitter: @NYTNow.