When I was a young boy exploring my neighborhood near Seattle, I discovered a strange little building built of cinder blocks that appeared to be howling.

Filled with dogs and cats that were locked in cages, the building exploded with excitement when I walked in. The mutts howled, barked, jumped. Cats leaped over themselves. I visited every cage, promising my wagging and meowing friends that I would come back the next day and the next.

Every time I returned, there were new dogs and cats. Where were the buddies I had met the day before?

I was too young to know what an animal shelter was, or what was happening to my pals when no one wanted them. When I found out, I was crushed.

Someone killed them? These fluffy, panting balls of joy? I wanted to save them all, but we couldn’t own another dog and I was allergic to cats. My mother forbade me from returning to the cinder block building.

It was my introduction to the dark underside of America’s love for pets.

Thousands of dogs and cats are killed every month in shelters throughout the United States when there isn’t any room, when adoptions fall short, when animals are unhealthy or deemed dangerous.

It is a heartbreaking reality of the stupidity of people who buy pets and then give them up or who fail to spay or neuter their dogs and cats.

In Colorado, 8,801 dogs and 12,497 cats were euthanized in shelters in 2012, the latest figures available. That was a 19 percent decrease from the year before.

Groups of well-meaning citizens believe they have a solution to stop the slaughter in the shelters, drafting laws and pushing initiatives that would put restrictions on when strays and abandoned animals could be killed. But even those well-intentioned people are pushing their no-kill agenda too far.

In Colorado, an effort is underway to put an initiative on November’s ballot to make Colorado the first no-kill state in the country. The initiative still must clear a legislative panel before the required 86,500 signatures can be collected to get on the ballot.

The proposal would prohibit shelters from euthanizing stray or unwanted pets unless they are sick, suffering, contagious or deemed aggressive by an independent animal behaviorist. No dog could be called dangerous and euthanized based purely on their breed, according to the initiative’s draft.

Colorado law now requires shelters to hold healthy animals at least five days for someone to claim before killing them. Dogs deemed “dangerous” under laws approved in Aurora and Denver also may be euthanized.

The initiative would require a certified veterinarian to determine the health of the animal before euthanizing it. Also, unclaimed animals could be housed in the shelter or transferred to animal rescue or adoption organizations.

To pay for the expected increase in costs, the state would collect a 15 percent fee on all Colorado pet sales. Proponents say that would generate $5.5 million a year.

“In a perfect world, we wouldn’t have to legislate morality, but sometimes you have to take a stand,” said Juliet Piccone, an Aurora attorney who co-authored the initiative. “We don’t want these animals to be destroyed when it’s not necessary.”

Advocates point to success stories, such as Austin, Texas, recognized around the country for its efforts to reduce euthanization rates.

A shelter is considered “no-kill” when 90 percent of the animals make it out alive. Austin reached that goal in February 2011, a year after the city council there endorsed the no-kill goal.

Austin achieved its goals with aggressive adoption programs and placement services. But it hasn’t been cheap. A $12 million shelter was built in 2011 and almost immediately filled up. Austin officials now say neither the no-kill decision nor the new shelter were adequately funded, leading to increased budget requests.

In June, for the first time ever, the Austin Animal Center had to stop accepting new animals and waived fees for adoption.

That is a big problem, says Daphna Nachminovitch, senior vice president of PETA’s Cruelty Investigations Department. “What we see happen is turn-away policies begin,” she said. “And that isn’t helpful for those animals.”

If shelters won’t take animals, people intentionally abandon them, dropping them off in the dead of night, giving them away indiscriminately, or even throwing them from moving cars.

Shelters also warehouse animals they can’t adopt, and that can be equally cruel to the pets, Nachminovitch said.

Colorado should be heralded for the comprehensive work already being done for shelter animals, said Lisa Pedersen, president of the Colorado Federation of Animal Welfare Agencies, which is opposed to the proposed initiative.

“It’s not just about reducing euthanasia. It’s about increasing adoptions, increasing the number of animals that are spayed and neutered, and decreasing the number of animals that end up in our shelters,” said Pedersen, also CEO of the Humane Society of Boulder County.

The Metro Denver Shelter Alliance, a coalition of 25 public and private shelters, reports a “live-release” rate of 85 percent, which is up from 72 percent in 2005. (A live-release rate is the percentage of animals leaving shelters through adoption, being returned to their owners, or transferred.) According to the Department of Agriculture, Colorado’s live-release rate is 86.5 percent for all animals, one of the highest in the nation.

“We are already doing what this group is seeking with the initiative,” said Kristin Snow, spokeswoman for the Dumb Friends League, the state’s largest shelter. The organization’s live-release rate is 84 percent.

“Overall, as a state we are really quite effective without the necessities for these government mandates,” Snow said.

In the last year alone, more than 16,700 pets were adopted, reunited or transferred to placement partners through the Dumb Friends League. The nonprofit is microchipping homeless pets, offering behavioral counseling to help pet owners handle their animals, and has a “lonely hearts club” to market pets that have been in the shelter too long and a “barn cat” program for people who need a cat for the farm.

The only way to effect real change in the numbers of animals being euthanized is to cut off the source for homeless animals: invest in low-cost spay and neuter programs; support trap, neuter and release programs for feral cats; expand outreach and education; target low-income areas where many strays are born; and encourage people to adopt animals from shelters.

So far, Colorado is doing it. We are a lot bigger than Austin. A statewide program would be too much, too cumbersome and potentially have too many unintended consequences.

Instead of becoming a no-kill state, let’s become a comprehensive animal care state. Spay, neuter and love those dogs and cats. Don’t let their howls be silenced in a cinder-block building anymore.

Jeremy Meyer; 303-954-1367 or jpmeyer@denverpost.com. Twitter: @jpmeyerDpost.