We will flip the switch Monday to restrict online commenting to only Journal Sentinel subscribers. Since we announced the change last week the response from our customers has been overwhelmingly, unanimously positive.

We have been providing a digital commenting platform in order to encourage a forum for civil conversation — a place where folks from various walks of life can contribute their knowledge, thoughts and expertise. Before posting their first comment, all those using our platform agree to follow basic rules of civil behavior that include: no personal attacks, harassment, threats, obscenities, bearing of false witness and so on.

Unfortunately, many commenters have chosen to ignore those rules, almost always under the cloak of anonymity. Now that we can attach the commenting function to subscriber accounts, we will be able to know whose commenting privileges are being suspended or revoked. In the past, those who were kicked out often reappeared under a new email and name.

This doesn't mean we will be pre-clearing every comment. We publish about 200 stories a day and some draw hundreds, even thousands, of comments. We don't have the staff to edit them before publication and will still rely on readers to help flag rule breakers.

It also doesn't mean we won't allow tough opinions, particularly about elected representatives and public officials. As long as people stay within the bounds of decency, they can criticize the actions and motives of government leaders and candidates for office, for example. America's founders encouraged this kind of rough-and-tumble debate when they gave us the First Amendment. (Just please keep in mind that paid political operatives, serving a candidate, may be behind many of those posts.)

Our platform cannot be used to bully, defame or attack private citizens, be they other commenters or the family members of public figures.

As one public official wrote me last week: "Over the course of my career (I have) been exposed to all sorts of hateful rhetoric, mostly in the form of online anonymous comments. Additionally, my wife and children have been exposed to this sort of vitriol for absolutely no reason other than the fact that they share my last name...no matter how much you try to avoid or ignore it, the people who participate in these activities are relentless."

Many subscribers wrote that they have been reluctant to participate in our forums, even when they had firsthand information that would add to the conversation:

■"I have not even thought of posting a comment because of the nasty and mean-spirited responses."

■"The personal attacks and bickering could be construed as a form of bullying."

■"I am a subscriber to JS and have wanted to comment at times, but because some comments just become attacks at other posted comments I have held back."

Many said they had stopped reading the comments, let alone contributing to them:

■"The incivility of the comments had gotten to the point where we no longer wanted to read them. We were even questioning why we read a paper that allows such comments."

■"The blathering drivel that too often makes up forum comments these days has indeed served to rile people and bring out their worst."

■"The astonishing ferocity displayed in these exchanges, sadly, allowed you no other viable alternative. I hope this achieves the desired results: intelligent people agreeing to disagree while maintaining a healthy dose of civility and respect."

We hope so, too.

Our print subscribers can comment on stories and get unlimited access to JSOnline, our smartphone and tablet apps, and the electronic edition of the newspaper. If you haven't activated the digital account that comes with your print subscription, please visit jsonline.com/activate.

If you want to join the conversation but don't have a subscription, please visit jsonline.com/offers.

Thanks to all of you who contributed to the conversation by contacting me and sharing your thoughts. And thanks to all of you who support our work with your subscriptions.

George Stanley is the editor of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. He can be reached via email at gstanley@journalsentinel.com and followed on Twitter @geostanley.