One evening last fall, Dr. D'Anne Rudden was home watching Operation Change, a documentary series on the Oprah Network that highlights people and organizations helping change the world.

Learn more www.starkeyhearingfoundation.org

The featured organization, the Starkey Hearing Foundation, was one that the Longmont audiologist had for years wanted to work with. But watching the program, Rudden wasn't thinking that she would join Starkey's team within a few months.

But that's what happened.

The Oprah Network held a contest for one viewer to become part of the foundation's work. That viewer was Natalie Phillips, a Fort Collins audiologist and friend of Rudden. Phillips' husband declined to join her on the trip, so she invited Rudden.

D'Anne Rudden, right, and Natalie Phillips fit a girl with hearing aids during their visit to India. (Starkey Hearing Foundation / Courtesy photo)

Two weeks ago, the two of them found themselves in Bangalore, India, working with the Starkey Foundation to fit hearing-impaired patients with hearing aids.

Once the founders of Starkey found out both were experienced audiologists, they invited them to stay a few days longer than the three days the prize allotted.

Rudden operates her own practice in town, Longmont Hearing & Tinnitus Center. There she treats tinnitus and provides diagnoses and care for those with hearing loss. This experience, as well as the work of her friend Phillips, made them perfect candidates to work with the Starkey Foundation.

Starkey Hearing Foundation has provided more than 1.6 million hearing aids to people in more than 100 countries. The group goes into areas, identifies patients with hearing problems, and sends volunteers to the areas not only to give them the care but to teach them how to care for themselves.

"It's so much more than flying in, fitting hearing aids, and leaving," Rudden said of the foundation's work. "They have three phases of care. They are constantly going back and making sure (everything is working). They really do care about the sustainability of the program."

Rudden spent a week in Bangalore at a fitting station set up by the foundation, helping candidates get fitted with hearing aids. The foundation had been traveling throughout the country doing work, so her and Phillips met up with them in the southern Indian city. She said she was told to expect about 500 people a day, but the team she was with ended up fitting more than 800 a day, 98 percent of them children. Rudden said that for her, the experience was almost overwhelming.

"You see these kids, and you think about how, potentially, your voice is the first thing that this child may have ever heard," she said.

Rudden was shocked at how easy it was to treat some of the children who had been put in schools for the deaf. The lack of care available left their parents no other option than to treat them as permanently deaf.

"You would get these kids who had been in deaf schools, and when you fit them with hearing aids, it turns out that their hearing loss was not nearly as significant as we would envision for them to be in a deaf school," she said.

Besides getting to change the lives of hundreds of kids, Rudden got the bonus of sharing the experience with Derrick Coleman, fullback for the Seattle Seahawks.

"What a great humanitarian that man is," she said. "He was there from the very beginning to the very end. He really puts his heart ... into the cause."

Rudden said that while the trip was intense and emotional, one moment stood out: when a girl whom Rudden thought she wouldn't be able to treat finally could hear.

"You see these kids, and you think about how, potentially, your voice is the first thing that this child may have ever heard," D'Anne Rudden said. (Starkey Hearing Foundation / Courtesy photo)

"You're at ten (the highest volume setting on the hearing aid) and you've turned up the volume as high as it will go and she's not responding and you're prepared for this heartbreak," she said. "They put her in a body aid (a large hearing aid worn on the chest), which is just the last resort, and turned it on and you saw that moment of 'I hear.' She lit up like a candle."

Now home from India, Rudden is back to day to day work at her practice, but her charity work is far from over. She is also involved with an organization called Empowering A Billion Women by 2020. This new organization elevates women's entrepreneurship in the world and gives women the tools to elevate themselves. Rudden serves as one of the global ambassadors, and hopes to connect Empowering A Billion Women by 2020 with the Starkey Hearing Foundation to help improve both groups' work.

"My personal mission is to hopefully connect these two organizations," she said. "Women that are given the tools to be in their own businesses, they tend to not just take care of themselves, but take care of their communities."

While Rudden moves forward with her work, she will remember what she learned back in India.

"It was so much more than I ever had imagined," Rudden said of the trip. "I had wanted to do it for so long, and it was even better than I had dreamed it would be."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones