Serena Williams won her 21st Grand Slam title at Wimbledon on Saturday, defeating Garbine Muguruza of Spain. Sunday promises the long-awaited rematch between defending champ Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer, who's won the tournament seven times already himself.

The rivalry between Djokovic and Federer is one of the greatest in modern tennis, but arguably, it's not the greatest all-time. Many would say that honor actually goes to a matchup 35 years ago — back in the era of wooden racquets, headbands, long socks and short shorts.

Wimbledon 1980 was the ultimate showdown.

There was Björn Borg, a rock star, the dreamy Swede with flowing blond hair. Borg was the four-time defending Wimbledon champion. Then, there was the scrappy New Yorker named John McEnroe, a 21-year-old tennis prodigy known for his temper.

"He had such a beautiful game, but he was wound as tight as a drum all the time out there," says sports photographer Walter Iooss. "And at any second, you waited for him: One line call, and he just — he'd flip out."

Borg and McEnroe were complete opposites. They were dubbed fire versus ice. While Borg was the crowd favorite, the British tabloids pegged McEnroe as the bad guy.

"People weren't very crazy about him. They booed him when he came onto the court," says retired NBC sportscaster Bud Collins. He was calling the match that day at Wimbledon, 35 years ago. "And of course Borg was the gentleman, the stoic Swede, and they played this magical match which went on and on and on."

McEnroe easily took the first set, but Borg came back strong, winning two sets in a row. McEnroe wasn't one to quit, though. He fought to stay alive in the fourth set, which led to what felt like a never-ending tiebreaker.

Incredibly, McEnroe stayed in, and the match continued.

"They just went at it as though they were the only players on earth," Collins says. "It was a brawl. It was the best thing comparable to a heavyweight title fight. And certainly, they were the two heavyweights of tennis."

Finally, Borg and McEnroe entered the fifth and final set. Whichever player won this set would win it all.

"One guy would make a tremendous shot and that would tie it up. And another guy would make another tremendous shot and take the advantage," Collins says. "Advantage, deuce, advantage, deuce, advantage, deuce. I was having a little trouble keeping score."

Meanwhile, down at the sidelines, Iooss was waiting for the match point.

"In an event like that, you always think of one thing going in, which is the last moment," Iooss says. "What's going to happen when the match ends? When McEnroe or Borg rejoices?"

In the end, it was Borg's flawless backhand that clenched it.

The crowd erupted, and Iooss captured the moment: Björn Borg sliding on the grass, arms extended, head back — the look of pure joy. The stoic Swede, not so stoic in the moment, had won his fifth straight Wimbledon.

On the other side of the net, John McEnroe was on the grass sprawled out, face-down with the look of pure defeat. After nearly four hours, the historic brawl at Centre Court was over.

"It was perfect," Iooss says. "Yankees and Red Sox, Ali and Frazier, Borg and McEnroe. These are great rivalries, and rivalries make each side better. You see a match like that maybe once in your life, so I was lucky to be there."

"I just said to myself, and I think many others did, 'This is the greatest tennis match I've ever seen,' " Collins says. "And I think if you asked Borg and McEnroe, they would both say the same."

McEnroe may have lost, but he gained a lot of respect. Now, he's a fixture at Wimbledon. He's there this weekend — this time, in the stands where crowds cheer him on.



Copyright 2015 NPR. To see more, visit http://www.npr.org/.

Transcript

ARUN RATH, HOST:

The awesome Serena Williams won her 21st grand slam title at Wimbledon today. Tomorrow, in the men's final, the long-awaited rematch between Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer, one of the greatest rivalries in modern tennis, though I would argue the greatest matchup of Wimbledon's most interesting rivals took place 35 years ago. NPR's Daniel Hajek takes us back.

DANIEL HAJEK, BYLINE: We're talking about the era of wooden rackets, headbands, long socks and short-shorts. Wimbledon 1980 was the ultimate showdown. There was Bjorn Borg, a rock star, the dreamy Swede with flowing blonde hair and a four-time defending Wimbledon champion. And then there was a scrappy New Yorker named John McEnroe, a 21-year-old tennis prodigy known for his temper. Here's sports photographer Walter Iooss.

WALTER IOOSS: He had such a beautiful game, but he was wound as tight as a, you know, drum all the time out there. And at any second - you waited for him, one line call and he just - he'd flip out.

(SOUNDBITE OF 1981 WIMBLEDON CHAMPIONSHIPS)

JOHN MCENROE: You can't be serious, man. (Screaming) You cannot be serious. That ball was on the line.

HAJEK: At Wimbledon, the British tabloids pegged McEnroe as the villain.

BUD COLLINS: People weren't very crazy about him. They booed him when he came onto the court.

HAJEK: Retired NBC sportscaster Bud Collins was calling the match that day, back on July 5, 1980.

COLLINS: And of course, Borg was the gentleman, the stoic Swede, and they played this magical match, which went on and on and on.

(SOUNDBITE OF 1980 WIMBLEDON FINALS)

HAJEK: McEnroe easily takes the first set, but Borg comes back strong, winning two sets in a row.

(SOUNDBITE OF 1980 WIMBLEDON FINALS)

HAJEK: But McEnroe isn't one to quit. He fights to stay alive in the fourth set, which leads to what feels like a never-ending tiebreaker.

(SOUNDBITE OF 1980 WIMBLEDON FINALS)

UNIDENTIFIED ANNOUNCER #1: Number seven for McEnroe.

UNIDENTIFIED MAN: Come on, John.

UNIDENTIFIED CHAIR UMPIRE: Quiet please.

(SOUNDBITE OF TENNIS RALLY)

UNIDENTIFIED ANNOUNCER #1: Yes, two sets all.

(APPLAUSE)

HAJEK: Incredibly, McEnroe stays in and the match continues. Again, Bud Collins.

COLLINS: They just went at it as though they were the only players on Earth. It was a brawl. It was the best thing comparable to a heavyweight title fight. And certainly, they were the two heavyweights of tennis.

(SOUNDBITE OF 1980 WIMBLEDON FINALS)

UNIDENTIFIED ANNOUNCER #2: If Borg wins this point, I fancy the roof will blow off this center court.

(SOUNDBITE OF TENNIS RALLY)

COLLINS: Oh, a marvelous volley again.

HAJEK: Finally, Borg and McEnroe enter the fifth and final set. Whoever wins this set wins it all. Collins says it feels like it would never end.

COLLINS: One guy would make a tremendous shot, and that would tie it up. And another guy would make another tremendous shot and take the advantage - advantage, deuce, advantage, deuce, advantage, deuce - I was having a little trouble keeping score.

HAJEK: Meanwhile, down at the sidelines, sports photographer Walter Iooss was waiting for the match point.

IOOSS: In an event like that, you always think of one thing going in, which is the last moment. What's going to happen when the match ends, when McEnroe or Borg rejoices?

HAJEK: In the end, it's Borg's flawless backhand.

(SOUNDBITE OF 1980 WIMBLEDON FINALS)

UNIDENTIFIED ANNOUNCER #2: That's it.

HAJEK: The crowd erupts, and Iooss captures it - Bjorn Borg sliding on the grass, arms extended, head back - the look of pure joy. The stoic Swede wins his fifth straight Wimbledon. And on the other side of the net, John McEnroe lies sprawled out face down with a look of pure defeat. After nearly four hours, the historic brawl at Centre Court is over.

IOOSS: Oh, it was perfect. You know, Yankees-Red Sox, Ali-Frazier, Borg-McEnroe. These are great rivalries and rivalries make each side better. You know, you see a match like that maybe once in your life, so I was lucky to be there.

HAJEK: McEnroe may have lost, but he gained a lot of respect. Now he's a fixture at Wimbledon. He's there this weekend, this time in the stands, where crowds cheer him on. Daniel Hajek, NPR News. Transcript provided by NPR, Copyright NPR.