The local weather forecast calls for 1 to 3 inches of snow today, but Jersey City Incinerator Authority crews will try to keep the streets clear without any salt, a city council member confirmed last night.

“I was told they have no salt, so as far as I’m concerned, there is no salt,” Jersey City Councilman Richard Boggiano said.

The snow is expected to start early in the day and to be falling steadily later in the day. By nightfall, the temperatures are expected to be in the upper teens with winds whipping at 20 to 30 miles an hour.

“The city will be using liquid brine on the streets,” said Jersey City spokeswoman Jennifer Morrill.

The resources of municipalities have been tested by multiple snowstorms this winter. Thursday’s storm dropped roughly a foot of snow on the county and exhausted Jersey City’s supply.

“We are in the same situation every city in the region is, in that our salt resources have been drained due to the back-to-back storms causing a shortage of supply in the region,” Morrill said.

Yesterday was a brief reprieve from the snow, a welcome break for Zuheir Bader, general manager of Chevrolet of Jersey City.

With each storm Bader has to dig out more than 200 cars, move them, plow and then put them back.

“We can’t sell a car if it’s covered with snow,” said Bader, whose dealership is located at Communipaw and Mallory avenues. “We have to do it every time it snows, even 2 or 3 inches. We do not like snow very much.”

In the north end of the

county, firefighters are dealing with a different problem — digging out some 1,000 fire hydrants.

All 15 North Hudson Regional Fire & Rescue companies are out digging out hydrants that “are completely buried, as opposed to those that have some snow,” but can be accessed, NHRFR Co-director Jeff Welz said.

As for the next storm, Bayonne Mayor Mark Smith said his city is prepared. “We have an adequate amount of salt and our personnel are squared away and ready to go,” he said.

West New York was expecting a delivery of three truckloads of salt yesterday, while North Bergen was conserving as much as possible. North Bergen spokesman Phil Swibinski said crews will plow and salt the hills and primary roads, but only plow the secondary roads.

Hudson County will have 24 vehicles out battling the snow in the county roads and county spokesman Jim Kennelly said there is “sufficient salt for taking care of the roads this Saturday.” Kennelly said the county will be spreading brine in advance of the snowfall.