The operator of the Northwest Parkway has tapped restructuring advisers as the toll road contends with a high debt load, people familiar with the matter said.

The operator, Portugal’s Brisa Auto-Estradas SA, is working with bankers at Moelis & Co. to evaluate restructuring options for the toll road, the people said. A bankruptcy filing is not imminent and all options, including an out-of-court restructuring, are being considered, some of the people said.

The 8-mile toll road that loops from Interstate 25 to U.S. 36 through Broomfield, Lafayette and Louisville is the latest of its peers to struggle under a debt burden accumulated before the recession under the assumption that rising toll receipts would cover debt payments. But traffic and housing forecasts generally proved to be too optimistic as development didn’t pan out.

In 2007, Brisa and Companhia de Concessões Rodoviárias CCR paid $603 million for the right to operate and maintain the road for 99 years. CCR has since sold its 10 percent stake to Brisa, according to the Northwest Parkway website.

Northwest Parkway carries roughly $450 million in debt, most of which matures in late 2017, according to the people. Some of its bonds recently traded around 40 cents on the dollar, one of the people said.

Royal Bank of Scotland PLC, which serves as the bank agent, holds some of the company’s debt, the people said. European banks that joined RBS in underwriting the 2007 deal, including BNP Paribas and Caixa Geral de Depositos, still hold some of Northwest’s debt, some of the people said.

Moelis also worked on the restructuring of Pocahontas 895, a toll road outside Richmond, Va. That deal saw its Australian operator, Transurban Group Ltd., hand over the 8.8-mile concession to a group of its European creditors.

Moelis is currently advising the operators of the Indiana Toll Road, which is in restructuring negotiations with creditors as it faces a late June payment it cannot afford to make, according to people familiar with the matter.