‘One of us’ service, time-proven expertise drive Hudson’s Premier Tax

Premier Tax Inc. owner Wendy Byl in her new Hudson office at 1334 Hosford St. (Hudson Star-Observer photo by Chuck Nowlen)

Good news in Hudson as this year’s annual tax panic starts to heat up:

Tax pro Wendy Byl is one of us and gets to know her clients like friends; she’s got 25 years of high-level experience; and she’s gifted at squeezing every penny out of individual and business returns.

She also promises affordable prices at Premier Tax Inc., her new tax, accounting and business-services firm.

“Tax is my passion. I love tax,” says the 20-year Hudson-area resident, mother of North Hudson Elementary School third-grader Blake and wife of local truck-delivery professional Jon.

“The reward is making sure people are getting every dime they can.”

She adds in an interview last week in her Hudson office at 1334 Hosford St.:

“Sometimes people don’t realize all the things that could impact their tax schedules. I had one customer who’d gone to another tax firm last year, and when I asked her a bunch of questions, she was shocked. She said, ‘Nobody at the other firm even asked me one question. They just took my forms and plugged the numbers in.”

That’s not Wendy Byl, a former longtime insurance-division operations director at CHS, the Twin Cities’ Fortune 100 agricultural business-services cooperative. She’s been specializing in tax and accounting for the past seven years.

So Byl knows well that when it comes to all things tax, business and accounting, God and the devil are both in the details.

Hence her decidedly client-focused, one-on-one style, backed by her constant habit of keeping on top of every new nuance in federal and state tax codes -- and changes in her clients’ financial pictures as well.

“My approach is to really get to know the people I work with and what their situations are. I believe relationships are really important -- versus talking to somebody really quick and then not seeing them again until next year,” she explains.

“Tax issues don’t end between January and April, and one of the biggest things I see is when people make financial decisions before they know the full tax implications. So I encourage them to call me all year round.”

“And,” she adds pointedly, “I will be getting back to them the same day they call if at all possible. One of my pet peeves is when people don’t call me back, so I know that people want a callback right away.”

They also want a tax, business services and accounting expert who cares about them as individuals, not as a standardized collection of revenue-stream contributors.

“No two people’s returns are the same -- and that’s part of the fun,” she notes.

Meanwhile, when it comes to her expertise, the calm, soft-spoken Byl is not one to trumpet her own praises. She lets her professionalism speak for itself instead.

“My theory is that if a customer comes in, I can keep them as a client,” she says matter-of-factly.

“I’ve seen some of the big tax firms’ prices, and they keep getting higher and higher. … But I’m not doing this to push through thousands of tax forms every year. My goal is simply to get to know my clients well and give them the most professional tax preparation I can at an affordable price.”

Byl continues: “In fact, if a customer worked with a professional firm last year, we’ll charge 50 percent of what they paid them -- and that price won’t change next year by more than $5 unless there’s been a significant tax change.”

Premier Tax’s website -- www.premiertaxhudson.com, set to launch Jan. 11 -- also includes a portal where self-preparers can complete and file their own federal and state tax forms online.

Built by the North Carolina-based Drake Software, the portal’s online-filing fee schedule is highly competitive with other tax sites’: Federal 1040EZ forms are free; 1040A forms cost $19.95; long-form 1040s cost $39.95; and the charge is $19.95 for as many state forms as a client needs.

“It’s very user-friendly,” Byl notes of the website’s self-filing option, which is accessible by clicking on the site’s “Prepare Your Tax Online” link.

“We’ll help an online client if they have any problems. If a client wants someone to talk to the IRS for them to help them solve their problem -- or if they need someone to represent them with the IRS after they file -- we do all of that too. All they have to do is call us.”

For returns that Premier Tax prepares and files, the fee schedule is based on complexity and the amount of time required.

“For my tax clients, I have a price structure that’s based on what we’re doing for a person,” Byl says.

“It’s pretty set pricing, but we also base it to a certain extent on time, so if I can get a client’s return done in, say, an hour, I’m not going to charge them for any more.”

Byl works on an hourly basis for her accounting and business-services clients, for whom Premier Tax offers payroll management, bookkeeping, and start-up and small-business consulting for sole proprietorships, partnerships, LLCs and S corporations.

“We’ll do whatever a client wants us to do for them -- I’m open to doing as much or as little for them as they want,” she says.

“Basically, we take the worry about accounting and other things away, so the business owner can focus on what they’re best at -- namely, running their business.

“A lot of business owners don’t know what they can and can’t write off, especially when they’re just starting a business up. That first year especially, they can miss a lot of things.”

In both her tax and accounting/business services, Byl is always on the lookout for new tax-law curveballs, along with deductions and write-offs that others might overlook.

“The IRS usually waits ‘til the last minute to finalize new things,” she notes.

“Sometimes people who always did their taxes the same way in the past get some new form that they don’t know what to do with. … There are also things like people who are paying rent that are not applying for a rent credit on their returns.

“A lot of people don’t know if they could do better. That’s one of the reasons we ask people to come in with last year’s returns. The IRS allows you to amend for up to three years, and in Wisconsin, you can amend a return for up to four previous years.”

This year is also the first that the full effect of the Affordable Care Act will be brought to bear on the tax returns of clients who didn’t have insurance coverage during 2015, she notes, adding: “I took a special class on the Affordable Care Act because it’s so complicated.”

During this year’s tax season, Byl will be ably backed up by a certified public accountant and her niece and business partner Cheyenne Evans, whom Byl has been training on simple returns for the last six months.

The bottom line for all Premier Tax clients:

“Billions of dollars go unclaimed every year,” Byl says. “We help people get as much of that back as possible.”

For more information, go to the Premier Tax website, stop in -- the office is located just off Heggen Street near the main Hudson post office -- or call (715) 808-0082.