BOULDER — Mike MacIntyre is back where he wants to be.

In the college game.

In his early years in coaching, MacIntyre thought of himself as a second-generation college-game “lifer.”

Among the stops his father, George, made was a seven-year stay as the head coach at Vanderbilt, and Mike played under him for two seasons as a safety. Mac Intyre knew then and knows even more now that his father and his staff had monumental and lasting impacts on Mike’s contemporaries.

That set a high standard, and ever since — including at Colorado, where MacIntyre is about to begin his third season as head coach — he has aspired to meet it.

Even amid the brightened spotlight of the contemporary college game, it can be heartening to hear former players from three years ago, 10 years ago, even 45 years ago, say they’re grateful for what they learned from their coaches. They’re also likely to add that it took some separation from their football careers to make them truly understand it.

The big-time college game’s detractors probably won’t concede this, but it happens all the time, whether those former players were in the NFL for nine years or became pediatricians.

“Here, every day, you’re able to try to make a difference in a young man’s life, along with football,” Mac Intyre said after the Buffaloes’ Sunday morning practice. “I enjoy that part of it.”

Yet in 2003, when Bill Parcells was beginning his four-season stint as the Dallas Cowboys’ coach, he called MacIntyre, then on the staff at Mississippi. Parcells asked MacIntyre and asked if he would be interested in talking about moving to the NFL.

As the Buffaloes reached the halfway point of their preseason practices Sunday, MacIntyre told me that he never — not for one second — had thought a move to the NFL was something he wanted.

But, hey, when the “Tuna” calls …

MacIntyre was the Cowboys’ defensive backs coach during Parcells’ 2003-06 run, then was on Eric Mangini’s staff for one year with the New York Jets.

“I enjoyed coaching the players that I was there with, and I enjoyed the guys I was around, but they were coming in and out the door,” MacIntyre said. He added, “And they’re men. Now you get kids that are 17, 18 years old and you’re taking them through the journey, which I enjoy doing.

“I learned a lot in the NFL and it was a great experience for me, one that Bill Parcells gave me. Working for Eric Mangini, I learned a ton from him. It was kind of like getting my Ph.D. in football. But I enjoy the daily things in college more.”

What did he learn from Parcells?

“Wow, we’d take all day if I told you that,” MacIntyre said.

Then he recited a list of highlights, mostly involving organization and innovation in everything from talent evaluation to practice structure.

The five seasons in the NFL allowed MacIntyre to be vested in the league’s pension plan, and it identified him as a proven member of the league’s assistant coaching pool, meaning as long as he was willing to move around, he could stay in the league for many years.

Yet he was uncomfortable.

“I knew that if I had a good opportunity, I was going to to go back to college,” he said. “If I didn’t, I would have stayed.”

This time the call was from an old Mississippi coaching compatriot, David Cutliffe, named Duke’s head coach in December 2007. So MacIntyre was the Blue Devils’ defensive coordinator in 2008 and ’09, restarting the collegiate game progression that took him to San Jose State as head coach from 2010-12 and then to Boulder in 2013. Among his players now is his older son, redshirt freshman wide receiver Jay MacIntyre.

“I knew my desire was to be a college head football coach,” MacIntyre said. “Everybody has different desires, you know?”

Terry Frei: tfrei@ denverpost. com or twitter.com/ TFrei