The Competitive Enterprise Institute publishes an annual report on how much federal regulation is costing the economy, cheekily named the Ten Thousand Commandments. The 2015 edition estimated the cost that year to be $1.88 trillion, more than 5 times the cost of federal corporate income taxes that year, and about 10% of the entire 2015 GDP.

The costliest regulatory burden has got be the EPA’s assault on American energy industries. We have a president today conducting a war against our own nation’s coal industry. Oil and natural gas are next on the chopping block.

The Heritage Foundation’s Steve Moore has produced a study estimating the total value of proven reserves of oil and natural gas in America at $50 trillion! That is about three times our entire nation’s GDP.

But so-called progressives are leading a crusade to deny that buried treasure to the American people, under the foolish slogan “Leave it in the ground.”

That is the fairest measure of the cost of the president’s anti-American energy regulation, for which the justification is a fairy tale. The Heartland Institute is now completing the third of three 1,000-page volumes of double-peer-reviewed science published over the past year under the title Climate Change Reconsidered II, demonstrating that the risk of catastrophic consequences from the use of those fossil fuels is indistinguishable from zero.

A close second in regulatory costs is ObamaCare, which is increasing the costs of health insurance by double digits every year. The employer mandate requires all employers employing 50 or more full-time workers to buy mandated health insurance for those workers. The result is 6.1 million involuntary part-time workers today, which the Bureau of Labor Statistics defines as those who “would have preferred full-time employment, (but) were working part-time because their hours had been cut back or because they were unable to find a full-time job.”

But the next most onerous overregulation is Dodd-Frank, whose burdensome costs fall disproportionally on small community banks with fewer employees. Dodd-Frank has led to a decline of over 40% in such smaller banks, which specialize in loans to small businesses, whose growth has been badly lagging.

The Federal Reserve reports that the sharp decline in commercial banks has been driven by the dearth of new bank formation since Dodd-Frank was adopted in 2010, with zero new banks in 2012, and just one in 2013. Consequently, Dodd-Frank has only added the new problem of “Too Small to Succeed” to the old problem of “Too Big to Fail.”

Particularly destabilizing has been the Durbin rule enacted in Dodd-Frank, which arbitrarily slashed by about half the fees banks could charge merchants for use of debit cards by their customers. The Federal Reserve estimates that has cost banks about $14 billion a year, which banks have been recouping by increasing fees to their customers and terminating services such as free checking.

A new economic study by the Perryman Group estimates that the modern, international electronic payments system arising from card payments creates 23 million permanent jobs and increases GDP by 12%. That results because modern electronic payments reduce transaction costs by 50% compared to paper currency transactions, and because the widespread availability of mobile touch-and-pay systems makes the formation of new business models possible, such as Uber and Airbnb. The Durbin rule arbitrarily slashes payment for this pro-growth innovation, which will only tend to limit and shrink it.

A good means of addressing the explosion of federal overregulation is the proposed REINS (Regulations of the Executive In Need of Scrutiny) Act. That act would cut back on executive overreach by requiring that any federal regulation imposing $100 million in increased costs on the private sector would have to be approved by Congress before going into effect.

That would have preempted the entire EPA jihad against traditional American energy production, as well as most Dodd-Frank regulations. Congress would never have allowed Obama to bankrupt the coal industry, for example.