Forfeited car could see new life in drug resistance education program

Forfeited car could see new life in drug resistance education program

Forfeited car could see new life in drug resistance education program

Nick Gunderson can still remember how cool the car driven by his hometown police department's school resource officer was as a child.

The car wasn't the typical Ford Crown Victoria but a sleek Chevrolet Corvette promoting Drug Abuse Resistance Education in Moorhead schools.

"If you had D.A.R.E class or if you went to a function, there was the D.A.R.E. Corvette car," said Gunderson, who is now the school resource officer for the East Grand Forks Police Department.

The repurposed sports car and others like it seized and forfeited to law enforcement in drug investigations have aimed to send a message to students about the consequences of using drugs for years.

Now, Gunderson may get an opportunity to drive a D.A.R.E. car of his own should the City Council approve outfitting a forfeited 2011 Dodge Charger with lights, sirens and police markings.

In addition to the usual police car accessories, the car would be marked in some manner alerting community members it was seized in a drug case.

"Our goal for this is to be a positive message, you know. 'Don't do drugs. Look what happens if you do drugs,'" Police Chief Mike Hedlund told the council Tuesday.

The bright orange Charger comes through the Pine to Prairie Drug Task Force, of which the Police Department is a member. Any assets forfeited as part of a drug investigation become property of the task force, including the Charger, which was seized as part of a drug case originating in East Grand Forks.

The task force's governing board has given the Police Department permission to use the car, with the caveat that other member agencies can use it for community events such as parades.

Equipping the car would likely cost less than $2,000, which Hedlund said could be covered by funds already included in the Police Department's 2016 budget and donations if they are necessary.

"Essentially, we get a good vehicle for the cost of the upkeep," he said.

Gunderson would use the vehicle to travel between the four public schools he visits in the city. The addition of the Charger would reduce mileage put on the department's patrol vehicles, which Gunderson currently uses.

The council will vote on whether to give the expenditure final approval at its Tuesday meeting.

The department does have the option of selling the Charger but would only receive up to 25 percent of the car's sale price, Hedlund said. The task force would keep the rest of the money.

In 2014, vehicles comprised the majority of property handed over to law enforcement agencies in Minnesota at 58 percent of forfeitures, according to a report from the state Auditor's Office. Cash followed at 28 percent, firearms at 13 percent and other property at 1 percent.

Last year, the Pine to Prairie Drug Task Force recorded 100 forfeitures with a total estimated value of $53,505.

Minnesota state law lays out what offenses can result in the forfeiture of property to law enforcement. Property owners can request a judicial determination to check that their property was seized and forfeited properly.

Vehicles and other property can be seized as evidence during drug investigations, but those investigations often involve intent to sell drugs or an depend on the type or amount of drug in possession, Hedlund said.

"This isn't from something like simple possession of personal use marijuana," he added.