As Colorado Democrats battle to maintain control of the governor's office and the seat held by U.S. Sen. Mark Udall, the party could take over the University of Colorado's Board of Regents for the first time in more than three decades.

Republicans have long controlled the nine-member, publicly elected board that oversees the university system's $3 billion budget. This year, Democrats are hoping to take over the board majority for the first time since 1979.

Three seats are up for grabs this election cycle.

Incumbent Democrat Irene Griego, who has served on the board since late 2011, is running against Libertarian candidate Steve Golter in the 7th Congressional District.

Three candidates — Democrat Linda Shoemaker, Republican Kim McGahey and Libertarian Daniel Ong — are vying for a seat from the 2nd Congressional District.

But perhaps the most closely watched district on Nov. 4 will be the 6th Congressional District, where Democrat Naquetta Ricks and Republican John Carson are chasing the seat vacated by Republican Jim Geddes, who is leaving for a spot on the Douglas County school board.

During his six-year term, Geddes often promoted his belief that CU's Boulder campus needed more political diversity, chiefly on the Republican side.

Once a Republican stronghold, the Aurora-based 6th Congressional District is now one of the most competitive in the state after 2011 redistricting. Ricks and Carson are battling in a district split evenly among Republicans, Democrats and independent voters.

Advertisement

'Partisan politics plays a big role'

To CU President Bruce Benson, the 1994 Republican nominee for governor, politics aren't a big factor in his relationship with the board.

"I don't really think about that," he said. "Some of my best supporters on the board are Democrats. We've got a lot of work to do, and you ought to forget about partisan politics, as I have done."

But some argue that Benson wouldn't have the president's job if it weren't for the board's Republican majority. His hiring came after a 6-3 party-line vote by the regents in 2008, with all three Democrats on the board voting against him.

"I think that partisan politics plays a big role in the Board of Regents," said Cindy Carlisle, a former regent and a Democrat. "Mainly what it does, as in other political bodies, is shift the balance of power. If (the board) has nine members and five of them are one party, then they control setting up search committees for presidents."

Perhaps the most politically sensitive topic to come before the regents in recent years was whether concealed guns should be allowed on campus.

In the end, the Colorado Supreme Court ruled that the regents didn't have the authority to make that decision. Even since that ruling, many regents have spoken publicly — and fiercely — about their stance on guns.

Regent Steve Bosley, a Republican with an at-large seat, acknowledged that philosophical differences exist on some issues, but he said much of what the regents decide or discuss is not overtly political.

Bosley pointed to the unanimous approval of the new College of Media, Communication and Information — an academic matter with no place for politics.

Even when politics come into play, Bosley said the board mostly balances itself out.

"We're a nine-member board," he said. "If we only needed one opinion, it would only be a one-person board. So differences are going to be there; it's just how you deal with the differences, and after a vote, you walk away and say, 'What's the next issue?'"

Bob Sievers, a Democrat who served on a board with seven Republicans, said regents' constituents don't care much about politics. They'd rather make sure their tax dollars are being used effectively and that students are getting a good education.

"I don't think you (would) see any profound change in what the board does," he said. "The important thing is how collegial they are going to be and how they're going to work to understand the complexities of the budgets and the academic programs. It's hard work."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Sarah Kuta at 303-473-1106 or kutas@dailycamera.com.