Handgun (Photo: Brand X Pictures)

Here's a look at some of the major issues Florida legislators will debate in the 2015 session.

GUNS

The shootings at FSU's Strozier Library last November triggered a new effort to repeal the ban on guns on campus.

University presidents across the state — including FSU's John Thrasher — oppose the bills by Sen. Greg Evers, R-Crestview, and Greg Steube, R-Sarasota. They argue that the mixture of impetuous youth, alcohol and guns would make a deadly combination on campus.

But Unified Sportsmen of Florida lobbyist Marion Hammer, a two-term former president of the National Rifle Association, argues that there's no reason a law-abiding gun owner should become a criminal simply by crossing Academic Way. The NRA argument that "the best way to stop a bad guy with a gun is to have a good guy with a gun" has so far prevailed in pre-session committee hearings.

Three years ago, lawmakers rejected a plan to lift the campus ban. Thrasher, then a powerful state senator, killed it.

budget calculation (Photo: filmfoto)

BUDGET

The Constitution says they have to pass one, and they usually go right down to the 60-day deadline – normally striking a House-Senate compromise on Monday or Tuesday of the session's last week, so the budget can steep for the required 72 hours before final passage.

Gov. Rick Scott's "Keep Florida Working" budget this year totals $77 billion. It includes $673 million in tax cuts, most noticeably reductions in cellular phone, cable and satellite TV tax cuts. College textbooks would also become tax-exempt under Scott's proposals and the tax on manufacturing machinery and equipment would be eliminated.

Scott, who campaigned in 2010 on a promise to eliminate the corporate income tax, would take another bite out of it by raising the basic exemption to $75,000 – removing about 2,200 businesses from the income tax rolls.

The governor also proposes to hike per-pupil education spending to a record $7,176. There are no college tuition increases in the budget.

But there's also a potential hole in it. The Low Income Pool, a program that spread more than $1 billion among hospitals, is set to expire in June and legislators will have to plug the gap. A tax increase is not on the table.

Water (Photo: Ron Chapple)

WATER

The big winner at the polls last November was not the governor or any Cabinet officer. It was a constitutional amendment mandating about $1 billion a year in state spending for water and land acquisition.

More than 4.2 million Floridians — 75 percent of the turnout — approved Amendment 1, requiring one-third of revenue from the real estate documents tax to be spent on conservation. The Legislature now has to implement the amendment, which is how politics enters the equation.

Both Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, and House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, have made water policy a top priority for the session. The House Appropriations committee has already approved a nearly 100-page bill by Rep. Matt Caldwell, R-Fort Myers, and it could be the first bill taken up this year.

The proposal (HB 7003) would increase Agriculture Commissioner Adam Putnam's role in water policy. The Senate, meanwhile, has a plan (SB 918) by Sen. Charlie Dean, R-Inverness. With a billion to spend among stormwater and acquisition projects, the package is sure to land in a joint committee for compromising.

There is already an advertising campaign in major television markets by Everglades advocates who want the Legislature to use about $350 million in Amendment 1 revenue to buy land from U.S. Sugar under a 2010 contract that expires at the end of this session.

Caduceus (Photo: Comstock)

HEALTH CARE

Gov. Scott startled his Republican supporters and angered the Tea Party faction of the GOP two years ago by endorsing Medicaid expansion – provided the federal government keeps its $50 billion part of the bargain, under the Affordable Care Act.

The idea got nowhere in the past two legislative sessions, and House Speaker Crisafulli, has said his chamber is not interested in doing it this year. Democrats and various health lobbyists will continue pushing the issue, but they lack the votes to change the situation.

Cannabis doctor to speak at IHMC (Photo: Yuliya Semakova)

MARIJUANA

Legislators last year legalized medical use of "Charlotte's Web," a non-euphoric extract of cannibis — high in the element that soothes seizures, low in the stuff that gets you high — but implementing regulations are still tied up in the bureaucracy.

Voters almost passed a constitutional amendment authorizing prescriptions of smokable marijuana to ease the suffering of patients with ALS, cancer, AIDS and some other afflictions. That amendment fell short of the required 60 percent public approval, but its sponsors are gathering petition signatures to put a revised amendment on the 2016 ballot.

They hope the renewed campaign will put pressure on lawmakers to pass their own medical-marijuana law. Since opponents successfully raised fears that last year's amendment would lead to de-facto pot legalization, proponents hope legislators will enact a reasonably restrictive law to help the seriously ill while not simply legalizing pot.

A total legalization bill has been filed — simply removing cannabis from the list of controlled substances — but there is no chance of passage.

Stack of money. (Photo: Medioimages/Photodisc)

ALIMONY

Sen. Kelli Stargel, R-Lakeland, and Rep. Ritch Workman, R-Merritt Island, won passage of a plan two years ago to change Florida's alimony laws, but Gov. Scott vetoed it. He said its retroactive provisions would interfere with alimony decrees many recipients – mainly divorced women – depended upon.

They left the issue alone for the election year but Stargel and another Polk County Republican, Rep. Colleen Burton, are back now with a revised proposal. It would end permanent alimony awards in most cases, allowing judges to decide how much, and how long, alimony payments should be made.

Workman now chairs the House Rules Committee, a key position for moving legislation to the floor.

Florida House panel on Tuesday pushed forward a plan aimed at increasing oversight of the state’s troubled prison system (Photo: John Mcallister)

PRISONS

Reports of inmate deaths and woeful health care, among other abuses, in Florida prisons have caught the attention of leading legislators this year. Department of Corrections Secretary Julie Jones – Gov. Scott's fourth prisons chief in four years – has logged long hours before House and Senate committees, promising tough disciplinary reforms.

The Senate has a plan to create a state corrections commission, with power to investigate conditions and violent incidents.

Filling vacancies in the ranks of correctional officers and repairing inadequate facilities will cost a lot of money. Everyone wants to make the prisons safer, for inmates and officers alike — but if legislators have to choose between spending for tax cuts and education or prison inmates and their health care, it won't be a close vote.

Male croupier turning over card at Blackjack table, close-up (Photo: John Howard)

GAMBLING

There seems to be an eternal struggle for Florida's vacation image, between the established attractions that spent years – and millions – establishing a family-friendly resort reputation, and those who'd like to see some gambling.

For the past two years, legislators have done studies and heard from lobbyists representing "destination resorts," meaning giant hotel-convention complexes in the Miami-Fort Lauderdale area that would feature Las Vegas-style gambling. The Senate has tried, and failed, to come up with an umbrella regulatory plan for all forms of "gaming" – from the lottery to bingo to horse tracks and card rooms.

A big side bet this year is expiration of the 2010 Seminole gaming compact this summer. That deal called for the tribe to pay the state at least $1 billion over five years, for exclusive rights to offer banked card games like blackjack at its casinos.

Majestic Flag of Florida (Photo: CGinspiration)

MISCELLANY

Every year, legislators give serious discussion to dozens of issues that may or may not affect a lot of people's lives, but generate considerable discussion, concern or amusement.

•Rep. Frank Artiles, R-Miami, wants to prohibit transgender people from using public restrooms – other than the ones designated the sex they were at birth.

•Rep. Michelle Rehwinkel Vasilinda, D-Tallahassee, is back with her annual bill to repeal capital punishment in Florida.

•Sen. Eleanor Sobel, D-Hollywood, proposed a "domestic partners" registry with county clerks of court signing up unmarried couples who live together. A federal judge recently declared Florida's ban on same-sex marriage unconstitutional, but Sobel's bill (SB 854) would apply to all couples.

•Sens. Garrett Richter, R-Naples, Dorothy Hukill, R-Port Orange, and Rep. Larry Metz, R-Groveland, have proposed bills to regulate use of remote-controlled flying drones.

•Sen. Jeff Brandes, R-St. Petersburg, wants to set statewide standards for insurance requirements and background checks for ride-sharing businesses like Uber and Lyft. Those companies have argued that they are technology firms, not taxi services, but established taxi and limo companies don't want them competing.

•Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fort Walton Beach, has a bill giving the state all regulation of those services. Brandes' bill would still allow cities some local regulation.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1AsH8Z5