The sexual exploits of the United States Secret Service are back. Earlier this evening, a secret service agent turned himself into authorities for sending naked photos of himself to a Delaware State Police detective posing as a 14-year-old girl online. The agent then tried to solicit sex with this non-existent underage girl (via CNN):

A Secret Service officer assigned to the White House was arrested after he was caught in a sting sending naked pictures of himself to someone he thought was a 14-year-old girl from Delaware, according to a criminal complaint unsealed Thursday. Lee Robert Moore turned himself in to the Maryland State Police Barracks on Monday, the same day the complaint was filed against him in the U.S. District Court for Delaware. The complaint details a series of online chats between Moore, 37, and a Delaware State Police detective posing as a 14-year-old girl from Delaware. Moore is alleged to have sent naked photos of himself to the undercover officer and requested to meet in person to have sex. When he turned himself in, Moore waived his Miranda rights, according to the complaint, and agreed to an interview with law enforcement. In the interview, he said that he sent some messages while on the job at the White House and admitted to sending messages to what he believed was an underaged girl and other underage girls on a mobile messaging service. Moore was charged with the attempted transfer of obscene material to a minor, which carries a sentence of up to 10 years. It was not immediately clear if Moore had an attorney.

In 2012, the Secret Service was embroiled in a much more serious scandal during the 6th Summit of the Americas in Cartagena, Colombia, where members of the advance team solicited prostitutes and got caught after two agents refused to pay one of the call girls. Prostitution is legal in Colombia, but there are still the ethical standards of the Secret Service at play. The incident occurred before the arrival of the president, but it was a rather embarrassing chapter for the Department of the Treasury. To make things worse, a Department of Homeland Security investigator looking into the scandal was resigned after he was caught with a prostitute. Since then, it seems that federal agents from all departments have a problem concerning the solicitation of call girls while on assignment.