The Loveland Lions Club presents 70 dealers Saturday at Timber Dan Antique and Collectible Toy Show and Sale

Eric Weedin, left, and Jason Grasseschi, back left, work their booths during the Timber Dan Antique and Collectible Toy Show and Sale at The Ranch on Saturday, while Ryker Turner, 7, middle, and Bray Turner, 4, purchase a Star Wars toy with their grandparents Terry and Sandra Fornes.

Seven-year-old Ryker Turner and his younger brother, Bray, each got $20 Saturday to spend at the toy show.

The Johnstown boys walked up and down the aisles of booths set up for the Timber Dan Antique and Collectible Toy Show and Sale at The Ranch, stopping at one with Star Wars toys to make a few of their purchases.

"It's awesome. There's kind of a lot of Star Wars," Ryker said, clutching a grocery bag filled with a couple of Star Wars toys and a Lego set, purchased with money he received from his grandparents Terry and Sandra Fornes of Windsor.

The Timber Dan Toy Show and Sale, offered twice a year by the Loveland Lions Club, featured 180 tables operated by 70 dealers. The dealers, who came from nine states, sold farm and construction toys, books, games, models, dolls, teddy bears and toys from brands such as Hot Wheels, Matchbox, Tonka, G.I. Joe and Barbie.

A variety of dioramas based on The Simpsons television show are on display Saturday at a booth during the Timber Dan Antique and Collectible Toy Show and Sale at The Ranch. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The toy show and sale, which serves as a fundraiser for the Lions Club to support its eyeglass and scholarship programs, typically draws 900 to 1,000 people, but just over 500 people came to the February show during the winter snowstorm.

"It's pretty good for how the weatherman said it was supposed to be," said Wilma Davis, president of the Loveland Lions Club, about the turnout. "It's hurt the crowd a little bit but not as bad as I thought."

Lisa Connelly of Evergreen decided to sell her childhood 1970s- and 1980s-era toys from her basement, including Barbie dolls, furniture and clothes, trolls and board games.

Advertisement

"It's a great venue to sell things that were special to you, rather than just donate them, and it raises money for the Lions Club," Connelly said. "It's fun to see a whole show of nothing but toys. It gives (people) fond memories of their childhood."

Westminster resident Larry Thomas sells Hot Wheels, Micro Machines, slot cars and model kits to subsidize his real interest of collecting and selling toy and model trains.

"Every train person has too many," Thomas said. "Train collectors are the most loyal of all collectors."

Train collectors can start out young and stick with it into old age, never losing interest, like collectors can with other items, he said.

"They've done everything they can do, and they want to have something else," he said, adding that with trains, collectors can keep changing the layouts of the tracks and cars to keep up their interest.

For toy collector Don Smith, who sells construction toys, cars and tractors, it's all about the process of buying, he said.

"It's not so much the collecting. It's the hunt," Smith said. "Once I get something, I lose interest, unless it's a really special toy."

The big thing that Jason Grasseschi of Loveland likes to collect is action figures, but he also has Legos, Hot Wheels, die-casts and other toys for sale.

"I try to get my childhood back," said Grasseschi, who has rooms in his house dedicated to his collections. "I still have my original Star Wars stuff from when I was seven years old."

The next show and sale will be 9 a.m.-3 p.m. Oct. 3 at The Ranch.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.