Employer-sponsored health insurance premiums are up across the country at a time when wages are stalled, forcing some workers to hand over 28 percent of their paycheck just to keep coverage, according to a troubling new national survey of employer programs.

“The costs employees and their families pay out-of-pocket for deductibles and their share of premiums continued to rise, consuming a greater share of incomes across the country. In all but a handful of states, average deductibles more than doubled over the past decade for employees working in large and small firms. Workers are paying more but getting less protective benefits,” said a report issued Thursday by the Commonwealth Fund.

While the report revealed a slowing in premium hikes since Obamacare kicked in, the decade of flat income meant that employees had to increase their insurance payments by as much as 175 percent, with workers in the South getting slammed the hardest.

The report, titled “State Trends in the Cost of Employer Health Insurance Coverage, 2003–2013,” found that premiums grew faster than income in every single state and that average premiums were up to 28 percent of the median income of some states.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

The average premium paid by workers and employees combined was $16,000, but differences in states were wide.

Said the report:

In 2013, family premiums, including both the employer and employee contributions, ranged from a low of $13,477 to $14,382 in Alabama, Arkansas, Idaho, Mississippi, and Hawaii to a high of $17,262 to $20,715 in the District of Columbia, New Jersey, Massachusetts, New York, and Alaska. Growing faster than income, average premiums amounted to 20 percent or more of the median income in all but 13 states and the District of Columbia in 2013, compared to just two states (New Mexico and West Virginia) in 2003. In seven states — Alaska, Arkansas, Kentucky, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, and West Virginia — average premiums were 25 percent to 28 percent of the state median income in 2013.

Companies, to keep their costs low, have shifted more of the funding responsibility to workers. The report said that in 2013, employees contributed an average 21 percent of the total premium for single-person coverage, up from 17 percent in 2003. Add in premium hikes, and employees are paying 93 percent more.

Also from the Washington Examiner Sessions: Crime surge crashes into election, 'people not safe in their homes' FBI Director James B. Comey had an odd plea to Washington reporters when he met them earlier this month. Please, he said, write about the surge of murders rocking the nation's cities.

Paul Bedard, the Washington Examiner's "Washington Secrets" columnist, can be contacted at pbedard@washingtonexaminer.com.