Topics: Boston, Climate Change, coastal flooding, Dream City, Living With Water, Innovation News

In one vision of Boston, a network of canals fills and empties with tides and storm surges. Water is drawn through sluices with embedded, hydroelectric turbines, generating power.

In another, an aquatic park snakes around an urban island fortified with terraced steps that keep the ocean in sight but out of reach.

These are two of the nine finalists in Living With Water, a competition to redesign Boston for the year 2100, with the assumption that sea levels are 5 feet higher than today. For many coast-dwellers, that prospect is an existential threat so serious that it’s better not to think of it at all.

Collectively, the ideas from Living With Water try to make a counterpoint: That realism and optimism, when it comes to sea level rise, are not incompatible. On the one hand, the water is rising. On the other, we can rebuild in such a way to live happily with a strengthened sea.

For a city like Boston, there’s not much choice. According to a World Bank study from 2013, only seven cities in the world are more vulnerable to flooding. (The other U.S. cities: Miami, New York, New Orleans and Tampa.)

This point may have been on Bostonians’ minds, but it’s about to be on their balance sheets too. Preliminary drafts of FEMA’s new flood maps, which will be finalized some point in the next few months, have severely adjusted the city’s exposure in a hundred-year flood event.

Under the new maps, the number of residences in the flood plain will more than double, from 8,000 to 18,000. The number of businesses in that territory surges from 250 (mostly on the waterfront) to nearly 4,000. In other words, nearly 10 percent of all the businesses in Boston are in the flood plain.

All those homes and businesses, a swath that includes new and expensive buildings like the Institute for Contemporary Art, must now pay the kind of flood insurance premiums more familiar to residents of beachfronts and barrier islands.

There’s a bit of irony here, because the history of Boston development is essentially a story of turning water into land. This was common practice in all littoral cities; New York, for example, sold bargain-priced “water plots,” muddy strips of beachfront whose value could be realized through infill. Washington, D.C., pulled the land for the Jefferson and Lincoln Memorials right out of the Potomac.

But Boston was a step above the rest, unfurling new territory at a rate that was unmatched in its time. (In the century after Boston stopped expanding, Hong Kong has reclaimed more than 20 square miles of land!)

Prior to 1900, Boston tripled its landmass through land reclamation alone. The historian Walter Muir Whitehall termed it “cutting down hills to fill the coves,” and he was not being poetic: Beacon Hill, for example, was decapitated to fill in a pond that’s now Bulfinch Triangle. Fort Hill became Chinatown; Pemberton Hill created the ground for North Station.

The city’s greatest geoengineering feat, though, was the creation of the Back Bay neighborhood, a decades-long infill project that reclaimed 700 acres of stagnant marshland. Trains brought thousands of cars of gravel in from the countryside. Rubble from the Great Fire of 1872 was piled into the mud as well. By 1900, the former marsh was one of America’s most thriving and elegant urban neighborhoods.