On his New Rules segment, Bill Maher tore apart hypocrites who are enjoying the benefits provided by Obamacare, but continue to vote for Republicans who want to kill the law.

Video:

Maher said,

We need a new definition of insanity, and it’s having a congress with a eight percent approval rating , and reelecting just about all of them. Only fourteen percent of voters say congress has done anything to improve their lives, and yet reporters keep finding people who voted against Obamacare, but who are on Obamacare and love it. And why wouldn’t they? Why wouldn’t they love it? They can finally breathe easy that a serious health problem won’t bankrupt and or kill them. You’d think that would be the kind of thing that people would want to reward with their vote. But you ask them, would you ever consider voting Democrat? Sh*t no. I’m sticking with the pro-life doctor who impregnates lots of people who aren’t his wife. Top that, Obamacare.

Maher’s overall point was that the scandal plagued Republicans are cruising to reelection in House races because the American people aren’t paying attention. The Real Time host said that name recognition is all that matters to voters. There is also the fact that House Republicans have gerrymandered districts to such a degree that it doesn’t matter what they do. Republicans can win an election in their districts by virtue of the fact that they have an (R) next to their name on the ballot.

It is hypocritical of Republicans to claim to hate Obamacare while enjoying the benefits of the law, but Republicans are hating a fictitious Obamacare that dreamed up by Republican politicians and their media. The lingering problem that ACA supporters have struggled to overcome is that Republicans defined the law first. President Obama and Democrats did a terrible job explaining what the law was, and it took them years to somewhat right the ship.

Democrats should be rewarded by the voters for passing a health care reform that works, and has benefited tens of millions of Americans, but they won’t be because Republicans continue to run on the Obamacare fantasy that they sold the public five years ago. The Republican poisoning of the well means that the majority of Americans will continue to oppose “Obamacare” while approving of what the ACA does.

This duality is why Obamacare remains unpopular, but Republicans will never be able to repeal it.