Nadja Svenson

Police say argument over stargazing ends in stabbing



— A 22-year-old Londonderry woman was arraigned Thursday on a second-degree assault charge, after she allegedly stabbed her father in the chest Christmas Eve during an argument over the location of the Big Dipper.



Londonderry Det. Chris Olson said officers were called to 92 Old Nashua Road at 11:57 p.m. Tuesday night to a 911 call reporting someone had been stabbed in the chest. Upon arrival, they were greeted by the victim's wife, who said her husband had been stabbed and was in the basement.



In the basement, Olson said officers found Robert Svenson, holding a bandage to his chest where he had suffered a stab wound.



"It was a non life-threatening injury," said Olson. "He was unable to tell us who had stabbed him."



Olson after speaking with the victim's wife, they believed the man was stabbed by his daughter Nadja, 22, who was upstairs in the home. Police located Nadja in a room on the second floor of the home, and arrested her without incident on a charge of second-degree assault.



Robert Svenson was taken to Parkland Medical Center in Derry, where he was treated for his stab wound.



Olson said Nadja "wasn't very talkative," but that officers were able to determine through interviewing family members a motive behind the alleged attack.



"It was the result of an argument they had," said Olson. "The two were out looking at the stars on a clear night, and began arguing over where the 'Big Dipper' and other constellations are in the sky. It escalated from there. I don't know what you would call the particular type of knife that was used, but it was larger than the typical kitchen knife."



Nadja Svenson was arraigned Thursday on a second-degree assault charge in 10th Circuit Court in Derry, where she was ordered held on $5,000 cash bail. She is due back in the 10th Circuit Court Jan. 2 at 8:15 a.m.



pfeely@unionleader.com



To improve the chance of seeing your comment posted here or published in the New Hampshire Union Leader:



Identify yourself. Accounts using fake or incomplete names are suspended regardless of the quality of posts.

Say something new, stay on topic, keep it short.

Links to outside URLs are discouraged, if used they should be on topic.

Avoid comments in bad taste, write well, avoid using all capital letters

Don't cite facts about individuals or businesses without providing a means to verify the claim

If you see an objectionable comment please click the "Report Abuse" button and be sure to tell us why.

Note: Comments are the opinion of the respective poster and not of the publisher.

Post a comment