Companies plan to continue subsidizing and managing benefits while taking aggressive action to keep costs down.

U.S. employers expect a 4 percent increase in 2015 healthcare costs for active employees after plan design changes, according to the 2014 Towers Watson Healthcare Changes Ahead Survey.

If no adjustments are made, employers project a 5.2 percent growth rate, putting absolute cost per person for healthcare benefits at an all-time high. Despite this cost trend, most (83 percent) employers consider health benefits an important element of their employee value proposition, and plan to continue subsidizing and managing them for both full-time and part-time active employees, according to the survey.

Of particular concern on the cost front is the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act’s excise tax, which goes into effect in 2018. Nearly three-quarters (73 percent) of employers said they are somewhat or very concerned they will trigger the tax based on their current plans and cost trajectory. More than four in 10 (43 percent) said avoiding the tax is the top priority for their healthcare strategies in 2015, according to the survey.

“In the current economic climate, affordability and sustainability remain dominant influences on employers’ overall healthcare strategies,” said Randall Abbott, senior consultant at Towers Watson. “Expense management and worker productivity are equally critical to business results.”

In response to short- and long-term cost concerns, a growing percentage (81 percent) of employers plan moderate to significant changes to their healthcare plans over the next three years, up from 72 percent a year ago.

Another cost-mitigation tactic being considered for 2016 and 2017 is changing how employers subsidize healthcare for spouses and dependents. A third (33 percent) of employers are considering significantly reducing company subsidies for spouses and dependents—10 percent have already implemented such reductions and 9 percent intend to do so in 2015.

Despite the challenge of managing the high cost of health benefits, nearly all employers (99.5 percent) said they have no plan to exit health benefits for active employees and direct them and their families to public exchanges, with or without a financial subsidy. Three out of four employers (77 percent) said they are not at all confident public exchanges will provide a viable alternative for their active full-time employees in 2015 or 2016.

“The most effective employers are continually evaluating new strategies for improving health plan performance,” Abbott said.