Deb Stucklen speaks at the 2014 Loveland Hour for Peace event from behind a multi-faith altar at Ferguson High School. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald )

If you go This box has been updated to say that the event occurs in the a.m.

What: 30th annual International Hour for Peace and third event in Loveland. When: 4:45-6:15 a.m. Thursday, Dec. 31. Where: Loveland event is at Namaqua Unitarian Universalist Church, 745 E. Fifth St., and the Fort Collins event is at Unity Church of Fort Collins, 1401 W. Vine Drive. Both events are free of charge and will have coffee, tea and hot chocolate. More info: Programs will include "We Messages" to unite us, the John Randolph Price World Healing Meditation, and music, prayers, speakers, information and resources from a variety of local faith, peace and humanitarian groups. For more information or to volunteer to help, contact the area coordinator Dr. Vickie Gardner, 970-227-1539, Hour4Peace@att.net, or visit www.hourforpeace.org.

Hour for Peace offers people all over the world an opportunity to gather for peace, love, understanding and forgiveness through a global "mind-link" at noon Greenwich Mean Time on Dec. 31 every year, according to hourforpeace.org.

Advertisement

"If you want to create peace in the world, if you're a peacemaker, people all over the world gather at that same time," said Dr. Victoria Gardner, organizer of the Loveland and Fort Collins International Hour for Peace. "We pray for peace, we sing about peace, we have speakers and read about peace. There is all kinds of scientific evidence of the efficacy of the prayer. Where two or more are gathered... (quoting part of a Bible verse)."

Gardner is excited about three momentous ideas being celebrated this year.

This year is the 30th annual international Hour For Peace event celebrated around the world.

It's the 30th year this event has happened in Fort Collins and the third year a commemoration also has been brought to Loveland.

"The Peace Song" was created 60 years ago, whose first lines are, "Now peace begins on earth, and let it begin with me."

"That, of course, is our theme song," Gardner said.

"But how about it instead of it being about me, how about 'we'?" she added. "We are the people. We are the world. United we stand. We're in this world together. Yes, we can."

And the United Nations was founded 70 years ago, in 1945.

"Which is about unity, working together," Gardner said.

Both Hour for Peace events in Loveland and Fort Collins will have representatives from the United Nations Association of Northern Colorado speak at the Hour for Peace events.

A representative, Thaddaeus Chambers, will speak at the Loveland event.

A winner of a local United Nations Association essay contest focused on the refugee crisis will also read her essay at the Fort Collins event.

"Two of our peacemakers made their transition this year," Gardner said. The Fort Collins event will have a special tribute to Michael Riversong and Jack Manno, who died this year.

Riversong played music during the Hour for Peace from 2006 to 2013, and was the event webmaster. Manno and his Jazzology Trio provided music for the Fort Collins Hour in 2013 and 2014. He was also on the planning team for three years and was one of the founders of the local chapter of Veterans for Peace.

Gardner said that they only had about 30 people to the Loveland Hour for Peace in 2014, but it was 15 degrees below zero that night.

"We expect around 100," she said.

She added that if you have 100 people, then there is tremendous value in those 100 people focusing on peace along with the millions of people all over the world.

Organizers are concerned about continuing to grow the event and getting more young people involved.

"A lot of the baby boomers that started in 1976 are dying or going to nursing homes," Gardner said. "I'm 66. We really need to get more young people involved."

She depends on 20 to 30 key volunteers to help lead the programs.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.