The region’s three main health insurance companies are exceeding government standards for how much of their premium revenue must be spent on medical benefits for their members.

HealthNow New York, the Buffalo-based parent of BlueCross BlueShield of Western New York; Independent Health of Amherst; and Rochester’s Excellus Health Plan, which operates in this area as Amherst-based Univera Healthcare, over the past three years all surpassed the minimum federal standard of spending on medical care and health services. That standard is known as medical loss ratio, or MLR.

Health plans are required, under the federal Affordable Care Act, to account for how they spend the premium dollars they collect by reporting composite data for the previous three years.

Insurers that don’t meet the minimum standards are required to issue rebates to their members. In 2013, according to the most recent data available on the website of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, insurers nationwide returned $332 million to their members. In New York, five insurers returned $12.1 million to their individual, small group and large group members that year.

For individual, direct-pay plans and for small-group plans, health plans are required to spend 82 percent of premium revenues on their customers’ medical benefits. For large group plans, the minimum MLR under federal guidelines is 85 percent.

The three local insurers reported overall medical loss ratios across all of their lines of business for 2012, 2013 and 2014 combined.

For Excellus, the MLR was 91.5 percent. In other words, Univera’s parent over the three years spent $10.4 billion on medical benefits on its members, $823 million more than required over that period under the federal standard.

“Our members get high value health coverage with us,” Excellus CEO Christopher Booth said in a statement.

HealthNow’s MLR was 89.5 percent between 2012 and 2014. Over that time, the insurer spent $3.8 billion on medical benefits, or $214 million more than required.

“With 90 cents of every dollar being spent on medical benefits, health insurance costs are directly correlated to the costs of health care our members receive,” Kyle Rogers, a HealthNow spokesman, said in an email.

And Independent Health reported a medical loss ratio of 88.7 percent over the three years.

“Our MLR demonstrates Independent Health’s efforts to operate efficiently, collaborate effectively with our provider partners, and engage our members in their health through innovative products and benefits, such as our nutrition benefit,” Frank Sava, an Independent Health spokesman, said in a statement.

email: swatson@buffnews.com