Sean Eldridge gestures during his interview on Tuesday at the Freeman office in Kingston. Tania Barricklo — Daily Freeman

KINGSTON >> Democrat Sean Eldridge said he is committed to the Hudson Valley and wants to represent the 19th Congressional District to help find a solution for what he calls the “do-nothing Congress” in Washington.

“Shokan is my home,” Eldridge, 27, said during a wide-ranging interview at the Freeman offices Tuesday afternoon. “That’s where I live. That’s where I spend all of my time.” He said he is committed to continuing to work with the small businesses that have been provided equity investments through his firm, Hudson River Ventures, whether or not he successfully challenges incumbent U.S. Rep. Chris Gibson, R-Kinderhook, in the Nov. 5 election.

At the same time, Eldridge said, he believes in public service and wants to be an independent voice for the 19th Congressional District. As he has travelled throughout the district, which includes 165 towns, Eldridge said, he has seen a lot of frustration with Congress because it has not taken action on immigration reform and has not invested in education, infrastructure and high-speed Internet service that would help small businesses grow.

Eldridge took every opportunity during the interview to differentiate himself from Gibson, a retired U.S. Army colonel and Iraq war veteran who is seeking his third two-year term.

Advertisement

Eldridge said he respects Gibson, but said there are important differences between them. Eldridge said he is opposed to the natural gas drilling method known as hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, and has refused to accept campaign contributions from corporate or business political action committees. Eldridge said he is also an advocate for women’s health and “reproductive freedom,” while Gibson has voted to defund Planned Parenthood.

Gibson has voted against federal funds being used to pay for abortions but supports federal funding for women’s health services, his spokeswoman has said.

“At a young age, I’ve been very blessed in my life,” Eldridge said, noting that his husband, Chris Hughes, was one of the founders of Facebook. “And I’ve been given opportunity that I could never have imagined. But that’s going to enable me to be independent. I’m not taking any support from corporate PACs or businesses.” He said there is too much corporate money in Washington, D.C., and that is why he advocates for campaign finance reform.

When asked about being able to match campaign donations with his own money, Eldridge again said he has been blessed in recent years. He said, though, he wants every candidate to have the same opportunity to run for office based on their ideas, values and stances on the issues without having to be wealthy or accept campaign contributions that make them beholden to large corporations. Eldridge said it would be hard to get adopted, but he would support a constitutional amendment to stop corporations from dumping money into political campaigns.

Eldridge also responded to criticism that he invests in some of the same companies who are involved in activities such as hydrofracking, which he opposes. He said his husband has a diverse set of investments that are managed by a third party. Eldridge said he is not involved in picking the investments on a day-to-day basis and that his campaign has completed every necessary disclosure to report those investments and be transparent.

“But let me be clear,” Eldridge said. “I think that all of these companies need to do what’s right for our environment. They need to pay their fair share. They need to be contributing in a positive way to our country.” He also said there is a difference between having diverse investments and accepting corporate campaign donations.

Eldridge said he does not support New York’s Secure Ammunition and Firearms Enforcement (SAFE) Act, arguing that it was rushed through to adoption, but said he does support “common sense” federal background checks for people purchasing firearms. Eldridge, who said he owns a shotgun for home defense, said he believes there is a way to balance Second Amendment rights and protecting innocent lives.

On the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, Eldridge said he believes the law has been confusing for people and needs to be improved. He said everyone has a right to affordable healthcare and he wants to make sure the subsidies provided in the act are effective and that employers are not having employees work fewer hours to avoid paying for their health benefits.

On tax reform, Eldridge said he supports the “Buffett rule” in which people who make more than $1 million annually should pay at least 30 percent in taxes regardless of whether their money comes from investment income or capital gains.

He said Congress should stop reacting to crises that arise and be proactive. He said it should already have adopted bipartisan immigration reform legislation. Eldridge also said he believes in gradually raising the cap on the Social Security tax to ensure the system remains solvent. He also said too many lives have been lost during the conflict between Israel and Palestine and that a two-state solution should be sought.

“I think right now we’re living with the least productive Congress in the history of our country and I think we have a Congress that’s too beholden to large corporations and special interests and isn’t working for us,” Eldridge said. He said he is looking forward to “a robust debate” between now and Election Day about how to move the country forward.

The 19th Congressional District comprises all of Ulster, Greene, Columbia, Delaware, Sullivan, Schoharie and Otsego counties; most of Dutchess and Rensselaer counties; and parts of Montgomery and Broome counties.