Throwing his own words back at him, D.C. rapper Wale slammed Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid Friday on Twitter for his efforts to force the Washington Redskins to change its team name.

In a series of tweets, Wale recalled remarks Reid made in 2008 about President Obama being a “light-skinned” African American with no “negro dialect,” and said the Nevada Democrat uses racism to “make a bigger name” for himself.

The rapper’s tweets followed the reports on Thursday that Reid and 48 of his Democrat colleagues in the Senate sent a letter to NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell urging him to change the Redskins team name.

Outraged GOP senator slams Dem chairman

for calling Obamacare opponents racists

According to the Washington Times, Wale has a friendship with Redskins star quarterback Robert Griffin III, and has a Twitter following of 3.6 million people.

With a social media footprint that large, Reid may have bitten off more than he can chew.

Senator Reid got a lot to say about other ppl bein racist . But I did a lil research . He sketchy RT @Shoegame_Wiz: @Wale nahh get us hip — Wale Folarin (@Wale) May 23, 2014

Basically he tryna use racism to make a bigger name for his self . I’m. Not into politics like that but it’s a right an wrong thing — Wale Folarin (@Wale) May 23, 2014

Same dude tht was talkin down on Obama bein a “light skinned” with “me negro dialect ” all the sudden is a crusader for what’s right in race — Wale Folarin (@Wale) May 23, 2014

Senator Reid don’t know anything about Washington team and I doubt he cares he just using a sensitive time to garner attention . Easy call — Wale Folarin (@Wale) May 23, 2014

Team owner Daniel Snyder has resisted efforts to change the name, and Fox News reported that team president Bruce Allen sent Reid a letter Saturday that said the team’s nickname is “respectful” toward Native Americans.

The letter noted that the team’s logo was designed by Native American leaders and cited surveys that show Native Americans are supportive of the nickname.