Guess which presidential candidate is most fiscally conservative

Photo: Ty Wright /New York Times Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 According to a new report from the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, the most fiscally conservative presidential contender left standing is ... Hillary Clinton. Seriously. According to a new report from the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, the most fiscally conservative presidential contender left standing is ... Hillary Clinton. Seriously. Photo: Ty Wright /New York Times Guess which presidential candidate is most fiscally conservative 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Suppose you’re a hard-core fiscal conservative. You don’t give a hoot about social issues, and you don’t follow any of this nonsense about identity politics or insiders and outsiders. All you care about is getting the nation’s fiscal house in order.

Are you sitting down? Because the candidate you should vote for might surprise you.

According to a new report from the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, the most fiscally conservative presidential contender left standing is ... Hillary Clinton.

Seriously.

You’re probably used to thinking of Clinton as just another spendthrift liberal, oblivious to fiscal restraint. And it is true that she wants to expand the footprint of the federal government. By a lot.

Consider her New College Compact, which would substantially reduce higher-ed costs for new students and lower debt for past ones. She also plans to expand the Affordable Care Act.

Her proposed expansions and investments in clean energy, early-childhood education, family leave, veterans services and infrastructure look costly, too.

On the other hand, Clinton also proposes a lot of tax changes and other policies that would raise revenue or save money.

These include imposing a surtax on personal income over $5 million; raising rates on medium-term capital gains; limiting the value of tax breaks; changing the immigration system; taxing carried interest as ordinary income; raising the estate tax rate; imposing a risk fee on large financial institutions; and some as-yet-unspecified changes to the corporate tax code.

Here’s the bottom line for the nation’s bottom line: Clinton’s spending increases and other proposals have a total price tag of about $1.8 trillion over the next decade. But her offsets, mostly from tax hikes, would save an estimated $1.9 trillion over that same period (or closer to $1.6 trillion if you don’t count those business tax proposals).

The net fiscal impact of her plans, then, is close to zero.

To be clear, she’s not likely to reduce the federal debt. That presumably would be a more attractive outcome for the strictest of fiscal conservatives — including the number-crunchers at the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, who based their estimates partly on analyses from the Congressional Budget Office, Tax Policy Center and other outside groups.

“While Secretary Clinton would not worsen the fiscal situation, she also unfortunately does not offer concrete proposals for improving it,” laments the report. “With debt at post-war record-high levels and projected to grow unsustainably, simply remaining on our current course is not enough.”

Still, contrast Clinton’s plan with those offered by, oh, the other remaining presidential candidates, who would blow multitrillion-dollar holes in the budget.

Bernie Sanders proposes to expand the reach of the government far more than Clinton, and he promises to offset his increases with commensurate tax hikes.

Many of the underlying assumptions his campaign used to get these numbers to add up, however, are way too optimistic.

An earlier Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget analysis estimated that the budget shortfall from Sanders’ proposals would add $2 trillion to $14.8 trillion to the federal debt over the next decade.

On the Republican side — the party allegedly devoted to fiscal responsibility — things look just as bad. The remaining GOP candidate, Donald Trump, offers massive, across-the-board tax cuts that he doesn’t even attempt to pay for.

Trump would cut tax revenue dramatically, while simultaneously raising spending on programs such as veterans health care. The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget ballparks the total cost of Trump’s proposals at $11.7 trillion to $15.1 trillion over the next decade.

For the record, the various proposals touted by Texas’ junior Sen. Ted Cruz before he suspended his presidential campaign Tuesday night — which included tax cuts, a repeal of Obamacare and a bigger military — would have added between $2.7 trillion and $21.3 trillion to the federal debt.

Maybe when (if) voters start to notice the fiscal differences, Clinton will finally receive the praise she’s been due, from arithmetic fans and fiscal conservatives alike.

crampell@washpost.com