"I like his proposals on reforming the tax code, building the wall, immigration, repealing Obamacare," the actor said Sunday morning on Fox News.

After recently publicly endorsing Donald Trump, actor Scott Baio returned to Fox News on Sunday morning to express why he supports the GOP frontrunner, but not necessarily the views of the Republican party.

"I like his proposals on reforming the tax code, building the wall, immigration, repealing Obamacare — dropping the corporate tax rate down, so bring some of that money back that’s out of the country back into the country," said Baio on Sunday Morning Futures with Maria Bartiromo.

The actor, well-known for his roles on the TV series Happy Days, its spinoff Joanie Loves Chachi and Charles in Charge, said that when it comes to Trump, he "doesn't need a political decoder ring to understand what the guy is saying."

"I think he’s a straight shooter when he talks to me," said Baio. "When he talks I understand him. It’s like the way you and I grew up. It’s a very sort of direct language ... ."

Baio, who considers himself a "Conservative independent," also expressed why he doesn't associate with the Republican party.

"I think most importantly for me, and I’m not discounting Ted Cruz or John Kasich and I like them both, but Donald Trump is the only guy I think that has the will and the nerve to attack and to fight back because we have this mentality," he said. "The Republican party — which I try not to associate myself with anymore because I think they are very untrustworthy on almost every issue — they seem to have this mentality that they don’t want to get down in the dirt. They want to be above the fray because they want to be perceived as nice, and they get killed."

Baio had more words about the Republican party adding, "They lose elections because they don’t want to fight. When you fight, you fight to win and they don’t ever want to fight and I can’t understand it."

When it came to discussing President Barack Obama, Baio was more concerned about the actions of the Republican party than the current president.

"I don’t blame Obama," he said. "I don’t agree with anything the guy does, but the Republicans had every opportunity to stop him and just laid down."

Watch the full interview below.