DAVISON, MI - Christine Bartel started this week as the president and CEO of McLaren Homecare Group, a subsidiary of McLaren Health Care.

McLaren Homecare Group, headquarter in Davison, offers community-based home health care, palliative care, hospice services, home medical supplies and equipment, home infusion services, and pharmacy services to more than 30 counties across the McLaren system.

"Christine Bartel is a tremendous addition to the McLaren team, and we are excited about the health care experience and knowledge she will bring to her new position, especially with regard to home care services operations," said Bart Buxton, president and CEO of McLaren Lapeer Region who oversees McLaren Homecare Group, in a release. "The Affordable Care Act is changing the health care landscape, and Christine understands how to navigate these transitions to the benefit of our patients and our organization."

Bartel, 49, earned a bachelor's degree in economics with a premedical emphasis from the University of Colorado Boulder. Currently, she is pursuing an MBA in health care administration from George Washington University in Washington, D.C.

Bartel has approximately 19 years of health care experience, holding various administration and executive leadership positions in which she was responsible for clinical compliance, care coordination, and operational efficiencies, including financial integrity and growth strategies. A Colorado native, she will work to develop and implement new processes as needed at McLaren Homecare Group, with the objective of further integrating home care services across the entire McLaren system.

"I was attracted to McLaren Health Care because they have the necessary resources and capabilities to provide high-quality evidence-based health care while sustaining economic viability," Bartel said in the release. "A new health care delivery system is upon us, and staying relevant in health care today means changing with the times. McLaren's leadership understands this well."

She succeeds Steve Serra, who also served as president and CEO of McLaren Homecare Group. Serra left McLaren to pursue other opportunities.