U.S. Rep. Tom Marino is defending his record in the 10th Congressional District to challenges by two opponents, Democrat Scott Brion and independent Nick Troiano, who believe they have better answers to problems like Social Security and veterans issues.

The 10th District extends through 15 counties from Perry County north and east to the Pennsylvania borders. Roughly 51 percent of voters are registered Republican and 36 percent Democrat, and the district has been in Republican hands since 2010, when Marino defeated incumbent Democrat Christopher Carney.

The candidates are slated to debate at 7 p.m. Tuesday in Pittston, which will be streamed live on PBS station WVIA.

Marino, 62, of Lycoming County, a former U.S. attorney who is seeking a third term, hasn't made his polls public, but said they show him "in very good shape." He serves on three House committees — foreign affairs, homeland security and the judiciary — and six subcommittees.

Brion, 44, of Lycoming County, a graduate of Wharton School of Business, worked 20 years in the international energy markets. He returned to his family's home in 2008 and founded Tioga Resources LLC, a real estate company that worked in Marcellus Shale development. He has done pro bono work in the Marcellus Shale field for residents.

Troiano, 25, a native of Pike County and Georgetown University graduate, started the nonprofit The Can Kicks Back to explore bipartisan solutions to reduce the federal deficit. He drafted a piece of legislation called The Inform Act that would require the government to disclose its true future debt liability, which he estimates at more than $200 trillion.

Ryan Barton, Marino's campaign manager, said a recent poll shows Marino with 58 percent of voters saying he's their choice, compared with 22 percent for Brion, 10 percent for Troiano and 10 percent undecided. The poll was taken Oct. 20-21 by Harper Polling.

The poll also said that 52 percent of voters have a favorable image of Marino, compared with 24 percent for Brion and 25 percent for Troiano.

The voters had this to say in the poll:

On the top issues facing the country, 23 percent said the economy and 22 percent, spending and debt.

On the party they would vote for to represent them in Congress, 53 percent said they would cast their ballot for a Republican and 37 percent, Democrat.

On the current state of the country, 74 percent said the country is on the wrong track, 53 percent held President Barack Obama responsible and 15 percent said it was the fault of Marino and Republicans in Congress.

Troiano said his poll, done in September, showed Marino leading the race with 38 percent, followed by Brion with 26 percent and Troiano with 16 percent. But Troiano said if he was going head-to-head against Marino, 38 percent of voters preferred the incumbent, and 33 percent Troiano, with 29 percent undecided.

Candidates on flood insurance, health care, national debt

Troiano and Brion paint Marino as part of dysfunction and inaction in Congress.

Marino puts the blame on President Barack Obama and the Senate and describes the election as "a turning point — whether this country will turn down the social path this administration is taking us, or if we win the Senate, pass the 387 pieces of legislation sitting on Harry Reid's desk."

"There is more at stake here because of the debt we are in, because of issues like Ebola, Benghazi and the IRS," Marino said. He called for a travel ban on all nonmilitary and medical passengers traveling to and from Ebola-affected countries in West Africa, and the resignation of the U.S. Centers of Disease Control director Tom Frieden.

Marino said his priorities if re-elected would be repealing the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act, replacing Obamacare with "good health care we can afford," creating 12-year term limits, eliminating omnibus motions and "taking the handcuffs off business" by cutting red tape and overreaching federal intrusion.

Troiano, whose campaign focuses on decreasing the national debt and entitlement reform, criticizes Marino for voting for the government shutdown last year. Troiano said the shutdown motivated him to run, as it "accomplished nothing but cost $24 billion in lost wages and jobs and the uncertainty it created."

In response, Marino said he voted "not to increase taxes and not to allow the president to spend more money we do not have."

Troiano supports the Simpson-Bowles plan to reform Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid. He said he wouldn't have voted for the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, saying "we already have two unsustainable health care entitlements."

Marino said the national debt can be dealt with by passing House-approved legislation that awaits Senate action, which would create jobs, lower corporate income and other taxes, and allow the nation to use its natural resources.

Brion doesn't believe Social Security is in imminent danger. "We have 20 years before there would be any impact to payments or benefits," he said.

His answer is to grow the economy and increase employment, and consider immigration reform to bring younger workers into the workforce.

"The conversation should not be about cutting benefits but increasing benefits. We have 15 percent of seniors living below the poverty line. We are saying it's acceptable to increase that rate. That's wrong," Brion said.

Brion also stresses education, and veterans' and senior citizen affairs.

During the sequester, he claims funding to Title I and other mandated educational programs were cut, which disproportionately affected rural school districts and contributed to a rise in property taxes.

Marino said he believes the U.S. Department of Education needs to be decreased in size if not eliminated, and teaching basics should be emphasized. The savings should go to the states, who would allow local school districts to determine best use for the funds.

Regarding veterans, Brion said services need improvement, with those in Lycoming County having to drive two hours to Wilkes-Barre. "If the VA can't provide the service, we need to provide it through private health care if necessary," Brion said.

Marino would keep the VA, but make major changes to reduce wait times and make it run like a business. He would issue veterans a voucher to clear up backlogs, and allow veterans to go to hospitals of their choice for some care.

Marino's opponents criticize his support for the original Biggert-Waters Act, which resulted in sharp increases in flood insurance until it was amended.

Marino said he voted for it because representatives were told by Federal Emergency Management Agency that insurance rates would only rise 5 percent to 7 percent. "It should be repealed," Marino said, adding he will fight for further reforms in the next session.

Regarding minimum wage, Brion supports an increase and tracking it to inflation. Marino says increasing it could hurt small business, and these jobs are entry-level positions. Troiano believes it should be indexed to inflation and the earned income tax credit could be expanded to provide relief.

Party chiefs on the 10th District race



In Perry County, which makes up about 6 percent of the 10th District, Republicans outnumber Democrats more than 2-to-1: 9,136 to 3,790. The district is in 24 of 31 voting districts in Perry County.

Donald McClure, Perry County Republican Party chairman, calls Marino's challengers "two invisible souls," saying they haven't been seen much in his county.

"Tom Marino has provided extraordinary attention to Perry County, and has served us very well," McClure said.

But Elaine Dorman, Perry County Democratic chairwoman, said she sees "an awful lot of Republicans jumping ship in this race. They've had enough of [Gov. Tom] Corbett."

She said she doesn't see Troiano having a big impact on the race in Perry County with Democrats voting for Brion.

In Pike County, Troiano's home county, GOP committee chairman Christopher Decker predicts Marino and other Republicans will sweep the ballot.

Rather than drawing support from the GOP, Troiano is attracting more Democrats, Decker said. "He's seen as a liberal up here in Pike County," he said. "He went to school to be a politician. We don't want to elect another career politician."

Pike County Democratic Chairman Bruce Taylor said while Troiano may be attracting some Democratic supporters, "I think his platform and his background is Republican, so I think he might draw from Marino as well."

The 10th District has been "gerrymandered to pieces to draw Republicans from the center of the state," he said. "It virtually guarantees a Republican candidate has an automatic edge."

Taylor said Democratic gubernatorial candidate Tom Wolf as a front-runner might help carry Scott Brion, and Republicans disgusted with Corbett might stay home.

In Lycoming County, home district for Marino and Brion, Republicans outnumber Democrats by about 10,000 voters. Bob Brobson, Lycoming County GOP chairman, also said he's confidant Marino will be re-elected.

"He's highly regarded, [and] he does a great job for his district," he said.

Lycoming County Democratic chairman John Mussare, who believes Marino has provided "poor leadership" for the 10th District, said the race amounts to having two Republicans running against Brion.

"Our saying up here is 'He's a mini-Marino,'" Mussare said, referring to Troiano, who was a Republican.

Troiano said criticism from both parties "goes to show both sides feel threatened by the attraction my campaign has been able to gain."

Marino's vote for the Biggert-Waters Act could work against him, Mussare said, even though he's working to fix its missteps. Veterans' issues are also important in Lycoming County, he added.

Campaign expense data

Since January 2013, Marino for Congress raised $987,000, including $489,000 from PACs. He spent $835,000, according to the Federal Election Commission.

Brion raised $175,000, including $7,100 from PACs, and spent $160,000.

Troiano raised $151,000, all from individuals, and spent $130,000.

UPDATE: Campaign expense report information was added.