1 YEAR AGO

Week of July 11, 2013

The Town of Eagle vowed its support for the OHV (Off Highway Vehicles) lobby effort, supporting the plan to revert back to previous local OHV rules.

Gypsum residents complained of single-family zoning violations from neighbors.

Eagle County was prepping for Obamacare, and the county received grant money to help residents understand the new health care options.

Eagle teens Ben and David Witt returned from a Cambodian orphanage where they volunteered with Vail-based Children’s Global Alliance.

5 YEARS AGO

Week of July 9, 2009

Carol Warner prepared to enter her award-winning flat-coated retriever Milo in the Roaring Fork Kennel Club dog show in Eagle.

The Charlie Daniels Band was set to perform at Gypsum Daze.

A Women’s Wellness weekend featuring an award-winning naturopathic physician was set to take place. The weekend package included yoga, two nights lodging, meals and instruction for $375 per person.

Annabel Kinney and her mom, Jann, were spotted earning hours for the Eagle Valley High School choir at the Eagle Valley Community Fund Rummage Sale.

10 YEARS AGO

Week of July 8, 2004

The Gypsum Daze headliner was Clay Walker, who was joined by Jennifer Moorman.

The new go-to person for valley residents who had questions about their vegetable and flower gardens was Laurel Potts.

Gypsum’s historic Lundgren barn was moved to a new foundation as work was set to begin to turn that space into a community amphitheater.

Burns-area teen Jared Schlegel roped in huge successes at the Colorado State High School Rodeo Championships.

20 YEARS AGO

Week of July 7, 1994

Eagle County reported a total of 353 building permits issued in the first six months, reflecting a development boom.

Eagle Police Lt. Ron Sommerhause was recovering from injuries suffered when a suspect he was attempting to question ran over him with a car. The 21-year-old suspect fled after the incident, but was captured later that night.

Bill Wood was the new District Ranger in the Eagle Office of the White River National Forest.

30 YEARS AGO

Week of July 12, 1984

With the new water system on line, the town of Eagle was on the verge of lifting its “boil” order on drinking water.

After months of controversy, the U.S. Postal Service announced the new Eagle Post Office would be located on a 1.14 acre lot immediately east of Beasley’s Super Foods in the Eagle Commercial Park.

An engineering consulting firm advised the town of Eagle that a reservoir site on Brush Creek, proposed by the Adam’s Rib developers, was not a suitable location.

40 YEARS AGO

Week of July 11, 1974

Vail resident Ted Kindel was appointed to a vacancy on the Eagle County School Board.

The Wolcott community celebrated the 4th of July with a parade, barbecue, and a softball game pitting the “Bellyache Bombers” versus the “Wolcott Sheepherders.”

Anna Marie Hoza and Alfred Colby announced their engagement.

Mike Luark, Tom Toomer, Sumner Schlegel, Robert Toomer and Debbie Kashner brought home honors from the Future Farmers of America state convention in Gunnison.

Buster Jenkins and the High Country Travelers were playing at the Copper Eagle; while Helmut Fricker’s German band was booked at Bernice’s Place.

50 YEARS AGO

Week of July 9, 1964

The Denver and Rio Grande Railroad announced it would discontinue its Royal Gorge route, the only passenger service between Glenwood Springs and Pueblo. The railroad attributed the decision to the loss of a mail contract, which generated $500,000 in annual revenues.

Leo Hargrave of Edwards purchased the former Serv-U Shop building in Eagle from Billy Morgan. He had no immediate plans for the building.

The ground-breaking for the Ruedi Dam was scheduled for mid-July, and would feature a performance by the Army Band and a picnic. Enterprise editor Marilla McCain described the dam as “one of several projects to take water from Eagle County to eastern Colorado.”

The local community had raised $14,739 for construction of a medical clinic in Eagle. Excavation work was to start soon, with Dennie Eaton as the chief contractor.

Kevin Doll of Eagle was the top bareback bronc rider at the Flight Day’s Rodeo.

Arnetta Ann Clark married Herb Eaton in a ceremony at St. Mary’s Catholic Church.

60 YEARS AGO

Week of July 8, 1954

Gophers were doing some grave-robbing in Eagle. The Enterprise reported that rodents had exposed a human arm bone and jaw bone, and had dug up a coffin handle in the early day pioneer graveyard located north of the railroad track and across the highway from the Montgomery Ranch. The grave markers had been tramped down by cattle and sheep. The Enterprise suggested that the cemetery district take responsibility for the parcel.

The Enterprise warned that approval of the Frying Pan-Arkansas water diversion project could “change the location of the desert from eastern Colorado to the Western Slope”.

Eagle County was oiling the first four miles of Brush Creek, up to the Alex Macdonell ranch. Neeoma Matthews joined the staff of the Eagle Barber Shop as a beauty operator.

A four-year-old Grand Junction boy, who became separated from his family on a Fulford camping trip, was found unharmed by the next morning. He told his rescuers, Mick and Nels Yost, that he spent the night “sleeping with the squirrels.”

70 YEARS AGO

Week of July 10, 1944

Miner Billy Colerick, 74, suffered a fatal heart attack while visiting Fulford to work his Doctor’s claim. Colerick, a California native, had come to Fulford every summer since 1921, hoping to find a rich vein. That never happened.

Spilled gas near an electric plant in Bond caused a fire that destroyed the pool hall, store, and home owned by Andrew Simon. Damage was estimated at $15,000.

80 YEARS AGO

Week of July 13, 1934

A Denver businessman was electrocuted while fishing on the Eagle River. He was killed when he attempted to unwrap his fishing line from a slung electrical wire carrying electricity.

A West Lake Creek rancher came to town bearing crates of mountain strawberries.