Reutes/JASON REED President Barack Obama speaking about clean-energy jobs at Opower offices in 2010

As it prepares for a potential initial public offering, Opower Inc., a company that runs innovative energy-efficiency programs for utilities, has been adding board members and tweaking its branding to align with successful software companies.

These efforts might help the Arlington, Va.-based company affect how investors view it. Whether Opower gets compared to other software companies that had a great IPO run in the past 24 months, or to “smart grid” and “clean-tech” companies that serve the heavily regulated utility industry, could affect its fortunes. The company recently hired bankers to explore going public, the Wall Street Journal has reported.

On Thursday, Opower announced that it welcomed Mark McLaughlin, chairman, president and chief executive of Palo Alto Networks Inc., to its board. He’s joining Marcus Ryu, chief executive of Guidewire Software Inc., and Deep Nishar, senior vice president of products and user experience at LinkedIn Corp.–all having started on the board in the past few months.

All three of the companies that the new directors work with represent potential comparisons and learning opportunities for Opower. All three were also high-growth venture-backed software companies that completed successful IPOs in the past two years.

Palo Alto Networks, for example, which provides security software to enterprise customers, priced its IPO in 2012 well above initial plans and then saw its shares jump on first day of trading. It currently trades at about 9.3 times sales, according to data from Capital IQ.

It’s notable that in the press release announcing Mr. McLaughlin’s appointment, Opower dubbed itself as a “cloud software” company, which appears to be the first time it referred to itself this way. It also threw in other technology buzzwords, such as “big data,” a term that started cropping up in Opower’s press releases starting this fall.

Contrast that to the way Opower characterized itself in 2009, as “a leading smart-grid software company.” The company’s products and offerings didn’t drastically change over the years, but it’s self-characterization did.

“Smart-grid” companies haven’t done nearly as well in the public markets recently as have software technology plays.

EnerNOC Inc., for example, a company that provides that reduces demand for electricity for commercial customers and works with utilities, trades at a price of 1.13 times sales, according to Capital IQ. Silver Spring Networks stands out in this regard — it’s a venture backed smart-grid company that languished in IPO registration for many months, but did have a successful IPO earlier this year. Still, there are many fewer successes in this sector than in software.

“Opower has always been a software company, and that will continue to be our focus,” said Carly Llewellyn, spokeswoman for the company. She declined to comment further.

Opower processes loads of data, collecting reads from electronic meters from millions of homes. It sends consumers paper reports, as well as messages via text and email, where it gives them suggestions for how to decrease energy use tailored to their circumstances (they vary based on whether you own a big house or live in an apartment building). The company compares electricity usage of homeowners to that of their neighbors, creating a peer-pressure effect that leads people to save more electricity.

Its business requires a good understanding of what drives consumers, know-how in data processing, as well as skills in regulatory and politics work as it sells to utilities.

Which category of companies Opower will fall under in investors’ eyes will matter greatly for its IPO, as share price depends often on performance of companies considered comparable.

Confusion over how to categorize the company likely cost a bit of money to SolarCity Corp. The solar project developer and financing company that went public a year ago, set its share price well below earlier estimates. At that time SolarCity was trying to differentiate itself from solar manufacturers that hurt many investors, but its CEO Lyndon Rive said then that many investors still lumped it together with those more unfortunate businesses.

SolarCity shed the negative associations and is now the stock with the best post-IPO performance for the year, according to Nasdaq. (It priced at $8 and is trading at above $52.)

For Opower the challenge will be to present itself as a software-as-a-service play, and not be burdened by the fact that it sells to a notoriously difficult customer set: utilities.

In previous interviews, Jon Sakoda, board member and partner at New Enterprise Associates, one of Silicon Valley’s largest venture firms, said that Opower has been growing faster than any of the firm’s other software-as-a-service companies.

Software companies that sell to a niche industry have been successful, with Guidewire among the group. That company, whose CEO is a recent member of Opower’s board, went public last year and sells its products to insurance providers. It has been trading well above its IPO price.

Opower sells to utilities, and it has been adding expertise in that area, as well, but by adding people to its advisory board, rather than to the board of directors.

Write to Yuliya Chernova at Yuliya.Chernova@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @ychernova.