You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Message: * A friend wanted you to see this item from WRAL.com: http://wral.com/13070279

— A Nash County man who allegedly led authorities on a 15-mile high-speed chase in Nash and Wake counties was arrested Saturday and charged with more than a half-dozen criminal counts, including assaulting a law enforcement officer.

Zebulon police arrested Dennis Carroll Bunn, 60, of 9327 Whitley Road in Bailey, one day after, they say, he led officers on a pursuit – at speeds 15 mph over the posted speed limit – from Wake County to Bailey, where he crashed his Dodge Ram pickup truck through a barricade at Bailey Elementary School.

Carroll faces two counts of assault with a deadly weapon on a government official and one count each of fleeing to elude arrest with a motor vehicle, assault on a female, assault on a government employee, resisting a public officer and littering.

Bunn was taken to WakeMed in Raleigh after the crash Friday for a physical and mental exam, authorities said.

Witnesses said he had been behaving unusually Thursday night when he caused a disturbance inside a Bailey grocery store that made customers uneasy.

Authorities said Bunn was trying to assault people with a club at a fast-food restaurant Friday morning in Zebulon when police tried to take him into custody.

That's when he allegedly jumped into the truck, tried to ram a police car and then sped off, police said.

Authorities said Bunn fought with police and other emergency workers and even tried to sic a dog on them. Arrest warrants indicate that he refused to get out of the truck when it crashed and that he had to be forcefully removed from the vehicle.

The assault on a female charge, according to the arrest warrants, stems from accusations that Bunn threw wadded paper at a woman's face and hit her with it. He's also accused of punching a Zebulon police sergeant in the face.

Carroll was in the Wake County Detention Center Sunday under a $65,000 bond and was expected to make his first court appearance Monday.