Loveland Swim Club enjoying solid week

Eryn Eddy, third from the left, stands on the podium at the Junior National Swimming Championships in Irvine, Calif,, on Saturday after finishing fifth in the 200-meter freestyle. (Jim Nickell/For the Reporter-Herald)

IRVINE, Calif. — From the very first swim Wednesday — when Liam Gately dropped 30 seconds in the 1,500-meter freestyle to finish 16th — until Saturday night — when Eryn Eddy earned her way on to the podium — this week's Junior National Championships have treated the Loveland Swim Club pretty well.

And there's still one more day left.

Eddy's performance in the 200 free Saturday has been the highlight so far. The Thompson Valley junior to-be finished in fifth place by touching in at 2:00.78, a time that LSC coach Jim Nickell says puts her in the top 100 in the world in the event.

Eddy (Jim Nickell/For the Reporter-Herald)

Eddy entered the meet with the eighth-fastest qualifying time at 2:02.30. But she was able to improve that seed by three spots during Saturday's preliminaries with a 2:01.38. She then lowered her time again in the finals by more than a half-second to hold her place and finish .90 seconds behind national champion Stanzi Mosley.

Nickell said Eddy, who's no stranger to big meets, is beginning to find out what it takes to perform her best in such pressure-packed situations.

"She's starting to learn to be comfortable at this elite level, with 1,000 people in the stands cheering and with the video cameras on and all that," Nickell said. "To learn how to be comfortable in that environment takes some time, and she's done a great job of it."

Advertisement

Other notable LSC performances this week have included Brooke Hansen making the finals in the 100 freestyle in 56.90, Jack Thorne dropping 8 seconds in the 400 free by going 3:39.90 and Morgan Friesen's swims in the 100 breaststroke (1:11.42) and 200 breaststroke (2:35.92).

The LSC has also been doing work over in Fresno, Calif., at the Western Zone Senior Championships, where Jackson Buyers, Walt Dauksher, Jake von der Lippe, Bailey Stewart and Brody Lewis all hit times that will qualify them for next year's junior nationals — with Kelly Hatanaka and Morgan King aiming to join their teammates by the meet's end.

"All in all these guys have had a great meets so far. We've still got one brilliant day left," Nickell said.

Contact Reporter-Herald Sports Writer Sean Star at sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/seanvstar