The out-migration of students from any particular school can gouge its enrollment, cutting into that school's funding and ability to offer programs.

The next several weeks will be consequential for the health of neighborhood schools in Portland for years to come. It doesn't take much of a leap to figure what that could mean, as well, for the fortunes of Portland itself. Schools are at the foundation of thriving communities. And Portland is the envy of many large American cities for having an intact school system that enjoys enormous loyalty across generations.

At issue is the Portland Public Schools transfer policy, which is in part lottery-based. If a school has room, a student from within the district is in for the asking. If too many students want to transfer in, however, a lottery kicks in. And as any student engaging in the lottery is allowed three choices of schools, the practical reality is that most everyone who asks to transfer does. The system embraces personal choice, a cornerstone of life in any free society.

But the out-migration of students from any particular school can gouge its enrollment, cutting into that school's funding and resources available for programming. And a PPS committee at work on the subject for more than two years has found the present lottery-based system may, if preliminary data simulations are correct, perversely affect the socioeconomic and racial composition of any school's student population.

Last year alone, 89 of 414 students at the Lewis School had transferred in from elsewhere, The Oregonian's Kelly House reported. While enrollments at other PPS schools were drawn down, the Woodstock neighborhood school was enriched.

PPS data, meanwhile, shows Lewis to have slightly more than a third of its students classified as economically disadvantaged. That may sound high. But many schools within PPS have student populations that are overwhelmingly classified as economically disadvantaged, racking up figures of 80 percent and higher.

The question must be asked: Does the transfer policy hamper PPS' ability to achieve its goal of providing equal educational opportunity to every child regardless of color or economic station?

Editorial Agenda 2014

More jobs for Oregon Position the Port for the future Make Portland a city that works Keep people moving Build a culture of student success Move forward on tax reform Protect and expand personal freedom

_______________________________ Read more about the editorial board's priorities for Oregon.

The committee that will release its full findings next month apparently thinks so. It declared in a preliminary report over the summer that the committee, whose official name is the Superintendent's Advisory Committee for Enrollment and Transfer, "believes that the strength of the PPS system should be the prevailing consideration – even over individual needs and desires ... (and that) the enrollment system should not exacerbate patterns of segregation by race and class." Among other things, the committee wrote that it "supports lessening the degree of choice in favor of strengthening neighborhood enrollment."

That means, if PPS Superintendent Carole Smith and the school board agree, that personal choice could well diminish in the years to come in service to stabilizing the movement of students, and allocation of money, in Portland's public schools. But several unknowns loom: With limited mobility within PPS, would families with the wherewithal flee to private schools or the suburbs? Or would they stick around and commit to their neighborhood school as never before? A parallel effort by PPS to redraw school boundaries might help offset the impact of such change and bolster neighborhood identity. But conversely, if Smith were to thank the committee for its recommendations and insist families continue to enjoy broad personal choice, will the long-term result be to foster segregation in Portland's schools? Could the city afford that?

In an interview with The Oregonian's editorial board last week, Smith said she was impressed by the willingness of the committee to engage such a difficult subject in one frame of mind but to discover the many layers of complexity — gentrification and the changing economy to name two — running beneath it. And she underscored the fluid dynamics of urban education, saying: "I don't think this is one thing that you solve in one choice. ... There are tensions that you don't resolve. It's how you manage them."

How Portland reconciles a liberal transfer policy that early data suggests undercuts a PPS goal of fairness will be as important this year as any budget in any year. The choices immediately ahead will deeply affect neighborhood schools but also the city's long-term fortunes. This one's worth everyone's full attention.