As the Pac-12 continues to look for ways to expand its brand, so too does Colorado.

The conference has set up an arrangement to send a men’s basketball team to China this fall and is having preliminary discussions of a potential football bowl game in Australia that would include a conference representative.

“We’d be for it,” Colorado athletic director Rick George said of playing overseas. “There hasn’t been a lot of talk about ‘global’ in collegiate athletics. But I do think it’s important and it makes sense in a lot of ways. I’m glad the Pac-12 is out in front of this.”

Last month, the Pac-12 revealed details of a nonconference men’s basketball game between Washington and Texas of the Big 12 to be played in Shanghai on Nov. 14. It will mark the first time that a regular-season game between U.S. teams in any sport, professional or college, is played in China.

“This is historic … a milestone,” said Pac-12 commissioner Larry Scott.

A second regular-season men’s college game will be played in China next year.

As for Pac-12 football, the Pac-12 and Mountain West are talking about having representatives of their conferences play in a bowl game in Australia as early as after the 2016 season.

Scott’s “Globalization Initiative” appears to be gaining momentum.

“There are a lot of presidents and chancellors from Pac-12 schools that want to attract students from China and that part of the world,” George said. “CU attracts students from those areas. That’s good for the diversity of our institutions.

“It’s also to expose our brand. For the Pac-12, and the 12 schools underneath it, to get that kind of exposure in China and other places is invaluable.”

Scott took over as conference commissioner in 2009 and immediately began talking about expanding the brand of the conference to a global audience. If that raised some eyebrows, it shouldn’t have. Scott served the previous six years as chairman and CEO of the Women’s Tennis Association. Among his accomplishments: signing a contract with Eurosport to broadcast WTA events in more than 50 countries.

In 2011, Scott launched the Globalization Initiative. USC and UCLA men’s basketball teams have played exhibition games in China, as has the California women’s basketball team. The Pac-12 sent an all-star women’s volleyball team to China, and last summer a Pac-12 men’s all-star basketball team (including CU’s Xavier Johnson) played exhibition games in China. A delegation of basketball coaches from the Pac-12 conducted clinics in China.

Scott said he hopes a nonconference men’s basketball game involving a Pac-12 team will become an annual tradition that signals the start of the college hoops season.

George can identify with Scott’s vision. George worked for the PGA Tour as president of the Champions Tour (seniors) from 2003-08; he helped to increase revenues and sponsorships. George was instrumental in developing strategic plans that included events outside the U.S.

The 2014-15 PGA Tour schedule includes tournaments in China, Malaysia and Mexico.

“If you want to grow your visibility and your brand, going to China and Asia is important for that,” George said. “I do like us getting exposure in that part of the world.”

So does the Pac-12. It’s not out of the question that someday the Alibaba Group could consider including the Pac-12 Network on its list of channels. Corporate sponsors may follow.

“The audience in China includes 650 million households,” George said. “That’s pretty significant.”

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler