Story highlights Timothy Stanley: U.S. politicians becoming regular feature in London

Candidates considering visit to London should take second look at map, he says

Timothy Stanley is a historian and columnist for Britain's Daily Telegraph. He is the author of the new book "Citizen Hollywood: How the Collaboration Between L.A. and D.C. Revolutionized American Politics." The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author.

(CNN) Here in London, you can tell that the U.S. presidential election is only about 600 days away because every restaurant here seems to contain a senator or a governor. Why do they come to Britain? Whatever their motivation, nine times out of 10 they wish they hadn't.

Most recently, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker visited Chatham House -- a gorgeous foreign policy study center in Westminster. There he was asked if he believed in evolution or not. Why, I cannot fathom. Either way, Walker refused to answer , which probably seemed like a clever thing to do in the heat of the moment.

But while an equivocation that might simply sound awkward in America, it sounded off-the-wall crazy in London. Why? Because for us it is like being casually asked "Does two plus two equal four?" and replying, "I'd rather not answer a hypothetical question." One doesn't dodge an invitation to assert fact in the UK. Scott dodged, and because the audience laughed gently at him in English accents, it made him look all the more like a country bumpkin.

Timothy Stanley

American politicians have to stop doing this. Go to Israel instead: there the applause lines are well scripted and all the audience expects to see you do is pray with moist eyes. In contrast, England is somewhere that American political careers go to end. We're too judgmental, too passive aggressive, too weird. Even we don't like ourselves -- so I've no idea why Americans fly here seeking a warm welcome.

Consider how horrible we were to Mitt Romney. Of course, from our point of view he wasn't very nice to us either.