LITTLE ROCK — In her second public appearance in Arkansas since launching her 2016 presidential bid, Hillary Clinton told supporters Monday that Republicans want to undo the progress the country has made in the past several years.

Speaking at Philander Smith College in Little Rock, Clinton said that like her husband, Barack Obama inherited a “mess” when he became president.

“The Republicans want us to have collective amnesia and forget that,” she said. “Our country was losing 800,000 jobs a month.”

Homes were being foreclosed on and businesses were closing as the country sank into the Great Recession, Clinton said. She said Obama got to work as soon as he took office and pulled the country back from the brink of disaster.

“Things work better with a Democrat in the White House,” she said.

Clinton praised the Affordable Care Act and the private option, Arkansas’ alternative to the Medicaid expansion that was envisioned under the federal health-care law. The rate of uninsured Americans has fallen below 10 percent for the first time in 50 years, and Arkansas has cut its rate of uninsured residents nearly in half, she said.

“All the Republican candidates for president are determined to get rid of the Affordable Care Act,” she said. “Republicans in Congress have tried to repeal it 54 times — 54 times! Well, I am not going to let them rip away the progress we’ve made.”

But Clinton said she would work to build on the progress that has been made on health care. She said she would seek to ease burdens on small businesses, ensure that consumers have choices and have a plan to crack down on drug companies that unfairly hike prices.

She said other issues of her campaign will include making college affordable, addressing racial injustice and ensuring that everyone has a chance for success, “not just the ones at the top.”

Clinton previously spoke at the state Democratic’s Party’s Jefferson-Jackson Dinner in North Little Rock in July. She said Monday that every time she returns to Arkansas, where she was first lady for just under 12 years, “memories flood, flood, flood through my head.”

“When I am president, Arkansas will be on my mind every day,” she said.

Doyle Webb, chairman of the state Republican Party, said in a statement Monday, “Hillary Clinton’s visit to Arkansas today further evidences just how out of touch she is with voters. Arkansas has not changed. Hillary Clinton has changed. She may believe that the policies she is peddling will distract voters from the FBI investigation into her secret email server, but she is wrong. The values of Arkansas voters cannot coexist with corruption and scandal, two things that seem to walk hand in hand with Hillary Clinton.”

Fred Brown, spokesman for the Republican National Committee, said in a statement, “Hillary Clinton’s renewed embrace of ObamaCare — with its job-killing mandates, higher premiums, and broken promises — shows just how desperate she is to change the subject from her growing email scandal. But by doubling down on a failed law voters have always opposed, Hillary Clinton is once again reminding them how she’s out of step on the issues.”

A native of Illinois, Clinton taught law at the University of Arkansas before marrying Bill Clinton, who went on to become the 40th and 42nd governor of Arkansas and the 42nd president of the United States. Hillary Clinton served as a U.S. senator from New York from 2001-09.

She ran for the Democratic nomination for president in 2008 and lost to Barack Obama, who went on to defeat Republican Arizona Sen. John McCain to win the presidency. Obama appointed her as U.S. secretary of state in 2009, a post she held until 2013.

Clinton’s appearance in Little Rock came three days after her daughter, Chelsea Clinton, visited the city on a tour to promote her book for young readers, “It’s Your World: Get Informed, Get Inspired & Get Going!”