Week In Review

Senate

The Senate voted 89-8 to pass a spending bill covering transportation, veterans affairs and combating the Zika virus. Contrary to reports that the White House threatened to veto the spending package, the White House threatened a veto only if any “problematic ideological” provisions were added to it through an amendment.

The Senate unanimously passed legislation that would allow victims of the 9/11 terrorist attacks to sue Saudi Arabia. The White House threatened to veto the bipartisan legislation, which will now be taken up in the House.

Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.), under pressure from the The Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, introduced a bill expanding universal background checks.

Senate and House negotiators reached a bipartisan deal on legislation that would update safety standards for dangerous chemicals such as asbestos that have gone unregulated for decades.

House

The House Natural Resources Committee introduced a new bill aimed at giving Puerto Rico the restructuring tools to mitigate its $70 billion debt crisis. The measure, H.R. 5278, contains numerous changes, including clarification on how creditors get paid.

The House passed a $610 billion defense policy bill 277-147, with most House Democrats voting against the measure. The chamber also passed legislation that would appropriate $622 million to fight the Zika virus in a 241-184 vote largely along partisan lines.

Chaos erupted on the House floor when several Republicans flipped their votes from “yay” to “nay” for a pro-LGBT amendment, which was then rejected 212-213. The underlying $81 billion spending bill for military construction and veterans affairs later passed 277-147. The House-passed Zika measure was merged into the spending bill.

The House Freedom Caucus pressured House GOP leaders into allowing forthcoming hearings to impeach Internal Revenue Service Commissioner John Koskinen. Freedom Caucus leaders told Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) that they would force a House vote on the matter unless hearings were scheduled.

Advocacy

The Russian government and its supporters have set their sights on Congress in a push to get rid of the Magnitsky Act, which sanctions dozens of Russian officials and mobsters who were implicated in a $230 million tax fraud cover-up.

The trade group Airlines For America, which represents the nation’s largest airlines, said a 2013 decision by lawmakers on Capitol Hill to divert $12.6 billion in passenger-security fees is contributing to long security lines at airports.

Supreme Court

In an unsigned unanimous opinion, the Supreme Court instructed lower courts to seek a compromise in a case concerning an accommodation for religious groups that don’t want to offer insurance coverage for contraception under the Affordable Care Act. The opinion is the latest sign of the Supreme Court trying to avoid 4-4 rulings.