An Arapahoe County grand jury last week indicted five men associated with the Crips gang in connection with a 2011 shooting that left a Sudanese war refugee dead, according to the sheriff’s office and court papers.

The men were trying to settle a feud with a rival gang when they accidentally shot and killed Youn Malual, 43, outside his apartment complex in an unincorporated part of the county about 3 a.m. December 26, 2011, the papers say.

Malual’s wife found her husband dead, with two gunshot wounds to the head, slumped over in the driver’s seat of his gold Nissan Pathfinder. The refugee was a father of five.

The suspects — Devon Grant-Washington, 22, Brandon Jackson, 28, Urocca Guyton, 27, Amin El-Howeris, 26, and Bruce Roberts, 26 — have been taken into custody.

Investigators determined that Malual, who was found on the 1100 block of South Xenia Street, had returned home from his job as an RTD bus mechanic and parked outside of his apartment building before he was killed.

The suspects drove to the complex hoping to shoot a rival gang member who also lived in the complex, with whom the group allegedly had been involved in several Denver-area shootouts in the months before. When Malual arrived home, one of the suspects mistakenly shot him, according to the indictment.

After realizing their error, at least one of the suspects fired another five times into an apartment in the complex before the group fled, says the indictment.

Malual came to America six years before his death as he fled with his family from war. His neighbors told The Denver Post that his family could be heard wailing from his apartment after they learned their patriarch was dead.

“Mr. Malual and his family have been able to see this first step in a process that may help them get the justice they deserve,” District Attorney George Brauchler said in a statement.

Members of the district attorney’s cold-case unit, as well as sheriff’s investigators, contributed to the roughly three-year investigation and ensuing arrests.

The sheriff’s office and attorney’s office presented the case to a grand jury in June and indictments against the five suspects were returned late last week. All but Roberts, who was charged with first-degree accessory to murder, were charged with first-degree murder.

Roberts is being held in lieu of $50,000 bond while the rest are being held without bail.

The indictment shows investigators interviewed the five men and other witnesses several times over the past few years working to find out what transpired the morning Malual was killed. Using text-message records and cellphone global positioning system pings, officials determined that the men were in the vicinity of the complex the morning of the slaying, according to the indictment.

“It was a very difficult, thorough, lengthy investigation,” said Sheriff Dave Walcher, who was undersheriff at the time of the killing and responded to the homicide scene the morning Malual’s body was found. “Usually with homicides, the victim is known by the suspect or there is some kind of connection. There was no kind of connection between the individuals we arrested and the victim. Wrong place at the wrong time.”

Walcher likened the investigation to “putting the pieces of a puzzle together.” He said he vividly remembers the morning Malual was found.

“It just had one of those feelings that it’s not going to be solved tonight,” he said.

Jesse Paul: 303-954-1733, jpaul@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jesseapaul