It’s not easy running a public hospital in 21st-century Texas, especially a new, more expensive one.

As Parkland Memorial Hospital moves into a twice-as-large campus this week, its leaders are faced with increasing demand for services at a time when growth in revenue remains uncertain. The hospital also must cover the added cost of operating the new facility.

“The issue for us is that we have a lot of pent-up demand with a patient population that is wholly uninsured or on Medicaid,” said Dr. Fred Cerise, Parkland’s chief executive officer. “We may see more people with insurance or Medicare, who chose to stay with us, but our overall payer mix is not going to change dramatically.”

As it moves, Parkland is hiring about 300 new employees, who will be needed to clean the larger building, handle the technology and help the staff adjust to the work flow in a new setting.

“We’ll probably err on the conservative side and get in there and adjust,” Cerise said of future staff. The hospital’s utility costs also are expected to decline, even though it will have twice as many bathrooms and more space to heat and cool.

And there are other ways Parkland faces greater financial strain.

Dallas County’s public hospital must write down the value of its new campus, taking a $40 million depreciation in the first year. The hospital is then required to set aside funds, some in cash, for replacement of those assets, Cerise said. “It’s a new cost for us.”

Dallas County’s public hospital also must rebuild its operating reserves, which stood at $250 million before the new hospital was built. Typically, that money is used to pay bills when other sources of income are low, such as when the annual infusion of Dallas County taxes runs out.

All the hospital’s operating reserve funds, however, were spent on new Parkland. Last January, the board of managers approved the use of unspent designated funds when Parkland’s cash runs low. Such short-term borrowing “works well for Parkland,” as long as the funds are “ultimately replaced and used for their stated purposes,” the board decided.

“Moving forward, we will evaluate on a situation-by-situation basis and look at all our options,” John G. Moore, Parkland’s new chief financial officer, said of the practice of tapping into designated funds to pay bills and draw down federal dollars.

Shrinking pool

As the Affordable Care Act comes into focus, it’s also obvious that Parkland won’t benefit as much financially as was hoped when the federal law passed in 2010. The county hospital took in about $30 million last year from newly insured patients.

While a positive sign, it was a rather small contribution toward Parkland’s nearly $1.4 billion budget for 2015. The county taxpayer’s share was $496 million.

Parkland had expected more of its patients to qualify for Medicaid coverage, until Texas political leaders rejected an expansion of the state-federal program that came with 90 percent federal funding.

Parkland has scrambled to get more supplemental Medicaid dollars, but the pool of money is shrinking and more private hospitals that provide charity care are asking for a share. Parkland was informed it would qualify for about $5 million less of those funds next year.

‘Unmet demand’

“It’s definitely a challenge,” said John Hawkins, the Texas Hospital Association’s senior vice president for government relations.

Parkland is among about 200 public hospitals in Texas that depend on Medicaid as their primary income, he said. Most are in rural areas, where uninsured residents have one option for care.

“Private hospitals get more private health insurance as a cushion,” he said. “We’re hoping these hospitals don’t get in a poor financial situation and start cutting certain community investments. That’s a bigger concern in an urban area.”

About 1.1 million Texas residents were expected to qualify for the expanded Medicaid coverage. That includes thousands of Parkland patients, who are uninsured and living on poverty-level wages.

“A Medicaid expansion would fix a lot for us,” Cerise said. “It would free up resources for us to create more specialty clinics and more primary care access points. With Texas having the highest uninsured rate in the country, we know there’s a lot of unmet demand.”

About 2.5 million Texas residents don’t qualify for coverage under the new federal law. Many are undocumented immigrants, who depend largely on their county-operated health systems. Without it, they must seek care at emergency rooms, public and private, which are prohibited by federal law from turning them away.

“As long as we have a federal law allowing people to present at hospitals and be stabilized, we’re going to have a safety net supported by the government,” Hawkins said.

Funding questions

Beyond these financial challenges, Parkland also could face questions about its growing dependency on local taxpayers. A former Parkland board member wants a public debate over how much Parkland costs and why county residents must automatically foot the bills.

“The big issue is the financial structure of Parkland as a public safety-net hospital,” said Richard Kneipper, a former Parkland board member who co-founded a health care technology services company in Dallas.

“There ought to be a public discussion in Dallas County as to whether it is appropriate for taxpayers to continue to support Parkland’s operating budget to the tune of hundreds of millions of dollars each year,” he said, “when taxpayers around the country no longer provide major funding to their public hospitals.”

Kneipper was known to keep a close eye on Parkland’s spending during his four-year tenure on the board, which ended in 2008. He often questioned the hospital’s spending habits and whether they followed sound business practices.

“You have to question the stewardship of the taxpayers’ dollars, especially when they submit budgets to the Commissioners Court that show a deficit,” Kneipper said of the Parkland budget, which was approved last year with a $34 million shortage.

Hospital officials said they have balanced the current budget, but haven’t specified exactly where the money came from and whether any services were cut.

Parkland spokesman Mike Malaise said the deficit was eliminated “entirely through improving efficiencies, improving collections and accessing programs that help improve patient care while adding funding to the system.”

Going forward, Dallas County taxpayers will likely see a 7.5 percent increase in hospital taxes in 2016, due to rising property values. Although Parkland once lowered its tax rate when the hospital didn’t need the money, it is willing to accept next year’s higher payments because it does need the money.

“It is simply a statement of increasing home values unrelated to Parkland,” Malaise said. “Parkland is not asking for any tax increase.”