Medicaid managed care’s penetration rate might grow by even more in 2016 than in 2015 as additional state programs kick in, industry executives and observers predict. And long-term services and supports will become a key part of numerous additional Medicaid programs this year as states increasingly conclude that LTSS is necessary for meeting care-integration and cost-reduction goals. But the startup processes won’t be all smooth, as recent developments in states such as Iowa (see brief, p. 8) and California show.

There seems to be little doubt about the overall direction despite the obstacles. Medicaid managed care will show “significant continued growth” in 2016, predicts, for instance, Jeff Myers, president and CEO of the Medicaid Health Plans of America (MHPA) trade association. Managed Medicaid’s penetration rate climbed 4% in 2015, and “I wouldn’t be surprised to see 4% or more” this year, he tells MAN.

The growth, however, could take somewhat of a different form in 2016 as states move more toward “carving in” services such as behavioral health and the pharmacy benefit as Iowa is doing in its controversial new Medicaid managed care program (MAN 12/17/15, p. 5). That program was due to start Jan. 1, but CMS on Dec. 17 said “we do not believe Iowa is ready to make this transition” then and that instead it would work with the state toward a March 1 start.

Such bumps in the road notwithstanding, Myers says he expects to see more carve-ins this year since plans believe they work better than carve-outs, including being less fragmented as well as less expensive over time. He points out that Florida, which has been criticized by insurers and others for its “freestanding formulary” that contributed to losses incurred by Medicaid plans in the state’s new Managed Medical Assistance program (MAN 5/7/15, p. 6), is looking into whether to carve this in.

The carve-in trend will continue in 2016, says Bob Atlas, president of the EBG Advisors unit of health care law firm Epstein Becker & Green, P.C. and a longtime Medicaid managed care consulting executive. He points out that one reason the pharmacy benefit had been carved out previously — because Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs) weren’t allowed to receive Medicaid drug rebates — was eliminated in the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

Another big trend for this year is LTSS, which Atlas calls “the last frontier” remaining for Medicare and Medicaid programs. States have a huge stake in improving outcomes and controlling costs for these kinds of expenses not covered elsewhere, and many states are using home- and community-based services (HCBS) waivers in efforts to do so, he notes. But he adds that “there are limits” on how successful those efforts can be “because there’s no incentive for anyone except the state to move patients” into HCBS programs, for which there are only limited numbers of spots anyway.

So states have become eager to launch LTSS programs, and they generally are using MCOs as the medium to “deinstitutionalize patients,” according to Atlas.

He points out that Florida already has an LTSS initiative as do about 10 other states, and numerous others are planning them. “The momentum will continue to grow,” Atlas predicts, but there also will be resistance from long-term care providers, which tend to be “more of a cottage industry,” albeit one with political muscle.

“2016 will be a pivotal year” for LTSS, agrees Myers. He cites New Jersey as a state doing a “marvelous job” on LTSS and notes Virginia is planning to start a program this year. There will be an increase in states operating under so-called Section 1915(c) HCBS waivers in 2016, he predicts.

Such programs are a key item for state budgets, which again will be under extreme strain. How that strain will affect Medicaid MCOs this year will depend on several factors, including the one-year suspension of the insurer fee that Congress agreed to last month in its government-funding legislation. A handful of states have taxes on Medicaid MCOs to help finance their Medicaid programs, and at least one of them — California — is under a federal deadline to end the tax by midyear. Moreover, in 2017 states must begin picking up 5% of the costs of the Medicaid expansion under the ACA.

‘No Meaningful Drop’ in Pay Rates Expected

The effect of all this on payment rates for Medicaid MCOs is uncertain. Myers says he’s eager to see how the final version of Medicaid managed care regulations, which he expects out this spring, address the issue of minimum actuarial value for plan payments. Regardless of what’s in the regs, though, Myers forecasts no “meaningful drop” in per-person payment rates for plans in 2016 and certainly no provisions to derail the growth of Medicaid managed care.

That growth is coming in different ways in different states. In North Carolina and Alabama, for instance, Myers says, the enabling legislation has provisions to encourage provider-led entities (PLEs) to accept capitation for Medicaid managed care. Myers considers the current situation in North Carolina, where 11 large health systems are seeking to form a PLE, as vindication for the concept of capitated managed care. He says it’s great that the providers are doing this, but adds he “wouldn’t be surprised” if they sought to change the ownership or structure of the new entity in the future.

Atlas, who has been a consultant to the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services in the state’s Medicaid MCO legislation that passed last September (MAN 10/1/15, p. 5), notes that the provider groups haven’t yet created any formal legal entity and that the member health systems could elect to start their own plans before the state’s whole Medicaid MCO program goes live.

Regardless of how it happens, industry observers seem unanimous in seeing more growth for Medicaid managed care next year. Atlas tells MAN the gains won’t be as big as in the past couple of years since most of the ACA-related expansions now have occurred.

A record 51.3 million Americans or 70% of Medicaid beneficiaries received their physical health benefits from a private Medicaid plan in 2015, according to a study by the Strategy& unit of PwC released at the MHPA annual meeting last November (see table, p. 6). That’s up by 7.8 million beneficiaries from 2014, when the share in private plans was 66%. And while 56% of the Medicaid MCO population was managed by just 12 companies as the PwC report noted, there still are 194 MCOs furnishing capitated care, Myers says.

Share of Private Managed Medicaid (As % of Overall Medicaid Population)1

Largest Share Smallest Share Hawaii 100% Idaho 1% Tennessee 100% Iowa2 10% Kansas 95% Arkansas 22% Texas 94% North Dakota 24% New Jersey 94% West Virginia 40%

1 As of summer 2015, and only includes states with some form of private managed Medicaid.

2 Iowa recently completed a procurement to move to managed care, beginning January 2016, but its start has been pushed back to March 1 by CMS.

SOURCE: “The Still Expanding State of Medicaid in the United States” report prepared by Ari Gottlieb of Strategy&, part of the PwC network, which was released at Medicaid Health Plans of America’s annual conference in November 2015.

At The AIS Marketplace — AIS’s Medicare and Medicaid Market Data is a valuable resource with information on rates, benefit designs, enrollment, contacts, trends and strategies on the Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D and managed Medicaid programs. Packed with practical data and strategic information, it tracks the enrollment trends, plan design information and market share statistics that are required for an effective strategic planning process. Click here for more information and to order the 2015 edition today!