A trio of health insurers announced that they plan to sell plans under Obamacare in 2017. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Federal and state officials disagree over the status of Community Health Alliance as it winds down its operations, which could impact how it repays its outstanding debts to the federal government and claims to providers.

The federal government decided that CHA, a consumer operated and oriented plan established under the Affordable Care Act, defaulted on a $73.3 million loan because of "the suspension of CHA's license to offer health insurance coverage" on the federally run exchange.

Kevin Counihan, CEO of health insurance marketplaces at the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, wrote in a letter dated Dec. 23 that after "careful consideration and a thorough investigation" the agency declared the loan, including interest, costs and other expenses, "immediately due and payable."

Julie Mix McPeak, commissioner of the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance, replied on Jan. 6 with a request that CMS reconsider the determination of default because the state did not revoke or suspend the company's license nor is the company in receivership.

CHA entered into a voluntary run-off on Oct. 14. Unlike some other co-ops that failed, CHA is not under the control of state officials. It is working with state and federal officials to end operations.

"That was surprise for us. We are asking them to reconsider that position," McPeak told a joint session of the state senate commerce and labor committee and the finance, ways and means committee Tuesday.

McPeak said the CMS request would put the federal government ahead of payments to providers for medical claims.

Jonathan Gold, a spokesman for CMS, said it is premature to speculate whether the agency will recover any funds and that "CMS is committed to using every tool available to recover loan funding." There was no comment on whether the Dec. 26 letter meant the agency would be paid ahead of medical claims.

McPeak said the department had been working with CHA to make sure all claims were paid and using leftover funds to repay the federal government.

Senators were troubled by the exchange and whether it would put Tennessee medical providers and policyholders at financial risk.

Julie Mix McPeak (Photo: Submitted)

Sen. Jack Johnson, R-Franklin and chairman of the senate commerce and labor committee, noted that if the federal government was repaid first then providers could use legal actions to get payment from patients who sought medical care "in good faith" thinking they had coverage.

McPeak said the TDCI would work to make sure providers and policyholders are not at risk, including "utilize receivership proceedings, including liquidation, so that we might trigger a guarantee fund."

She said those measures would be a last resort because the other insurers selling plans on the exchange would have to pay an assessment to set up the fund and they too have been hit with losses from exchange plans.

"We’re going to do everything we can to avoid that situation because right now we have the money in the company to pay the claims,” McPeak said.

CHA faced setbacks from the outset, including a growth spurt from the first to second year on the exchange and changes to risk corridor payments. Its plans for 2014 were among the higher-priced options on the exchange in the first year and it had 2,287 members, with 186 on individual plans at the end of 2014. It had a net loss of $22 million at the end of 2014.

Then, in the second year, it redesigned and repriced its plans, coming in as one of the least-expensive options, and enrolled 35,761 by mid-January. The sudden growth concerned state officials that CHA was frozen from open enrollment.

The insurer is not selling plans for 2016 so policyholders have had to move to other insurers.

McPeak said the decision to freeze enrollment "was with assumption we would have all the funds necessary to pay those claims.”

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RyRAwa