Every time a baby is born at John Muir Medical Center in Walnut Creek, the sounds of Brahms’ Lullaby stream through the halls of the hospital. On a recent spring day, the tune rarely stopped playing as the entire 35-bed mother-and-baby unit in the Long Tower was occupied.

“It was beautiful,” said Nicole McCaughin, John Muir’s interim director of women and children’s services. “We had 35 moms with babies, and that was the first time since we built the Long Tower (in 2011) that every single room was full.”

Hospitals around the Bay Area appear to be sharing in the joy, reporting that the number of births has finally started inching up to prerecession levels. John Muir, Lucile Packard, UC San Francisco, Kaiser Permanente and Contra Costa Regional hospital systems all say they are seeing a rise in births after a slowdown during the economic slump.

But it’s too early to call it a baby boom. The jury is still out on what is leading to the upswing. Some say it could be a confluence of factors: an improving economy, a Bay Area population surge, the addition of more affiliated clinics and doctors’ practices by many major hospital systems and increased medical enrollment because of the Affordable Care Act.

“We are a lot busier than before,” said McCaughin. “Those years of the recession, we were seeing fewer births — and now, it seems we’re pulling out of it with the recovery.”

Most since 2008

Last year, John Muir saw 2,900 deliveries, its highest since the start of the recession in 2008. From 2010 to 2012, births bottomed out to an average of about 2,530 deliveries a year. “So far for this year, the hospital looks like it’ll meet or exceed last year’s births, too,” McCaughin said.

Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford in Palo Alto has seen a similar increase, said Yasser El-Sayed, obstetrician-in-chief and co-director of its Johnson Center for Pregnancy and Newborn Services.

“In the last two years, we have been seeing for the first time this slight uptick of about 100 births each year, when before that we’d been seeing a decline since 2008,” he said. “It’s too strong to say it’s a baby boom. But we’re definitely all seeing a tick up, but whether that’s going to continue to go up, time will tell.”

Births at UCSF Medical Center rose by 7 percent in fiscal year 2013 and 17 percent in 2014, said UCSF hospital spokeswoman Elizabeth Fernandez. During the recession, it saw nominal increases of 4 percent or less, and even dips of 6 percent in fiscal 2012 and 9 percent in 2010.

Advertisement

So what’s leading to the upswing?

Kaiser spokeswoman Deniene Erickson said some of Kaiser’s increases may be due to increased health insurance enrollment with the Affordable Care Act.

“There are theories, but nobody knows for sure … One thing that’s been cited is — and we think it might be — is that in a better economy, people are most likely to add to their families,” McCaughin said.

That was the case with Shabana Azmi Shaik, 25, and her husband, Mahaboob, 32, of El Cerrito, whose 7.5-pound boy, Rehann Ali, was born May 28. They waited three years into marriage before having a baby.

“We had some financial problems — that’s why we didn’t plan for a baby at first,” she said. But after moving from Arizona to California, they found a more favorable fiscal climate, steady income and more robust health coverage through Medi-Cal.

Can’t yet label it trend

During the thick of the recession, the loss of jobs and health insurance made many think twice about signing on to the extra expense of raising a child. The U.S. Department of Agriculture estimated that in 2013 it cost $245,000 to raise a child to age 18.

According to the Pew Research Center, 2007 marked a record high number of births in the United States — 4.3 million. But the Great Recession followed, and U.S. births began to decline, even as the nation’s population continues to grow.

Similarly, in California, 2007 marked a high point since the mid-1990s, with 566,137 births, but since then the number had been dropping every year, until recently. Santa Clara, Contra Costa and Alameda counties are now seeing increases after reporting 8 to 12 percent declines during the recession.

But the upswing needs to be tracked for five to 10 years before it can be labeled a trend, said Allison Thrash, a Santa Clara County spokeswoman.

Fernandez said it’s hard to know precisely what’s behind UCSF’s increase, whether it’s because more women in the Bay Area — or more women in general — are having babies, or if more women are choosing to have their babies at UCSF specifically, or even if the recent rise in births is due to the organization’s opening a medical center in Mission Bay this year.

John Muir officials also wondered if the opening of a new clinic in 2005 in Brentwood and East County, fast-growing areas of Contra Costa County, may be partly feeding the increases. El-Sayed of Lucile Packard agreed that the rise in birthrates remains a bit of a mystery.

“My sense of why they are seeing births going up is similar to why you’re seeing on the road that traffic is up,’’ he said. “More people are moving in because of a better economy. The Bay Area is always a bit anomalous because it has new technology and young folks coming in. And when that environment is going well and the economy is going well, people will have more babies.”

Contact Joyce Tsai at 925-847-2123. Follow her at Twitter.com/joycetsainews.