Pacific Coast Medical Supply soon moves ... a block and a half down Marine Drive.

EDWARD STRATTON — The Daily Astorian Norm Stutznegger owns Pacific Coast Medical Supply, which moves from 12th Street and Marine Drive 1 1/2 blocks west early next month. Traveling with the store will be Stutznegger’s Great Dane and store mascot, Maggie. Buy this photo EDWARD STRATTON — The Daily Astorian Pacific Coast Medical Supply moves into the former Astoria Hemp Works at 1062 Marine Drive early next month. Buy this photo Submitted photos Pacific Coast Medical Supply opened in January 1998 at the corner of 12th Street and Marine Drive. Patricia Heaton, left, was Norm Stutznegger’s first customer. Buy this photo

After 17 years at the corner of 12th Street and Marine Drive, Pacific Coast Medical Supply moves early next month ... 1 1/2 blocks west.

President and CEO Norm Stutznegger, a former paramedic and employee of a larger medical supply company, said he saw a chance to stay downtown and save money with a cheaper lease at 1062 Marine Drive, formerly the Astoria Hemp Works until it moved to Portland in January.

“We have been located in downtown Astoria for years, and I just don’t think we can change that,” said Stutznegger, also a volunteer firefighter. “We partner really well with Columbia Memorial Hospital.

Pacific Coast provides home medical supplies, from an infant needing a nebulizer for asthma to a 93-year-old veteran needing mobility support. The majority of his customers get equipment delivered.

The company, which works mostly through people’s medical insurance, is pulled both by the cost of its medical supplies and by the reimbursements it receives from insurance companies for supplying them to people.

“We’re fixed to what Medicare pays, if we want to be what’s called a ‘participating provider,’” said Stutznegger, who estimates that a third of his customer base is Medicare recipients. Another third comes from Medicaid, which can provide even lower reimbursements, and the remainder comes through private insurance and on-the-spot payment.

Stutznegger says there are both good and bad results for his business from the Affordable Care Act, which allowed millions more Americans access healthcare but has sharply divided the country. More insured people can mean more customers, but Stutznegger said the law has also meant lower reimbursements. As a result, he’s had to stop carrying certain items.

Joint Commission

Pacific Coast Medical Supply recently earned The Joint Commission’s Gold Seal of Approval for accreditation by demonstrating compliance with its national standards for health care quality and safety in home care.

It underwent a rigorous, unannounced, on-site survey Aug. 26 and 27. A team of Joint Commission surveyors evaluated Pacific Coast for compliance with standards of care specific to the needs of patients, including infection prevention and control, leadership and medication management pertaining to oxygen and medical gases.

“With Joint Commission accreditation, we are making a significant investment in quality on a day-to-day basis from the top down,” said Stutznegger. “Joint Commission accreditation provides us a framework to take our organization to the next level and helps create a culture of excellence.”

For more information on Pacific Coast Medical Supply, visit www.pacificcoastmedical.com