LOS ANGELES (AP) - John Lamb was waiting to make his major-league debut for the Cincinnati Reds when he spotted Vin Scully on the video board talking about him and his grandfather.

Scully mentioned in his game preview that Lamb’s grandfather John Ramsey used to be the Dodgers’ public address announcer. Lamb was born six months after his grandfather died in 1990, having spent 26 years behind the mic.

“I was taking it all in and trying to embrace it,” said Lamb, who lost 5-3. “It was definitely a surreal moment. I definitely felt like I was dreaming.”

Adrian Gonzalez spoiled Lamb’s debut by hitting a three-run homer with two outs in the fifth inning that put the Dodgers ahead for good.

Lamb allowed five runs and eight hits in six innings. The 25-year-old left-hander from the Orange County city of Laguna Hills struck out seven and walked two.

“He’s got velocity, movement, deception, he’s got a nice big overhand curveball and a real nice changeup. There’s a lot to work with,” Reds manager Bryan Price said. “I thought he was extremely composed. It was a difficult environment in which to pitch in for a debut back at home.”

Alex Wood (8-7) earned his first victory in three tries with the Dodgers, allowing three runs and five hits in 6 1/3 innings. The left-hander struck out three and walked three while pitching at home for the first time since being acquired from Atlanta.

Kenley Jansen retired the side in the ninth for his 23rd save in 24 chances. He earned his 129th career save, tying Jeff Shaw for second all-time in franchise history.

Joey Votto drove in all three of Cincinnati’s runs, including a two-run homer that left the Reds trailing 5-3 in the sixth. After going 1 for 4 in the series opener Thursday, he was 2 for 4 with a run scored.

Votto’s RBI double in the first provided the Reds’ only lead.

Justin Turner’s sacrifice fly tied the game 1-1 in the bottom of the first. His RBI single with two outs in the fifth put the Dodgers ahead for good, 2-1, in his second game back from a serious skin infection. Gonzalez followed with his homer.

Lamb wore Johnny Cueto’s former No. 47 after the Reds sent Cueto to Kansas City last month for Lamb and two other left-handed prospects. Lamb took fellow rookie Michael Lorenzen’s spot in the rotation after he was optioned to Triple-A Louisville on Thursday.

Lamb was the eighth rookie pitcher to start for the Reds this season, tying the modern club record. Rookies have started 16 straight games since July 28, the longest such streak since the first year of the rookie designation in 1958.

TRAINER’S ROOM

Dodgers: RHP Juan Nicasio went on the 15-day DL retroactive to Monday with a left abdominal strain, and RHP Carlos Frias was transferred to the 60-day DL with right lower back tightness. … RHP Chris Hatcher, who had a left oblique strain, came off the 60-day DL. … C Yasmani Grandal returned after missing a day with a sore left shoulder.

MULITPLE HITS

Votto had his National League-leading 40th multi-hit game while raising his batting average to .400 with nine doubles, six homers and 15 RBI in 27 games since the All-Star break.

UP NEXT

Reds: LHP David Holmberg (1-1, 3.06 ERA) makes his fourth start of the season and his first career appearance against LA. In Monday’s 2-1 loss at San Diego, he only allowed a two-run homer by Justin Upton.

Dodgers: LHP Brett Anderson (6-7, 3.43) leads the majors with a 66.1 ground-ball percentage, inducing 263 grounders this season.