A year after taking over leadership of the Chicago Urban League, Andrea Zopp was asked whether she would ever consider running for public office.

"I don't have a thick enough skin to run for office. You have to be perfect or not care," Zopp told the Tribune in 2011.

More than four years later, Zopp is making her first bid for public office — a Democratic run for U.S. Senate — admitting she's toughened up after a stint on the Chicago Board of Education during tumultuous times.

"I'm not trying to go to Washington to make a career. I'm trying to go to Washington to bring a lifetime of experience on key issues and (having worked) with a broad range of people to get things done," said Zopp, 59. "I know that sounds oh-so naïve, but that's what I've done across my entire career."

Much like her decision to enter politics, her career and her campaign represent a series of contrasts.

Democratic candidates for U.S. Senate take on the Affordable Care Act Find out where the Democratic candidates for U.S. Senate stand on the Affordable Care Act. Feb. 8, 2016. (WGN-TV / Chicago Tribune) Find out where the Democratic candidates for U.S. Senate stand on the Affordable Care Act. Feb. 8, 2016. (WGN-TV / Chicago Tribune) See more videos

Her decades of experience have largely been as an executive, but she is seeking a seat in the legislative branch of government.

She is running against the Democratic establishment candidate — U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth — though Zopp has some high-profile backing from some establishment Democrats, including many in the African-American community.

Zopp's first TV ad features her in a courtroom, focusing on her background as a former Cook County and federal prosecutor at a time when prosecutors aren't exactly popular figures in Chicago.

She served in the corporate board rooms of Sara Lee, Sears Holdings and Exelon, earning an executive salary, but has positioned her campaign as one representing the underserved and impoverished within the African-American community.

And her school board service included voting to close nearly 50 schools, a move that advocates contended would upend already struggling neighborhoods from which she now seeks support.

Zopp responds by using a phrase at the junction of corporate America, public policy and politics — she's striving for "better outcomes" by bringing diversity to the corporate world and student improvement at Chicago Public Schools, and getting elected to help "the communities that I care about and working families trying to climb out of poverty."

William Daley, the brother and son to two Chicago mayors and a former White House Cabinet official and chief of staff, said he was surprised Zopp "called one day and said, 'What do you think of my thinking about running for the Senate?'"

Daley told Zopp it would be a "tough race," given Duckworth's candidacy. "Much to my surprise, (Zopp) said, 'No, I want to do this. It doesn't matter. I know it's a long shot, but I want to do this.'"

Daley acknowledged that he believes from a "political perspective that having someone who could help draw out the African-American vote in the first presidential election without Barack Obama would be important for Democrats," as well as electing an African-American to the seat that Obama once held.

"She's a very smart person and she'd be a great representative and I think she'd be a very strong candidate in the general election," likely against Republican Sen. Mark Kirk, Daley said.

Zopp said going into the Senate campaign, she knew her four-year tenure on the board overseeing Chicago Public Schools carried political baggage.

"To the extent that there is a negative over what people will criticize me about in this race, it's my time on the school board — something I did out of a passion and commitment to young people. I worked for free a lot to try and help improve schools for educational outcomes for the students in the district," Zopp said.

As for the school closure vote, Zopp said she has "never heard anybody say, 'How are the kids doing? What happened to the students?' Or even, 'what happened to the neighborhoods?'

Michael Tercha / Chicago Tribune Andrea Zopp, a candidate for the Democratic nomination for U.S. Senate, appears at the Chicago Tribune editorial board for an endorsement session Feb. 8, 2016. Andrea Zopp, a candidate for the Democratic nomination for U.S. Senate, appears at the Chicago Tribune editorial board for an endorsement session Feb. 8, 2016. (Michael Tercha / Chicago Tribune) (Michael Tercha / Chicago Tribune)

"The question always has been, 'how are the students doing now,' and largely, they're doing better, the new schools are doing better. … You have to look at the whole package and it's a very difficult decision to get to better outcomes for students and a better positioning for the district that's now in a very tough fight."

Zopp also served on the board during the tenure of Barbara Byrd-Bennett, the former district CEO who pleaded guilty to a federal corruption charge stemming from a kickback scheme in which prosecutors said she steered a contract for principal training to her former employer.

"That (Byrd-Bennett) was engaged in a scheme to defraud the district was just not on the radar screen, and there were no flags other than she had worked there. But from my perspective, the fact that she worked there meant that I trusted her judgment," Zopp said.

In hindsight, Zopp said, the district should have put the contract out for bids and required an annual reassessment of the training program.

Though it is her first bid for public office, Zopp is not a stranger to politics. Her father, Reuben Davis, was a prominent lawyer in her hometown of Rochester, N.Y., who went on to run for judge.

"It was horrible. As a Democrat, the Republicans ran a younger, much less qualified guy against him, and it was bad and he lost. But he ran again and ultimately got on the bench. The second time he ran, both parties endorsed him," she said.

Her parents' involvement in social causes instilled the same urge in Zopp from an early age.

"I grew up middle-class," Zopp said. "My parents were deeply engaged in the community — (and countered) the idea that if you're not embedded that somehow you either forgot where you came from or more importantly, you're not committed to help.

"Yes, I worked in corporate America. I got paid as an executive so that I could raise my family, take care of them like we all want to do. But I made a difference in corporate America. I created opportunities for women, minority businesses, I brought a perspective that wasn't there and I still stayed deeply involved in community organizations," she said.

Zopp served on a variety of boards, including the Chicago Area Project and the National Urban League. She also served on the Cook County Health and Hospital Systems board, commissions that reviewed the E2 nightclub fire and Burr Oak cemetery scandal, and the state commission that reviewed the now-ended death penalty process in the state.

But Zopp's corporate career might have come later, or not at all, if it weren't for a political decision. In 1997, she was one of three finalists for U.S. attorney in Chicago — a position never held by an African-American or a woman. The job went to Scott Lassar in a selection that involved then-U.S. Sen. Carol Moseley Braun, an African-American.