A British mother will not breastfeed her daughter because she was born with two front teeth.

A British mother will not breastfeed her daughter because she was born with two front teeth. TheBelvietv YouTube Screenshot: Eva Faith

A British mom’s decision to breastfeed her baby changed once the baby girl was born.

Vicki Griffiths, 26, gave birth to Eva Faith on Sept. 8 with the intent to breastfeed her new daughter, until she noticed a physical abnormality. Eva was born with two fully formed front teeth. Vicki's family, along with the nurses and midwives at the James Cook University Hospital in North Yorkshire, were left dumbfounded by Eva’s two small surprises. Vicki's husband, Steven, was the one who spotted the teeth in his daughter’s lower jaw.

“When I came back into the room Steven said, 'she’s got teeth, you know!' and then we both burst out laughing,” Vicki told the Daily Mail. “We were in shock, and so were the midwives."

“I had been planning to breastfeed, but when I saw Eva’s teeth I was put off. I don’t think anybody could blame me!" Vicki said.

The Griffiths worry that their daughter will start growing more teeth before she is old enough to have Calpol or other children’s medicine for teething pain. The couple was concerned that Eva might have to have her teeth taken out, a procedure usually done in rare cases where babies are born with teeth. If a baby’s teeth is wobbly, they can be a choking hazard for the newborn and therefore are often removed.

A pediatrician examined the little girl’s teeth, who deemed that they were stable enough to not cause any harm to the child. Eva currently sips on bottled milk and keeps her mouth open, according to Griffiths. Newborns with natal teeth usually have one or two teeth in the lower gum.

“At first, it was really mad to look at, but we’ve got used to them now,” Griffiths told the Gazette Live.

Cases of natal teeth occur about three times every two years at James Cook hospital, according to Jonathan Wyllie, a consultant neonatologist at the hospital.

“We deliver 4,000 babies a year. It's every 2,000 to 3,000 births,” said Wyllie, the Daily Mail reports.