By Gretchen Wenner

It’s here.

The budget Oxnard leaders and employees have been dreading — one calling for massive cuts — was released Thursday night, a few days after City Manager Greg Nyhoff’s first anniversary as chief executive.

It proposes $12.8 million in reductions to the general fund, the city’s main checkbook for basic services such as police, fire and parks. General fund spending is projected at $115.2 million in the new fiscal year that starts July 1. (Read the city's 300-page proposed budget here.)

Key items to reach the $12.8 million figure include $4 million in proposed cuts to employee compensation, a roughly 5 percent trim to salaries and benefits that would require negotiations with labor unions; $4.2 million in savings from eliminating vacant positions; and $4 million from departmental cuts that will likely include some layoffs. Department heads will be asked to come up with an additional $620,000 in savings by making operations more efficient.

A $16 million loan from Measure O, the city’s half-cent sales tax, is also needed before July to maintain liquidity, the city says. Without the loan, the general fund would be $3.5 million in the red after covering deficits totaling $16.4 million in other funds, according to the report.

The proposed spending plan reflects findings of consultants Nyhoff brought on last fall to, among other things, sort out the city’s convoluted financial picture. The total budget, at $359.4 million, includes separate funds for utilities and other services.

The reckoning has been grim.

“Our city was headed toward insolvency unless we acted immediately,” Nyhoff wrote in an introductory report released with the budget.

Oxnard’s fiscal troubles have hit as many cities are recovering from the Great Recession. Its problems stem from “inappropriate and undisciplined practices” that hid troubles brewing in the city’s checkbook, the report says, including instances where the city was not complying with state laws.

Thursday’s proposed spending plan is a vastly different budget document than Oxnard has produced in the past. It provides far greater detail and includes balances and five-year forecasts for all funds.

“Past budgets obscured the fact that many funds had deficit balances,” Nyhoff wrote.

Since early this year, Nyhoff has made clear cuts were coming. But scenarios have changed as more and more problems were uncovered. In recent weeks, public discussion has focused on the need to trim $10.8 million from the general fund. Thursday’s documents put the overall number $2 million higher. On a practical level, however, reductions would total $8.6 million after savings from slashing vacant positions are factored in.

The budget proposal will be discussed by the City Council on Tuesday night, though no decisions will be made.

A formal hearing is scheduled for June 16, with adoption slated for June 23. Additional workshops could be held next week if the council wishes.

Initial reaction has been harsh from unions for the police and fire departments, which together make up 64 percent of general fund spending.

The Oxnard Firefighters Association released a statement Thursday night saying if the proposed cuts are enacted, “businesses and citizens of Oxnard should be prepared to wait for an extraordinary amount of time for emergency services to arrive.” The group says Oxnard’s fire department already suffers from low staffing and funding. Its statement says the consulting firm Nyhoff hired is using legal and analysis teams that are “anti-employee.”

On Wednesday night, the Oxnard Peace Officers Association detailed proposed Police Department cuts on its Facebook page, adding: “Spending more money for the animal shelter while we decrease funds to solve murders, investigate crimes and decrease police services is crazy!” The comment referred to the City Council’s approval this week of up to $1.7 million for county animal shelter services, an item with a significantly higher price tag in the new fiscal year because the county raised prices.

Both unions are asking supporters to contact council members.

Oxnard’s shortfall stems from numerous problem areas.

More than two dozen funds for assessment districts and development fees had negative balances — which in some cases were improperly masked by excesses in others funds — amounting to more than $8 million. Rising pension costs in general are a factor, as is a $1 million budgeting error for a supplemental retirement plan. Some $5.5 million for public safety pensions must now come from the general fund. That’s because Oxnard’s past practice of paying all public safety pension costs from a special property tax wasn’t consistent with state law, the city says. Deficits in the golf course and performing arts center funds total millions, while various budgeting errors and subsidies also contributed.