Bloomberg News

Comcast is going to pay you $20 if its technicians are even just one minute late to your home for a service call.

At the National Cable & Telecommunications Association annual show in Chicago, Comcast Cable President Neil Smit said that starting in the third quarter, if a company technician shows up a minute late to a service appointment, $20 will be automatically deposited into the customer’s account. The company said it has set a goal that by the third quarter, its technicians will no longer show up late to customers’ homes.

Comcast has worked hard to transform its low-rated customer experience after some embarrassing episodes of poor customer interactions went viral around the Internet in recent months. Last year, the company tapped a product executive, Charlie Herrin, to spearhead a move to “productize” the customer experience.

“It is unacceptable some of the individual instances that have been well-documented,” Comcast Chief Executive Brian Roberts said. “It was a rallying cry inside the company.”

Comcast said it has budgeted more than $300 million for its new customer-service efforts, which come on the heels of the collapse of the company’s plans to buy Time Warner Cable Inc. for $45 billion.

Among Comcast’s new initiatives: allowing customers to follow technicians on an Uber-like app that will show them where en route their technician is. The app also allows customers to rate each technician’s service call. The company said the app will be rolled out in all of its service areas by the end of the year. It also is releasing an app that will remotely diagnose problems with your set-top box.

Mr. Smit said Comcast is going to hire hundreds of new technicians and 5,500 new customer representatives to staff new call centers over the next couple of years.

“We need to win back their loyalty,” Mr. Smit said. “Perceptions are lasting and we have to take every opportunity and every point of contact with the customer to get it right.”

The company showcased its latest technology at a new retail store in Chicago that evokes the feel of an Apple store or Google Fiber space—with large screens and gadgets for people to test.

Comcast executives said they are transforming about 100 of their 500 retail stores into such studio spaces that will hold community events and allow customers to come and try out Comcast products.

Comcast has previously talked about how it wants to better its customer experience. On the company’s earnings call with analysts on Monday, Mr. Roberts said the company was moving on from its failed deal with Time Warner Cable and focusing on operating and growing its core business, including transforming customer service.

Mr. Roberts indicated that customers’ expectations are rising thanks to the Web-like efficiency of apps like Uber, and that’s pushing Comcast to hasten its pace.

“Part of this is the world is giving us the chance to accelerate because of the technology,” he said.