3 years ago

(CNN) – Ann Romney said she and her husband, 2012 GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney, had their shot at the White House and it's now time for others to take on the challenge–but didn't totally rule out another run for office.

"We had our turn, we gave it our all," she said in an interview that aired Monday on CNN's "New Day." "Now I feel like it's time to pass the baton on to someone else…I'm looking at my children and I'm thinking they've got to step up. Other generations have to now step up and take over."



Follow @politicalticker Follow @KilloughCNN

"So we'll see, you know you never rule out everything," she added. "But really I don't believe we'll have that opportunity again."

Asked who she'd like to see run in 2016, Ann Romney mentioned Mitt Romney's 2012 running mate, Rep. Paul Ryan, as well as New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush as some of many "qualified, capable people."

One year after the election loss, the Romneys have recently been promoting Ann's new book, "The Romney Family Table," a book that shares recipes and memoirs.

While Ann Romney seems ready to move on from election politics, she still said she'd rather be in the White House with her husband right now rather than back in private life. Mitt, she argued, would be better at handling the economy and the Obamacare rollout debacle.

"I really just would like to be there, I would like to see Mitt there. There are so many things that I would like to have seen been addressed right now," she told CNN's Kate Bolduan.

Romney on Obamacare promise: ‘It was not honest’

On a more light-hearted note, Romney's book includes a recipe for pancakes–the same dish she made for the couple's Secret Service details the morning after Romney lost the election.

"It's a comfort food, and we needed comfort," she said. "My detail had become enormously close friends of ours and we loved them and it was sad moment...So for me, it was just like what do I do? I got to get in the kitchen and cook."