Members of Congress unanimously rallied around the suicide prevention bill President Barack Obama signed in February, but now veterans advocates say the legislation didn't go far enough in guaranteeing access to mental health care providers.

Finding enough behavioral health care workers has been a struggle for the Department of Veteran's Affairs, but also for the rest of the country as health care coverage continues to expand under Obama's signature health care law, the Affordable Care Act. With millions more people covered by health insurance, there has been an increased demand for mental health care, and the country faces a severe shortage: Half of U.S. counties don't have mental health professionals, according to the National Institute of Mental Health.

Experts explored some of these gaps in a sparsely attended briefing Tuesday on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C., hosted by the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention.

[MORE: Coming Out as a Suicide Survivor]

"We’ve been a nation of war for such a long time," Sen. Joe Donnelly, D-Ind., said at the briefing. "Members from [our military] come back and there’s such a disconnect … They see things and deal with things that completely change their lives."

Donnelly this year has introduced three bipartisan bills – which he calls the "care package" – to expand on recently passed legislation. The bills would track data on programs, require the Department of Defense and the VA to provide training on suicide risk recognition and how to intervene, and recruit physician assistants, among other provisions.

The Clay Hunt Suicide Prevention for American Veterans Act, which Obama signed in law in February, is named after a Marine Corps veteran who killed himself in 2011 as he struggled with post-traumatic stress disorder after deployments to Iraq and in Afghanistan.

The bill requires independent reviews of the VA and the Department of Defense programs aimed at preventing suicide, creates peer support and community outreach pilot programs, and forms a program to repay loan debt for psychiatry students to incentivize them to work in the VA health system. It also creates a website to provide veterans with information about mental health services and allows the VA to collaborate with nonprofit mental health organizations on suicide prevention.

[RELATED: How Schools Cope After a Tragedy Like Suicide]

"Let's build on the success of Clay Hunt," Bill Rausch, political director at Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America, said at the briefing. He said Americans don't talk about mental health and suicide. "The idea of getting a checkup for mental health is foreign in this country," he said.

People who work in the military are more likely to die by suicide than in combat, comprising 22.2 percent of all suicides in the U.S., according to data from the Department of Defense and the VA. Many also face unemployment, social isolation, homelessness or addiction as they struggle to cope with what they experienced as soldiers and the difficulty of adjusting to life back at home. Often, such problems are connected to PTSD, a mental disorder that can occur following a traumatic event like war or sexual assault. It can include painful flashbacks, nightmares, outbursts, thoughts of suicide and feelings of worry, guilt or sadness.

[READ: New Strategies Aim to More Safely Treat Depression in Young Patients]

Yochi Dreazen, author of "The Invisible Front: Love and Loss in an Endless Era of War," said at the briefing that suicides don't stop after war stops, as PTSD can persist for decades. Service members also can become depressed if they suddenly stop taking prescription painkillers or sleep aids, which can bring about suicidal thoughts.

Members are reluctant to seek help because they are afraid they will be perceived as not wanting to serve anymore, Dreazen said.

Clay Hunt's passage followed other government actions to address the issue of suicide among military members. In 2011, the Obama administration reversed a longstanding policy to deny presidential condolence letters to families of soldiers who killed themselves. And last August, Obama announced a series of executive actions aimed at improving access to mental health services for service members, veterans and their families. The Jacob Sexton Military Suicide Prevention Act, also introduced by Donnelly and signed by Obama in December, requires a yearly mental health assessment for all service members.

American Foundation for Suicide Prevention aims to reduce suicide by 20 percent by 2025, but a report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shows suicide rates are on the rise. More than 40,000 Americans kill themselves every year, making it the 10th leading cause of death in the U.S. and the second-leading cause of death among people ages 10 to 24. Dreazen said at the briefing that beginning in 2009, during the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the military suicide rate began rising.