Jeb Bush, a converted Catholic, said at a town hall meeting on Tuesday that while Pope Francis is a “most extraordinary leader,” he would be better off staying out of the debate over climate change.

Making the first stop on his announcement tour after becoming an official presidential candidate in Miami on Monday, Bush first praised the pope to about 300 Granite Staters at the Adams Memorial Opera House.

“He speaks with such clarity, speaks so differently,” Bush said. “He’s drawing people back in the faith, which as a converted Catholic now of 25 years, I think is really cool.”

But Bush, asked to react to the pope’s encyclical that reportedly criticizes those who deny that climate change is caused by human activity, said he hopes he does not “get castigated for saying this by my priest back home, but I don’t get economic policy from my bishop or my cardinal or my pope.”

He said that religion “ought to be more about making us better as people and less about things that get in the political realm.”

Bush, however, acknowledged that climate change exists “whether men are doing it or not,” and needs to be addressed in a nonpartisan and, preferably, non-political way.

Bush spoke and answered questions for about an hour after being introduced by state Sen. Russell Prescott, who topped a list of early supporters for the former Florida governor on the first full day of his official campaign. Prescott said Bush has “the character, resolve and inner strength to take on this tough challenge.”

He touted what he considers his conservative credentials, but also tried to show a passionate side and a willingness to reach out to Democrats.

Answering a question on how to address the financial issues faced by the Social Security and Medicare systems, Bush said his brother, former President George W. Bush, tried to address it and “got totally wiped out. Both Republicans and Democrats were against it. The next president is going to have to try again.”

“In the environment we have today where the political partisanship is just so poisonous, we have to re-weave a web of civility,” Bush said.

“I have deep disagreements with liberal Democrats and their policies, but I don’t’ assume that they have bad motives. That kind of puts me like in a different place, apparently, in the political world today. I don’t’ assume bad motives of people. I just disagree with them.”

Bush was asked why Republicans are so often accused of providing tax breaks for the wealthy.

“I do think that our tax code is rife with exemptions that wealthier people take more advantage of,” Bush said. “But many of those tax revisions have been authored and supported by Democrats, not necessarily Republicans.”

He called for a simpler tax code, and “not have the government be the arbiter of what line you get into to get your benefit. The best way to sustain growth is for the government to take a step back, to simplify the tax code.”

He said he is working on an “intellectually honest” tax code revision proposal “that will be part of a high growth strategy.”

“It will lower rates, eliminate as many exemptions as possible,” he said. “We haven’t had reform in our tax code since 1986. It created big time economic growth, and it helped us balance the budget.”

Bush said Republicans should not shy away from a pro-growth philosophy based on cutting government spending, and he insisted such an approach can win over voters who have not in the past supported GOP candidates.

The crowd that attended his announcement in Miami, was “a different kind of crowd,” he said, “but it was reflective of the diversity of the state (Florida), because they know that I care because I was a governor who cared.”

“The progressive agenda may sound good, and it’s alluring, but now we see what it looks like, and it’s ugly,” Bush said. He called for a “different approach and then go campaign in places where Republicans haven’t been seen for a while.”

Bush opposed a suggestion that tax credits be given for campaign contributions. He said the U.S. Supreme Court decision in the Citizens United case made it difficult to replace the current system. He called instead for the ability for candidates to receive unlimited contributions as long as there is “total transparency.”

He said it is unlikely a constitutional amendment to overturn Citizens United will be passed.



Fiscal restraint can be brought to Washington, he said, in the same way that he brought “eight years of consistent belief in limiting government and personal responsibility” to Florida from 1999 to 2007.

He said the U.S. economy can, and should, grow at the rate of 4 percent a year, which, he said, would result in “high wage jobs for people who have not gotten a raise in a long, long while. We would lift people out of poverty, and we would no longer be as pessimistic as a nation as we are today.”

He said he created a “high growth strategy” as governor, creating 1.3 million jobs in eight years.

“Who is going to be the president who will make it possible to grow at 4 percent a year over the next decade?” Bush asked. “I believe I have the skills from experience, from trial and error, from taking incoming along the way, from being a governor that had to balance budgets eight years in a row, who had to make people upset once in a while and make a decision and not hide behind the collectiveness of the legislative body.

“I didn’t file an amendment and call that success,” Bush said, in a veiled reference to the lawmakers who are also running for the GOP presidential nomination. “I actually did things as governor.”

“Now it’s time to stop talking about things,” he said. “We have a lot of people who are really good at talking. Much better than me. It’s time for someone to be president to fix a few big things so that this nation takes off.”

Bush called for more choices for veterans, “so you could go, whether you have a clinic or a hospital in your vicinity, to take advantage of it.

He also called for a changes in the secondary and higher education to better match graduates to existing job opportunities.

“We ought to have more choices in high school as well,” he said. “There is nothing wrong with someone getting a college degree that will make them more college-ready or career ready. The skills they require are both the same.”

Bush called for the repeal and replacement of the Affordable Care Act with a program that does not include employer or employee mandates. He called the ACA “the number one thing that suppresses job growth and take home pay.”

Bush hugged a special needs woman in the audience, saying that in Florida, “We took one of the worst programs for the developmentally disabled and made it one of the best.”

Caring for the disabled and the needy “is not a value we should shy away from as Republicans.”

Overseas, he said, the U.S. needs a clear strategy to defeat Islamic terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State group (ISIS).

“This president has said two times in the past year that we don’t have a strategy,” said Bush. “Really?”

He said the approach should be, “Create a strategy, and, second, be all in.”

“It’s going to take a while, but take them out,” he said.

Reacting to Bush’s announcement and appearance in the Granite State, New Hampshire Democratic Party spokesman Raymond Buckley said, “Jeb Bush is back in New Hampshire trying to convince us he has something new to say. He doesn’t. Over the past month we’ve seen him try to figure out what his position is on Iraq, changing his mind seemingly every day. We’ve seen him defend his book that supports shaming single mothers. We’ve seen him try out the same failed policies of the past, and it’s clear that’s where Jeb Bush is stuck. Jeb Bush isn’t interested in leveling the playing field for Granite Staters. He’s out to do what he’s done his whole career, put himself and people like him over everyday Granite Staters.”

After the event, Bush headed to Iowa and then will go to the other early voting states, South Carolina and Nevada. New Hampshire is viewed as key to chances of winning the GOP presidential nomination because Granite State Republicans have often favored candidates viewed as appealing to the party establishment.