Transforming weeds, kitchen scraps and other natural elements into a rainbow of textile dyes is a concept as old as civilization itself, with dye vats dating to as early as 2000 BC.

Now, these homemade pigments — some long abandoned in favor of more startling chemical dyes — are being rediscovered in kitchens and studios around the world.

“There’s been a huge rise in interest over the last two or three years,” said Sasha Duerr, author of “The Handbook of Natural Plant Dyes” (Timber Press, 2011), who teaches natural dye techniques and has founded the Permacouture Institute, which promotes sustainable textiles. “There’s a lot we have to revisit and learn.”

In Colorado fiber-arts circles, small and independent dyers who sell their wares are thriving concerns, and fiber guilds, such as the Rocky Mountain Weaver’s Guild (rmweaversguild.org), the Handweavers Guild of Boulder (handweaversofboulder.org) and the Northern Colorado Weaver’s Guild (fortnet.org/NCWG) offer information on the craft.

The Rocky Mountain guild is even working on creating a dye-plant garden at the Denver Botanic Gardens at Chatfield.

At a time when focus is returning to locally produced goods, these sustainable natural colors reflect their surroundings. The soft, welcoming blues of painted shutters in the south of France are made from indigo. The golds of Provence are from ochre. And from the American Southwest, those dazzling reds and fuchsias are made from cochineal, a parasite that lives on cactus.

“I try to stay open and think of colors when I look around me. I collect lots of different things, like Osage orange, pecans and walnuts, onions and pomegranates,” said Maura Ambrose, who makes hand-stitched quilts of naturally dyed fabrics in her Folk Fibers studio in Austin, Texas.

Onion skins (yellows), walnut hulls (browns), avocado peels and pits (pale pink), marigolds (yellows), sumac leaves (brown), mushrooms and lichens (with their rainbow of possibilities), cochineal (fuchsias and reds) and madder root (oranges and reds) are traditional favorites. Coffee grounds and old tea bags also are great for shades of tan and brown. Nettle yields greenish tints.

Even succulent plants can be used to make dyes, said Duerr, who recommended aloe for pinks and yellows and jade plants for purples and black. Wild fennel, abundant in northern California, yields fluorescent yellows “so bright they hurt your eyes” if harvested while in bloom.

Like cooking, the results depend as much on the chef as on the recipe, Duerr said. “The beauty of it is that you can take something from the back of your closet and give it new life using just the waste from your dinner.”

Any plants containing sufficient tannins can be used to achieve colorfast fabrics without additives, known as mordants. But there are also natural mordants, such as rhubarb, sumac, pomegranate rinds, lemon juice or vinegar.

With a mordant, sumac fruit yields red pigment and indigo yields its classic shades of blue. Cream of tartar can be used to brighten colors, and salt to intensify them.

To be safe, designate a pot specifically for dyeing projects, and use gloves to protect your skin. If you’re dyeing in the kitchen, work in the sink and avoid surfaces used for preparing foods. Although natural-dyeing books from the ’60s, ’70s and ’80s are plentiful, experts warn that books from that period often recommend using toxic substances like chrome, copper or even lead as mordants.

“You just don’t want to be inhaling that kind of thing,” said Duerr.

Wrapping the natural materials in muslin or putting them in some old pantyhose makes projects neater and easier.