Spending money

In response to Charles R. Faraci (letters, Nov. 5), I find it strange you focused on what our first lady proposed to spend and nothing on how many of our tax dollars have been spent on vote after vote to repeal Obamacare.

Or how much has been spent on investigation after investigation on Benghazi. How much of our money has been wasted on an e-mail investigation that the people pushing it said it was totally political?

But I forgot: You just want your country back from those black people in the White House. Well I hope you get everything thing you deserve in Donald. Carson, Rubio and Cruz are a little to dark for your taste.

Wesley Henson, Longview

Cable quality

A few months ago I personally visited with the cable provider's engineer to express my complaint about the quality of the transmission (it's called tiling and shows digital blocks across the screen, disrupts sound with picture sink and the sound pops or crackles).

Two technicians came to my home, replaced the cable from the utility pole, inside the house to the TV. They stood there watching the same poor quality reception as before, monitoring it on the signal channel on the TV. All of this while talking to the engineer at the office who said he was not seeing any poor quality.

We purchased a new LCD HD television and guess what? We still have poor quality transmission. The ABC Channel from Shreveport, History and Discovery channels are the worst, but also include the movie channels. What is the problem?

Sure is a shame to pay the top tier price plus HBO and Stars movie and get such poor quality service. It seems that all our calls and letters falling on deaf ears and we are only singing to the choir.

Dean McDowell, Longview

On abortion

Abortion is a controversial topic and we need a solution. I believe that everyone has the right to life, despite if the human fetus has not been fully developed because the fetus is still a life, a person.

There was a lot of concern when the court rejected the idea of revising the laws against abortion. I believe this not only has to do with religion, but equality.

A lot of research shows that women who are victims of rape are more likely to have an abortion. There are many of you who can choose to not have an abortion. The fetuses who are induced are sometimes used for science or probably disposed as trash.

That's a human life that has been thrown away like an apple core. A human's life shouldn't be treated that way. We are not things. We are human beings. It should be illegal to be able to have an abortion, unless a woman's life is in danger.

Abortion should be ended because the life that grows in the womb deserves to have a future like each of us has today. Everyone deserves to live.

Isis Martinez, Henderson