Zen99 has raised nearly $2.5 million in seed funding. The investors included Upside Partnership, Collaborative Fund, Y Combinator, SV Angel and CrunchFund. Based in San Francisco, Zen99 is a provider of tax and insurance tools for independent workers.

PRESS RELEASE

SAN FRANCISCO, CA–(Marketwired – Nov 6, 2014) – Zen99, a provider of tax and insurance tools for independent workers, announced today that it now offers affordable health insurance plans in 47 states through its partnership with GetInsured, the nation’s easiest way to shop for health insurance. In addition, the company has secured nearly $2.5 million in seed funding to expand its core team and create additional products to support the rapidly growing US freelance workforce. Investors include Upside Partnership, Collaborative Fund, Y Combinator, SV Angel, CrunchFund and others.

“Opportunities abound for those exploring alternatives to the standard 9-to-5 job; from ride sharing to microgigs to traditional contract service work, we’re finding that people are increasingly drawn to the freedom, flexibility and self-reliance of the freelance lifestyle. But with contract work comes more paperwork, and no HR department to help you sort through the logistical and legal requirements that come with it,” said Tristan Zier, CEO and co-founder of Zen99. “Zen99’s tools remove that burden by streamlining tax and now insurance forms, 1099 expenses and more to ensure contractors don’t miss out on tax savings and remain compliant with the Affordable Care Act.”

By partnering with GetInsured, freelance workers across the country — a segment expected to reach more than 40 percent of the workforce by 2020 — can now search for and enroll in affordable health insurance plans for themselves and their families. Through Zen99, contractors can track earnings, expenses and mileage, find simplified insurance options and estimate their eligibility for tax credits that can substantially reduce the cost of health insurance, all in one place.

“The Affordable Care Act has made health insurance affordable and extremely beneficial for independent workers, but for many health insurance is still one of the most confusing topics they face,” said Chini Krishnan, GetInsured co-founder and CEO. “Through our partnership with Zen99, the process is made simple — so people can find the right health insurance plan for their needs and budget while ensuring they comply with federal laws.”

Zen99 provides educational support though Zen99 University, informative content on issues faced by independent workers, such as “The Ultimate Guide to Ridesharing,” a free resource about tax and insurance basics to consider when working for a ridesharing platform, and — just in time for open enrollment-season — “What Independent Contractors Should Know About Health Insurance.”

Independent contractors can sign up for Zen99’s free tax and insurance tools, learn more about their health insurance options and purchase a policy by visiting www.tryzen99.com.

About Zen99

Zen99 provides free tax and insurance tools that make it simple for America’s rapidly growing independent workforce to streamline tax and insurance forms, 1099 expenses and more to ensure they don’t miss out on tax savings. Zen99 now offers affordable health insurance plans to qualified contractors and their families nationwide, and provides a way to manage all types of tax credits, which can substantially reduce monthly insurance premiums. Zen99 offers educational support and informative content for the freelance workforce through Zen99 University. Based in San Francisco, California, Zen99 is backed by Y Combinator, SV Angel, CrunchFund, Upside Partnership and Collaborative Fund among others. For more information, visit www.tryzen99.com.