WASHINGTON — In the orbit of Washington think tanks, the Competitive Enterprise Institute is an obscure name with a modest budget that belies its political connections to conservative titans like the Koch brothers.

But the institute, a libertarian research group, enjoyed a coming-out of sorts on Wednesday, as the lawsuit that it organized and bankrolled — challenging the Affordable Care Act — was heard by the Supreme Court. The case has the potential to end federal insurance subsidies for some 7.5 million people in 34 states.

Until now, the 31-year-old think tank was probably best known as a strident critic of what it calls “global warming alarmism.” It has also been a ceaseless advocate for small government and free markets and has played what the conservative entrepreneur Steve Forbes called “a critical role in preventing the worst of the left’s utopian nightmares from becoming reality.”

But beyond its research reports and policy papers, the Competitive Enterprise Institute has a litigious side, and it has teamed up with state attorneys general to challenge an array of Obama administration regulations on financial, air-quality and other issues.

The Competitive Enterprise Institute sees itself not as a think tank, but as a “do tank,” committed to changing federal policies rather than just analyzing them, said William Yeatman, a senior fellow at the group.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Challenging the law known as Obamacare seemed like a “natural fit,” the institute declared on its website, because the measure “threatens the rule of law” and has harmed “million of Americans” through lost health plans and higher premiums.

Supporters of the health care law dismiss the group’s claims as overwrought and unsubstantiated. But the institute has now made it to the Supreme Court by seizing on four words in the law — regarding tax credits for an insurance marketplace “created by the state” — and using them to challenge the very underpinnings of President Obama’s signature health care achievement. The group worked to organize legal challenges, found four Virginia residents to serve as plaintiffs, and financed the litigation through the courts.

“While the case involves only a handful of plaintiffs, it is really about the millions of Americans who are victims of Obamacare’s mandates and penalties,” Sam Kazman, the group’s general counsel and a staunch opponent of government regulation, wrote in an op-ed article this week in USA Today.

The institute declined to say how much it is spending to bring the case to court, but it said the money is coming from its general budget, not from a single source. Its positions are “developed independently and are not influenced by the views of donors,” the group said.

Those donors include the much-better-known foundations created by the conservative billionaires Charles G. and David H. Koch, as well as other conservative groups like Dunn’s Foundation for the Advancement of Right Thinking in Florida and the Sarah Scaife Foundation in Pittsburgh, according to tax records and other reports.

The donors also include the foundations of Exxon Mobil, General Motors, Verizon and many other major corporations. The group received a total of $5.4 million in grants and contributions in 2013, according to its most recent publicly disclosed audit.

At a conservative gathering in Washington in 2010, Michael S. Greve, who was then the think tank’s chairman and remains on the board, uttered an attack on the health care law so vitriolic that it has now become almost legend among the measure’s opponents.

“This bastard has to be killed as a matter of political hygiene,” Mr. Greve declared. “I do not care how this is done, whether it’s dismembered, whether we drive a stake through its heart, whether we tar and feather it and drive it out of town, whether we strangle it.”

On Wednesday, his group had its chance.

“This is one of those things that is truly darned good about this country: You can have a big brawl where people really disagree vehemently, but at the end of the day you have nine lawyers who are really damned good lawyers and will sort all this out for the country,” Mr. Greve, a law professor at George Mason University, said in a telephone interview.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For his group, however, Mr. Greve sees the case as a bit of a “mixed blessing.”

“Obviously, this is a huge thing for C.E.I., and it sort of helps with name identification and donors and all the rest of it,” he said. “But it also has the effect that the entire institution becomes in the public mind identified with this one big case, and that’s something you need to fight a little.”