Protecting the health and well-being of students who come to the University of Colorado at Boulder is one of the most important priorities for our student government. We recently joined a growing list of university student bodies from around the country that are urging federal and state leaders to require vaccination for a deadly strain of meningitis.

At a number of campuses, there have been outbreaks of meningitis B, for which two vaccines are now available. Regrettably, these outbreaks have sometimes resulted in deaths. Across the country — from Princeton and Drexel to the University of Oregon and San Diego State, students have been vaccinated only after an outbreak hits. At that point, it may be too late for some. We think it is time to have the meningitis B vaccine added to the current — and very effective — recommendation that students be vaccinated for common strains of meningitis.

As a student of neuroscience and molecular, cellular and developmental biology, I understand the science and the risks of meningitis for myself and my peers. While the general public only hears about the disease when an outbreak is covered in the media, we on college campuses are made aware of it before we even enroll, and are frequently reminded of ways to prevent the disease. The flu-like symptoms of meningitis might be viewed as just another minor illness, but meningitis is a deadly disease that can result in serious complications, such as the loss of limbs, permanent neurological damage, or death.

As a student living in a residence hall, I also appreciate how such a disease can be easily spread among young people who are living in close proximity. In fact, one-fifth of all meningitis infections occur in young adults between the ages of 14 and 24. Vaccines work, and that is why we believe it is an essential next step to add this vaccine to the recommendations.

The federal Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) will be meeting soon to consider the issue of meningitis B. ACIP is made up of medical and public health experts who provide nationwide recommendations on vaccines and immunizations. States, universities and public health leaders look to ACIP’s recommendations when making policy. We, like students on other campuses, are urging ACIP to expand the recommendation for meningitis B to require the vaccine for incoming freshmen, rather than only after an outbreak has occurred.

Despite the growing number of outbreaks and deaths across the nation and the indisputable evidence about the effectiveness of meningitis vaccines, some ideologically driven individuals are spreading fear and ignoring the facts.

It was sad to see Robert F. Kennedy Jr., a member of one of the nation’s most historic families, put the lives of college students at risk by working to prevent access to these needed vaccines.

Both the state of Colorado and CU have effective policies regarding meningitis vaccines. Unfortunately, the currently recommended meningitis vaccines do not cover the B strain that has been hitting college campuses. And that is why these new vaccines are so critical.

This issue is impacting our age group more than any other in the country, and it is our hope that by speaking out, students’ voices will be heard and acted on. As students, we take our health and well-being seriously, and we appreciate what these vaccines can do to help protect us now and in the future.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.