Health Signing Up For Obamacare Is Supposed To Be A Lot Easier This Year CREDIT: AP Photo/Jon Elswick, File

At this time last year, amid the first open enrollment period for Obamacare’s new health insurance marketplaces, HealthCare.gov was a disaster. The website that was supposed to make it easy for Americans to enroll in new plans was plagued by glitches, and the Obama administration admitted that it wasn’t thoroughly tested in time for the roll-out.

Next month, however, federal officials are hoping things will be very different. The White House says that HealthCare.gov is now faster and easier to use. They’ve spent more than five weeks testing the site, including searching for potential weaknesses in the website’s security, and they’re expressing hope that it will offer an “easier and more satisfying consumer experience” this year.

The next enrollment period for the health insurance marketplaces kicks off on November 15, and people using the federal site will be able to start browsing plans a month from today. Millions of people are expected to enroll in plans for the first time, while about five million Americans are projected to use HealthCare.gov to make changes to the Obamacare policies they currently have.

Federal officials have significantly streamlined the process for many of those people. About 70 percent of the new customers will only have to complete a 16-page application, compared to the application from last year that involved as many as 76 steps. There’s also a new mobile function that will allow people to enroll on their smart phones. Officials predict it will take about half the time to sign up for a plan.

“Consumers want a faster experience,” Andy Slavitt, the principal deputy administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which is responsible for the Obamacare website, told reporters on Wednesday. “They want a more intuitive experience, not to input the same information over and over. And they want mobile.”

Slavitt didn’t rule out the possibility that HealthCare.gov will run into some technological difficulties once millions of people are trying to use the site. But he expressed confidence that his team is more prepared to address them, and he said the website can now handle “significantly more” concurrent users than it could during the last enrollment period.

“We’re in a very different spot than we were last year, when we were building from whole cloth. Now we’ve got a body of knowledge that we’re continuing to build and learn against,” Slavitt said at Wednesday’s press briefing.

To help revamp HealthCare.gov, the government hired a “second wave of programmers” from Silicon Valley startups and tech giants like Google. Many of the top leadership roles have changed, too; Slavitt, for instance, was brought in after HealthCare.gov’s initial disastrous roll-out to try and rescue the site for its second time around. This week, the Hill noted that the White House is sending an “implicit message” that the new team leading the effort will be more effective than the people who preceded them.

Some members of the private sector are already gearing up to help Americans navigate the enrollment period. Walmart, the biggest private employer in the country, recently announced that 2,700 of its stores will be staffed with insurance agents to assist people who want to enroll in either the Medicare program or new plans on Obamacare’s insurance marketplaces.