The fast food giant known for its Big Mac and the ability to “turn frowns upside down” may soon have an answer to diminishing profits and declining consumer appeal – the veggie burger.

A Change.org petition that’s garnered nearly 90,000 signatures is asking McDonald’s to add a plant-based protein option to its mealtime line up. High-profile supporters like Ellen Degeneres, Alicia Silverstone, Pam Anderson and Russell Simmons are even joining the mix. Adding their voices to the throngs of people who are trying to prove that Mickey D’s could have a new market in pursuing a vegetarian dining option.

Chipotle, Burger King, Subway, Denny’s and Starbucks are among those restaurant chains that have taken a cue from vegetarian diners seeking greater options among fast food restaurants. The move, should McDonald’s pursue it, is not far-fetched as veggie burgers and wraps with hummus and beans are already sold at its Indian and Canadian locations.

While vegetarians and vegans can already customize their orders with meatless options, the petitioners claim that’s not enough, and that salad options aren’t particularly filling.

There’s no telling in whether McDonald’s will heed the desires of the petitioners, but for now, a spokeswoman for the nation’s 111th largest company said: “In our experience, menu items at McDonald’s are most successful when enough customers choose to select them. It allows us to ensure freshness of ingredients and overall quality of the food item. We’ll continue to evolve our menu to meet the changing preferences of our customers.”

This latest ploy to modify the menu may provide the kind of boost McDonald’s is looking for.

The fast food chain, with 35,000 stores in 100 locations globally, is facing declining sales and profits. The answer: according to Tim Fenton, McDonald’s COO, they intend to step up efforts to be more productive, efficient and relevant to the customers that frequent the giant.

One of the ways to maintain relevance, some might argue, would be to capitalize on national efforts at promoting more health-conscious lifestyles. From the First Lady’s Let’s Move Campaign, to the roll out of the Affordable Care Act, and efforts by employers across the country to focus on wellness and preventive care, adding more healthy options could really inure to McDonald’s benefit.

A vegetarian option might also assist the company is providing healthier, more affordable food choices to members of low-income and economically underserved communities. In cities across the country, McDonald’s is easier to access than a grocery store. By providing different vegetarian options, in addition to its salads, the brand could gain real accolades for introducing vegetable-based options into the diets of people who typically can’t afford to “eat better.” Time will tell whether McDonald’s will bring back the veggie burger, but if it does, it could be a step in the right direction.