Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

LAS VEGAS (AP) — Taylor Swift had a historic night at the Billboard Music Awards: The pop star is the most decorated artist in the show’s history win 20 wins, beating Garth Brooks’ 19-win record.

She won eight awards Sunday night at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, including top artist, and also opened the show with the premiere of her action-filled, star-studded music video for “Bad Blood.”

“It’s unbelievable that the fans went out and proved what they proved this year, and that’s the only reason I won eight awards,” Swift said in an interview with The Associated Press following her wins.

“Is it eight? Did I win eight awards?” she asked excitedly. “Yeah, sick.”

Swift’s video opened with her and Selena Gomez fighting men in an office and then fighting each other. It ended with Swift’s and Gomez’s armies going head to head. Other stars in the clip included Mariska Hargitay, Ellen Pompeo, Jessica Alba and Ellie Goulding, and Hayley Williams of Paramore.

Swift swapped her first two verses with new ones from rapper Kendrick Lamar for “Bad Blood,” a song rumored to be about Swift’s friendship with Katy Perry.

Swift’s other wins included top female artist and Billboard 200 album for “1989.” She sat in the audience with some of her “Bad Blood” co-stars as well as rumored boyfriend Calvin Harris. Swift kissed the DJ-producer-singer on the cheek and gave him a hug after winning her awards.

“I’m happy right now that it all was pulled off without a hitch,” an excited Swift said in the AP interview about her new video. “I can’t believe it didn’t leak. I can’t believe the Kendrick version of the song didn’t leak. Right now I am just taking the biggest sigh of relief that the fans got to experience it the way I wanted them to experience it, which was a full element of surprise.”

Though Swift had an epic open of the Billboard Awards with her video, Kanye West’s closing off the show was tragic. The rapper was booed in Las Vegas when he performed “All Day” and “Black Skinhead.” The stage was smoky and it was hard to see West at times.