Health Facts: Confused about health care reform's impact? Here's help

If there's one thing that seems to unite employers and employees right now, it's that there is confusion when it comes to health care.

Employers struggling with rising costs now have a lump of potential taxes, fines, fees and requirements. Deadlines have moved — for example, the 2015 requirement for employers to offer qualified plans.

Employees are getting a lot of communication from insurance companies, from their employer and the things written in the papers. Meanwhile, there are things that apply to folks at small companies that don't apply to folks at large companies.

There's no easy answer for anyone.

However, there are people who study this for a living. And there are employers that have ideas and strategies. There are resources for employees as well. That's the basis for this project.

Crain's Detroit Business is proud to partner with the Greater Detroit Area Health Council on this HealthFacts project. The goal is to make information available.

In this collaboration, GDAHC has been a resource to Crain's for ideas on health care, the impact of the Affordable Care Act and the perspective of health care providers.

CEO Kate Kohn-Parrott, formerly the director of benefits at Chrysler Group LLC, offers some advice to employees.

In addition to this package of stories, there has been a series of webinars through the year. Six employer-related webinars were hosted, and the second employee-related webinar will occur Thursday. Register at crainsdetroit.com/webinars. And this series will continue with a series of speakers addressing 2014 health care strategies at the Crain's Health Care Leadership Summit.

The event, to be held Oct. 29 at the San Marino Club in Troy, will approach the health care situation with ideas of innovative ways that the health care community is approaching challenges right now. For more information or to register, go to crainsdetroit.com/events.

About this report

The questions and challenges that employers are facing are vastly different than the challenges for employees. With that in mind, this package consists of two parts: one for employers, one for employees.

For employers

Delay is not a strategy: Parts of the new health care laws are coming, parts are delayed. A look at hoe employers are charting their strategies.

How that "Cadillac" plan could become a train: With a 2018 tax facing employers who spend more than $10,000 on an employer, reducing costs will be a priority.

Case study: Ansara Restaurant Group

Case study: Key Safety Systems

Massachusetts comes to Michigan: Some elements of the Affordable Care Act resemble an early plan in Massachusetts. Business and health care leaders from Massachusetts visited with local health care leaders and offered advice on how to adapt.

Delays and changes: The U.S. government has delayed, by one year, the rule that businesses with 50 or more full-time workers must offer a qualified health plan for employers. What happens now?

5 key strategies for communicating health care reform

Top things for employers to look for in 2014

Top 5 categories of questions that employers need to ask for 2014

For employees

Fasten your seatbelts: Employees should expect changes, lots of information and plenty of options over the next few years when it comes to health care. An overview.

What to expect: Some advice from Kate Kohn-Parrott, former benefits director of Chrysler and current president and CEO of the Greater Detroit Area Health Council.

What to know: A few key points on what employees should know about the Affordable Care Act.

Plenty of questions: A recent survey shows 69 percent of employees in the Detroit area want more information about health care.

Employee Q&A: Some of the basic questions that employees might have about benefits, answered by a consulting firm.

Calculating the credit

Glossary of important terms

What it means for Michigan

Related Links