Buy Photo Jackie Shrago, a volunteer with Get Covered Tennessee, navigates the healthcare.gov website to help Connie Austin sign up for insurance through the Affordable Care Act in the 2015 open enrollment season. (Photo: George Walker IV / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The Nashville Health Department kicked off the Affordable Care Act open enrollment season with an event co-hosted by Get Covered Tennessee to raise awareness about how and where people can find help with enrolling — and why getting health insurance is important.

Reaching people with the message about tax credits is a priority this year because there will be large jumps in penalties for being uninsured when tax season rolls around in 2016 and 2017. Get Covered Tennessee is working with the state health department and other partners to reach people in all counties who may not know there are tax credits available to offset the cost of monthly premiums.

The fee for being uninsured in 2014 was the greater of $95 per person or 1 percent of household income, an amount that for some was not worth the cost of monthly premiums. The fees for being uninsured in 2015 and 2016, however, are jumping.

For 2015 the fee increases to the greater of $325 per adult or 2 percent of taxable income.

For 2016 the fee increases to the greater of $625 per uninsured adult or 2.5 percent of taxable income.

For 2017 and beyond, the penalty adjusts annually for inflation.

Nashville Mayor Megan Barry said there will be initiatives with faith-based programs and other community access points to reach people who are uninsured. The city had more than 93,000 people enroll in plans in 2015. Roughly one in five people in Nashville are uninsured.

Illness is unpredictable and people should know "that you won't be bankrupt; that you have access" to health insurance, Barry said.

Barry wants those who are helping people with enrollment to "work harder and smarter." The mayors of Chattanooga, Knoxville, Memphis and Nashville have agreed to boost enrollment initiatives. Nashville had the most enrolled in 2015.

"We don't want to lose our No. 1 spot," Barry said.

The outreach initiatives echo others around the country that are trying to reach people where they are, such as colleges, community sports groups and churches, said Ceci Connolly, managing director of PwC's Health Research Institute.

Enrollment campaigns will try to raise awareness about subsidies, particularly in states such as Tennessee that are seeing hefty increases in some plans.

"It will be about price, the penalty going up this year, and it will also be about the value of the subsidy ... because not everyone knows," Connolly said.

Nancy Nolan came to the kickoff event to find out her options after receiving a letter from BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee about her premium going up. She estimates the increase at more than 80 percent.

Nolan started buying insurance on the exchange in its first year. Before the exchange, buying insurance was tough because her son fell into the pre-existing medical condition category, where finding coverage was challenging. She estimated her family spent about 30 percent of their income on medical costs before the exchange opened.

Shoppers can expect to see less variation in monthly premiums this year. BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee received an average 36.3 percent rate increase, while Cigna reconfigured its networks to keep its premiums stable year over year.

Last year, Community Health Alliance took a larger share of the exchange than in 2014 because it offered some of the lowest premiums on the exchange. The Knoxville-based cooperative will not be selling insurance for 2016 because the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance deemed it financially unstable.

Susan Dyer, 62, will be looking for her second ACA plan. She liked her plan in 2015, which offered a health savings account, although it required a learning curve in the beginning.

"I've loved it," Dyer said.

Her plan is increasing by about $140 a month — before a tax credit — and she wanted to find out how to look for a new plan while she is looking for a new job.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Need help with enrollment?

See what's available at www.healthcare.gov.

Contact Get Covered Tennessee online, http://www.getcoveredtenn.org/, or by phone to schedule an appointment with someone in your area. There will be free, in-person assistance available in all 95 counties.



To call for an appointment or to find out where assistance is available: 1-844-644-5443.

In Davidson County, Get Covered Tennessee will be at the Southeast Library on Saturdays and the Lentz Public Health Center on Mondays.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MtVv5B