Volunteer Terry Conlon dials voters on behalf of the Planned Parenthood Votes and Planned Parenthood Health Systems Action Fund from their call center in Raleigh, N.C. The volunteers are encouraging voters to support Sen. Kay Hagan, D-N.C. (Photo: Sara D. Davis for USA TODAY)

RALEIGH — On a rain-soaked afternoon in North Carolina's capital city, Planned Parenthood's temporary campaign office glowed bright pink. On "Women Are Watching" Wednesday, most of the 10 volunteers wore pink T-shirts emblazoned with the slogan — sometimes accessorized with a string of shiny, pink Mardi Gras beads.

Despite the festive atmosphere, the group got down to business — picking up identical black clamshell cellphones and calling dozens of potential voters to denounce Republican Thom Tillis' record in the state legislature on abortion rights and to round up support for first-term Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan.

The Hagan-Tillis contest — one of a handful that could determine which party controls the U.S. Senate in 2015 — is already one of the most expensive Senate fights in the country with more than $30 million spent on the airwaves and climbing. Behind the scenes, however, the national political parties and independent organizations such as Planned Parenthood are deploying millions more in an unparalleled effort to influence who votes in a state that has veered sharply between the Democratic and Republican parties in recent elections.

Americans for Prosperity (AFP), which began its television advertising bombardment against Hagan last year, is carrying out the largest field campaign in its 10-year history in the state. The group, part of the conservative network tied to billionaire industrialists Charles and David Koch, has organized 670,000 phone calls to voters since April and has set a minimum target of knocking on 13,500 doors a week.

Democrats, meanwhile, are running their biggest field operation in a North Carolina Senate campaign as part of the "Bannock Street Project." The effort is a key component of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee's strategy to drive higher-than-typical turnout for a midterm election. Democrats are sending $60 million and 4,000 paid staffers to 10 Senate battleground states.

An army of nearly 10,000 Democratic volunteers already is working in North Carolina.

"This is potentially ground zero for who controls the Senate," said Steven Greene, a political scientist at North Carolina State University in Raleigh. "Turnout is the ballgame."

BATTLE FOR THE SENATE RUNS THROUGH NORTH CAROLINA

The political stakes could not be higher.

Republicans need to net six seats to seize the majority in the Senate. The GOP appears poised to win three open seats now held by Democrats in Montana, South Dakota and West Virginia — all states won by Republican Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election.

Most of the remaining Senate fights are being waged in solidly Republican territory. North Carolina is an exception — a presidential battleground where Democrats have an edge in voter registration.

In 2008, then-senator Barack Obama made North Carolina history, becoming the first Democratic presidential candidate to capture the state since Jimmy Carter's 1976 victory. Blacks, who make up 22% of the state's population, turned out in droves to vote. Nearly 72% of registered black voters went to the polls that year, overtaking white turnout rate in the state for the first time.

In the 2010 midterm elections, however, many of the Democratic Party's core constituency stayed home.

Just 17% of voters ages 18-25 and 41% of black voters cast ballots that year, according to data collected by Democracy North Carolina, a non-partisan research and advocacy organization based in Durham, N.C. Republicans went on to sweep both chambers of the state legislature that year and in 2012, when they also clinched the governor's office.

Under GOP control, the state has enacted new abortion regulations, reduced early voting, banned same-day voter registration and approved a sweeping package of tax reductions. (In the ongoing court battle over the new voting laws, a federal appeals court ruled Wednesday to restore same-day registration.)

On paper, Hagan would appear to have a built-in advantage. There are 2.7 million registered Democrats in the state, compared with nearly 2 million Republicans. Another 1.8 million are unaffiliated with any party.

But Hagan and her allies must walk a political tightrope: Turn out the coalition of college students, single women and African-American voters who backed President Obama without ever mentioning the president in a state where his disapproval rating hit 57% in a recent poll by High Point University.

RALEIGH VS. WASHINGTON

The Republican strategy in the race is straightforward: Cast Hagan, who voted for the 2010 Affordable Care Act, as a rubber stamp for an unpopular president and his policies — while making sure that Republican voters make it to the polls.

"North Carolinians can't name a single thing she's done," Tillis spokesman Daniel Keylin said in a recent interview. "But they know she's voted with President Obama 96% of the time."

To drive that point home, AFP last week conducted a five-day, 14-city "Call Out Kay" tour. Staffers rode through the state in a red Chevy Suburban plastered with images of Hagan that denounced her positions on health care and energy.

During a recent stop in Raleigh, the group's organizers implored more Republican activists to join the cause.

Republican supporters grab free T-shirts, bracelets and water bottles after the Americans for Prosperity "Call Out Kay" tour. (Photo: Sara D. Davis for USA TODAY)

"We are going to take on and beat the left on the ground," Donald Bryson, AFP's state director, told a crowd of about 95 people who gathered in a cavernous hall at the state fairgrounds to hear speeches, eat pulled-pork sandwiches and listen to bluegrass music.

Carol Marino, a venture capitalist who lives in suburban Raleigh, already has volunteered for the North Carolina Republican Party this year. But she left the AFP event thinking about helping out as well at one of the group's phone banks in the weeks ahead.

She said she voted for Tillis in the GOP primary in May and will support him again in November because she thinks he was an effective state legislator. "I'm going to stay involved. We have got to get rid of Harry Reid," Marino said, referring to the Nevada Democrat who serves as Senate majority leader. Reid, who regularly slams the Koch brothers and Republicans from the Senate floor, "has brought the ... meanness in our discourse to new levels," she added.

For their part, Hagan's allies are targeting Tillis' record as speaker of the North Carolina House on issues they hope will resonate with voters in a state where women outnumber men in voter registration by more than 560,000.

Democrats have hammered Tillis for a state law that regulates abortion clinics and an education budget that spent $481 million less than state budget officials had projected was needed to keep pace with inflation and other rising costs.

"It has turned into who do you hate more — Raleigh or Washington?" said Michael Bitzer, a political scientist at Catawba College in Salisbury, N.C.

TURNOUT LABORATORY

In some ways, Election Day already has arrived in North Carolina. Absentee ballots went out in early September; in-person, early voting starts Oct. 23.

In the time left, both sides are scrambling to secure votes. Working America, a group affiliated with the AFL-CIO, is pushing to reach 150,000 households in the Greensboro area, where African Americans make up more than 40% of the population.

The Republican get-out-the-vote effort, meanwhile, is centered on 16 rural counties where the GOP is so dominant that many voters cast their ballots in primaries but don't bother to vote in the general election because Republican candidates will prevail, said Todd Poole, the state party's executive director.

In an election this close, the party needs "every reliable Republican," Poole said.

Both sides also are trying new tools to shape the ground game.

North Carolina is one of 22 states where Republicans are carrying out a major technology initiative. The Republican National Committee has teamed up with a private enterprise, Data Trust, to marry part of the RNC's massive voter database with other consumer information about voters, such as where they shop and the magazines they read.

Party officials say the new system has dramatically changed the ground game. Volunteers canvassing a neighborhood, for instance, download a mobile app that has both a street map and a list of the residents in each home. The app is pre-loaded with individualized surveys tailored to the residents' voting history and preferences.

The app also allows canvassers to update the database instantly. If the occupant already has mailed in an absentee ballot for Tillis, for instance, that information is uploaded in real time, allowing the party to bypass that address on future visits to the neighborhood.

This all stands in stark contrast to 2012, when the party's canvassers approached voters with paper surveys and filled in responses by hand.

Taking a cue from this year's wildly popular ALS Ice Bucket Challenge, the RNC has launched a Facebook app that asks Republicans to pledge to vote and then to challenge three other Facebook friends to do the same.

Groups on the left are testing new technology, too.

Planned Parenthood, which aims to talk to 400,000 North Carolina voters by Election Day, is piloting what it calls a "catch and release" program. It is recording likely Hagan supporters explaining why they should vote on Election Day. Instead of getting a phone call with a generic recorded reminder to cast a ballot on Nov. 4, Planned Parenthood will play the voter's unique message back to him or her.

Think of it as nagging yourself to vote.

Emma Akpan, left, gets direction from Heather Williams at the Planned Parenthood Votes and Planned Parenthood Health Systems Action Fund call center on Sept. 24, in Raleigh. The organization is supporting Sen. Kay Hagan, D-N.C., in her fight against Republican Thom Tillis. (Photo: Sara D. Davis for USA TODAY)

In all, the group will spend $3 million in North Carolina, said Melissa Reed, executive director of state's Planned Parenthood Health System Action Fund.

It may be too soon to tell whether it's all working.

Despite the frenzied effort to reach and persuade them, many voters interviewed recently said they had not yet focused on the race.

Annie Shaw, a mental health counselor and mother of three, voted for Hagan six years ago, but this year she's weighing her options. Public education is a top concern. Although her kids go to good schools, resources are so tight that they often can't bring their textbooks home, she said.

Shaw, 37, hasn't reached a verdict on the Affordable Care Act. At her job, "I've seen more people coming in because they now have insurance," she said. But Shaw said she also saw her health insurance premiums rise.

"More than likely, I'll vote for her again," Shaw said as she sat outside a Starbucks in a neighborhood north of downtown Raleigh. "I don't think Kay Hagan has done an awful job."

A few miles away, Lossie McLean, an 18-year-old student at Raleigh's historically black Shaw University, hasn't given the contest much thought. She said she had never heard of Tillis. But she has come to recognize Hagan's name, through the campaign's targeted digital advertising.

Every time McLean has ventured over to YouTube to watch her favorite videos on how to apply makeup, she said, an ad promoting Hagan pops up.

In Henderson, N.C., a town of about 15,000, not far from the North Carolina-Virginia border, Janet Pulley has seen more than enough ads.

"It's almost funny. One ad comes on and says one thing, and the next one comes on and says, 'That's not true,' " she said. "We just sit there and laugh at them."

Pulley, a manager at a textile plant, hasn't decided who will get her vote, either. She cited the economy, public education and conservative values as top issues. Although she is a registered Republican, she voted for Hagan in 2008 to send a "new face" to Washington.

"The incumbents get in office and stay for too long," said Pulley, 53. "It needs to be shaken up once in a while."

Follow fschouten on Twitter

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1wZkCYt