Justin Timberlake revealed just last week that he and wife Jessica Biel are expecting their first child together and on Saturday she displayed her very prominent baby bump during a lunch outing.

The duo dined together in Santa Monica and with Jessica, 32, casually dressed in jeans, a grey top and a shirt tied around her waist, her advanced pregnancy was evident.

She left her long brown hair loose around her shoulders as she made her way back to their car with her husband following lunch.

Scroll down for video

Baby on board: Jessica Biel's baby bump was on display as she enjoyed a meal out with husband Justin Timberlake on Saturday

Boy or girl? While Justin said they haven't discovered the sex of the baby, Jessica was spotted with a blue gift-wrapped package during the week

Justin was also casual in tan trousers and a black top just days after the excited father-to-be, 34, revealed the happy news.

Justin shared his joy with an adorable snap of him kissing his wife's growing baby bum as he celebrated his 34th birthday last week.

Parents-to-be: Jessica and Justin are set to welcome their first child together later this year

Best gift of all: Justin revealed the message on his birthday calling it the best gift of all

Rumours had been swirling for weeks that the Total Recall actress was pregnant after a series of photographs showed an expanding waistline.

But both Jessica and her Sexy Back singer husband have stayed silent on the subject until now.

As Justin thanked his fans for the birthday wishes he announced the exciting news and revealed they had opted not to find out the gender in advance of the birth.

Way to celebrate: Justin Timberlake chose his 34th birthday to confirm news his wife Jessica Biel is expecting

Handsome couple: Justin and Jessica pictured here in November last year, kept fans guessing

'Thank you EVERYONE for the Bday wishes! This year, I'm getting the GREATEST GIFT EVER. CAN'T WAIT. #BoyOrGirl #YouNeverKnow#WeDontEvenKnow#WeAreTakingBets.'

Back in December,Justin's former 'N Sync bandmate Joey Fatone confirmed that the couple were expecting.

'He told me a while ago and I kept my mouth shut. But now I can talk about it,' the former boybander told In Touch.

Recently, Jessica has been spotted covering up her physique in an assortment of loose-fitting clothes in the past few months leaving many to wonder if she indeed was expecting.

Undercover: Jessica hid the news of her pregnancy well as she was spotted cloaking her stomach area with a flowy grey coat while out and about in New York City back on December 16

On December 16, the former 7th Heaven star was seen cloaking her stomach area with a flowy grey coat while out and about in New York City.

This will be the first child for both Biel and Timberlake. They began dating eight years ago and got engaged in December 2011.