People in Business for May 18, 2014

People in Business for May 18, 2014

BATON ROUGE AREA

Stephen Mumford has been named vice president of clinical service lines for Baton Rouge General/General Health System. He was director of perioperative services for Baton Rouge General and was instrumental in the hospital’s surgical services expansion and the opening of its Gastroenterology Center on Perkins Road.

Melissa Monroe, of Central, has been named nurse manager for the Lane Rehabilitation Center at Lane Regional Medical Center. She was nurse manager for the emergency department at Baton Rouge General Medical Center.

Campus Federal Credit Union has named Kristie Daspit as chief operating officer; Ron Moreau as chief development officer; Jay Noel as chief lending officer; and Jane Verret as chief administrative officer.

Daspit, who was vice president of marketing and project management, will oversee information technology, marketing, operational systems support, vendor management, and research and product development.

Moreau, who was vice president of business development and community relations, will oversee branch administration, business development, community and financial education and the Member Relations Center.

Noel, who was vice president of business services, will oversee business and retail lending, collections and mortgage lending.

Verret, who was vice president of risk management, will oversee compliance, security and fraud, human resource management and internal audit.

Crompion International LLC, a specialty stainless steel provider, has named Brent Wilson as sales manager and Maria del Carmen Pérez as senior sugar engineer.

Wilson held strategic growth and management positions for Jemison Metals in Birmingham, Alabama.

Pérez was chief specialist at the Cuban Sugar Research Institute’s Technology Department in Santa Clara, Cuba.

Rockit Science Agency announced promotions of existing employees Grant Hurlbert to creative director and Stephen Bowling to vice president interactive.

Brian Alexander has been named manager of drilling operations for Louisiana and Mississippi operations of Terracon.

He is based in Baton Rouge and has provided leadership in drilling operations, working closely with drill crews and sub-contract drillers that provide services for Terracon.

NEW ORLEANS AREA

Verizon Wireless has named Matt Burkart as Gulf Coast retail director, based in New Orleans, for the Houston/Gulf Coast Region. Burkhart was district manager in the Florida Panhandle.

Chad P. Morrow has been named a member, or partner, at the Sher Garner law firm. Morrow represents clients in the areas of secured financing transactions, real estate transactions, real property and leasing, and other commercial transactions.

Paul Cosma, of Uptown Auto Specialists, has been elected president of the board of directors of the Greater New Orleans Executives Association.

AROUND LOUISIANA

Paul Durand, president and chief executive officer of St. Martin Bank and Trust in St. Martinville, has been installed as chairman of the Louisiana Bankers Association.

Other officers are chairman-elect W. Paul Tweedy, president and chief executive officer of Bank of Jena, and treasurer Thomas L. Martin, president and chief executive officer of Gibsland Bank & Trust. Immediate past chairman on the board is Drake Mills, president and chief executive officer of Community Trust Bank in Choudrant.

New directors are southeast region representative David Anderson, vice chairman and executive vice president of First NBC Bank in New Orleans; south central region representative Jerry Ledet Jr., president and chief executive officer of Synergy Bank in Houma; and southeast region representative Alton McRee, president and chief executive officer of Fidelity Homestead Savings Bank in New Orleans.

Other directors on the board from the local area are southwest region representative Claire Benoit, president and chief executive officer of Rayne Building and Loan; capitol region representative Joseph F. Quinlan III, president and chief executive officer of First National Bankers Bank in Baton Rouge; Acadiana region representative K. Brent Vidrine, chairman, president and chief executive officer of Bank of Sunset and Trust Co.; and LBA Chief Executive Officer Robert T. Taylor.

Gov. Bobby Jindal has made appointments or reappointments from the local area to several state boards and commissions.

Children’s Cabinet Advisory Board: Kelly Pepper, of Baton Rouge, president and chief executive officer of the Louisiana Association of Nonprofit Organizations; and Lindsey Ursy, of New Orleans, coordinator of early childhood comprehensive systems at Tulane University.

Louisiana State Board of Social Work Examiners: Carla Moore, of Baton Rouge, a former child welfare specialist at the state’s Department of Children and Family Services.

Group Benefits Policy and Planning Board: Letti Lowe-Ardoin, of Baton Rouge, a certified public accountant and the chief operating officer at Hannis T. Bourgeois LLP, and Scott McKnight, of Baton Rouge, vice president of Bancorp South Insurance Services Inc.

River Region Cancer Screening and Early Detection District: Melody Christy, of Gonzales, former deputy clerk of court for the Ascension Parish Clerk of Court.