Sonia Despiar, LPN, right, a nurse with Gouverneur Healthcare Services, with patient Imelda Silva during a doctor's visit in New York. (Photo: Bebeto Matthews, AP)

Medical billing is complicated. Full of codes and jargon, a medical bill or explanation of benefits can confuse the smartest of consumers. After a stressful injury or illness, it may not be top-of-mind to get the sums on these complicated documents lowered by combing through them for errors and haggling with a billing representative. But even though that's a great way to lower medical bills, there are some others you can use if that fails or seems too daunting.

1. Crowdfunding

Popular for medical plights small and large, crowdfunding is at the top of this list because it involves the least risk: none. That's a good thing for people already under a lot of stress, and often in a lot of pain. Crowdfunding has been around for ages, but nowadays it's best done online with the help of social media, and if you choose the right platform, a personal fundraising coach. Simply, many people donate a small amount, which adds up and becomes a large sum the patient can use to pay bills.

Desiree Vargas Wrigley, co-founder and CEO of crowdfunding platform GiveForward, explains the power of this tool. "Medical crowdfunding sites like GiveForward do two things really well," she says. "First and most importantly, we help patients get the funds they need to get better. Second, we give friends and family an answer to the question, 'What can I do to help?' when a loved one is suffering." For someone facing huge medical bills, it sure beats teddy bears or balloons.

2. Hire a billing advocate

Medical billing advocates are professionals, usually with years of billing or insurance experience, who know the ins and outs of the industry. As such, they know how to lower medical bills by spotting errors and negotiating with medical centers and insurance companies alike. The higher the bill, the higher its chance of containing errors.

"It's astounding that eight out of 10 medical bills I see contain numerous errors," says Pat Palmer, founder and CEO of advocate organization Medical Billing Advocates of America. Over the past 20 years, she's helped consumers save over $100 million on medical bills, she says. They don't have to be enormous, either. "Any consumer can use this, because they have no one else to defend them," she says.

3. Ask to pay in cash

If the bill isn't sky high, or you have emergency funds available or a health savings account (HSA) that will cover it, you can ask the hospital what the cash discount is. Sometimes cash discounts are as generous as 89%, but usually hover around 30% depending on the medical center. If the discount yours offers isn't quite that generous, you may be able to negotiate a higher one if you're willing to meet with them and discuss your needs in person.

4. Seek charity aid

People who donate to charities might not feel comfortable seeking help from one. Rest assured, an expensive illness or medical emergency is a legitimate reason to accept charity aid. The quickest place to find it may be your hospital's patient services desk, which may have a listing of charities that help with medical causes. If you're a person of faith, another great place to look is within your religious organization, starting with your local congregation. Local Lions' or Elks' clubs may also offer assistance to community members, but each chapter is different, so checking their websites couldn't hurt.

5. Deducting from your taxes

This one won't save money on medical bills per se, but it can help recoup some of the lost money come tax season. Medical bills can be deducted from your taxes if they amount to 10% or more of your income, or 7.5% if you or your spouse is 65 or older. That may seem like a high bar, but non-traditional medical charges count toward the total. This includes things like acupuncture, weight loss services, and transportation to and from medical care providers.

NerdWallet Health is a USA TODAY content partner providing general news, commentary and coverage from around the Web. Its content is produced independently of USA TODAY.

Other NerdWallet articles:

MORE:Everything you need to know about medical bills on your credit report

MORE:Will FICO 9 fix my medical debt?

MORE:Does my health insurance cover mental health treatment?

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1ty17VD