Topics: Atheism, Books, Editor's Picks, isis, Jonathan Sacks, Judaism, moral majority, New Atheism, Religion, Religious Right, Richard Dawkins, Science, Life News

Jonathan Sacks rarely goes by more than two titles. This might be taken as a form of modesty, because the man actually has three: one of them academic (a PhD in philosophy), one civil (a British life peer, Sacks sits in the House of Lords) and one religious (he’s an Orthodox rabbi). Is it Lord Rabbi Dr. Sacks? Dr. Lord Rabbi Sacks? I’ll leave that one to the copy editors, or perhaps to a committee on heraldry.

For 22 years, Sacks served as the British Commonwealth’s Chief Rabbi, a role that made him the public face of Judaism for millions of Britons. The Chief Rabbi position doesn’t carry any theological weight, but it did put Sacks in the middle of conversations about interfaith relations and the role of religion in modern society. (The role also drew Sacks into the internecine squabbles of British Jewry, which he mostly seemed to aggravate).

Religion, politics and Jewish relations: not exactly dinner table conversation. Sacks stepped down from the Chief Rabbinate in 2013, but he clearly has a taste for contentious topics. In his most recent book, “The Great Partnership,” which comes out in paperback this month, Sacks discusses science, religion and the pitfalls of hard-line atheism. His argument is not that science and religion are perfectly compatible. Instead, Sacks suggests that no single system of knowledge can engage the world entirely. The result is a moderate’s manifesto; a lengthy, erudite defense of what Sacks calls “cognitive pluralism.”

I reached Sacks by phone in New York, where he holds professorships at NYU and Yeshiva University. We spoke about Richard Dawkins, the relationship between religion and politics, and why there are so few Jewish creationists.

You write that “the mutual hostility between religion and science is one of the curses of our age.” What’s made this relationship so fraught?

There was a time when the church felt it could censure truths that it felt to be inconsistent with its own deeply held beliefs. Now it’s as if it were almost a mirror image. Science is claiming a monopoly of knowledge, and thus some scientific atheists are intent on depriving religion of any cognitive status. I think this has been a swing of a pendulum, and I think it has more to do with power than with intellectual integrity.

In a recent interview, Richard Dawkins described you as very nice, but he said that attacking you was “like attacking a wet sponge.” Why does Dawkins have such trouble with your arguments?

Because Richard, who is a brilliant scientist, thinks that morality is a simple matter. Oh, we’ll get a few scientists and we’ll work out what we should do and what we shouldn’t do. And quite frankly, the whole history of humankind has borne testimony to the fact that we may quite reasonably know what is the right thing to do. Actually getting people to do the right thing is the hardest thing on earth. I really admire Richard Dawkins’ work within his field, but when he moves beyond his field, he must understand that we may feel that he’s talking on a subject in which he lacks expertise.

Science takes things apart to see how they work. Religion puts them together to see what they mean. And I think the people who spend their lives taking things apart to see how they work sometimes find it difficult to understand the people who put things together to see what they mean.

I think there’s an important distinction to be made here, though, between science and reductionism. Plenty of scientists put together grand theories of the universe, or study things like emergence. They aren’t only taking things apart.

I’m thinking about the reductivists. That’s really what a number of these atheists are. They believe in science, but they believe that science is all there is. And that’s just wrong. To me, science has religious significance in a sense, because it allows us to see the world as the work of God, and I think it’s probably no accident that science grew up in cultures that were essentially Judeo-Christian.

In your book, you trace science-and-religion disputes back to the difference between Greek philosophy and early Jewish thought.

The Greeks were very visual. They saw knowledge as a kind of seeing. We still carry all those metaphors with us: insight, foresight. And that’s what science is, really. The truth that you can see empirically by your senses, especially the sense of sight. Whereas ancient Israel, and Judaism in general, is a religion of the ear, and the fundamental truth is the truth you hear. It’s much more concerned with language, and with language as a means of creating relationships and establishing bonds of trust.

The primal, basic scientific situation is where I am observing some phenomenon. The basic religious situation is where I am engaging with another person or personal being. Those are two mindsets. I think we need both. Judaism was an extreme example of one, and Greece is the other. Historically, they came together in Christianity.

Why do so few Jews take issue with the theory of evolution, while creationism is common among Christians?

I think Christians tended to think that religion and science were part of the same universe of discourse. So they assumed that the Bible was telling us scientific stuff, as well as moral and spiritual stuff. Whereas Jews don’t read the Bible that way.

I mean, look how much time the Bible spends in describing creation: 34 verses. It spends 600 verses describing how the Israelites constructed the Tabernacle. Genesis 1 is not remotely thinking about being science. It’s clear that the first chapter of the Bible is teaching us about the goodness of the world, not about the cosmo-genesis of the world.

Reading your book, I often felt as if you were asking Western society to become a little more Jewish, or to think a little bit more Jewishly.

Well, I’m just saying that sometimes a religion — and Judaism happens to be mine — embodies a truth that we may have forgotten for a while. There’s nothing in Judaism that’s hostile to science. I think we are great admirers of it, and the Talmud has here and there a little note of real admiration for the Greeks, and for their ability to think scientifically.

In the past few years, there’s been a tendency to compare the New Atheists to certain fundamentalist religious groups. Is that a worthwhile comparison? Do you think that, when you look at the extremes of religiosity and scientism, you see a kind of kinship?

A fundamentalist is somebody who can’t really understand a point of view opposite to his own. He can’t really hear in stereo, he can’t really see 3-D. Whereas a really great scientist like Niels Bohr will say that the opposite of a superficial truth is a falsehood, but the opposite of a profound truth is very often another profound truth. Niels Bohr really got it. But some of today’s atheists don’t get it. They know that science is a profound truth, but they can’t understand that something opposite can also be a profound truth.

You write that “atheism deserves better than the new atheists.” What kind of thinkers do atheists deserve? Is there a type of atheism that our society needs?

Well, you know, Bertrand Russell was an atheist with a sense of humor. And the new atheists tend either to lack a sense of humor, or the only humor they’re capable of is sarcasm. I mean, somebody with a little intellectual humility does not say, “Anyone who disagrees with me is stupid.” That is fundamentalism. Fundamentalism is the attempt to impose a single truth on the plural world.