Michael Markel poses for a portrait on a lot he is developing in Prospect. Construction should begin soon on a single-family home on this site. The lots in Prospect are the first residential building that Markel Homes, founded in 1973, is doing in Longmont. (Matthew Jonas/Longmont Times-Call) ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

Michael Markel founded his company way back in 1973, but the homebuilder is only now about to start putting his fingerprints on housing in Longmont.

Markel Homes started buying up lots in south Longmont's Prospect neighborhood last summer and is about to break ground on the first round of single-family houses and townhomes at the site.

"This house is sold, pre-sold, to a Longmont family," Markel said as he stood on the muddy lot that will be the site of the first home he builds in Prospect: a four-bedroom house, approximately 3,800 to 4,000 square feet — including the basement — that will have a three-car garage and a sizable enough lot that it could hold another smaller structure.

"We're not going to be building the carriage house, but it has the potential for a carriage house," Markel said.

Last August Markel bought 18 lots from Kiki Wallace, the original developer of the Prospect New Town neighborhood, which has won national recognition for its "new urbanism" design. On those 18 lots, Markel is building nine single-family homes, which will range from about $650,000 to $800,000, and nine townhomes, which will sell for approximately $550,000.

The townhomes themselves will be large — 2,250 square feet, Markel said — with three bedrooms and a loft. All the houses and townhomes will have a basement.

Markel, who lives on 73rd Street and has a Longmont mailing address, said he has always been attracted to Prospect's design, which is what compelled him to approach Wallace in the first place.

"Prospect has a real variety and a character mix and we're trying to continue that theme," said Markel, adding that is different than the way he usually approaches homebuilding.

"As a builder, I don't repeat too much the same design," he said. "Every project, large or small, I kind of wipe the decks clean."

Prospect, however, "sort of splits the theme between contemporary and traditional," which is what he wants to do with the homes he's building there.

"It can accomodate all different types of designs and actually makes it much more interesting (from a builder's standpoint)," Markel said.

Along with the 18 original lots Markel bought he's also under contract to purchase an additional 40 lots, on about 7 ½ acres, which he also has slated for a mix of single-family homes and townhomes.

"We want to have started all 18 of these and then we would start with the intrastructure on the next round in the next 8 to 10 months," he said.

Markel Homes' imprint on the Prospect neighborhood won't stop there. Markel also has plans — construction won't start until next summer at the earliest — on about 8 acres of vacant land on the northeast corner of the neighborhood where he intends to build a condominium development that will include a mix of for-sale units and rentals.

"Just the last couple of months I have signed an agreement with (Wallace) on the multi-family (site) — 150 to 200 units," Markel said.

Given the time it will take to move through the city process he doesn't expect construction to start on those until at least 14 to 18 months from now.

Markel also has two other future projects coming up in Longmont that he declined to talk about, but presumably they will be more in the style of the other communities he's built in Boulder, Niwot and Lafayette and Louisville. In Prospect, he said, his plan is to be "complementary" to the existing housing stock.

"I've been in conversations with Andres (Duany, considered by many the father of the new urbanism style) to help me work some of this out," Markel said.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com