Philanthropist extraordinaire Sheldon G. Adelson has announced that he will be throwing his full support behind presumptive GOP presidential nominee Donald J Trump in the 2016 race for the nation’s highest elective office by offering a contribution that could exceed $100 million.

According to a New York Times report, both Adelson and Trump met last week while the former was in New York to attend the Jewish Values Network dinner. The Times reported that during their private meeting at Trump Tower, Adelson said he was willing to “contribute more to help elect him (Trump) than he has to any previous campaign,” according to two Republicans with direct knowledge of Adelson’s commitment.

Adelson, an internationally renowned casino magnate based in Las Vegas has said that he plans to significantly reduce his giving to congressional Republicans and would direct most of his contributions to groups dedicated to Mr. Trump’s campaign, according to the Times report.

Thus far Trump had been self funding his GOP primary campaign along with small-dollar contributions but has lacked the sort of major donor network needed to sustain him in the general election, as was reported by the Times. Trump has estimated that he may need $1 billion for the campaign but has only recently begun scheduling fund-raisers and hiring finance staff members, the report said. Many of the Republican Party’s wealthiest contributors, including the billionaire brothers Charles G. and David H. Koch, have indicated they are unlikely to give to his candidacy.

In Friday’s Washington Post, Adelson penned an op-ed in which he expressed his full throated support for Trump’s candidacy.

If Trump isn’t elected president, warned Adelson, Americans would get a third term of Barack Obama in the form of Hillary Clinton, as was reported by INN.

“While the primary cycle still has some important elections ahead, it is clear that Donald Trump will be the Republican nominee for president,” he wrote, adding, “I am endorsing Trump’s bid for president and strongly encourage my fellow Republicans — especially our Republican elected officials, party loyalists and operatives, and those who provide important financial backing — to do the same.”

“The alternative to Trump being sworn in as the nation’s 45th president is frightening,” warned Adelson.

“For nearly eight years, Republicans have fought tooth and nail against President Obama and his policies. We waged battles over debt, government spending, Obamacare and the Iran nuclear deal — an issue of paramount importance to me personally and to many others around the world.

“We gained some victories, but on too many issues Obama achieved his goals, if not necessarily America’s goals. As Republicans, we know that getting a person in the White House with an ‘R’ behind his name is the only way things will get better,” wrote Adelson.

“If Republicans do not come together in support of Trump, Obama will essentially be granted something the Constitution does not allow — a third term in the name of Hillary Clinton,” he added.

“I’ve spent time talking to Donald Trump. Do I agree with him on every issue? No. But it’s unlikely that any American agrees with his or her preferred candidate on every issue,” wrote Adelson.

The op-ed comes a week after the Jewish American billionaire said during a gala in Manhattan he will be supporting Trump now that he's the presumptive Republican nominee for president.

"Yes, I'm a Republican, he's a Republican. He's our nominee. Whoever the nominee would turn out to be, any one of the 17 - he was one of the 17. He won fair and square," said Adelson.

He added that Trump "will be good for Israel."

Adelson's support for Trump comes after the billionaire did not officially endorse any candidate during the Republican presidential primaries, even though he expressed willingness to back Trump in March.

That willingness came despite an initial altercation between the two in October, when Trump took aim at Adelson and wrote on Twitter that the billionaire wanted to make Senator Mark Rubio (R-FL) "his perfect little puppet" in the Republican race.

However, the two met in December and apparently sorted out their differences. Adelson later said they discussed Israel, and said he found Trump to be "very charming."

Walter Metuth (INN)