Liquor license for movie venue has been obtained

A panel of Japanese Americans talk about their experience of being sent to internment camps after the Pearl Harbor attack in 1941 in the Canyon Theater at the Boulder Public Library in this 2006 file photo. Boulder plans to use the theater as an art house cinema three nights a week beginning in early 2016. ( Camera file photo )

Editor's note: This article has been changed to include the University of Colorado's International Film Series as one of the art house cinema options in Boulder.

The Boulder Public Library plans to turn the Canyon Theater on the north side of the Main Public Library into an art house movie theater three nights a week.

The movie theater, which is scheduled to open in early 2016, is the result of more than a year of discussions between the library and Downtown Boulder Inc., which will manage ticket sales, alcohol service and marketing.

"We've been trying for years to get an independent arts cinema downtown," said Sean Maher, executive director of Downtown Boulder. "We've been close a few times, but it's never happened. And it came to us: The library has a 200-seat theater that sits unused most of the time."

David Farnan, Boulder's director of library and arts, said he hopes to bring more activity to the north building of the library and to the surrounding Civic Area, and the library has hired a curator with expertise in independent films to choose movies for the cinema.

"The curation of the cinema is crucial," he said. "I think if we have the right films, we'll draw the right audience, and then we need to create the right experience so they want to come back."

The library has obtained a liquor license to serve beer and wine at the cinema, and Seeds Library Cafe, run by the Boulder County Farmers' Market, will provide food service.

Advertisement

"The whole idea behind it is to create an awesome experience for the public," Farnan said. "It's a nice space, but it's a little outdated, so we're going to play up the nostalgia effect."

Profits will fund other library programs

The theater will open at 6 p.m. Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays. On Thursdays, when the library is open later, the library will be closed from the theater side to reduce disruption to library patrons.

The Canyon Theater will remain available for library programs and community groups the rest of the time.

While Farnan said he has high hopes for the movie theater, it's not a cheap venture. The digital projector alone costs $25,000, and other startup costs, such as coordinating the sound system with the projector, could bring the capital costs above $50,000. Those costs are being paid with donations to the library's gift fund and from savings in other areas of the library budget. The operational costs will probably be around $100,000 a year, Farnan said.

To break even, the theater needs to average 30 percent capacity across six shows a week, though Farnan hopes for much better attendance. Unlike other library programs, there will be a fee for the movies. That fee has not been determined, but it likely will be similar to or slightly less than regular movie tickets, Farnan said.

If the project makes money, the profits will be put into other library programs, including free matinees for children, Farnan said.

Farnan said the project carries some risk.

"All the indicators are that there is demand, but I am a show-me guy, and I'll believe it when I see it," he said. "I have spent as much time thinking about how we dissolve this as how to make it successful. We will see some bumps."

'We need some alternatives'

At the same time, the cinema project — which will go by Boulder Arts Cinema, taking the name of an old downtown theater — won't have the expenses of a private cinema, particularly rent, Farnan said.

The only other art house theaters in Boulder are the 60-seat Boedecker Theater at the Dairy Center for the Arts and the International Film Series at the University of Colorado, which shows movies in the Muenzinger Auditorium.

Landmark Theatres closed its Crossroads Cinema on Pearl Street in 2007. The six-screen theater showed mainstream Hollywood movies as well, but on any given night, several screens were dedicated to independent fare.

Maher said he doesn't see the new theater competing with the Boedecker theater because each has just one screen, while most art house theaters have several screens. In fact, the lack of space for a multi-plex has been a barrier to bringing a private art house theater to the downtown area, Maher said.

Bill Obermeier, executive director of the Dairy, could not be reached Friday afternoon.

Maher said an art house cinema has been a goal of downtown Boulder boosters for a long time.

"We need some alternatives," he said. "We have great live music venues. We have great restaurants. But we're limited in other entertainment options. It gives people another reason to come downtown, and once here, they'll patronize our restaurants and enjoy the mall."

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere