Generous company pensions where workers’ retirement income is linked to their last wage are “dead and gone” - and the Government’s dramatic proposals to reform the pensions system, announced last week, sounded their death knell.

This is how the wider pensions industry - comprising consultants, insurers, fund managers and large employers - are viewing the controversial consultation document published on Thursday under the title “Reshaping workplace pensions for future generations.”

If anything, say experts, the document highlights just how much worse off future generations will be than their elders. It marks the “watershed” moment that separates today’s acute pensions problems from a “long-vanished, golden-age past”.

The proposals sparked immediate anxiety among millions of members of generous schemes, who feared valuable benefits, such as inflation-proofing, or benefits for a surviving spouse, might be watered down.

The suggested changes do pose a threat to a group of workers - estimated to number in hundreds of thousands, or low millions - still contributing to schemes. But the prosposals would not harm entitlements already built up by workers. Nor would they impact the millions of people already retired, and enjoying the benefits they built up during their careers.

At the heart of the controversy is the “final salary” or “defined benefit” type of pension where an employer promises to pay workers a pension linked to the wage at which they retired. The arrangements factored in years of service, too, so longstanding employees could typically hope to retire on a maximum pension equivalent to two-thirds of their final salary, set to rise in line with inflation until their death.

These schemes were rolled out by big employers after the war, and rapidly became the norm for workers of all pay grades during the Sixties, Seventies and Eighties. In 1963, £1 in £4 of all pension savings in the private sector was in a final-salary type scheme. By 1979, which was the peak of this form of pension saving, this proportion had rocketed to £9 in every £10.

Then came the great reversal. Increased lifespans, successive changes to legislation which made the arrangements more costly to employers, and poor investment returns came toegther to make the schemes unaffordable.

So companies - having once offered “Rolls Royce” pensions which were the envy of the world - switched to meaner schemes where workers were given no guarantees and relied solely on investment returns to grow their retirement pot. These latter arrangements were known as “defined contribution” and are now the norm.

Ros Altmann, pensions campaigner and a leading expert on the rise and fall of Britain’s company pensions, explained: “Successive Governments tried to force employers to take on social welfare responsibilities in their pensions by enshrining additional requirements in law and removing flexibility. Employers were asked to assume a role that normally only the state would fulfil.

“Rather than ensuring schemes would be sufficiently funded to cater for the rising future costs, the Government decided to tax what it believed were 'surpluses’, thereby discouraging employers from building up buffers against bad markets or future demographic and economic change.”

Last week’s proposals were an attempt to strike a new balance between the benefits of final salary schemes on the one hand and the inadequacies of defined contribution on the other. But they come too late to make employers seriously consider improving their offer to younger workers, it was claimed.

John Walbaum, a partner with consultants Hymans Robertson, said: “Companies have long memories. They were burned by previous governments. Why would they want to offer guarantees again, in any form, if there is a risk that future governments will move the goalposts? The bottom line is that any guarantee has to be paid - and businesses understandably don’t want to be held to that. Final salary savings are all but closed, they’ve been closing for years, and nothing will stop that process now.”

Others said the Government’s proposals highlighted the extent to which employers’ and employees’ interests were pitted against each other, with neither party wanting to shoulder the burden of risk. The demise of the final salary schemes, where huge risks were born by employers, gave way to the opposite scenario - where all the risk was placed on the individual. The main risks relate to the length of the retiree’s life, during which the pension savings has to be eeked out, and investment risk - where capital can be lost through falling stock markets or lower-than-expected returns.

As well as highlighting the generational divide between the “baby boomers” who enjoy final salary schemes and later generations, who won’t be so well provided for, the Government’s paper underscores the distinction between private sector pensions and those in the public sector. These are largely final-salary, with the guarantee provided by the state.

Ms Altmann said: “Taxpayers are still going to guarantee the pensions for public sector workers for many years ahead, and I do hope public sector workers will value and appreciate just how generous their pension arrangements are, both in absolute and relative terms.”

- How to give yourself a richer retirement: Get tips each week in our weekly newsletter

Use our free Annuity Calculator to discover how much income you could receive.