Kiz: We knew the Denver offense would look different under the direction of new coach Gary Kubiak. But this is ridiculous. Oh, for those wild-and-crazy days of John Fox. Only two years ago, the Broncos set an NFL record for most points scored in a season. This season, they could have no offensive player picked for the Pro Bowl for the first time since 2007. Tell me I’m wrong. Please.

Renck: I’d like nothing more than to scream you’re wrong. However, the possibility exists. If a Broncos offensive player makes it to the Pro Bowl, it will be on reputation — not on this year’s statistics. Wide receiver Emmanuel Sanders is the most deserving. His numbers, though, tailed off after he suffered a shoulder injury at Cleveland and an ankle injury at Indianapolis. He has only 36 yards receiving the past two games, undermining his numbers at a position where multiple AFC players have gone bonkers.

Kiz: It all starts with the quarterback in the NFL, and Denver no longer has an elite one. Neither Brock Osweiler nor Peyton Manning is lighting up the scoreboard in the playoffs. I just hope one of them can make it through the playoffs without being crushed under a shaky offensive line. Is Evan Mathis or Louis Vasquez worthy of the Pro Bowl? When Denver declined to trade for Cleveland tackle Joe Thomas, did John Elway turn his back on a bona fide offensive star and toss away his best chance to win a championship?

Renck: The Joe Thomas price tag was outrageous. The Browns wanted their Herschel Walker deal, asking for first-, second- and third-rounders in 2016. Of course, having Thomas would have helped. I respect that Elway showed restraint. I’m not sure this is a Super Bowl title team even with Thomas, and losing three high draft picks would leave gaping roster holes starting next season.

Kiz: The biggest mystery of this season is Demaryius Thomas. Actually, he’s no mystery at all. Thomas possesses splendid athletic gifts. And he’s so likable, because D.T. is a softie at heart. But maybe that’s the problem. He does not have the “get outta my way” competitive edge I like to see in a truly elite wide receiver. Too much distracts him. Let’s be honest. It’s hard to live up to a $70 million contract, and Thomas has handled it poorly.

Renck: Thomas has been out of sorts since training camp, when he spent several weeks working to get into football shape. He has had a lot on his mind with his contract and the release of his mother to a halfway house. I see a player on Sundays trying to turn short routes into touchdowns. His desire to do too much has left him not doing enough. He needs to get back to basics, take what the defense gives him and relax. When you think, you stink in pro sports. Just play ball.