Editor’s Note: Hubert Zajicek is the president and CEO of Health Wildcatters, the downtown healthcare startup accelerator that we have written about extensively. The 33rd annual JP Morgan Healthcare Conference took place earlier this week in San Francisco. The invite-only event attracts some of the industry’s most forward-thinking and influential characters. Zajicek was invited. So D Healthcare Daily asked him to write about what he saw. His report is below.

SAN FRANCISCO — Thousands of investment bankers, healthcare CEOs, and analysts stuffed the hallways and conference rooms of Westin Union Square Hotel in San Francisco last weekend. As an attendee, it was physically challenging to maneuver the narrow hallways and finding a seat practically anywhere was particularly difficult.

The conference attendees spilled onto Union Square in front of the hotel last Tuesday to discuss the latest news, strike deals, and exchange notes. The conference is the healthcare trend-setting event of the year and has been for more than three decades.

Healthcare and deal making is alive and well and the politicians are not far off. Keynotes by Ezekiel Emanuel, the bioethicist and fellow at the Center for American Progress, and former U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice rounded out the program, reminding us that healthcare represents a sixth of the U.S. economy and is as political as ever.

Drug pricing is a hot topic, with exceedingly expensive cancer drug treatments drawing the ire of payers and the government. Dr. Emanuel openly challenged the value of treating such terminally ill patients. The showdown at the Supreme Court in March to effectively de-fund Obamacare will have to be on all of our radar screens, as it affects all healthcare consumers.

The term “healthcare consumer” is being used more by the digital health players, who see the future in a collaborative approach between informed healthcare consumers and a less paternalistic system of healthcare delivery. It will be interesting to see which trends hold, and which fold over the course of the year. One thing is for sure: big data and digital health will play an ever-increasing role in all of our lives.

San Francisco is hosting many dozens of related events this week, whether it is other investment-conferences or social get-togethers by all the bio-pharma, medical devices, and other industry powerhouses.

With seven tracks running in concert at the conference, it is literally impossible for one person to give a comprehensive overview of all the relevant activity. But below are some of my observations and insights gained over the span of my attendance at the event.

Digital Health: It was easy to spot the events having to do with Digital Health or Mobile Health. These sessions had more attendees standing than sitting; there were no empty seats. Most impressive was the 23andMe presentation, which was so overrun, that there were several dozen people in the hallway listening from outside the room. Other notables in this category were Truven a data analytics company; Teladoc, a D/FW based leader in telemedicine (that D Healthcare Daily has profiled); Airstrip, a San Antonio based company creating the networks to deliver real-time monitoring; ShareCare a health-based social network; Health Catalyst a data warehousing company; Flatiron Health an oncology database that raised $130 million from Google, among others; and Doximity a safe and HIPAA compliant social network for doctors. The companies in this space raised a record $4 billion last year. Business models are being proven while IPOs in this space are still rare. Health wearables faded away a bit; they had more of a showing at the Consumer Electronic Show the week before in Las Vegas than here in San Francisco.

Rare and deadly diseases and implantable solutions: Rare and difficult to treat diseases received a lot of attention. These developers of orphan drugs also have become an interesting takeover target. Case in point, just before the conference got kicked off, Shire announced its acquisition of NPS Pharmaceuticals, an orphan drug developer for $5.2 billion. Novocure, has a novel approach with electric fields to treat Glioblastoma, one of the deadliest forms of brain cancer. Their phase III clinical trials were terminated at interim analysis due to early success. This only happens when it would be unethical to withhold clearly superior treatment from patients. Intarcia presented a novel insulin delivery mechanism, which would allow patients to get one dose a year.

Generics, Bio-similars and Diagnostic Testing: Some of the larger publically traded companies like Hospira (generic drug manufacturer), Rite-Aid (pharmacy-chain similar to Walgreens & CVS), or Quest Diagnostics reported continued robust growth. Rite-Aid benefitted from generics and re-financing of debt, Hospira from bio-similars which are more costly to bring to market, but more profitable than generics and Quest from a continued expansion as the current market leader in lab services. Diagnostics and genetic testing remain an active field of healthcare investment activity. Whether it is to support justification of the use of expensive drugs, or discovery of rare diseases. With full human genetic testing dropping into the $1,000 cost range, it is easier to talk about truly “personalized medicine.” Discoveries here will deliver opportunities to develop unique approaches to cures for many years to come. Also, a trend to incorporate clinics in pharmacies is expected to continue to grow, if Rite-Aid is to be believed.