Who suffered from New York pols' payoff cases? Defense for key state legislators downplays impact, but others say society, people do suffer

Albany

After ex-state Sen. Tom Libous was convicted on a single felony charge last summer, he made a final plea for his freedom. The once-powerful Republican had helped his son land a job at a politically connected law firm, and promised the firm that the young man's employment would be subsidized by an Albany lobbying firm. A jury found that he had lied about the arrangement to FBI agents.

But in the end, he insisted it was a victimless act.

"I never sent business to the law firm that hired my son," Libous wrote to Judge Vincent Briccetti in his plea for leniency. "I did not propose any bills that would benefit the lobbyist that hired the law firm."

Libous' case is one of three recent, high-profile New York political corruption prosecutions brought by Southern District U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara that are at or near their conclusions. Last week in federal court in Manhattan, ex-Democratic Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver was convicted on seven felony counts. In a nearby courtroom, the trial of former Republican Senate Majority Leader Dean Skelos and his son, Adam, is nearing its own finale.

These trials have churned up voluminous details about schemes in which politicians or their relatives were paid by special interests with extensive business before New York government.

In some cases, however, defense attorneys have argued that no one suffered as a result — and in fact, they claim, the public may have benefited.

Silver's attorneys, for instance, argued there was nothing wrong with the speaker steering state grants toward potentially life-saving mesothelioma research — or Silver then referring patients who had been exposed to asbestos to the personal injury law firm where he was "of counsel" — an arrangement that brought the patients "economic justice" (along with millions in referral fees for Silver).

Prosecutors and affected interest groups, however, maintain that these kinds of arrangements are far from victimless, and have skewed incentives and unfairly tilted public policies in often unexpected ways.

There are, of course, obvious differences between the theft of a wallet and the theft of a legislator's "honest services," a legal term of art that's at the heart of the Skelos and Silver cases. It's difficult to precisely chart cause and effect in a political system shrouded in secrecy, but the victims from the most recent round of indictments may include everyone from New York City's low-income tenants to upstate medical patients, and potentially every New Yorker that pays for auto or home insurance.

"I think elites are less likely to feel the pain of corruption," said Zephyr Teachout, a scholar on political corruption and a 2014 Democratic candidate for governor. "But poor and middle class people see that they, and the public at large, are all victims."

In the case of Libous, Bharara's office argued that corruption unfairly tilted the state's transportation policy.

In 2005, Libous arranged for his son, Matthew, to land a $150,000-per-year job at a politically connected Westchester County law firm. But Libous' team maintained no one got hurt by the deal: He was not charged with any quid pro quo arrangement, and the defense claimed it was "impossible for the (non-existent) victim" to have been victimized.

Bharara's office argued in its sentencing memorandum that as part of Matthew Libous' hiring, his father had arranged for an Albany lobbying firm, Ostroff Hiffa, to pay $50,000 of Matthew's annual salary. At the time, Libous was chairman of the Senate Transportation Committee, and Bharara's team said the firm's Fred Hiffa would meet with Libous regularly to lobby on behalf of his many transportation clients.

"Contractors and vendors in the transportation industry who did not know enough to retain the lobbyist that was paying off the Transportation Committee chairman and his son did not get the fair hearing and consideration that they expected and to which they were entitled as well," Bharara's office wrote.

"Contrary to the defendant's argument that his crime was victimless," the U.S. attorney's office added, "the people of the State of New York are victims whenever, as here, an elected official abuses the trust the public placed in him by accepting secret payoffs from lobbyists and by covering up his conduct."

The judge sided with Bharara. On Nov. 24, in a White Plains court room, Briccetti sentenced Libous, who has terminal cancer, to six months house arrest and a $50,000 fine.

Silver, the former Assembly speaker, was convicted last week in Manhattan in connection with two schemes.

According to Silver's attorney, he was a "great champion" of tenants rights during a time when rents in New York City have soared. According to a 2014 study released by the Community Service Society, between 2002 and 2011, New York City lost 385,000 units of housing affordable to low-income residents — over 40 percent of units in that category.

But during his trial, Silver was found to have arranged payments from developers to a law firm that handled property tax appeals for real estate companies, yielding hundreds of thousands of dollars in fees for the speaker. In 2011, lobbyists for one of those developers, Glenwood Management, met with Silver to push the luxury apartment builders' agenda on the lucrative 421-a tax break program, which incentivizes the building of affordable housing, as well as rent regulations — both then close to expiring.

According to testimony from one lobbyist, Richard Runes, Glenwood ended up getting largely what it wanted out of the renewal of both programs.

"We knew Senate Republicans were in the pocket of the real estate industry, so that wasn't a surprise," tenant activist Michael McKee told the Times Union, describing the 2011 negotiations. "What was really surprising was that Sheldon Silver sold us out after he had positioned himself as this great defender of tenants' rights."

McKee added, "They made very minor alterations at the very edges and called it a great tenant victory while they left every loophole in place so that Glenwood could get more (market-rate) units into the system."

Silver was also found guilty last week of steering $500,000 worth of state Department of Health grants to mesothelioma research being conducted by Dr. Robert Taub of Columbia University, who then steered patients toward the personal injury law firm Weitz & Luxenberg. Silver reaped millions in referral fees.

Taub testified he cozied up to Silver to land money for underfunded research on a deadly, rare condition.

"I'm put on this earth to help these people," Taub said. "That's what I want to do."

Others say it was unfair to taxpayers to distribute the money secretly and outside any procurement rules. And some relatives of patients believe the referrals to Weitz & Luxenberg may have hurt the patients Taub was trying to help.

One relative of a patient Silver referred to Weitz & Luxenberg recently told the New York Post she was "convinced the law firm would've worked much harder for my father's case if they weren't giving Sheldon Silver the 33 percent."

On the other hand, Silver is believed to have wielded influence over New York City's special court for asbestos cases – a setup critics say slanted the process against businesses facing off against Weitz & Luxenberg.

Tom Stebbins, executive director of the Lawsuit Reform Alliance of New York, which advocates for tort reform, said Silver held up efforts to rein in New York's medical liability payouts, which are by far the highest in the nation — even higher than California.

"The idea of a no show job paying hundreds of thousands of dollars for no work is a farce," Stebbins said of the ex-speaker, who did no actual legal work. "(Silver's) one job to continue to get paid was not to piss off his employer, Weitz and Luxenberg."

California has passed such medical liability reforms. Stebbins said the lack of action here is the main cause for a spate of New York City hospital closures and a lack of access to care in a number of upstate counties, including 11 that have no OB/GYN services.

Stebbins believes New York's high medical liability payouts may have set the conditions for another alleged plot — one that connects the Silver and Skelos cases.

In a lesser-publicized aspect of Skelos' trial, the former Senate majority leader is accused of arranging a no-show job for his son, Adam, at Physicians' Reciprocal Insurers, a financially struggling medical malpractice insurer on Long Island. Skelos then allegedly pushed through legislation favorable to PRI including a measure in the 2015 budget that prevented the state Department of Financial Services from liquidating medical malpractice insurers with a negative balance through 2019.

PRI is reportedly one of only two companies in the state fitting that profile.

Some in the insurance industry believe the exemption could contribute to skyrocketing insurance premiums for New Yorkers.

Ellen Melchionni, president of the New York Insurance Association, which represents property and casualty insurers, argued that insurance companies need to maintain an surplus to pay future claims — and that allowing an insurer to operate in the red is "incredibly risky."

Insurers pay into a property and casualty guaranty fund that in essence operates as an insurance pool for insurance companies. If a medical malpractice insurer (such as PRI) went insolvent, its claims would be paid off out of the fund — increasing the assessments on other types of insurance companies. That cost would ultimately be passed on to policyholders. "New York law has strict requirements for the financial stability of an insurance company," Melchionni said in a statement. "The fact that there is another law on the books granting an exemption ... to medical malpractice insurance companies from these stringent requirements not only puts medical liability policyholders at risk, but all New York residents and companies who purchase auto, home and business insurance coverage."

The schemes outlined by Bharara, of course, represent what his office felt could be proven and prosecuted. More broadly, the U.S. Attorney has characterized his cases as an indictment of New York's political culture. He has criticized the fact that many legislative decisions are made by the so-called "three men in a room" — the governor, Assembly speaker and Senate majority leader.

In a speech at Manhattan's Waldorf Astoria Hotel in April, Bharara denounced the "massive opportunity cost" of public corruption, and suggested that despite his efforts, much has gone unseen and unpunished.

"How many past bills were born of bribery?" Bharara said. "How many items in the budget? How much of the work of city and state government is tarnished by tawdry graft, and how much will be unless there is some reform?"

cbragg@timesunion.com • 518-454-5303 • @chrisbragg1