Rev. Franklin Graham. (Phto: BGEA)

Because of his promotion of gay issues, President Barack Obama opened the “floodgates of acceptance” of “sexual immorality,” said Rev. Franklin Graham, who added that the rainbow, a sign given from God after the flood in the Old Testament, is conversely shown in Revelation as preceding “the unstoppable wrath” that will fall on “all who rebel against Christ.”

“[U]nder the zealous gay/lesbian activism of President Obama -- who in his first term actually opposed same-sex marriage -- the floodgates of acceptance of this practice of sexual immorality were opened wide,” said Rev. Graham in his commentary for the September issue of Decision magazine.

“Never, though, would I have dreamed that our president would light up the White House with the vivid, bright rainbow colors of the gay movement,” said the reverend, son of pastor Billy Graham. “It was a deliberate, measured step by the president to flaunt and celebrate a disastrous [Supreme Court] ruling that blatantly defies God’s moral law.”

The evening of the Supreme Court’s ruling (5-4) that homosexual “marriage” was a constitutional right, the White House was illuminated with the colors of the rainbow, which is the symbol for the homosexual movement.

As for the rainbow in the book of Genesis, Rev. Graham explained that, “The rainbow came after the iniquity of man had become such a stench in God’s nostrils that God acted to cleanse the earth, sparing only Noah and his family. At Christ’s return, the earth, the heavens and mankind will come under the intense judgment of God.”

“When the rainbow appears in the Book of Revelation, it precedes the impending, unstoppable wrath that will come upon all who rebel against Christ,” said Rev. Graham, who oversees the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association.

The White House, illuminated in gay rainbow colors to celebrate the Supreme Court's ruling that homosexual "marriage" is a civil right. (AP)

Rev. Graham continued, “The Apostle John writes: ‘Then I saw another mighty angel coming down from heaven, wrapped in a cloud, with a rainbow over the head, and his face was like the sun, and his legs like pillars of fire’ (Revelation 10:1).”

“Unprecedented woes of God’s end-time judgment have commenced, as Almighty God prepares a new Heaven and a new Earth where righteousness reigns and sin is forever banished,” said Rev. Graham.

The immorality and depravity of contemporary society mirrors that of dying Rome, said the reverend.

“I cannot overstate what a dangerous era we have now entered,” he said. “Immorality and depraved debauchery are not only endorsed by courts and political leaders, but these are joyfully celebrated. God’s standards are mocked and ridiculed in the process, and the battle lines are clearly drawn for decades to come between a decadent, defiant culture and believers who are committed to the truth of the Gospel.”

“Attempts to throw off biblical morality never result in the freedoms anticipated,” said Rev. Graham. “The end is always increasing enslavement to immorality, a consequence that ultimately can lead to the demise of a civilization.”

“Destructive behavior of every kind is gradually unleashed, ushering in increasing lawlessness and corruption,” he said. “I don’t think we realize the horror that awaits a people who rebel and reject God’s authority.”

In addition to running the BGEA, evangelist Franklin Graham is the president of the international Christian relief group Samaritan’s Purse. Rev. Graham, 62, is married and has five children. He regularly preaches in the United States and around the globe.