Marti Gobel portrays both teachers and students in Next Act’s “No Child.” Credit: Timothy Moder

SHARE Marti Gobel portrays both students and teachers in Next Act’s “No Child.” Timothy Moder Marti Gobel portrays both teachers and students in Next Act’s “No Child.” Timothy Moder

By ,

Before taking the stage, they spend countless hours preparing for performances that are rarely remembered. On stage, they'll challenge an audience with an increasingly short attention span to think harder, about issues that are frequently slighted or ignored.

They'll then be pilloried by snarky, sometimes stupid critics who haven't done their homework and frequently don't understand what's being presented. And they're grossly underpaid for work that not only changes but also saves lives.

True of actors, what I've written is equally applicable to teachers, as one sees in Nilaja Sun's semi-autobiographical "No Child," featuring a teaching theater artist in a Bronx high school. Showcasing an amazing Marti Gobel playing eight of those students and eight additional characters, it's now on stage at Next Act Theatre under Mary MacDonald Kerr's direction.

Channeling the Stage Manager in "Our Town," Gobel first embodies a wizened janitor, who sets the scene while mopping Rick Rasmussen's spare set: chairs heaped upstage before bleak institutional windows, a nearly empty classroom and a free-floating door — which pivots to reveal a chalkboard, underscoring that what's learned provides a portal to other worlds.

Not that these kids seem destined to travel anywhere. When Ms. Sun shows up to launch a program through which they'll read, analyze and then enact a play, these students are all starring in a self-produced drama as juvenile delinquents — true to what they've always been told they are.

Hence Ms. Sun's strategically chosen script for this exercise: Timberlake Wertenbaker's "Our Country's Good," riffing on the true story of how Australia's first convicts staged a play — and discovered they need not remain forever trapped within the confining roles they'd long inhabited.

So much for theory. Practice is another matter.

Playing Ms. Sun's students, Gobel makes clear how hard it is for them to leave behind their own imprisonment within the comforting if limiting roles they've always known, in which various poses and plenty of attitude mask their hungry need to take themselves seriously — and their crippling fear of all they risk if they actually do.

There's no time within this play's brief, 75-minute span to fully sketch each student's ensuing liberation, and some of Gobel's impersonations are sharper than others. But the best among them — often involving students at the moment when they come into their own while reciting lines from Wertenbaker's play — will stay with me a long time.

I'll more readily forget this script's weaker moments.

It's no accident that Sun invokes Arthur Miller; while funnier than anything Miller ever wrote, her script occasionally flirts with being equally sentimental and preachy, despite all Gobel does to keep it real. And I could do without a setup that generates some of its humor by trading on ethnic stereotypes involving two ridiculously hapless female teachers, only to see a male teacher ride to everyone's rescue.

But the abiding and inspiring impression left by the highly recommended "No Child" involves a teacher who, like the phenomenally talented actor who plays her, isn't afraid to live her passionate conviction that theater can remake the world's stage — and that there's a vital role awaiting every child making an entrance upon it.

IF YOU GO

"No Child" continues through Feb. 22 at Next Act Theatre, 255 S. Water St. For tickets, call (414) 278-0765 or go to nextact.org.