Meredith Ludlow lives in San Francisco.

An occasion like the 70th V-E Day anniversary, celebrated this month, would normally have spurred lengthy conversation between my armchair historian father and me. But not this year. My father, a Vietnam veteran, recently died of health complications related to his combat PTSD. For nearly 20 years, my family and I tried without success to prevent his self-destruction. We spent three years attempting to identify what plagued him, six years convincing him to get help, two years fighting to get him treatment from Veterans Affairs, and another eight years navigating the byzantine VA system. Yet in just 10 minutes we obtained VA approval for his burial in a national cemetery.

But this isn’t surprising. Lawsuits filed in April against VA over disability claims, coupled with the Justice Department’s 2014 criminal investigation of VA facilities nationwide, highlight the chronic obstacles veterans face in obtaining treatment. Less obvious is the reality that, absent an effective VA system, it is families who are fulfilling the government’s responsibility to care for our vets. They face their own daunting challenges and desperately need support.

Congress has long acknowledged this but has taken minimal action. In a little-publicized 2008 congressional hearing, the House Committee on Veterans’ Affairs discussed changing the paradigm of veteran care. Committee members and experts who testified argued that families play a pivotal role in the veteran recovery process. Care, therefore, should focus on the family as a whole — not the veteran in isolation. But seven years later, this shift hasn’t occurred.

During the hearing, congressional members recognized that families are often first to detect combat-related problems. My father’s PTSD surfaced 30 years after his deployment. Seemingly overnight he morphed from a successful businessman and community leader into someone who struggled to hold a job, abused alcohol and avoided human contact. Then more distinctly service-related symptoms emerged. Returning home from high school basketball practice one night, my brother found himself staring down the barrel of a rifle. In the midst of a flashback, my father had mistaken his son for a Viet Cong soldier.

In retrospect, though, subtle signs of illness had existed for years. Had we known what to look for we could have intervened sooner. While VA has added educational tools and resources to its Web site, that’s not enough. Lifelong communication and outreach with the veteran and family members are crucial.

Committee members also cited VA’s lack of “cohesiveness” in ensuring families receive adequate support. Because incorrect financial eligibility criteria were used in evaluating my father’s VA application, he was initially denied services. It took two years of petitioning VA, plus our local representative’s personal intercession, before this mistake was rectified. And once into the system, we encountered a fragmented organization that placed the onus of care coordination on veterans and their families. Each time my father entered a new VA program, we felt like we were starting over. One set of social workers handled PTSD inpatient treatment, another set primary care outpatient and yet others substance abuse. A navigator — someone assigned to every veteran’s family to coordinate entry into and continuity of care within the VA system — would have helped immensely.

This navigator could also direct families to the appropriate resources. This year alone, I have spoken with VA Medical Center, Vet Center, Veterans Crisis Line and Caregiver Support staff, inquiring about family counseling and support services. While committed to helping veteran families, VA staff often lacked awareness of the resources available, provided conflicting guidance or routed me back to Web sites containing generic information. Families need a single point of contact who can offer a holistic approach to care.

Beyond bearing the burden of care, the House committee hearing also addressed the “secondary trauma” families experience when witnessing a loved one’s unraveling. Due to my father’s unemployment, we had to sell our home. As he acquired DUIs, we dealt with the legal consequences. And each time alcohol withdrawal sent him to the intensive-care unit, we braced ourselves for the end. Given this overwhelming stress, I sought out counseling with VA but was told I had to find help on my own.

Within the VA system, family treatment is currently tied to the veteran. Families can’t access services until the veteran chooses to seek help, enters treatment and provides permission for family members to obtain care. But when an ill veteran doesn’t recognize his own problems let alone those of his family, this cooperation is unattainable. Unless the current law governing services for veteran family members is amended, families will struggle to access the affordable and specialized treatment they need.

If Congress and VA are truly committed to changing the paradigm of veteran care, families need to be front and center. Goals and metrics on family-centered programs should be incorporated into VA’s strategic plan and monitored for performance. Last year’s VA Performance and Accountability Report contained nine pages on burial service metrics, but none on family-focused programs. For veteran families like mine it’s about the quality of care while our veterans are alive, not the quality of the headstone when they die.