People Moves of the Week: Clayton Dubilier & Rice, BlackRock, Dickstein Shapiro

BlackRock hires new managaing director; Dickstein Shapiro grows corporate finance practice; CD&R names Jillian Griffiths COO

BlackRock Inc. (NYSE: BLK) — Andrew Marquardt came aboard the New York investment management firm as a managing director. Previously, he was with Evercore Partners, which he joined in 2010. Before that, Marquardt was at investment bank Fox-Pitt Kelton Cochran Caronia Waller, which was sold to Macquarie Capital in 2009.

Clayton Dubilier & Rice — Ravi Sachdev, former managing director for health care coverage and co-head of health care services at JPMorgan Chase & Co. (NYSE: JPM), is set to join the New York private equity firm as a partner. He had been with JPMorgan since November 2010. Before that, Sachdev was a managing director at Deutsche Bank AG from 2007 to 2009. Prior to that, Sachdev was a banker at Peter J. Solomon Co., where he advised the sale of Peoria, Illinois-based Rohn Industries Inc. Separately, CD&R named Jillian Griffiths (pictured) as chief operating officer. She will oversee the firm's finance, information technology, human resources, legal and office services operations. Griffiths, a 22-year M&A veteran, was previously a partner of PwC.

Dickstein Shapiro LLP — The Stamford, Connecticut-based law firm has expanded its corporate finance practice. Victoria H. Zerjav was hired as a partner, while counsel James Markwood joined in Washington, D.C. Zerjav joins Dickstein Shapiro from Kelley Drye & Warren LLP, also in Stamford. She focuses on employee benefits and executive compensation. Markwood, who was previously a special counsel with Dickstein Shapiro from 1986 to 1995, focuses on tax law for corporate clients. He was last at KPMG LLP.

Hogan Lovells — The Washington, D.C.-based law firm announced that Ron Silverman has joined its finance practice as a partner. Working out of New York, Silverman will advise companies on restructuring and insolvency. Silverman was previously a partner at Bingham McCutchen LLP. Hogan Lovells was formed in 2010 when Hogan & Hartson merged with London-based Lovells.

Kirkland & Ellis LLP — Louis Hernandez has returned to the Chicago law firm as a partner. He rejoins Kirkland from the Chicago branch of Paul Hastings LLP, where he was also a partner. Hernandez concentrates his practice on financing transactions, including leveraged buyouts and acquisition financings. He has also worked at law firms Altheimer & Gray, which shut down in 2003, and Goldberg Kohn Bell Black Rosenbloom & Moritz Ltd.

Pacific Investment Management Co. LLC (Pimco) — David Hammer has returned to the New York investment firm as an executive vice president and portfolio manager. He had joined Pimco in 2012 as a senior vice president but left in 2014 for Morgan Stanley (NYSE: MS) to be a managing director, overseeing municipal trading and research. Before his first stint at Pimco, Hammer was the head of the high yield and distressed municipal bond trading group at Morgan Stanley.

Paul Hastings LLP — The Los Angeles-based law firm brought in David Shine, a health care specialist, as a partner. At Paul Hastings, Shine will be chair of the firm’s M&A practice in the New York office. Previously, he was at Fried Frank Harris Shriver and Jacobson as co-head of M&A. Shine has also advised companies in the aerospace and defense sector, as well as energy, telecommunications and financial services. Past clients include Merck & Co. Inc., Northrop Grumman Corp., GE Capital, Medco Health Solutions Inc. and Vodafone Group plc.

Schiff Hardin LLP — The New York law firm hired Ryan Poscablo as a litigation partner. Poscablo, who served for nearly six years as an Assistant U.S. Attorney in the southern district of New York, is a corporate internal investigator. He specializes in white collar criminal defense and cybersecurity. From 2005 to 2009, Poscablo was an associate at Weil Gotshal and Manges LLP.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: