Topics: Bill Nye, Christianity, Creationism, Editor's Picks, History, ken ham, Religion, Life News

In the annals of great American nuttiness, the recent live-streamed creation vs. evolution debate between former kids’ television host and all-around mega-egghead Bill Nye and Young Earth Creationist Ken Ham will forever hold a distinguished place. Held on February 4 at the Petersburg, Ky., Creation Museum, which serves as the flagship enterprise for Ham’s Christian fundamentalist Answers in Genesis ministry, the science vs. religion smackdown showcased two competing theories about the origin and nature of life that have come to shape much of the sociopolitical discourse in modern America.

It’s unlikely that the debate ultimately changed any minds, but it did demonstrate a long-running historical theme that has made the U.S. fertile ground for the belief that God created humankind with a providential purpose. Since the days when the Puritans first arrived on its shores, Americans have believed that their nation was specially ordained by God to create a perfected society on earth untainted by the sins of the Old World. The origins of the simultaneously maligned and revered notion of “American Exceptionalism” can be found in the earliest Puritan attempts to forge a Godly society out of America’s supposedly uncivilized landscape, and this early attempt at creating heaven on earth made the U.S. susceptible to creationism.

Although Ken Ham is a native Aussie, he comes from a country spawned, like the United States, from the once-powerful British Empire. Australia and the U.S. share many cultural similarities, including a penchant for fundamentalist Christianity, and Ham’s twenty-plus years in America preaching the gospel of Young Earth creationism have made him every bit the pugnacious adopted Yankee. Ham’s beliefs are, to put it scientifically, flat-out bonkers. He contends that God created humans exactly as depicted in the Book of Genesis; that the earth is only 6,000 years old; that humans once coexisted with dinosaurs and, most significantly, that the Bible is the literal, inerrant word of God. Yep, Ham is the most extreme type of biblical literalist, and has no compunctions about using the Bible as the complete guide to history, geography, paleontology and theology all in one neat package.

Ken Ham’s beliefs don’t even represent the majority of American Christians, whether they be Evangelical, Catholic, mainline Protestant or otherwise. Heck, Ham is even too out-there for televangelist Pat Robertson, who declared on his “700 Club” broadcast that “to say that it all came about in 6,000 years is just nonsense and I think it’s time we come off of that stuff and say this isn’t possible.” But if Bill Nye the Science Guy seemed at times to be utterly flummoxed over the awe-inspiring logical fallacies that characterize Ham’s beliefs, it’s worth noting that this debate was less about evolution and more about competing ideas about the nature of human existence.

Over at the Unemployed Philosopher’s Blog, philosopher Daniel Mullin writes that, “the contest between creationists and evolutionists is not really a debate about data. It’s a contest between philosophical worldviews, naturalism and supernaturalism respectively.” Mullin notes that Ham’s views make a weird sort of sense when you realize that creationists are primarily concerned with consistency. If God is consistently in control of the world, then God can do anything, including making it physically possible for every animal on earth, dinosaurs included, to fit onto a pious geriatric’s oversize boat so as to survive a world flood. As Sean McElwee notes, Nye debated to defend evolution, but Ham was there to argue that evolution leads to moral degeneration, which he claims has driven the U.S. down a hellish path of same-sex marriage, abortion and other alleged spiritual abominations. Thus, while Nye aimed for the head, spouting the irrefutable evidence for natural selection, Ham aimed for the soul, arguing that accepting evolution means turning away from God. By turning away from God, he claims, the U.S. has renounced its once glorious status as the greatest nation on earth.

Ham and other like-minded creationists employ the historical tradition of the jeremiad — a type of political sermon or manifesto that laments the state of society and warns of imminent doom unless society changes its ways — in an attempt to expunge evolution from public discourse and return America to what they see as a Christian-centered society. The jeremiad has deep roots stretching back to America’s Puritan beginnings, and those Puritan origins shaped the cultural environment that fosters Young Earth creationism today. Back in 1978, the great Canadian-American scholar Sacvan Bercovitch described the influence of the Puritan jeremiad on American culture in his now-classic book “The American Jeremiad.”

Focusing on jeremiads from Puritan leaders like John Winthrop, whose 1630 sermon “Model of Christian Charity” influenced generations of American thinkers, Bercovitch argues that Puritan jeremiads “entailed a fusion of secular and sacred history,” the purpose of which was “to direct an imperiled people of God toward the fulfillment of their destiny, to guide them individually towards salvation, and directly toward the American city of God.” In this vein, Winthrop exhorted his followers to be as a “City upon a Hill” and work to construct the ultimate theocratic American society that would “shame the faces of many of God’s worthy servants.” Of course, were the Puritans to fail in this charge, they would reap God’s wrath. Thus, Bercovitch explains that the call to make America into a “City of God” was a kind of “ideological consensus” about how American society should be organized “in moral, religious, economic, social, and intellectual matters” in a way that remains “unmatched in any other modern culture.”