Evangelical and LGBT communities don't have to be at war.

Roger Lehman, an elder with West Side Christian Church in Evansville, Ind., hauls bricks to help anchor the lightweight, plastic crosses. (Photo: Denny Simmons, The Evansville Courier & Press, via AP) Story Highlights Discrimination against Christians is being allowed and even applauded.

As a nation, we have fallen into the assumption that Christian and LGBT communities must be enemies.

Scripture does not stereotype people into combative roles. It encourages us to see all persons as individual souls.

I have friends who laugh when I mention discrimination against Christians in the United States. You evangelicals have such a persecution complex, they tell me.

As an evangelical leader and observer, I do believe discrimination against my people is being allowed and even applauded in pockets of America — just as discrimination against homosexuals and others is being allowed in other pockets of the nation.

This time last year Chic-fil-A protests were erupting across the country. The telling moment was not the creative protests, but the public officials who declared the restaurant chain a hate group. Mayors in cities like Chicago and Boston said the private business was no longer welcome in their cities — because of the owner's personal religious beliefs.

Then, at the presidential Inauguration, Reverend Louie Giglio was forced out of participating — because he holds a view on homosexuality that dozens of other inaugural reverends have held for generations.

More recently, three-time Grammy winner Donny McClurklin was first hired and then barred from performing at the anniversary of Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr.'s speech. What did McClurkin (himself an African American reverend) do to be banned? It seems McClurklin has a life story of once being gay and now being a Christian who is not gay. Since his life does not fit the spirit of the age, he is no longer welcome in the public square.

The same culture clash is playing out in quieter towns and lives. Jack Phillips is presently being prosecuted by the Colorado Attorney General for violating human rights - -because as a Christian, he would not bake a cake for a same-sex wedding celebration. After the Colorado Civil Rights Commission decides his case, a local prosecutor could take him to criminal court where he could face a year in jail. (If a lesbian tee-shirt shop owner refused to print anti-gay-marriage tee-shirts, would the same happen? I sure hope not.)

Baker Melissa Klein is facing similar charges from the Oregon State Bureau of Labor and Industries, which could fine her $100,000 in emotional damages for every same-sex wedding she declined to cater.

In New Mexico, the state has already decided against religious liberty. In a unanimous ruling from the state supreme court, Justice Richard Bosson wrote that Christian wedding photographers "now are compelled by law to compromise the very religious beliefs that inspire their lives…the rule of law requires it."

Similar stories are unfolding in schools, cities and universities across the country. Call it a "persecution complex" if you want. The fact is some American Christians are today facing fines, bankruptcy and jail time for their religious beliefs.

Some celebrate this as due revenge against the bigoted Christians. Others of us see it as hostile. For those of us who see it as hostile, what does the Bible say to Christians living in a hostile society? It tells us to show extravagant love to the very people who oppose us. The Apostle Peter writes "Live such good lives among the pagans, that though they accuse you of doing wrong, they may see your good deeds and glorify God" (1 Peter 2:12).

That's not a natural response to injustice. But it was Christ's response. Those of us who believe in Christ must strive toward this — showing radical love to the people who most misunderstand us, who take us to court and run us out of business.

Scripture does show Christians standing up for their legal rights. When arrested, the Apostle Paul stood on his rights as a Roman citizen. American Christians have rights to stand on. But the emphasis in scripture is not Christians defending themselves. It is Christians loving the individuals who misunderstand and accuse us.

As a nation, we have fallen into a simplified TV explanation of our society -- the assumption that the Christian and LGBT communities must be enemies. I know many in the LGBT community are as bothered by this combative narrative as I am. For my side I can say that scripture does not stereotype people into combative roles. It encourages us, instead, to see all persons as individual souls who are loved by Christ.

Christians in America can begin choosing to see the homosexual people in our social circles as individual souls — and never as enemies. All of us can intentionally show love through actions to the relatives, co-workers and neighbors who culture says we should treat as enemies.

Are there people in your life who the culture says are your enemies? Are there people who expect you to be against them? Then those are the very ones to reach out to with generous love.

How? According to Saint Peter, with actions. I guess you could start by baking them a cake. Better yet, call them by name, have them over for dinner, and take the time to learn their story. That's what Jesus did.

John S. Dickerson, an Arizona pastor and journalist, is author of The Great Evangelical Recession: 6 Factors that will Crash the American Church…and How to Prepare.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to theopinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1acnvtD