Obamacare Architect Admits Obama Misled Americans, But…

posted at 3:12 am on November 14, 2013 by Duane Patterson

…it’s such a paltry pittance of a deception, deceit, fraud or out and out lie, because it only applies to a few million people, a mere two to four percent of the people who really couldn’t keep their health care plan if they liked their plan.

On Hugh Hewitt’s radio program Wednesday night, Dr. Jon Gruber, MIT economics professor and the architect behind the drive for the individual mandate, concluded a day where he was seen and/or heard everywhere on cable news outlets and radio to defend Obamacare, knock down criticism, and in some cases, like Hugh’s show, call for dissent to stop and just let it roll out unfettered.

Dr. Gruber responded to noted Obamacare critic Avik Roy of the Manhattan Institute this way.

HH: Okay, so when he says that the forty percent premium increase is coming, he’s wrong, or he’s deceptive, or he is simply not informed as to how the program works? JG: Oh, he knows how it works. He’s just being deceptive. HH: All right. JG: I mean, now basically, now there will be differences across people, but on average, people will pay less. And we’re only, once again, we’re only talking about a minority of people, where I’m talking about the majority of Americans who have insurance from their employer.

Hugh then followed up with the now-infamous Barack Obama promise that you can keep your plan, and your doctor, if you like your plan and your doctor, and asked Dr. Gruber if that was also just as deceptive, being that he has no problem calling deception where he sees is.

JG: The President was, no, he was not being deceptive. I don’t think he was being deceptive. I think the President was not being fully clear in what he said.

Two segments later, Hugh came around to the veracity issue this way.

HH: Dr. Gruber, if a student of yours had plagiarized fifteen percent of a paper he turned in, would he be expelled from MIT? JG: He’d certainly be up for disciplinary action, absolutely. HH: And so if the President misled fifteen percent of the American people, and only fifteen percent, isn’t that a deception of the sort Ron Johnson’s talking about? JG: Okay, the President, he did mislead a small share of the U.S. population. It’s not fifteen percent. As I said, it’s on the order of two to four percent. HH: And so if your student had only plagiarized two to four percent of his paper, would he still be in trouble? JG: Probably, yeah. HH: Yeah. JG: And President Obama has certainly gotten in trouble for this.

I was struck as I heard this of the often misattributed quote that has been alleged to have originated with George Bernard Shaw, Groucho Marx and Winston Churchill. The earliest iteration of this quote was found in as an anecdote in an O. O. McIntyre syndicated newspaper column in 1937.

“They are telling this of Lord Beaverbrook and a visiting Yankee actress. In a game of hypothetical questions, Beaverbrook asked the lady: ‘Would you live with a stranger if he paid you one million pounds?’ She said she would. ‘And if be paid you five pounds?’ The irate lady fumed: ‘Five pounds. What do you think I am?’ Beaverbrook replied: ‘We’ve already established that. Now we are trying to determine the degree.”

So Gruber has established the President misled. We’re just haggling over the number of people, so far, to which he did mislead. The full transcript and audio of the interview are available here, but the takeaway is that even the President’s best Chip Diller, and admittedly, Dr. Gruber is as good a defender of Obamacare as there is, even he can’t calm the panic that is spreading throughout the Democratic Party, as AP captured below in both House and Senate emergency caucus meetings with administration officials.







I know it’s tempting for Republicans to offer a life raft, but after 47 throws that have been previously refused, number 48 should be really simple. Total repeal. If the Democrats say no, I’m comfortable letting America have one more bite at the Obamacare referendum in November of 2014 after they see whether Dr. Gruber was right or not.

Recently in the Green Room: