Managing Editor's Note: Please support our sponsor VOR and consider attending their conference in June in Washington DC., to ensure appropriate care and housing choices for YOUR child in the future. "Making it Happen: Reforming Policy and Law in Support of Person-Centered Quality and Choice." VOR is the ONLY national, nonprofit advocacy organization supporting residential choice from small to large housing options.



By Desiree Kameka, Director of Community Education & Advocacy, Madison House Autism Foundation and Tamie Hopp, Director of Government Relations & Advocacy, VOR

Originally published in EP Magazine; excerpts posted here.

Did you know…

ü In the next decade, over 800,000 on the autism spectrum will transition to adulthood.

ü Almost all states have waitlists for accessing adult support services, yet the average growth of funding nationally is only 3.2%.

ü Almost one million individuals with intellectual and/or developmental disabilities (I/DD) are still living with caregivers over the age of 60.







In response to these staggering statistics, there is a movement of families and local organizations working together to create sustainable solutions to this national housing and support service crisis. They are gathering information at conferences, many have joined together for advocacy as the Coalition for Community Choice, and are sharing solutions at the new Autism Housing Network.

This collective energy and collaboration is in direct response to efforts by some government officials and even advocacy organizations to limit and eliminate certain options based solely on residence or workplace size and location, without assessing the smiles, laughter, sustainability, job security and true empowering sense of community and belonging that is alive and well in these residential and vocational opportunities.

What does policy have to do with housing, employment and service choices?

Federal and state policy and laws are largely responsible for how long term support services (LTSS)­­­­­­­­ are regulated and funded.

In one recent, significant example, the Affordable Care Act of 2010 required that the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) modify their regulations. On January 10, 2014, CMS released the long-awaited final version of the regulations, CMS 2249-F and CMS 2296-F. The new rule defines what CMS considers to be characteristics of “home and community” settings and the new person-centered planning requirements.