The Right Opinion I Want My Country Back

A little over three months ago wrote a column, “The GOP Will Stand or Fall on These Two Issues." It was essentially an open letter to the GOP following their rout of Democrats in the 2014 election, not because Americans love Republicans, but because they wanted the Democrat Party’s odious agenda stopped dead in its progressive tracks. I noted that both issues are going to define Republicans "as fighters for ordinary Americans, or as the go-along-to-get-along, elitist, ruling class wimps you have been for quite some time.” The two issues? Defunding the portion of the DHS budget enabling President Obama’s amnesty-by-executive-order agenda, even if it meant invoking the nuclear option to do so, and preventing the confirmation of Loretta Lynch as Attorney General of the United States. In March the GOP caved on issue one, passing a budget with no strings attached. Last Thursday Republicans doubled down on their cravenness, confirming Loretta Lynch as Eric Holder’s successor.

It’s not the first time. Following the election of George W. Bush in 2000, the GOP obtained the political Holy Grail: majority control of both houses of Congress and the presidency. For the first time in the memory of millions of Americans, the party that professed the principles of limited government and fiscal responsibility were given the so-called keys to the car.

So what did they do? They foisted “compassionate conservatism” on an unsuspecting electorate, which was nothing more than a bogus attempt to disguise the reality they were embracing the very same bureaucracy-expanding, break-the-bank spending beloved by the Left. In fact, until Barack Obama came along and broke all records for fiscal irresponsibility, no other administration added more to the national debt than the Bush administration.

In short, millions of American voters were betrayed by elitist, ruling class wimps passing themselves off as an opposition party.

Even worse, it’s precisely that betrayal that led to Mr. Hope and Change, primarily because Americans take a pretty dim view of being thoroughly bamboozled, and also because the GOP insisted on making the epitome of a go-along-to-get-along GOP hack like John McCain its standard-bearer. The rest, as they say, is history.

I say it was the worst choice for president in my lifetime, and perhaps ever.

Democrats had gained control of Congress in the 2006 midterm, when Americans dealt the GOP a well-deserved thrashing. With the ascension of Barack Obama, they too gained the political Holy Grail. And despite the fact the economy was in shambles, they did what Democrats always do: They massively expanded government by passing ObamaCare, figuring it was the first step to the government-controlled single-payer healthcare system of their dreams. (For those who wonder where such dreams lead, the ongoing abuses of America’s veterans at the hands of virtually unaccountable thugs who administer the VA is your answer).

By the 2010 midterms, a majority of American voters had more than enough hope and change jammed up their collective keisters and handed the House back to the GOP, but left the Senate in the hands of Democrats. For the next four years, Harry Reid, arguably the worst Senate majority leader in modern history, made sure that virtually every bill that passed in the House never saw the light of day, much less received a vote, in the Senate. Reid, in all his crapweasel glory, was so dead against anything getting a vote, the country had no official budget passed for almost four years, relying instead on a series of continuing resolutions to keep government running. And during every bit of that time period, it was Reid, in tandem with our reliably corrupt media, hammering the GOP as the “obstructionist” party.

In 2012, in the midst of the worst economic recovery in the history of the nation, an Obama administration beset by scandals and saddled with a majority of Americans still disgusted by ObamaCare left Mr. Hope and Change ripe for the taking. What did Republicans do? Let me give you one clue by quoting something I wrote in August of 2012:

“Either Mitt Romney and the Republican party doesn’t get it about the media, or they’re just plain stupid. Yesterday, the moderators for the presidential debates were announced. PBS’s Jim Lehrer gets the first presidential debate on October 3rd in Denver, CO. Next up is CNN’s Candy Crowley in Hempstead, NY on October 16th. Last and not least, CBS’s Bob Schieffer moderates the final debate on October 22nd in Boca Raton, FL. ABC’s Martha Raddatz moderates the one VP debate on October 11th in Danville, KY. Leftists masquerading as even-handed, one and all.”

The second and ultimate clue is contained in the above quote: Once again Republicans nominated a wimp, Milquetoast Mitt Romney. And just like John McCain before him, Mitt’s advisors insisted he run a “high road” campaign. What were Democrats, their media allies and their moderators doing? Dredging up 45-year-old stories implying Romney was a bully and a homophobe, running ads insisting he was responsible for a woman dying of cancer, and running interference for Obama in the second presidential debate, highlighted by “unbiased journalist” Candy Crowley taking Obama’s side and insisting he called Benghazi itself a terrorist attack, when he did nothing of the sort. Romney’s high road campaign ended where all such GOP campaigns end: in ignominious defeat.

After the election, Americans discovered some “inconvenient truths,” the most salient of which was the colossal lie known as terror is “on the run,” courtesy of the same president who told Americans “if they like their healthcare plan they can keep it,” more familiarly known as Politifact's 2013 Lie of the Year.

Again, most Americans don’t like getting bamboozled, and by 2014 the bamboozler-in-chief had worn out his “transformational” welcome. Oblivious to that narcissist-deflating reality, the president insisted that a vote for Democrats was a vote for his policies. Americans got the message and routed Democrats, giving the GOP its largest House majority in more than 70 years, and a nine seat, flip-flop shellacking in the Senate. The message of “stop Obama!” couldn’t have been clearer.

It took the GOP less than four months to squander that mandate completely, ignoring that message in the process.

Thus, Americans are left with two choices: an endless rotation of ruling class elites whose contempt for the electorate grows more palpable with every passing day, or the establishment of another political party.

But not just any third party. Once again, I am calling for a mass resignation of GOP conservatives with name recognition, proven status as winners, and intact fundraising and campaign apparatuses who will form the foundation of that party.

And once again, spare me the moans and groans about how this will insure a permanent Democrat majority. First, if Republicans are acting like Democrats, then you have that already, for all intents and purposes. Second, and far more important, Democrats and the half of the GOP in hock to Silicon Valley and the Chamber of Commerce are in the process of creating that unassailable majority regardless — unless you think the headlong and bipartisan rush towards “comprehensive immigration reform” is merely coincidental. That rush is being exacerbated by the DHS, which is promoting an effort to get more than 9,000,000 green card holders naturalized in time to vote in the 2016 election.

As mentioned above, that would be the same DHS operating with a full budget, courtesy of the GOP.

There is no doubt in my mind that an overwhelming majority of Americans remain as opposed to tossing our traditions, culture, language and Rule of Law on the ash heap of history as they are to the lawless importation of people who will replace them in jobs, working for less pay. And while the argument of reforming the GOP from within the GOP resonates for many, I will remind those people such talk of reform has been going on since the 1960s.

Isn’t half a century of failed reform efforts more than enough?

Nothing worth doing is easy. But there’s a country that needs saving from people who no longer disguise their contempt for the notion that they are supposed to abide by the consent of the governed, not the other way around. There is nothing magically enduring about voting for the lesser of two evils, other than the self-inflicted despair and hopelessness of an electorate convinced that forming a third party is a fool’s errand.

Convinced by whom? A bankrupt ruling class and their equally bankrupt media collaborators, all willing to do anything it takes to make you as despairing and hopeless as possible? They want to make you forget that the overarching legacy of this nation from the Founding Fathers onward has been a whole-hearted embrace of the art of the possible. We can rediscover that legacy — and all the catharsis it would engender. Or we can remain willing dupes of a two-party system that is really one party with two different names, hoping for reform that never comes, and/or complaining about a status quo that is only possible as long as we the people continue to support our own disenfranchisement.

As I’ve said many times before, the lesser of two evils is still evil. I believe we’re better than that.

Much better.

© Copyright 2015 The Patriot Post