Buy Photo Mary Landrieu U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu Mary Landrieu U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-New Orleans, will become the chairwoman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee once the full Senate votes on a resolution officially naming her to the post. Louisiana Gannett U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-New Orleans, could find herself as chairwoman Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee. Louisiana Gannett U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-New Orleans, continues to support the Affordable Care Act, even though the law is unpopular in Louisiana. Gannett Louisiana file photo U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-New Orleans, continues to support the Affordable Care Act, even though the law is unpopular in Louisiana. Gannett Louisiana file photo Mary Landrieu Senator Mary Landrieu speaks to members of the editorial board recently at The Times in Shreveport, Louisiana. Jim Hudelson/The Times (Photo: Jim Hudelson/The Times)Buy Photo

A recent column by Joshua Pellerin praises Sen. Mary Landrieu’s accomplishments. Landrieu and her liberal Democrats have been in charge in the Senate since the last two years of the administration of President George W. Bush until now. They also had control of the House for the last two years of the Bush administration and the first two years of President Barack Obama’s term. All the debt incurred is on Landrieu, U.S. Sen. Harry Reid and Obama, since Obama’s presidency.

I wonder if the moratorium in the Gulf affected Pellerin the way it did for many other energy companies. Where was Landrieu on that?

Pellerin cites her backing of raising the minimum wage and her being against tax breaks for the “wealthy” as she lives in her Washington million dollar mansion. Pellerin and other liberals can pay an employee $20 or $30 an hour, if they choose. Why stop at $10 an hour? Does Mr. Pellerin’s CPA suggest he not use the tax breaks since they are only for the “wealthy?”

Obama is in the 39 percent bracket, but only paid around 25 percent. This is nothing but a straw man to divert attention from her support of Obamacare which caused millions to lose their health coverage and from her free spending at our expense.

This is Landrieu’s record: She voted for gutting the greatest health care system in the world, for policies resulting in record amounts of poverty and the largest amount of non-working Americans since World War II, for policies which keep her constituents depending on government and in turn keep her and others like her in power.

Al Louviere

Lafayette

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/opinion/2014/09/07/another-look-landrieus-record/15261999/