By Oskian Kouzouian, J.D., ORISE Fellow, AIDS.gov, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

There are two opportunities to offer public comment on plans to better understand and improve the health and wellness of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) Americans. These federal plans include but extend beyond HIV, addressing many other health concerns of the LGBT community.

NIH LGBT Research Strategic Plan

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has released its 2016-2020 Strategic Plan to Advance Research on the Health and Well-Being of Sexual and Gender Minorities [PDF 2,228 KB]. This five-year plan promotes and supports the advancement of basic, clinical, and behavioral and social sciences research to improve the health of people whose sexual orientations, gender identities/expressions, and/or reproductive development vary from traditional, societal, cultural, or physiological norms.

The plan is currently available for public comment and NIH is seeking feedback from researchers, health care professionals, health advocates, scientific or professional organizations, public agencies, and other interested members of the public about the proposed goals and objectives. Responses are due November 2, 2015.

To view the plan and for details on submitting public comments, please view the Federal Register notice

Healthy People 2020—Proposed LGBT Health Objectives

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is soliciting written comments on new objectives proposed to be added to Healthy People 2020 since the last public comment period in fall 2014. Public participation helps shape the framework, objectives, and targets of Healthy People 2020.

Comments are sought on on proposed objectives to be added to the following topic areas:

LGBT Health

Social Determinants of Health

Family Planning

Preparedness

The public comment period will be open from October 15, 2015 through November 13, 2015.

To participate in the public comment period, visit HealthyPeople.gov. Comments will be accepted through 5:00 p.m. ET on November 13.