Wagoner County Clerk Lori Hendricks has announced her bid for re-election.

After serving a full term in office, Hendricks said she is very proud of the accomplishments she and her staff have achieved.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

“I believe now, more than ever, with new requirements placed on employers by the affordable care act and an election to renew the county’s sales tax scheduled during the next term, it is imperative to continue to have a clerk with knowledge and experience at the helm,” she said.

Initially running on a promise to increase transparency, Hendricks has made improving the county website a priority.

“It is my hope that visitors to our website will find anything they may be looking for as it relates to county government,” she noted.

Hendricks has added audio recordings of the Monday county commissioners’ meetings online . This gives those who cannot attend meetings an opportunity to listen to proceedings.

Financial audits and the county budget in its entirety are also now posted and residents now have the ability to file documents online.

As a result of these efforts, Wagoner County’s website has been honored by the Sunshine Review, an agency which monitors governmental transparency, with an A- rating.

Fiscal responsibility is a strong focus and Hendricks noted the county clerk is largely responsible for putting together budgetary documentation for the governing boards.

She now provides this information on a five year trend to allow leaders to make better fiscal decisions for the county.

Hendricks said purchasing procedures have been improved by competitively shopping more than what is required by statute. This ensures citizens are getting the most for their tax dollars.

Hendricks said she and her staff have continued to train with the Oklahoma State University county officers training program. She and several of her staff have achieved the highest level of certification and Hendricks now serves on the program’s advisory board.

Knowing that Oklahoma is no stranger to natural disaster, Hendricks’ latest endeavor is to ensure all county records are stored electronically and backed up redundantly off-site.

“You cam be confident that your records are now fully recoverable should we ever experience a catastrophic event at the courthouse,” the county clerk assured.

Hendricks has served on a number of organizational boards including the Tulsa Youth Lacrosse Association, the Broken Arrow Convention and Visitors Bureau and the Magalassi Memorial Scholarship Foundation which promotes teen suicide awareness and prevention.

She and her husband Steve have been married for 25 years and have made their home in Broken Arrow since 1996. Together they have three children and two grandchildren.