BOULDER — One of the biggest Colorado football games in years was delayed twice Saturday night by lightning storms in the area.

Colorado and Oregon players in their warm-up drills were sent back to their locker rooms both times, and fans were urged to seek shelter. The game finally began at 9:08 p.m., the latest start ever for a game at Folsom Field. Previously the latest start was a 2007 loss to Florida State (8:15 p.m.), but that delay was strictly because of television.

Saturday’s game was originally scheduled to begin at 8:07 p.m. to accommodate ESPN. It ended at 12:31 a.m. Sunday.

Before the game a moment of silence was observed for the victims of Thursday’s shooting at Umpqua Community College in southwestern Oregon, which is located about 70 miles from the Oregon campus in Eugene. The Ducks wore helmet decals depicting a remembrance ribbon with the initials UCC for the school where the shootings took place. Colorado helmets bore the same decal on their helmets.

Oregon coach Mark Helfrich asked CU for the moment of silence.

“They were very respectful of that, which I thought was a very class deal by Colorado,” Helfrich said. “They were fantastic about that. Obviously our hearts and minds are there as well.”

Alternating QBs Oregon used two quarterbacks, Jeff Lockie and Taylor Alie. Vernon Adams, who started three of Oregon’s first four games but was replaced by Lockie after an ineffective start in last week’s 62-20 loss to Utah, has a broken index finger on his throwing hand. He also reportedly suffers from sickle-cell trait, which can cause cramping, and that’s more of a risk at altitude.

Lockie, who was Marcus Mariota’s backup last year, started and completed 8 of 11 passes for 54 yards. Alie completed 4 of 9 for 83 yards.

“We had a plan going in, and we wanted to execute that plan,” Helfrich said. “They’ve both done enough good things in practice last week to merit playing. We felt, looking at the game plan, we could parcel out aspects for each. We had divvied it up pretty well in our minds, unless something freaky happened.”

Oregon runners pound CU Royce Freeman rushed for 163 yards and two touchdowns on 27 carries. Taj Griffin added another 110 yards on 11 carries, including a 62-yarder.