Most of the dozen experts and sources I've spoken with the past three weeks have told me that a possible merger or strategic affiliation between Henry Ford Health System and Kaiser Permanente makes sense for a number of reasons.

First, the two integrated delivery systems share operational, cultural, synchronistic and historical similarities.

Both Detroit-based Henry Ford and Oakland, Calif.-based Kaiser employ their own physicians, nurses and operate their own HMOs and hospitals. This is unusual in the health care industry, but a model that some say could be more successful in the future world of bundled service and provider at-risk pricing.

The only real difference between the two systems is the 1,200-physician Henry Ford Medical Group is structured as a nonprofit, and the 17,800-physician Permanente Medical Group is for-profit. Kaiser's health plan and hospital divisions are nonprofit, like Henry Ford.

But both Kaiser and Henry Ford are looking to expand their customer base. Since 2010, Obamacare has helped to reduce the uninsured rate from 16 percent to 13 percent nationally. In Michigan, the uninsured rate has dropped at a greater rate because of Medicaid expansion, to 7.8 percent this year from 13.5 percent in 2010.

Simple math: Reducing the uninsured rate equals more potential customers.

But will a merger or strategic affiliation happen? Nobody knows for sure. Talks like this ebb and flow. And the executives involved aren't talking directly to me.

Another thing to understand, maybe more from a synchronistic standpoint than substantive is that both systems were founded by industrialists with the first name of Henry. You have automaker Henry Ford and shipbuilder Henry Kaiser. The two men named Henry felt prepaid health plans with employed doctors and owned hospitals made the most sense for their workforces.

Kaiser Permanente also shares a historical relationship with Henry Ford that goes back many years.

For example, Ford Motor Co. commissioned Kaiser in the late 1970s to study how HMOs could best serve Detroit. Kaiser recommended Henry Ford reorganize to acquire and incorporate what now is Health Alliance Plan, a 350,000-member commercial HMO.

Sometime in the 1980s, Kaiser and Henry Ford also engaged in merger talks under former CEO Gail Warden.

From a "stars are aligning" standpoint, there also are leadership changes at Henry Ford that point to possible strategic changes for the system.

For example, HAP's CEO James Connelly, who formerly was CFO of Henry Ford Health System, has announced he will retire in December.

Just last week, HAP Midwest Health Plan founder and president Mark Saffer, a podiatric physician, unexpectedly resigned. Midwest Health Plan was acquired in 2011 by Henry Ford for $70 million.

Nancy Schlichting, CEO of Henry Ford, has also announced she will retire in late 2016.

Henry Ford's new president, Wright Lassiter III, last worked at Alameda Health System in Oakland, which is the home base of Kaiser.

"The new president at Ford, Wright Lassiter, brought in to replace (CEO) Nancy (Schlichting) had a very good working relationship with Kaiser in the San Francisco Bay Area," one of my sources told me.

"He has been very involved in the discussions (with Kaiser) but the system won't be making any comments about this: too busy on the realignment as a result of the Beaumont Health effect," the source said.

It is not exactly clear what the Beaumont Health "effect" is. The eight-hospital system has the most market share in Southeast Michigan with an estimated 40 percent of inpatient admissions.

Two years ago, Henry Ford nearly merged with three-hospital Beaumont Health System. Instead, Beaumont merged with Oakwood Healthcare and Botsford Hospital.

Beaumont executives have told me they are making progress integrating operations of the three systems. They have finalized their leadership team and are working to complete installation of the Epic electronic medical record system at Botsford.

Mark Kopson, chair of the health care practice with Plunkett Cooney P.C. in Bloomfield Hills, said the similarities between Henry Ford and Kaiser make a combination an interesting possibility.

"The failure of Henry Ford and Beaumont (to complete their merger), in large part, was because of the cultural difference between the employed physician model and the private model" of Beaumont, Kopson said.

Because Kaiser and Henry Ford use an employed physician model, Kopson said they have a familiarity of clinically integrating care with fellow hospitals and health plans, Kopson said.

"Henry Ford has been looking for some time for strategic affiliation of some kind," Kopson said. "They have looked at players in the Michigan market" and not found a proper match.

For Henry Ford, Schlichting has said the system has been talking with many systems about either a merger or strategic affiliation. She won't rule out anything.

"We need to grow larger," Schlichting has told me.

Kaiser, which is a much larger company than Henry Ford, owns 38 hospitals and a 10.1 million-member health plan in eight states and the District of Columbia. It employs 17,800 doctors, 49,000 nurses with 177,000 total employees.

In 2014, Kaiser reported $57 billion in operating revenue with net income of $3.1 billion.

Henry Ford, the most integrated system in Southeast Michigan, owns five hospitals, two health plans with 690,000 members and employs 1,200 doctors, 8,200 nurses with 23,000 total employees. Another 2,000 physicians are affiliated with its hospitals.

In 2014, Henry Ford generated revenue of $4.7 billion with net income of $27.8 million.

Kaiser operates two regions in California (7.8 million members), Colorado (622,000), Georgia (269,000), Hawaii (242,000), Virginia, Maryland and DC (614,000) and Oregon and Washington (523,000).

Both systems coordinate care using an Epic EMR.

Last year, Kaiser sold its Ohio health plan to Cincinnati-based Catholic Health Partners. As Kaiser's smallest region with only 80,000 members, Kaiser cited changing market conditions in Ohio as reason to sell. Translated: There was no future for success in Ohio.

Like Henry Ford, Kaiser's key objective is offering its members the "Triple Aim" — healthier populations, affordable care and better patient experiences.

"There is a lot of potential in terms of two strong candidates coming together," said consultant Joe Spallina with Arvina Group LLC in Ann Arbor. "This could fast-track intellectual knowledge, expertise and (operational) strength."

But Jeff Goldsmith, president of Health Futures Inc., a Charlottesville, Va.-based consulting firm, said Kaiser's track record outside of California, Colorado and Washington, D.C., has been less than stellar.

"Denver is their most successful market outside of California. Washington D.C. is next," he said. "The rest have been hard. They try to build it on a mixed group and staff model and they have no leverage" with hospitals.

But Kaiser would have a head start toward success in Southeast Michigan if it could add Henry Ford Health System to its regional holdings, said Goldsmith, who has closely tracked Kaiser and last year interviewed its CEO, Bernard Tyson, for Health Affairs.

Goldsmith said Kaiser would bring to Henry Ford deep pockets and strong brand name.

"They will not bring (Henry Ford) relationship-built capital in Michigan and not bring them successful operational knowledge," Goldsmith said.

But Goldsmith questioned whether Henry Ford would be that much stronger as an $8 billion or a $10 billion system than its $4.6 billion revenue system it is now.

"These are untested assumptions that you need to be a particular market size to be successful," said Goldsmith, who also is a health care professor at the University of Virginia.

"The Henry Ford board has a vision as to their capital needs and operating support they need to regain momentum in their market," Goldsmith said. "Maybe they have decided they can't do what they want without being larger."

Related Links