Having recently secured just under $200 million for a new fund to invest in China’s health-care and life sciences industry, BVCF Managing Partner Zhi Yang talked to Venture Capital Dispatch on how the sector is getting too hot and why his firm is avoiding hospitals.

Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

Shanghai-based BVCF closed a $188 million third-dollar fund earlier this month to target early- and growth-stage companies in sectors that include pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, traditional Chinese medicine, medical technology, health-care services, and industrial and environmental biotechnology.

BVCF is one of a few firms that solely focuses on the health space, in contrast to the majority of China’s investors that are more generalist. But in the last few years, an increasing number of generalist venture firms have started to turn their hand to the health industry as China’s government pumps billions of dollars into the sector in a bid to modernize and reform.

Firms like Sequoia Capital in China and CDH Venture are active investors in the health-care sector, as well as other industries.

Mr. Yang said there are currently too many investors in the health industry, which is frothing up the sector by pushing up valuations. He warned that investing in hospitals could disappoint–hospitals’ growth tends to be slow and steady, relative to the quicker and more explosive returns that private equity and venture firms like, he said.

The number of private hospitals in China has increased over the last few years and currently account for just over 40% of all hospitals, according to The South China Morning Post, citing official government figures. As of last year there were roughly 9,800 private hospitals, up from 5,400 in 2008, the report said.

Instead, BVCF sees more value in smaller, specialized clinics, such as those in specific fields like oncology or neurology.

Private hospitals and smaller clinics are growing in popularity on the back of demand from China’s growing middle class, who have more cash to spend and demand better services.

BVCF’s portfolio includes pharmaceutical company Kunshan RiboQuark Pharmaceutical Technology Co. and NOD Pharmaceuticals.

The firm now has three dollar-funds under its belt, but is in the planning phase of raising its second yuan-denominated fund. It would come in the 500 million to 1 billion yuan range, and would be a touch larger than the firm’s initial 300 million yuan vehicle, which has now been around half invested, said Mr. Yang.

Write to Sonja Cheung at sonja.cheung@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @sonjacheung