It will take place less than a year from now. It will attract more news coverage than any other news event in 2015 and 2016 except perhaps the Summer Olympics and the final two weeks of the presidential campaign.

Yes, the Iowa caucuses are less than 11 months away. Americans are beginning a year-long examination of the voters of one state and its quirky electoral process. So get ready for the deluge of punditry on the implications of the presidential preferences of slightly more than 300,000 likely Iowa Caucus attendees.

Much will be made of the likely results of the caucuses, and indeed about the actual results, but little written on the peculiar characteristics of what has become an American democratic institution — an institution that may not be that democratic at all.

Considering they are the first in the nation for presidential delegate selection, the Iowa caucuses present quite the contrast to the United States as a whole. Iowa is not remotely demographically representative of our nation.

It is significantly more white, rural and Christian than the national average. Only 12.4 percent of Iowans are minorities, while nationally minorities comprise 28 percent of the population. Thirty-six percent of Iowans live in rural areas or small towns, whereas in the United States overall, 19.3 percent do. About 54 percent of Iowans identify as religious, whereas 49 percent of Americans identify as religious nationally.

While the disparity in the level of religious involvement is not shocking, the percentage of those religious people who are Christian stands out. Of the 54 percent of religious Iowans, only .5 percent identify as Muslim, Jewish, or of Eastern religion. This is markedly lower than the 4.7 percent of Americans nationally who identify themselves as religious but practice a religion other than Christianity.

On a racial basis, the Iowa caucuses skew significantly from the national average. The attendees are really white. Indeed, at the Republican caucuses of 2012, a full 99 percent of attendees were white, while nationally about 89 percent of the Republican Party is white. There was virtually zero representation at the Republican caucuses from the near 12 percent of Republicans who are from minorities.

The makeup of the Democratic caucuses is somewhat more representative of America, but not much. In 2008, the last time there were contested caucuses in Iowa, 93 percet of Democratic caucus-goers were white, with 4 percent of attendees reporting as African-American and 3 percent reporting as another race. Nationally, in 2008, the Democratic Party was 66 percent white, 16 percent African-American, and 12 percent Hispanic.

Process is prohibitive

Perhaps the lack of participation among minority voters has something to do with the caucus process itself.

It appears to be very simple. On a designated night at 7 p.m., political party members — or independents wishing to associate with the party — venture out into the Upper Midwest cold to a home, school, church, or other designated location within a precinct, and participate in the selection of delegates to go to a county convention. At that convention, delegates are selected to a state convention, where delegates are again chosen for the national conventions.

Very quaint. Very small-r republican. Very small-d democratic. But not really.

The structure of the caucuses limits access to the process for working men and women, families with children, business people who travel, the sick and infirm, and anyone else who has less than junkie veins for politics.

To show how this is so, let’s go through a few scenarios. First, the 7 p.m. deadline is real. The caucus chair can close the door and bar entry at 7, even if you are in line to enter the caucus venue. Snow, ice, traffic, job and kids are not an excuse. In the past, there have been no proxies or absentee voting. But what happens if you show up at 7 p.m. and your caucus host hasn’t returned home? This happens frequently; hosts are late, too. Well, you hang around in the cold — remember, it’s January in the Midwest — until they show up.

Once the caucus has convened, you have to listen to your fellow precinct neighbors make impassioned speeches about their favorite candidates. And there could be other political party business as well. Don’t think you can show up, indicate your preference and leave. You must wait to the end of the meeting before you are able to express your candidate preference. And if your candidate does not reach a 15 percent threshold, you must join another candidate group or a group of undeclared voters.

In 2004, I worked to have a group of young Latino voters attend their caucus in Muscatine, Iowa, for the first time. They arrived at the caucus site at 6:45 p.m. and waited for the doors to open. At 7:15 p.m., with no one else showing up, they left. At 7:20 p.m., the caucus chair arrived home and proceeded to phone the usual gang who came to the previous caucuses — all white — to tell them she was home.

When questioned afterward about her tardiness and subsequent procedure, she simply remarked, “I didn’t call them. I didn’t know any of them were interested. Besides, I don’t know any of them.”

The Iowa caucuses are unrepresentative, exclusionary, inconvenient, dysfunctional, and undemocratic.

But they could be worse. A few years ago, I was explaining these problems to a group of international students. At the end, one student commented, “Yes, it is not good. But it is much better than the military leaders picking the candidates.”

How true.

Rick Ridder is president of RBI Strategies and Research, a political consulting firm, and an adjunct professor at the University of Denver’s Josef Korbel School of International Studies. Portions of this commentary were given as a part of a speech for Oxford University at the British Library, London, England.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.