Brazil’s President Dilma Rousseff in Brasilia on Aug. 6, 2015. Associated Press

A daily roundup of corruption news from across the Web. We also provide a daily roundup of important risk & compliance stories via our daily newsletter, The Morning Risk Report, which readers can sign up for here. Follow us on Twitter at @WSJRisk.

Bribery:

In the Louis Berger case, India arrested four people, including a former minister and a hawala operator, and filed a money laundering case after cracking the money trail. Goa State allegedly delayed contracts until bribes were paid. The local minister defended his handling of the investigation. A company executive said the firm disclosed the allegations in India, and it might lose business as a result of the case. (PTI, Times of India, PTI, PTI, ENS, Indian Express, PTI, Economic Times)

Thailand announced it will charge Juthamas Siriwan in connection with a bribery scandal at the now defunct Bangkok Film Festival. (Variety)

Brazilian prosecutors charged a former Petrobras executive and five others with bribery, saying they favored a U.S. company. His lawyer couldn’t be reached but said previously his client was illegally detained. The company disclosed the matter in a securities filing. (Reuters, document)

Ukraine’s former agriculture minister allegedly took a motorcycle as a bribe. He brushed off the allegations. (OCCRP)

A former U.S. Virgin Islands government official has been charged in a $17 million bribery scheme. He couldn’t be reached. (AP, press release)

Cybercrime:

The Office of Personnel Management’s inspector general accused the agency’s information technology office of trying to thwart scrutiny of the protection of files that were hacked, and how well it responded to those breaches. (Washington Post)

Russian hackers have been trying to rip cash from online share trading accounts at some of Australia’s biggest brokers. (BI)

From Black Hat: Recruiting cybersecurity talent can be tough. (Federal Times)

Money Laundering:

A former IMF director was accused of laundering money; he has denied the allegations. A Spanish minister defended meeting him. (Olive Press, AP)

Swiss prosecutors launched a money-laundering probe of a former Russian minister after Moscow alleged he stored embezzled state assets in Swiss banks. He didn’t appear to be contacted. (Swissinfo)

Enablers of money laundering in London face a crackdown. (Financial Times)

India targeted assets in a money laundering probe of a medical institute. (PTI)

It’s difficult to say how much of Vancouver real estate is the product of money laundering, a paper says. (Financial Post)

Sanctions:

Dozens of companies tied to Iran’s elite Revolutionary Guards will win sanctions relief under the Iran nuclear deal. (Reuters)

The U.S. added a Russian oil field to its export controls blacklist. (Reuters, Bloomberg)

How do Iran “snap-back” sanctions work? (Sanction Law)

The head of Iran’s elite military Quds Force, who is subject to U.N. sanctions, met senior Russian officials in Moscow. (AP, Reuters)

Turkey froze the assets of Yemen’s former president and Houthi rebel leaders. (AFP)

Transparency:

The Cayman Islands continue to fight a central corporate registry. (Cayman Reporter)

General Anti-Corruption:

Brazil’s anti-graft crackdown may define the president’s legacy. The scale of the graft involved in the Petrobras scandal has shocked Brazilians. (Financial Times, NY Times)

South Africa’s ombudsman asked the president to comply with a court order. (Bloomberg)

Turkish opposition leaders want to probe gold exports linked to an Iranian businessman under investigation for corruption. (BGN, Today’s Zaman)

Private lives of China’s senior Guangdong officials will face tighter scrutiny amid the anti-graft drive. Chinese prosecutors will be punished if corruption suspects commit suicide. (South China Morning Post, South China Morning Post)

Pakistan shamed army generals caught misusing funds. (Guardian)

Doubt still hangs over the future of the SFO. (Guardian)

In local politics: Corrupt New York officials are still eligible for pensions. (Newsday)