Did President Barack Obama take direction from “Saturday Night Live” in crafting today’s speech about health care reform and the government shutdown? Probably not, but one of the similarities — a humorous example of life imitating art – is too ironic not to point out.

And it all involves the trendy tech giant Apple.

As TheBlaze reported over the weekend, SNL viewers were treated to a laugh at Obamacare’s expense when the show devoted an entire skit to mocking the confusion and complaints surrounding the health care law. Among gripes voiced by citizens in the comedic clip was one woman’s rant about her broken iPhone.

“I already have a complaint about Obamacare,” said the woman after she approached Obama’s lectern. “My iPhone 5s broke and I took it to the Genius Bar and they would not fix it. I mean what the hell is that?”

The faux-Obama, clearly flustered, explained that the angry constituent was confusing Obamacare with AppleCare — the latter of which is a product protection program.

“Well, either way. Happened on your watch,” she responded.

Watch this portion of the skit at the 3:10 mark:

Flash-forward to the very real debate over the government shutdown and Obama’s comments about problems surrounding logging on to HealthCare.gov (we covered some of that this morning).

“Like every new law, every new product roll-out, there are going to be some glitches in the sign-up process along the way that we will fix,” said Obama, who went on to work these problems out in the coming days.

In an effort to provide an illustration, he invoked Apple and some of the problems that were recently encountered in the company’s mobile operating system upgrade (iOS 7).

“Consider that just a couple of weeks ago Apple rolled out a new mobile operating system and within days they found a glitch, so they fixed it,” he said. “I don’t remember anybody suggesting Apple should stop selling iPhones or iPads or threatening to shut down the company if they didn’t. That’s not how we do things in America. We don’t actively root for failure.”

Watch Obama’s real-life comments here:

Life imitating art at its finest.

–