Built in 2004 and updated in 2012, this sophisticated 13-room Colonial has been meticulously maintained and incorporates a neutral color palette.

The kitchen in this Clinton Township home has hardwood floors, furniture-grade cabinets, stainless-steel appliances and granite counters. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Bob Beatty, Weichert Realtors)

CLINTON TOWNSHIP An elegant stucco-faced Colonial in Clinton Township overlooks picturesque views of the Spruce Run Reservoir and Recreation Area. Located in the sought-after Estates at Water’s Edge neighborhood, this five bedroom, two-and-one-half bath Bainbridge II model is situated on 0.24-acre and showcases a variety of extensive upgrades throughout. The surroundings include an entertainment-friendly Trex rear deck stepping down to a new paver patio and a new storage shed.

This 13-room home in Clinton Township has a neutral palette, three levels of living and a view of the Spruce Run Recreation Area. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Robert Beatty, Weichert Realtors)

Built in 2004 and updated in 2012, this sophisticated 13-room Colonial has been meticulously maintained and incorporates a neutral color palette. Interior highlights such as hardwood floors, classic trim, high ceilings, a gas log fireplace, oversized windows and an open floor plan enhance the livability of this custom-painted residence.

The home is entered by a foyer leading to the principal rooms. Spacious and sunlit, formal living and dining rooms are perfect for special occasions. The dining room is exquisitely custom-painted and trimmed in wainscoting, deep crown and applied moldings. A cozy den or home office is privately situated near the powder room.

Custom wood cabinetry, granite counters, a center island with breakfast-bar seating and upgraded stainless-steel appliances are among the desirable amenities in the gourmet kitchen. Additional features include hardwood floors, recessed and pendant lighting and a decorative backsplash. In the kitchen’s dining area, a picture window looks out on the spacious rear deck. Nearby, the two-story family room is anchored by a gas fireplace. It also has soaring ceilings, a wall of windows and a ceiling fan.

Upstairs, the light-filled master suite includes a large bed chamber with a walk-in closet and opulent master bath. The bath contains a soaking tub, a clear-glass-door shower and a double sink vanity. Also on this level are four additional bedrooms, a laundry room and a full bath providing a double-sink vanity.

Even more living space has been recently created in the finished basement, which now includes a huge recreation room and a game room with a seating area tucked to one side. The rooms are fitted with Berber carpet and recessed lighting.

This traditional Colonial also features an attached two-car garage with automatic openers, a neighborhood setting with sidewalks, a paved driveway and the Estates at Water’s Edge Homeowner’s Association handling exterior maintenance of all common areas. The community is across the street from Spruce Run Reservoir and Recreation Area, which is popular for picnickers, swimmers, fishermen, boaters and campers. The third largest reservoir in the state, it covers 1,290 acres with 15 miles of shoreline for recreation.

Mechanical workings of this home include multiple zones of natural gas heat and central air conditioning, intercom and stereo systems, public water, public sewers and underground utilities.

The Estates at Water’s Edge community offers easy north and southbound access to Route 31 right down the street. It is a mile from historic downtown Clinton and a short distance from NJ Transit’s High Bridge rail station or Interstate 78. Clinton Township in Hunterdon County is famous for the Red Mill set along the South Branch of the Raritan River, known as the most-photographed site in the state. Clinton’s bustling borough is filled with one-of-a-kind shops, art galleries and wonderful restaurants set along tree-lined streets. Also nearby is the Round Valley Recreation Area for hiking, fishing, swimming, boating and cross country skiing. Students living in Clinton attend Blue Ribbon-designated schools including the highly-rated North Hunterdon High School.

This upgraded Estates at Water’s Edge Colonial is offered at $574,900. Contact Weichert, Realtors sales agents Bob Beatty at 908-303-8606, Pamela Beatty at 908-246-3477, or the Clinton office at 908-735-8140 for more information. Additional listing information and photos can be found at www.24CrestviewDrive.info.

James Weichert, President and Founder of Weichert, Realtors, praised Bob and Pamela Beatty, a husband-and-wife sales team whose market area covers Hunterdon, Somerset, Warren and Morris Counties. “Bob and Pam Beatty are two hard-working and dedicated agents who have stood the test of time and proven that they can be successful in any real estate market,” said Weichert. “The Beattys are true professionals who have gained the trust of their clients and the respect of their colleagues and peers over the years.” He stressed the importance of using experienced real estate sales professionals when buying or selling a home. “Regardless of market conditions, you can always rely on Bob and Pam’s outstanding judgment and their commitment to meeting their customers’ expectations and needs,” added Weichert.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1UydDA3