US Congressman Alan Lowenthal 47th district.

ALAN LOWENTHAL Age: 73 Party: Democrat Occupation: Congressman Education: Bachelor’s degree from Hobart College, doctorate and master’s from Ohio State University Personal: Married with two adult sons from first marriage Public service: State Senate, state Assembly, Long Beach City Council Issues: Environmental protection, infrastructure investment, education improvement, redistricting Website: www.alan lowenthal.com

LONG BEACH >> The last time U.S. Rep. Alan Lowenthal, D-Long Beach, faced Republican Andy Whallon in the June primary, he won by 14 percentage points.

The only other contestant in the election earned three votes, and since the top two-finishers advance, Whallon is contesting Lowenthal’s re-election in November.

An aeronautical engineer by education, Whallon says he’s the alternative to Lowenthal’s voting record, which he sees as in line with the policies of President Barack Obama.

His top priority is job creation. Whallon labels the current economic recovery as weak, noting the economy has been growing an average of 2.2 percent per year compared to a 4.8 percent clip in the 1980s. According to government data, gross domestic product grew by 4.6 percent in the second quarter after shrinking 2.1 percent in the prior quarter.

ANDY WHALLON Age: 53 Party: Republican Occupation: Self-employed landlord, former aeronautical engineer Education: Bachelor’s degree from the University of Michigan Personal: Single, no children Issues: Job creation, personal freedom and privacy, health care reform, including repealing Obamacare Website: www.andy whallon.com

“We need to do what has always worked in the past: Low taxes, light regulations, and little spending,” said Whallon, a West Long Beach resident. “It worked in the ’80s, and it will work again.”

It will be difficult for Whallon to unseat Lowenthal in the strongly Democratic 47th Congressional District, which includes parts of Long Beach, Lakewood, Signal Hill, Avalon, Buena Park, Cypress, Garden Grove, Los Alamitos, Midway City, Stanton, Rossmoor and Westminster.

Yet if there’s hope to be found, it may be that Whallon’s loss to Lowenthal in the spring nearly matched the result of the better-financed campaign by former Long Beach Councilman Gary DeLong, also a Republican, who spent more than $1.4 million running against Lowenthal in 2012. Whallon, a first-time candidate, has disbursed $52,363 as of Sept. 30, according to the Federal Election Commission.

He’s counting on his message of more personal freedom making an impact with voters.

On his campaign website, Whallon lays out a vision of curbing government intrusions into privacy, “unwinding” the war against drugs, addressing human trafficking and improving health care, beginning with repealing the Affordable Care Act.

“It’s an entitlement program that is already costing far more than what was projected at a time when our government can’t even balance our books with the programs we have,” Whallon said.

In its place, Whallon suggests allowing the purchase of health insurance across state lines and giving everyone a tax credit for half the cost of a catastrophic health plan.

Lowenthal is a veteran of the state Assembly and Senate first elected to office in 1992 as a member of the Long Beach City Council.

In the state Legislature, Lowenthal authored the law creating California’s bipartisan citizen redistricting commission, and his first act in the U.S. House was to introduce HR 2978, the Let the People Draw the Lines Act of 2013.

Advertisement

The bill has sat in committee since, and Lowenthal acknowledges neither party likes the idea, but he told the Press-Telegram editorial board last week he will continue to push the legislation.

“We’re never going to get rid of hyperpartisanship until we get rid of gerrymandering,” Lowenthal said.

He also introduced a bill last month to provide as much as $8 billion annually for roads and railways used to move freight across the United States by putting a 1 percent tax on bills for cargo transported more than 50 miles.

The funds would provide a needed infusion to neglected infrastructure projects and allow cargo to move more freely, the congressman said.

As a member of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Lowenthal said he has gained a new respect for the role the country plays in helping oppressed people around the world.

He is supportive of airstrikes against ISIS in the Middle East, but says the United States should play a leadership role and not commit ground troops to combat.

With a presidential election approaching in two years, Lowenthal expects Republicans to come to the table to address some sort of immigration reform.

A supporter of the immigration bill the U.S. Senate passed last year, Lowenthal said it’s in the GOP’s best interest to agree to such legislation, which gives a pathway to citizenship for illegal immigrants already in the country.

“If not, they’re going to win regional elections, but they’re not going to win national elections, they’re not going to win the presidency,” said Lowenthal.