— Fearful that continuing to play football might one day reduce his quality of life or, even worse, shorten it by a few years, former San Francisco 49ers LB Chris Borland retired last week at age 24 after just one NFL season.

Tampa Bay Buccaneers S Chris Conte wouldn’t think of doing such a thing.

We know, because Conte did think of doing such a thing.

In December, near the end of an injury-marred season with the Chicago Bears in which he sustained two concussions, Conte was forced to ponder the same outcome Borland has, but he came to a different conclusion.

“I’d rather have the experience of playing in the NFL and die 10 to 15 years earlier than not play in the NFL and have a long life,” Conte told Chicago radio station WBBM-AM.

That passion for the game is surely one of the traits that made Conte so attractive to the Bucs. General manager Jason Licht and coach Lovie Smith want players who truly love the game.

And it seems Conte does, perhaps even more than life itself. After all, he’s continuing to play despite a 2014 season that was as physically taxing on him as any he ever played.

In addition to the concussions, Conte also sustained injuries last year to his right shoulder, his left shoulder, his right shoulder again, his right eye and his back.

Despite all that, Conte played in 12 games last year, all starts. That toughness is no doubt another thing made him attractive to the Bucs. It has certainly impressed his teammates.

“I’ve always liked Chris because he’s a hard-nosed guy,’’ said DT Henry Melton, a former teammate of Conte’s with the Bears who signed with the Bucs on the same day as Conte two weeks ago.

“He’s not going to shy away from contact. And he’s a playmaker. He’s been starting ever since (he came to the league) and he’s a great pickup for the Bucs.’’

*****

Familiar faces

Conte says he doesn’t feel like a stranger walking into the Bucs locker room. And it’s not just because Melton walked into that locker room right along with him.

Conte grew up with CB Alterraun Verner and spent the first two years of his career working for former Bears and current Bucs secondary coach Gill Byrd.

“That’s why it’s almost a dream come true to come and play for these guys,’’ Conte said. “Just the relationships that I have with Coach Smith, with Coach Byrd, it’s something that you don’t come across every day.

“These are special people that you don’t come across every day and they make you want to play harder for them. So, I knew that once they left Chicago I was going to do everything I could to play for them again.’’

*****

Getting to know you

The Bucs spent last Monday visiting with former Oregon QB Marcus Mariota. One of the things Licht was impressed by the most was Mariota’s humility.

“I don’t believe in my years in the NFL I’ve seen a player who’s had as much success as he’s had be as humble as he was,’’ Licht said of the 2014 Heisman Trophy winner.

rcummings@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7979

Twitter: @RCummingsTBO