BOSTON - The Massachusetts Health Connector is severing its relationship with technology vendor CGI in light of the debacle with the state’s new health insurance exchange website.

“The Commonwealth has decided to part ways with CGI, and we are beginning a negotiate with them about what a careful transition looks like,” Sarah Iselin, a special assistant to Gov. Deval Patrick overseeing fixes to the Health Connector website, said Monday after a meeting with the board of the Health Connector.

Since the health insurance website launched Oct. 1, it has been plagued by glitches that have left individual unable to use the website to enroll in subsidized health insurance plans under the national Affordable Care Act. The state has been managing the problems with a mix of temporary coverage, coverage extensions and labor-intensive manual workarounds.

Iselin said at the meeting that the Health Connector will not entirely scrap the website, but is also unwilling to stay the course with CGI. It is currently looking at either hiring a new vendor and rebuilding key components of the website, or potentially using software created for the federal health insurance marketplace or for another state’s exchange.

Iselin said the state has informed CGI of its decision. “We’ve just begun the process of negotiating what we hope will be collaborative and careful transition,” Iselin said.

Linda Odorisio, a CGI spokeswoman, said in a statement that CGI is prepared to work with the state on a transition. “CGI has worked tirelessly to deliver a health insurance exchange for the residents of Massachusetts,” Odorisio said. “We will work with the Commonwealth to ensure a smooth transition to the next phase of exchange deployment, allowing for the best use of system capabilities already in place.”

Patrick said in February that ending the relationship with CGI would be complicated due to the complexity of the website and CGI's ownership of the computer code. Patrick also previously did not rule out a lawsuit against CGI to recoup some of the losses the state will face as a result of the website problems.

MIT economics professor Jonathan Gruber, a member of the Health Connector board and a national expert on health care reform, asked at the board meeting whether there “will be fights” over getting computer code and other information from CGI.

Iselin responded that she has spoken with the head of CGI and is just starting negotiations over the transition. She said the state's contract with CGI allows for such negotiations. Iselin pointed out that CGI is undergoing a similar transition with the federal government. The administration of President Barack Obama severed its relationship with CGI after problems with the rollout of the federal health care website.

The state had a $69 million contract with CGI, with payments due as certain benchmarks are met. It has paid just $15 million so far and has not made a payment since the fall.

Iselin said the state is committed to negotiating in good faith to negotiate a transition that does not jeopardize the goal of having a functional Health Insurance Exchange, and it is too early to speculate about payments or other conditions of the transition. “We’re at the very beginning of negotiating a careful transition that advances and protects the project’s best interests,” Iselin said.

Secretary of Finance and Administration Glen Shor said it is not possible to predict the full cost of the project yet, since the Health Connector needs to both negotiate the exit with CGI and determine how it will complete the health insurance exchange going forward. “We are entering into conversations with CGI to structure a careful, thoughtful ramp down of the engagement, and I’m sure as part of that discussion, the state of the existing contract and resolution of it would be part of the conversation,” Shor said.