Camille Cerria has never been so excited about football.

Correction: Before now, the nautical event planner has never been excited about football.

All that changed when her Hoboken-based company, Smooth Sailing Celebrations, was chosen by the NFL to host four days of Super Bowl press events aboard its spectacular Majesty yacht, which is billed as the largest party boat in the country.

“I think (the NFL) really wanted a unique venue and there’s no more unique venue than a boat,” said Cerria, whose company is marking its 10th year in business. “Especially this boat, because of the atrium-style ceiling and everything else that it has to offer.”

The 45,000-square-foot Majesty boasts tremendously high ceilings and each of the four decks has an immense amount of open space filled with elegant tables, fireplaces, a cocktail bar, and even a working elevator.

Cerria called that a perfect fit for the NFL, which hasn’t provided many details, but will be using the Majesty from Jan. 27 to 30. She said the yacht will be docked in front of the Hyatt in Downtown Jersey City, where one of the Super Bowl teams will be staying.

“Without this boat, it would have been impossible,” Cerria said. “Their criteria was so specific regarding the space and height they needed, there was only one boat.”

Having the perfect venue — with a perfect view of the New York skyline — was half the battle, Cerria said. The other half is knowing the right people.

Her company has a strong relationship with the Westin in Downtown Jersey City, which will host the other Super Bowl participant. She was referred by officials there to the NFL and the rest, she hopes, will be Super Bowl history.

“Relationships are really important in this business,” she said. “I advertise, I market, I network, and that’s all well and good, but I think that the relationships that we have are really what make our company what it is and what really drives business to us.

“Word of mouth, people trust it.”

Cerria became an even bigger NFL fan when the San Francisco 49ers, the Denver Broncos and the New England Patriots — three of the four teams vying for a spot in the big game — contacted her about potentially hosting their private parties aboard one of the yachts.

“I’ve never been so excited about the Super Bowl in all my life,” she said with a laugh. “And now I feel as if I’m invested to see which team’s going to win and how their party’s going to be.”