WASHINGTON, D.C. — A bill that seeks to de-fund Planned Parenthood and repeal much of President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act was passed by the U.S. House Budget Committee Friday, Oct. 9, with a little help from a Republican congressman from Midland.

The GOP's budget reconciliation bill was approved by the committee Friday in a vote along party lines.

One of the 21 Republican committee members voting in favor of the bill was U.S. Rep. John Moolenaar, R-Midland.

Related: Saginaw County's two congressmen split on Planned Parenthood issue

Moolenaar said the legislation, not subject to a Senate filibuster because it's part of the budget reconciliation process, could make it to the president's desk.

"The Affordable Care Act is unaffordable," he said. "Our country is over $18 trillion in debt and this law spends more money we do not have. The law taxes medical devices that Americans use every day and has forced individuals and businesses to drop health care coverage they enjoyed."

The changes proposed in the bill, expected to face a veto if passed by both the House and Senate, would result in a net savings of about $80 billion over the next decade, according to a report from the Congressional Budget Office.

The flip side is that the 15 million Americans with health insurance as a result of the Affordable Care Act would likely no longer be insured if the bill went into effect.

Coming in the wake of political uproar over Planned Parenthood, the bill would also strip that organization's federal funding for a year and transfer the money to other health centers.

Referencing a series of undercover videos released by the Center for Medical Progress, Moolenaar said the bill would end "taxpayer funding for organizations that traffic the body parts of babies."

"It redirects taxpayer money and increases funding for better health care for women and children through federally qualified health centers, including the 13 in Michigan's Fourth District that serve more than 154,000 patients," he said.

The most recent push to defund Planned Parenthood by House Republicans comes after organization officials were secretly recorded describing how they obtain fetal tissue.

Related: Planned Parenthood to be investigated by new Michigan Senate oversight committee

Abortion opponents say the tapes show Planned Parenthood illegally profited from tissue sales. Planned Parenthood says it's acted legally and says the tapes were deceptively edited.

Saginaw County's other congressman — U.S. Rep. Dan Kildee, D-Flint Township — has opposed efforts to de-fund Planned Parenthood. Moolenaar and Kildee gave very different statements on the issue on the floor of the House of Representatives last month.

"Let's be clear, this is not a debate on abortion," Kildee said. "This is about whether or not families have access, through Planned Parenthood, to preventive healthcare, to lifesaving cancer screenings, to basic healthcare that ought to be available in every possible way."

Some Democrats criticized House Republicans for focusing on legislation President Obama will likely veto instead of finding a replacement for House Speaker John Boehner, who recently announced he will resign from Congress at the end of October.

"This effort to repeal the Affordable Care Act, you know it's going nowhere," Democratic Rep. Chris Van Hollen, ranking member of the House Budget Committee, told The Daily Caller. "The president is going to reject the bill."

But Moolenaar argued that the budget reconciliation would be a step in the right direction.

"By sending this legislation to President Obama's desk, our country has the opportunity to repeal the parts of the Affordable Care Act that Americans do not like and move toward patient-centered alternatives with lower premiums and fewer mandates, allowing individuals to choose the coverage they want," he said.

Moolenaar was elected in November 2014 to the seat formerly held by Midland Republican Dave Camp.

The 4th congressional district covers 15 counties in central and northern Michigan, reaching from Lansing suburbs to Cadillac and including a portion of Saginaw County.

Mark Tower covers local government for MLive/The Saginaw News. Contact him at 989-284-4807, by email at mtower@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.