“There are not a lot of positive messages about the Affordable Care Act in Oklahoma,” Mr. Goldman said.

Kevin J. Counihan, the chief executive of the federal insurance marketplace, says he hopes to overcome those doubts when he visits Oklahoma this week to highlight the open enrollment deadline. Nationwide, more than 11.5 million people have selected health plans or been automatically re-enrolled, with at least 8.8 million coming through HealthCare.gov and 2.7 million through state-based marketplaces.

In many other cities, like Milwaukee and Philadelphia, public officials are enthusiastically promoting enrollment in advance of the deadline. In this state, where President Obama lost all 77 counties in the elections of 2008 and 2012, insurance counselors and community health workers have been left to lead the fight.

“Obamacare is toxic,” said Craig W. Jones, the president of the Oklahoma Hospital Association, who wishes the state would expand Medicaid. “There has been absolutely zero sentiment in the Legislature to even think about expansion of the Medicaid program.”

Consumers who are eligible for insurance subsidies, in the form of tax credits, worry that they are getting something others cannot. Many Oklahomans have a strong streak of independence and are reluctant to rely on federal assistance. When told of their subsidies, Mr. Goldman said, consumers ask: “Am I getting more than I deserve? Have I earned this? Is it fair?”

Even Oklahomans generally satisfied with their coverage report some difficulties. Lucia Perri, 49, of Guthrie, an accountant, said she was pleased with her Blue Cross and Blue Shield policy. The premium is $538 a month. But with a federal subsidy of $440, she pays $98 a month.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Still, she said, she had difficulties enrolling, then renewing her coverage and determining the amount of her subsidy online at HealthCare.gov.

“I don’t like the way the government is administering this program,” Ms. Perri said. “There are too many surprises.”

Another problem stems from the decisions of state officials, whose refusal to expand Medicaid under the health law has created “this chasm of a no man’s land,” said Lou Carmichael, the chief executive of Variety Care, a community health center with more than a dozen clinic sites in Oklahoma.

Many Oklahomans have too much income to qualify for Medicaid under state rules, but not enough to qualify for subsidies to help them buy private insurance in the federal marketplace.

“Many of the people we see are destitute,” Ms. Carmichael said. “But they fall into the gap, and there is little we can do to help them.”

In Oklahoma, parents with dependent children generally cannot obtain Medicaid if their household income is more than about half of the poverty level — higher than $9,240 for a three-person family. Adults generally cannot get Medicaid at all if they do not have dependent children and they are not elderly, disabled or pregnant.

In states that have expanded eligibility under the health law, Medicaid is available to people with annual incomes up to 138 percent of the poverty level, up to $27,724 for a three-person family and $16,242 for an individual. And states that have expanded Medicaid eligibility have generally had much broader gains in insurance coverage.

“Consumers come in, eager to see their coverage options,” said Jesus Frias, an insurance counselor at Variety Care. “We go through their case, we help them apply, and often we find that they are not eligible for Medicaid or subsidized coverage in the marketplace.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

James E. Cooksey, 54, visited the Health Department here last week and left with nine prescriptions for drugs to treat very high blood pressure and diabetes. Mr. Cooksey said his minimal income came from work as a Salvation Army bell-ringer in the holiday season and from odd jobs like mowing lawns. But he does not qualify for Medicaid because he lives alone and has no dependent children.

“I’ve still got my mind,” Mr. Cooksey said, “but my body is failing me. And I’m not getting any help.”

For some, the state’s attitude is mystifying.

“If we have an ice storm, the governor is on the phone begging for federal money,” said Mr. Walters, the former governor. “If we have a tornado, everyone is lining up for federal money. And we take federal highway funds. It’s just the Obamacare dollars that are radioactive.”

But for conservatives like Jonathan Small, the president of the Oklahoma Council of Public Affairs, it is a matter of prudence. The state cannot afford the Medicaid program it has, much less a larger program, he said. The federal government pays 100 percent of the cost of newly eligible Medicaid beneficiaries from 2014 to 2016, with the federal share declining gradually to 90 percent in 2020 and beyond. Critics of the health care law worry that in the future, the federal government might reduce its promised contribution.

Then there are the rising costs, which have bedeviled many states. Premiums had been lower here than in many states. But, according to the federal Department of Health and Human Services, the cost of a benchmark insurance plan increased by an average of 35.7 percent this year in Oklahoma, more than in any other state using the federal exchange.

And while the Obama administration says the Affordable Care Act has increased competition among health plans, in Oklahoma, the number of carriers on the exchange has declined to two, from four in 2015, said State Representative Glen Mulready, a Republican who is the chairman of the House Insurance Committee.

Oklahoma’s economy and state finances have been battered by a steep decline in oil prices, which reduced state revenue. The state Medicaid agency reduced payment rates for hospitals and other health care providers by 3 percent this year.

Hospitals and others who support the expansion of Medicaid say it would bring an infusion of federal money into Oklahoma.

Oklahomans such as Mary C. Reynolds, a 60-year-old musician who recently renewed her coverage through the marketplace, see the benefits of the health law as well as its shortcomings. It enabled her to obtain insurance, which she had been denied for more than a decade because of a heart problem. But “it was a hassle to change to a new doctor” last year, she said, and she did not understand why her old doctor was no longer in her plan.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“My experience with the Affordable Care Act,” she said, “has been a mixed bag.”