A view of the Royal Gorge Bridge in November 2013. The bridge and park opens to the general public today with weekend guided tours, ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Officials from the City of Cañon City, the Royal Gorge Company of Colorado, and Beck Construction break ground at the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park in January. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

For the first time since the Royal Gorge Fire, visitors and guests will be able to go into the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park and admire the view of the majestic canyon and roaring Arkansas River from one of America's highest suspension bridges.

The bridge and park opens to the general public today with weekend guided tours, weather and construction permitting.

"It's pretty primitive up here as we are truly under construction, but you can never ruin the views, " said Mike Bandera, vice-president and general manager. "Interest in the rebuilding of the park has been off the charts, and we're ready to welcome guests."

The June 11, 2013, wildfire caused immediate evacuation at the park, and it has been closed to the public since. The fire destroyed about 3,000 acres, including most of the park's features and structures. The park underwent a $1 million cleanup and demolition process, but the bridge itself sustained minimal damage. The Cañon City Police Department has said the fire likely was human caused, but it remains under investigation.

Officials broke ground in January, kicking off the first phase of the rebuild to a tune of about $23 million. Phase one, scheduled to be completed in August, includes a new 14,000 square-foot visitors center, which houses an entry, a gift shop, a restaurant, restrooms and storage; a separate building, also on the north side, that will house restrooms and golf carts for handicapped use; a south side visitors center, a new zip line and aerial gondola, and a large children's play area attraction.

Advertisement

Guided tours will travel on park vehicles through the current construction site to the bridge and then over to the Royal Rush Skycoaster and Point Sublime. The tours are on a first-come, first-serve basis, with the first ride departing at 10:30 a.m. and the last ride at 3 p.m. Park capacity for the tours is limited. Cost is $10 per person, those 3-years-old and under will be admitted at no charge. Valid 2013 Season Passes will be honored, no other coupons will be valid.

Royal Gorge Bridge & Park General Manager and Vice-President Mike Bandera, left, and Cañon City Mayor Tony Greer speak during a ceremonial ground breaking for the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park in January. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Bandera suggests arriving at the park early and dressing warmly as the main transportation is an open-air people mover.

Electricity is spotty and the park is without sewer and water, but portable toilets will be available. Electricity and weather permitting, guests will be able to ride the Royal Rush Skycoaster, beginning March 22. Cost is $25 for one rider, $45 for two riders, and $60 for three riders.

For more information, visit royalgorgebridge.com or facebook.com/royalgorgebridge.