It played host to musical acts like Chainsaw Kittens, Billy Joe Winghead and the late Ronnie Dawson.

Even All-American Rejects appeared on that stage, the Tulsa skyline gleaming to the west.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

In more recent years, the two-story brick building at 520 E. Third St. was known as Plan B, Club Oasis and Utopia.

But from the late '90s to 2001, live-music fans and folks who pined for a return of downtown entertainment called it The Fur Shop.

"For pizza and $50, we got some good bands," Nelson B. Rogers said with a smile.

Rogers and his brother, Steve, plus business partner Mike Aston operated The Fur Shop. The building itself is presently owned by David Sharp.

Now, more than 10 years after the last act graced its outdoor stage, The Fur Shop will open again 혰 this time with entrepreneur and Tulsa City Councilor Blake Ewing at the helm.

"It celebrated downtown before downtown was really celebrated," Ewing said of his newest venture, which he plans to have open by the Wednesday before Thanksgiving.

Long before it was ever a bar, the building was the Midland Valley Train Depot, said Ewing, who recently leased the space from Sharp.

Although he was too young at the time to enter the bar, Ewing remembers The Fur Shop's heyday. Not much in the way of nightlife was available in those days, and The Fur Shop provided a fun downtown venue for live music, from local acts to nationally acclaimed talent.

As development in this part of downtown has increased, Ewing has been excited to see what's happening to the neighborhood.

This summer, he and his Blue Ox Dining Group opened Legends Dance Hall & Saloon at 514 E. Second St., where he found the old sign for The Fur Shop 혰 a neon from a fur-storage facility that served as the bar's namesake.

Now, following Ewing's lease of the site, the big sign 혰 bulb-less but carved with dozens of names, perhaps those of customers or musicians 혰 leans against the bar's west wall.

And it'll stay inside, as Ewing eventually will get a new sign for The Fur Shop, he said.

Other than some modest infrastructure repair, such as wiring and plumbing, the space was move-in ready, with interior decorating the main task ahead, Ewing said.

"This will be a little more ragtag than The Phoenix," he said of his cafe and bar at Sixth Street and Peoria Avenue.

Ample space outside will make for a great patio area, which downtown is kind of lacking, Ewing said.

The big outdoor stage on the building's south side is in good shape and will accommodate acts, weather permitting. A smaller stage inside will be utilized, too. Upstairs, he's thinking about a pool table or two.

He's even thought ahead to spring, when he might have a food truck outside.

"It's like the poor man's Guthrie Green," he said, chuckling.

"I want Tulsa to be a place where young, creative people feel wanted," said Ewing, who envisions The Fur Shop catering to both the creative, artistic community as well as those in downtown service jobs or friends meeting for drinks after work.

Summed up more succinctly, it'll be a true neighborhood bar, Ewing said.

And Rogers couldn't be happier that Ewing has leased it.

"There was always something exciting (here)," Rogers said. "It was a good thing."