If you subscribe to the Celluloid Closet theory of LGBT representation — that straight homophobia and internalized homophobia alike were perpetuated by pop culture’s total erasure (or, if anything, horrific representation) of gay people pre-’90s — then you probably think that The Real World’s 1992 premiere on MTV should mark the moment when the world started to change. The show was born during the tail end of George H.W. Bush’s presidency, but it was more of a product of ACT UP’s Silence Equals Death aesthetic: From the first season on, The Real World asserted the then-radical idea that diversity, which included a gay cast member as a rule, was its DNA.

“If we were going to put seven people in a house together, we knew that how we would get our story would be through conflict,” said Jonathan Murray, who created the show with the late Mary-Ellis Bunim. “And that conflict would only come if the people living together wouldn’t normally live together. They would make mistakes, or they would be uncomfortable, or they’d have to figure out how to get along. They’d say things that weren’t appropriate. They would be struggling to figure out how to co-exist with someone who they’re normally not used to co-existing with.”

It sounds simple, but for young gay people and people of color (and gay people of color!) who were not used to seeing themselves on television — especially erudite, good-looking, cool versions of themselves — The Real World was life-altering. The LGBT community has Callie and Arizona on Grey’s Anatomy and Orange Is the New Black and will also soon have HBO’s Looking. And though it’s still not enough, it’s a million times better than the creeps, killers, and nothingness that came before.

The Real World’s third season, which premiered in June 1994, was set in San Francisco, and among its cast members was Pedro Zamora, a Cuban-American AIDS activist and AIDS sufferer who was 22 when he joined the show. And he was 22 when he died on Nov. 11, 1994, one night after the previously taped season finale aired. On The Real World, and from all reports, in life, Zamora was the rarest of people in that his ambitious commitment to politics (to stomp out homophobia and promote safe-sex education) existed in equal measure to his personal charm. Having been diagnosed with HIV at 17, he decided to devote the rest of his life to stopping it from spreading.

“Before he showed up on our show, he had already appeared before a congressional committee,” Murray said. “He had protested in front of the White House. He had clearly shown the ability to cross bridges and talk to schoolchildren and others about AIDS education. Yet, at the same time, he was a young man who desperately wanted to fall in love and live as much life as he could in what he thought would be a short life. So he wanted to go to San Francisco. That was the city on the hill — the place he dreamed of being. I’m just so happy he got to do this.”

Either by accident, because he was a visionary, or both, Zamora also decided to marry his boyfriend Sean Sasser in front of the Real World cameras. It was years before the marriage movement became the next frontier for LGBT rights, but Zamora and Sasser — so sharp in their white Oxfords during their commitment ceremony — still represent many people’s first image of what a gay wedding would look like. (Sasser died this past summer of mesothelioma, a lung cancer.)

There were a number of remarkable moments during The Real World: San Francisco. David “Puck” Rainey, the magnetic and half-crazed bike messenger, provided several of them, and his eventual ouster from the house (at Zamora’s insistence) was riveting. But one heartening arc was Zamora’s friendship with Rachel Campos (now Campos-Duffy), a conservative Latina who also knew how to command attention. The two started the show at odds, but ended up close. “I give Rachel a lot of credit for being open to Pedro. And I give Pedro a lot of credit for being open to Rachel and not just turning away from her,” Murray said.

MTV has brought The Real World back to San Francisco for its 28th season, and it premieres on Wednesday. It’s a show of and for a different generation, and a drunker, more buff one; Murray and MTV have added a twist this season (the casts’ exes will unexpectedly and unhappily join them in the house after a month) in order to try to revive the franchise. (One of the cast members is a lesbian.)

On this occasion of the show’s return to San Francisco, and its 20th anniversary this year, I talked to Campos-Duffy about her memories of being on the show and her relationship with Zamora. Campos-Duffy — a writer and spokeswoman for the Libre Initiative — is married to Sean Duffy, another former Real World-er (he was on the Boston-set sixth season); they met on The Real World/Road Rules Challenge and have six children (soon to be seven!). Duffy is a tea party congressman from Wisconsin.

One thing: As you will see below, Campos-Duffy and I got into a more personal back-and-forth on same-sex marriage than I had planned. Because you’re reading this article and not listening to our conversation, I want to be clear that we were speaking to each other reasonably, though perhaps uncomfortably, and even laughed throughout. I had the benefit of knowing the politics of the person I was interviewing, whereas Campos-Duffy may have felt surprised.

But as Murray said, we’re all just struggling to co-exist! Right?

When you think about your Real World experience, what do you remember the most?

Rachel Campos-Duffy: I always think how lucky I am. Because obviously I met my husband because of the show. I just don’t see how it would have been possible for a Latina girl from Arizona to meet a lumberjack law student from Wisconsin.

One of the notable things about the first episode of The Real World: San Francisco, which I recently rewatched, is that you were the only person who expressed worry about living with someone with AIDS. As the Catholic Republican in the house, you were sort of pitted against Pedro from the beginning.

RCD: I think I might have been the only one in the hyper-PC world of 1993 San Francisco who dared express what I think we were all feeling. I think everybody felt some apprehension about it. But at that time, it was very un-PC to say so. I don’t think in 1993 anybody who was putting a want ad for a roommate was looking for a roommate that was HIV positive. I think there was a lot of fear about it back then. I was 22. To be honest, I haven’t seen that episode in 20 years! I can’t exactly remember what I did. But I’m sure there are things I might have done differently at 42 than 22.

Your relationship with Pedro obviously evolved. You invited him home with you — and he spoke in your mother’s class, right?

RCD: Yeah! And if you think I’m conservative, my mother is twice as conservative.

I’ve read some things you’ve said over the years about how important you felt his part on the show was. Showing people the life of someone who was not only HIV positive, but had full-blown AIDS — and was, in fact, very close to death.

RCD: Nowadays on TV, and in your personal life, everybody has a gay friend or someone they know or a relative. But back then, that wasn’t quite as common … Now no one could say that they didn’t know someone who was gay. Because the show feels so personal, people felt like they knew us. People felt like they really knew Pedro or they really knew me or they really knew Puck. Because we weren’t like celebrities — people just came right up to us like we were an old high school roommate or a friend. When people saw Pedro, they felt like they knew him. And that was something we’d never really seen on television before.