Obama Ups the Pressure for Iran Votes Jewel Samad/AFP/Getty Images What Happened:



As it campaigns to earn support for the Iran nuclear deal, the Obama administration lost another key Democrat in Sen. Robert Menendez of New Jersey, who announced his opposition to the pact in a lengthy statement Tuesday.



Menendez joins Chuck Schumer of New York as the only Senate Democrats to oppose the deal; 26 of their colleagues have come out in support of the agreement and 18 remain officially undecided. In the House, almost 100 Democrats have yet to choose one side or the other.



On Wednesday, Obama signaled he would keep the pressure on, sending a letter addressed to a New York congressman but directed more broadly at the undecided members of his party. The correspondence aimed to reassure concerned lawmakers that the elements of the deal would keep Iran in check and emphasized that military options would still be on the table should Iran pursue a nuclear weapon.



Why It Matters:



With Republicans united against the deal and expected to pass a resolution of disapproval regarding it, President Barack Obama needs at least 34 Democrats in the Senate and 146 in the House to prevent an override of his all-but-certain veto.



Obama's Wednesday letter was addressed specifically to Rep. Jerrold Nadler, a Jewish Democrat whose support could go a long way toward moving waverers into the "yes" column.



The tactic apparently worked, as Nadler on Friday endorsed the deal.



"I bring to my analysis the full weight of my responsibilities as a member of Congress, and my perspective as an American Jew who is both a Democrat and a strong supporter of Israel," he said in a statement.

Cruz Doubles Down on Shutdown

Cruz Doubles Down on Shutdown The Associated Press What Happened:



If Republican leaders were hoping to avoid a government shutdown, the latest op-ed column from presidential contender Ted Cruz will be unwelcome news.



In early August, the Senate failed to collect the necessary 60 votes to move forward on legislation that would defund reproductive health services provider Planned Parenthood, which receives more than $500 million in state and federal funds each year.



In a piece published by USA Today on Thursday, the Texas senator stressed that "funding the federal government does not require funding Planned Parenthood" – a warning shot as lawmakers face a looming budget deadline.



"Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell should not schedule or facilitate the consideration of any legislation that gives federal money to Planned Parenthood," Cruz wrote. "Instead, the Department of Justice needs to investigate and prosecute Planned Parenthood for any potential criminal actions of commercial trafficking of fetal organs."



Why It Matters:



Planned Parenthood has been the target of attacks from abortion opponents since the first of a series of videos surfaced earlier this summer purporting to show employees discussing the sale of aborted fetal tissue, which would be against federal law. The organization says the videos have been deceptively edited, and that it hews to regulations that allow women to donate fetal tissue for research purposes.



Cruz, who has been hinting that he would continue to press for defunding Planned Parenthood, is at odds with Senate leadership when it comes to potentially blocking a government funding plan that would include money for the group. But while McConnell vowed "no more government shutdowns" in the days before the Senate departed for August recess, Cruz has shown a willingness to stand alone before – and to take the government over a cliff in the process, as he did in 2013 in an effort to defund the Affordable Care Act.



With a deal to fund the government due by Sept. 30, Republican leaders may be powerless to prevent him from doing so again.

Clinton Gets Testy, Tested Over Emails

Clinton Gets Testy, Tested Over Emails The Associated Press What Happened:



Another week, another batch of negative headlines about Hillary Clinton's emails.



Most of the recent questions have swirled around whether Clinton sent or received classified information through her private account on her at-home server.



Clinton maintains she was not aware of classified information passing through her account. But a Reuters investigation released Friday suggests some of the information contained in her emails was "born classified." The State Department disputed the analysis.



Why It Matters:



With Clinton set to testify before the House Select Committee on Benghazi in October, the noise around the former secretary of state's email practices is only going to get louder. Committee Chairman Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., has insisted the fiasco has further justified the panel's work, a counter to charges from Democrats that Clinton is the victim of a partisan witch hunt meant to damage her campaign.



At a press conference in Las Vegas on Tuesday, Clinton appeared visibly agitated over repeated questions that are proving a major distraction from her presidential bid.



"I regret that this has become a cause celebre," she said. "But that does not change the facts, and no matter what anybody tries to say, the facts are stubborn."

Fed Hints at Hike, Congress Wants Oversight

Fed Hints at Hike, Congress Wants Oversight Manuel Balce Ceneta/AP What Happened:



The Federal Reserve on Wednesday released the minutes from its July meeting, hinting again that it was moving closer to an interest rate hike – perhaps as soon as September.



While the meeting summary can provide crucial insight into the Fed's interpretation of the health of the U.S. economy, the several week-delay between its release and the meeting itself can mean the information is outdated. It's been a volatile summer in world markets, as Greece has struggled to stave off economic crisis and China unexpectedly devalued its currency.



The Fed has flirted with raising interest rates on a regular basis since the economy began to pick up steam, but has so far decided against moving forward.



Why It Matters:



The Fed and its chairwoman, Janet Yellen, maintain a contentious relationship with Congress. Last month, the House Financial Services Committee advanced a bill that would force the Fed to use a mathematical rule to determine when to adjust interest rates, force it to disclose more details about bank stress tests, and permit Congress to request a formal review of its policies.



"It would be a grave mistake for the Fed to commit to conduct monetary policy according to a mathematical rule," Yellen told the committee last month.



If the Fed decides to back away from moving on interest rates yet again, Congress' calls for more oversight of a policy body that often acts behind closed doors will only grow louder.

Congress Trumped on Immigration