Published: Saturday, 8/8/2015 - Updated: 9 months ago



A BOOST FROM THE BIG DEBATE Kasich gets good reviews in debut on national stage



ASSOCIATED PRESS Enlarge Ohio Gov. John Kasich appeared pleased as he spoke to the media after the first Republican presidential debate in Cleveland.

As he heads back next week to campaign in New Hampshire, Ohio Gov. John Kasich has a tailwind from his performance in the national Republican candidate debate Thursday night in Cleveland that was viewed by some 23 million people.

While none of the 10 candidates is thought to have committed a fatal faux pas during the two-hour political panel broadcast on Fox News, nor have national political commentators crowned a victor.

Mr. Kasich, who went into the debate with the lowest poll numbers and the least name recognition, won positive reviews in what amounted to a national debut.

Ed Lee, writer of the “Debate Coach” column for CNN, wrote, “Kasich was fantastic. He was confident throughout the debate. While it felt like the other candidates were in a race to one-up each other, Kasich came across as refreshingly real and authentic.”

Mr. Lee said Mr. Kasich’s position of simultaneously opposing gay marriage and respecting the Supreme Court’s decision would be “well received across the political spectrum.”

“I expect Kasich’s poll numbers to skyrocket after this performance,” he said.

The debate lineup, selected based on poll numbers, was real estate developer Donald Trump, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, physician Ben Carson, Texas U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, Florida U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio, Kentucky U.S. Sen. Rand Paul, and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, along with Mr. Kasich.

Mr. Kasich, 63, scored the third-most minutes on camera in the debate, behind real estate magnate Donald Trump and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush.

In his five answers to questions and his closing statement, Mr. Kasich touted his claimed successes as governor of Ohio, justified his support of expanding Medicaid to cover more low-income people, accepted same-sex marriage, and told viewers twice that his father was a mailman.

Kyle Kondik, managing editor of the weekly political newspaper Sabato’s Crystal Ball at the University of Virginia Center for Politics, said, “as a candidate who has a little bit of a less conservative profile he’s pretty well positioned to become a media favorite.”

“The governor sometimes comes off as brash and cocky. He’s a guy who sometimes will commit unforced errors and he did not commit any unforced errors last night. It’s a tribute to him and to whoever prepared him for the campaign,” Mr. Kondik said.

A Quinnipiac University poll on July 30 found that 70 percent of voters didn’t know enough about him to have an opinion.

Next was physician Ben Carson, who was not known by 57 percent of voters.

By comparison, only 15 percent did not know Governor Bush well enough to have an opinion.

The next round of opinion polls will show whether Mr. Kasich’s performance clicked with Republican debate-viewers. Mr. Kasich, who has made about half a dozen trips to the early-primary state of New Hampshire, heads back there Tuesday.

Jon Stainbrook, the Lucas County Republican chairman, attended the debate and also the Kasich debate party at the Harry Buffalo, a bar-restaurant, next to the Quicken Loans Arena. Mr. Stainbrook said the governor visited the party briefly after the debate but before some scheduled media appearances and was beaming.

“He spoke for like two minutes. I’ve never seen the governor happier. He was grinning ear to ear. He was so happy with his performance,” Mr. Stainbrook said.

He enthused that Mr. Kasich got huge applause from the largely Ohio crowd, which may have impressed TV viewers.

The Washington Post’s Chris Cillizza noted the home team effect:

“The Ohio governor came across as reasonable, conservative, and just different enough in the first 60 (or so) minutes of the debate. It helped him that the crowd in Cleveland was ready to jump out of their chairs at his every utterance,” Mr. Cillizza wrote.

He thought Mr. Kasich faded in the second half.

Jeff Broxmeyer, a political science professor at the University of Toledo, said he didn’t think any candidate outright won the debate, but that each were achieving goals particular to them.

“Governor Kasich, it was a question of whether he would even make it into the debate, how he would engage other candidates, such as Donald Trump. That was a success for him,” Mr. Broxmeyer said. “I think he was successful in putting himself up as an alternative, sort of mainstream establishment candidate if Jeb Bush falters.”

Mr. Kasich fielded five questions and gave a closing statement during the two-hour debate.

The first question was about his decision to expand Medicaid coverage to include more low-income people in Ohio, which some Republicans believe amounts to an expansion of government and an embrace of the Affordable Care Act. Mr. Kasich’s answer included a reference to helping drug-addicted people get out of prison and restart a productive life.

The second question was about Mr. Trump. Mr. Kasich started out by suggesting the other candidates could learn from his outspokenness because it touches a public nerve. He quickly converted the question into an opportunity to talk about balancing the federal budget, reforming the military, and balancing Ohio’s budget with a $2 billion surplus.

The third question was how he would counter the rhetoric of Democrat Hillary Clinton who would categorize Republicans as supporting the wealthy while she supports the middle class, women, and minorities.

Mr. Kasich’s answer was to achieve economic growth and then reach out to “those in the shadows — the people who don’t seem to ever think that they get a fair deal. And that includes people in our minority community; that includes people who feel as though they don’t have a chance to move up.”

His fourth question was to explain his opposition to same-sex marriage. Mr. Kasich said he has a “traditional” view of marriage, but, “if one of my daughters happened to be that, of course I would love them and I would accept them.”

The fifth question was about God, to which Mr. Kasich said that God wants America to be strong.

In his closing statement, Mr. Kasich rehashed his biography in the public and private sectors, including asserting that, “I inherited a state that was on the brink of dying ... and people have hope again in Ohio.”

“It’s hard to find an obvious winner or loser,” said Mr. Kondik, a former Ohio news reporter who is researching a book on presidential politics in Ohio. “It was an entertaining debate. [Millions of] people watched, which would be the biggest primary debate viewership for either party ever. I thought Fox and the Ohio Republican Party put on a very good show and the moderators were pretty good.”

Contact Tom Troy: tomtroy@theblade.com or 419-724-6058 or on Twitter @TomFTroy.