“I understand that many people in the community, and heaven knows I’ve heard from a lot of them, would like me to have filed homicide charges. However, that is not possible under Colorado law without proof of a live birth.”

— Boulder District Attorney Stan Garnett

The Boulder DA was referring of course to the nightmarish case in Longmont in which a pregnant woman, Michelle Wilkins, was attacked and left for dead — and her baby removed and taken away.

The baby did not survive and there is no evidence, according to the coroner, that she ever took a breath — i.e., that she ever qualified as a person under Colorado law. And so a homicide charge was out of the question, just as Garnett said.

But there is something obviously very wrong with that outcome. It was a homicide, and everyone knows it. Wilkins’ daughter, Aurora, was 34 weeks post-conception, with about a 98 percent chance of survival outside the womb given proper medical care, according to a neonatologist quoted in The Denver Post. She is dead because she was murdered, and the law ought to account for it.

Instead, the law limits Garnett to a charge of “unlawful termination of a pregnancy in the first degree,” with a maximum penalty of 32 years in prison.

Lawmakers should address this defect. To that end, Senate President Bill Cadman, R-Colorado Springs, has promised a fetal homicide bill within days. However, passing it is likely to be difficult unless both pro-choice and pro-life lawmakers are willing to bend.

“You’ve got two victims of an incredibly violent act and, under Colorado law, you basically can seek convictions related to only one victim,” Cadman told me. “Where is the murder charge for Aurora Wilkins?”

“We’re just saying if you attack a woman and she’s pregnant and you can be charged with her attack, then you can be charged with the attack on her infant,” he added.

Pro-choice lawmakers historically have resisted such ideas for fear of granting anything that smacks of full human status to an unborn child and finding themselves on a slippery slope. But Cadman says the bill “is exclusively for a criminal act. There will be a provision that will clearly state that this does not apply to a woman’s self-determination [regarding abortion, obviously] or her health care.”

Such a statute would not remotely jeopardize abortion rights, but it would empower mothers who wish to bring their baby to term with the ability to seek full justice.

Of course, the exemption applying to legal termination of a pregnancy would have to be unambiguous or the bill will be killed by Democrats, who control the House and the governor’s office. And this is where pro-life lawmakers must give.

Four years ago, anti-abortion forces rallied against a bill expanding protection for unborn babies killed by criminal acts that ended a pregnancy. A similar bill did pass in 2013, but only because Democrats were entirely in charge — and that bill, of course, didn’t go far enough.

Will pro-life lawmakers bow to the reality that they can’t pass a fetal homicide bill without language that addresses Democrats’ fears of a slippery slope?

Garnett dropped a load of charges on the alleged assailant in baby Aurora’s case. If a judge imposes several sentences consecutively, the penalty could be 100 years.

But that won’t always be true when an unborn baby is murdered. And it’s time to rectify this glaring gap in our law.

E-mail Vincent Carroll at vcarroll@denverpost.com.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.