UNION CITY, N.J., Dec. 12, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- HolaDoctor, the leading health and wellness online destination for Hispanics, launched a new Toll Free Help Line to assist Hispanics in New Jersey with questions regarding Healthcare Reform, as well as to guide them in the application process for acquiring health insurance in the state and federal marketplace.

The 1-888-551-ALOSEGURO (1-888-551-2567), service is staffed by a group of bilingual representatives, trained to help Hispanics in everything related to the Healthcare Law and the purchase of health insurance, who answer user questions from 8am to 8pm EST on weekdays and from 9am to 5pm EST on weekends.

Callers receive personalized attention in Spanish by bilingual personnel trained on the Affordable Care Act, AKA "Obamacare," as well as the health insurance market in the United States.

"HolaDoctor is always looking for opportunities to help the Hispanic community in the U.S. and we know that Health Reform is a very confusing point for our people. That is why we are offering this service to help everyone who needs it. Our system is easy to use, confidential and totally free," said Roberto Estrada, CEO of HolaDoctor Inc.

HolaDoctor representatives have the knowledge and tools to provide information about tax credits or subsidies, the documentation required to enroll in the health insurance marketplace, get 2015 coverage, and also how and where to apply in New Jersey.

"Hispanics who call our free helpline are mainly concerned about how to enroll, if they qualify for financial assistance from the government and key dates and deadlines. Many are confused and frightened by the higher penalty this year of $325 per adult or 2% of yearly household income. Our representatives are specially trained to guide people through this complex process and provide the information necessary to understand the new healthcare law in a simple way," said Catalina Rodriguez, VP Marketing Services at HolaDoctor Inc.

Those interested may call 1-888-551-ALOSEGURO (1-888-551-2567), seven days a week or enroll online at promo.holadoctor.com/obamacare to receive a call from an HolaDoctor representative.

They can also visit our Health Insurance Center at: http://holadoctor.com/es/centro-de-seguros-de-salud for additional information.

About HolaDoctor

HolaDoctor® is a leading Hispanic health company. Founded in 1999, HolaDoctor manages the largest online community of Hispanics interested in health and wellness and is the exclusive partner of Univision Interactive Media for health content. HolaDoctor also provides strategic marketing, communications, and consulting services to healthcare companies seeking to grow the business with Hispanic consumers in the United States and internationally. The company has broad experience in the health care law (Affordable Care Act) [http://holadoctor.com/es/seguros-de-salud], health insurance, obesity and diabetes, among other key areas, to increase access to health care and reduce disparities among Hispanics. Headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia, with offices in South Florida and Latin America, HolaDoctor serves a growing customer base throughout the Western Hemisphere. For more information, visit http://www.holadoctor.net

Contact: Catalina Rodriguez

crodriguez@holadoctor.net

Telefono: 678-242-6779

SOURCE HolaDoctor