Investors reacted negatively to news that the U.S. government will not be renewing its healthcare.gov contract with CGI Group Inc., but analysts view the impact as negligible.

Montreal-based CGI’s shares fell approximately 3% on Friday after news emerged that the Obama administration will hire Accenture PLC to complete the Obamacare website.

“We believe that the inflammatory media portrayal that CGI was ‘jettisoned’ from the business or was ‘fired’ by Obama distorts the fact that funding had all but run out for the contract,” TD Securities analyst Scott Penner told clients.

“Given the political firestorm around healthcare.gov, is it surprising that the option periods were not exercised?”

Related

While acknowledging that this development is a perceptual negative, the analyst noted the potential business loss for CGI is rather small. He also pointed out there isn’t a broader impact on its U.S. federal government business.

“Given the speculated US$90-million contract value to Accenture, the dollar opportunity lost for CGI is negligible — US$90-million on a revenue base of $10-billion,” he said.

The analyst also suggested it is possible CGI will receive another contract from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) related to the Accenture transition.

Mr. Penner noted the original healthcare.gov contract announced by CGI on Dec. 1, 2011, was a two-year deal estimated to be worth US$93.7-million. There were three potential one-year option periods.

At a congressional hearing in October, the company testified the contract’s total value was US$290-million, of which US$112-million had been paid.

Rather than focusing on CGI’s health business, which accounts for 8% of the company’s revenue, Mr. Penner’s bullish case is based on CGI’s exposure to the European recovery and the U.S. expansion.

He rates the stock a buy with a $46 price target.

Justin Kew, an analyst at Cantor Fitzgerald, noted that CGI continues to be an active supplier to CMS and has been awarded US$37-million in additional contracts since early October 2013.

CGI is also the lead contractor for state-run exchanges in Colorado, Hawaii, Massachusetts and Vermont.

So while admitting that the CMS contract is high profile, Mr. Kew said the loss will have little impact on CGI’s long-term revenue and order backlog.

“While this news has pressured CGI’s stock, we believe that the company’s fundamentals remain solid and, in time, will be reflected in its share price,” he said.

The analyst noted the healthcare.gov contract represents approximately 1% of CGI’s 2013 revenue ($10.1-billion) and the total value of the two one-year extensions represents less than 0.5% of its current $18.7-billion backlog.

Mr. Kew also rates CGI a buy with a $46 price target.