As many presidential candidates marked the 14th anniversary of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks with solemn tributes and remembrances, Donald Trump deleted a recirculated tweet from two years ago.

A tweet the Republican front runner sent in 2013 said: “I would like to extend my best wishes to all, even the haters and losers, on this special date, September 11th.” The tweet was deleted by 8:30 a.m. ET on Friday. (Many sites, including Politico, captured images of the tweet before it was deleted.) Mr. Trump had not issued a statement or sent a tweet marking the anniversary as of midmorning.

The deleted Trump tweet, as captured in a Politico screenshot.

At about 11:15 ET, Mr. Trump sent a new tweet, saying “let’s all take a moment to remember all of the heroes from a very tragic day that we cannot let happen again!”

Gov. Chris Christie, whose wife worked on Wall Street at the time of the attacks, issued an executive order to lower the flags in New Jersey and mark Friday as “Patriot Day and National Day of Service and Remembrance,” in contrast.

“Like countless other Americans, the attacks on 9/11 hit especially close to home for Mary Pat and our family and friends, as we mourned for those that we lost and saw unimaginable grief take a toll on victims’ families,” said Mr. Christie, who has recounted stories of losing members of his church to the attacks while campaigning this year.

Former New York Gov. George Pataki spent much of Thursday and Friday making media appearances to mark the anniversaries. Mr. Pataki, who was governor at the time of the attacks, was slated to make 13 television and radio appearances across the two days, according to his campaign schedule. His statements often included lines about the country being divided.

It’s tragic that 14 yrs later we are as so divided & our leaders in Washington have forgotten the lessons of #9/11. http://t.co/E3IgjxpXcm — George E. Pataki (@GovernorPataki) September 11, 2015

Mr. Christie and Mr. Pataki have also drawn criticism from victims’ families for campaigning on their response to the terrorist attacks.

Several candidates focused on remembering the victims lost in the attacks. Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, whose brother George W. Bush was president at the time, tweeted “We should all take time today to pay tribute to the victims of 9/11, their families & the troops who’ve kept us safe.” Sen. Rand Paul (R., Ky.) also focused on the loss of American lives in his statement, as did Sen. Ted Cruz (R., Texas).

Today we remember the victims of the September 11 terrorist attack: https://t.co/wxup5w1bps #NeverForget pic.twitter.com/8s5mwsXAci — Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) September 11, 2015

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker‘s statement included a line about the attackers, saying, “…On that terrible day, radical Islamic terrorists unleashed unimaginable horror against our country, ending nearly 3,000 innocent lives.”