Please enable Javascript to watch this video

FAYETTEVILLE (KFSM)- Investigators are looking for a suspect who they said robbed a man and woman at gunpoint behind a Buffalo Wild Wings Sunday morning (Dec. 14).

The suspect is possibly armed with a revolver, according to Sgt. Craig Stout. He is described as a light-skinned Hispanic man around 30-40 years old, wearing a blue hoodie, a dark hat, and a green bandana on his face, according to authorities. They said he is around 5'8" and has a slim build.

Assistant manager Nathan Young was one of the victims in the incident. He said when he saw the gun pointed at him, he thought about his family.

"That was my first thing that came through my head was my kids, they mean more to me than anything," Young said.

He said the incident happened around 3 a.m. He said he and a fellow coworker were in the back parking lot leaving when a man came up to their car carrying a gun.

"He cocked the gun, pointed it at us, threatened us, it was a very very intense situation," Young said.

Young said the exchange lasted four minutes. He said several times the gun was just inches away from his face, and said the suspect touched the woman with it several times. He said the man took the woman's purse, a set of car keys, and very little money.

"He just made it very clear that he was wanting all of the money ,and he wasn't happy because he didn't believe me that all I had was $2," Young said.

Young said as a father and as a husband, he noticed the man who robbed him was married.

"I told him I had seven kids, because I saw he had a wedding ring, so I figured he might have kids, and he would sympathize with me," Young said.

He said he is grateful he is alive today to talk about what happened. Young said people can get desperate for money around the holidays, and said he doesn't know what his robber is going through.

"I don't have warm feelings for the guy but I feel sorry for people who feel like they have to do things, and that's what they have to do to get by, it's a sad situation," Young said.

Police said the robbery is still under investigation.