FORT COLLINS — Both coaches in Saturday’s potentially crucial Mountain West game at Boise, Idaho played for one of the most beloved college football coaches you might not have heard of — Ernest “Pokey” Allen, Boise State’s coach from 1993 until he succumbed to cancer late in 1996.

As a player, Boise State coach Bryan Harsin was in the Broncos’ program from 1995-99, and Colorado State’s Jim McElwain — who like Allen was from Missoula, Mont. — was recruited to Eastern Washington when Allen was an assistant there.

After practice Tuesday, McElwain said of Allen’s too-short tenure at Boise State: ” ‘Pokey’ arguably got that place really going when he left Portland State and went there and started to be a (Division I-AA) championship team. But it goes back to that he’s an old Missoula Central Spartan like myself.

“When he was let go at the University of Montana, he landed at Eastern Washington. He brought me there. He was recruiting me for (Montana) and he was the one responsible to get to me to Eastern. We remained friends. We had cabins up on Flathead Lake by each other and obviously he’s the guy to set my path, my destiny more than anybody else.

“I wasn’t a very good player. He had a soft spot in his heart for an old Spartan. He meant a lot to a lot of people. The lives that he touched. … When I think about his funeral and all the people that were there, it was something. You see all the players that he touched, the people that he touched, the kind of guy he was. He’d give you anything. He never asked for anything in return. Players who played for him loved him.”

Allen, a former star quarterback at Utah, had been defensive coordinator for the Portland Breakers when the United States Football League folded and stayed to become head coach at Portland State, then a struggling Division II program. The Vikings made the Division II national championship game twice under Allen and in 1992 drilled Boise State, then a I-AA power, 52-26 in Broncos Stadium, and Boise State hired him away for the next season.

By his second season, 1994, the Broncos made the I-AA national championship game. After Allen’s death, the Broncos moved up to Division I in 1997 and Allen’s successors included Houston Nutt, Dirk Koetter, Dan Hawkins, Chris Petersen and now Harsin.

Harsin had been on the Boise staff when he joined Mack Brown’s Texas staff in 2011, then spent 2013 as head coach at Arkansas State before returning to Boise State when Petersen took the job at Washington.

“A lot of people in college football don’t really know where this guy was about to go,” McElwain said. “It was cut way too short.”

Harsin this week said stepping away from Boise State for three seasons gave him “something different. And even stepping away from Boise State, (it was) hearing other people’s opinions and perceptions of Boise State.

“People will tell you when you’re no longer a part of it. But also, I think ultimately just a belief in our program and how we do things. It was something that was ingrained when I left and spent a few years away, you know what you want and I know what I believe and it’s here at Boise. But seeing different things from different people, at different places, so I think I bring a little bit different perspective than I would have had I just stayed here. I think that helps our players and our coaches and ultimately hopefully it makes a better football team because of it.”

On Saturday, if they meet informally at midfield during early warmups, Harsin and McElwain can tell Pokey stories.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei