Edwards' future is in his hands

Last Modified: Sunday, January 10, 2016 6:40 AM

By Jim Beam/American Press

Louisiana swears in a new governor Monday, and Gov.-elect John Bel Edwards is already making waves. Some of his cabinet appointments are controversial, talk about the possibility of new taxes is disturbing to many and he will be making other decisions that won’t be popular.

Typical Democrat, say many of his critics. However, he wouldn’t have won the job if that were truly the case. It helps to know more about the man and how he got to this point in his life.

Personal profiles of Edwards that were published by The Advocate of Baton Rouge and The Times-Picayune of New Orleans offer some helpful background. There is also a revealing biography written by Jeremy Alford of LaPolitics Weekly in 2013 about the time Edwards was thinking about running for governor.

Edwards is the son of Dora Jean and Frank M. Edwards Jr. of Amite in Tangipahoa Parish, one of the Florida Parishes in southeastern Louisiana. They were part of West Florida in the 18th and early 19th centuries.

Edwards is one of eight children, seven boys and one girl. Chris Edwards, a brother, died in a car accident in 2011. Edwards’ father, a former parish sheriff, died in 2014. Daniel, another brother, is the current sheriff.

One of those controversial decisions Edwards plans to make is to expand Medicaid under Obamacare, the president’s health care program for low-income Americans. It is expected some 200,000 Louisiana citizens will benefit. However, the president and his program aren’t popular in conservative Louisiana.

Edwards’ Medicaid decision was obviously influenced by the work his mother did as a nurse at Lallie Kemp Regional Medical Center, the charity hospital at Independence.

“I just remember my mom working so hard,” Edwards told The Times Picayune. “She thought it was her job as a nurse to provide the very best care to anybody who came in, regardless of their station in life. That applied to people whether they were in jail, or whether they had insurance or whether they didn’t, or whether they were black or white.”

Edwards gets high marks in race relations, and that appears to be a reflection of how his parents were able to get along with everyone. His dad became sheriff in desegregation times in 1968.

Buddy Bel, a cousin of Edwards’ dad and mayor of Amite, told the newspaper Frank Edwards connected with “all people, black and white, at a time when I’m not sure anybody else could’ve done it.” He was the first Tangipahoa sheriff to hire black deputies.

John Bel Edwards is pro-life, and that obviously comes from his Catholic upbringing. The Picayune said his mother strictly enforced attendance at St. Helena Catholic Church where the family took up an entire pew. Edwards participates in services there.

The decision of Edwards and his wife, Donna, to raise their daughter, who was born with spina bifida, also demonstrated their strong Catholic faith. It was the reason for Edwards’ decision to end his military service earlier than he had planned. Samantha, their daughter, is doing well. They have another daughter and a son.

Donna told The Advocate she and John Bel became a team from the start and they have been married 26 years. Their faith is part of the team, she said.

“Our faith has been first and foremost throughout this whole campaign and really brought us through it,” she said.

Edwards’ training at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point enhanced his leadership skills that he had demonstrated during his high school years. He was quarterback of his football team and a pitcher for the Amite baseball team.

After his military service, Edwards received a law degree from LSU in 1999 and joined his family’s law practice.

Edwards got interested in politics when he helped his brother, Daniel, run for sheriff in 2003. John Bel ran for the state House of Representatives in 2007 and has served two terms.

Alford, in his 2013 biography, said, “His colleagues regard him as smart, observant and respectful, but incisive with his questions. They say he’s effective in committee, unafraid to tackle tough issues and quick to challenge powerful opponents…”

Baton Rouge pollster Bernie Pinsonat told Alford he agreed with Edwards who said Gov. Bobby Jindal had placed personal ambition above the welfare of Louisiana citizens. Pinsonat said the governor’s cuts to health care and higher education could push lower- and middle-income voters away from Republicans, which it did last November.

Brad Stevens, Edwards’ nephew and law partner in the family firm, told the Picayune, “People were encouraging him to run and he was very frustrated with how things were going in Baton Rouge. It wasn’t one or two things that upset him. It was year after year; it was a pattern and wasn’t something he thought was right and proper.”

Alford said Republican Party officials and others weren’t giving Edwards much of a chance in 2013, but he would benefit from his pro-life and pro-gun stances. He said Edwards was able to win his legislative election by “convincing a House district of largely African-American, poor voters that a white man from a relatively privileged background would relate to their lives…”

Democrat Edwards told Alford, “It has never occurred to me to switch parties, not that I am 100 percent happy with the Democratic Party…”

Although critics are beginning to sound alarms about Edwards, it’s much too early to make those judgments. Give him and his appointees time, and they will determine Edwards’ political future.