Buy Photo Dennis Evans (Photo: Staff photo by Brice Stump)Buy Photo

Let’s consider the state of affairs of Maryland. Gov. Martin O’Malley’s philosophy of big government has turned former Gov. Bob Ehrlich’s billion-dollar surplus into a deficit. He was so short of money, he needed to raid the transportation trust fund to the tune of $1.1 billion and spend it on nontransportation projects.

Ever wonder why the dualization of Route 113 in Worcester County is not finished? He is trying to recoup the money by levying other taxes on the rest of us (including businesses). Politicians need to understand that every increase to the cost of doing business in this state is passed on to consumers. We pay, not the business directly. But when it becomes too expensive to do business in Maryland, businesses leave and we have, not only unemployment, but we lose the goods and services that that business provided. Unemployed people absorb taxes, not pay them. Delegate Mike McDermott understands all this, as indicated by his record as mayor of Pocomoke City and Maryland delegate.

Maryland used to rank 25th among the nation’s most business-friendly states, but we have dropped to 42nd since O’Malley and Lt. Gov. Anthony Brown took over. Business-friendly ratings for nearby states are: Delaware, 14th; Pennsylvania, 19th; West Virginia, 23rd, Virginia, 27th. Maryland once had 11 Fortune 500 companies and poultry operations were expanding. Only McCormick remains of those 11 companies — and McCormick is considering relocating to Pennsylvania.

Oppressive requirements placed on our farmers have stifled the poultry industry’s growth. Example: the proposed 5 percent “chicken tax,” which would affect 46,000 Maryland jobs. We have lost more than 6,500 businesses. Unemployment has increased and state government spending increased by more than $10 billion since O’Malley took office; 40 taxes have been increased, including the rain tax, sales tax, hospital bed tax, corporation tax, death and birth taxes, tobacco tax, title tax, hotel rental and building excise taxes, higher tolls, the liquor tax and the motor vehicle excise tax; the flush tax doubled.

This is nothing short of legalized extortion.

If O’Malley and our state legislatures needed money, they could have followed Pennsylvania’s lucrative lead. That state drilled 54,347 wells for natural gas in the Marcellus Shale Formation in 2003 — with no problems. This could have catapulted Maryland to prosperity.

Instead, pro-tax lawmaker O’Malley clones like Sen. Jim Mathias, Delegate Norman Conway and Brown chose to extort the money from citizens directly and indirectly while voting down natural gas drilling. Gasoline taxes go up every July 1.

We in this immediate area are not yet affected by the rain tax, which ridiculously taxes you on how much rain rolls off your roof and driveway. I said, “not yet”! How do big box stores like Wal-Mart deal with a tax dependent on how large their roofs and parking lots are? They increase the cost of their goods. Once again, we pay.

We have also become a state that’s friendly to illegal aliens, Common Core Standards (now disguised as Maryland College and Career Ready Standards), same-sex marriage, Obamacare (leaving thousands without insurance), gun control, Agenda 21 and convicted felons.

Why would people and businesses want to relocate in this state?

Dennis W. Evans lives in Berlin.

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/opinion/columnists/2014/09/14/dennis-w-evans-opinion/15624571/