ZenPayroll, a Google-backed Silicon Valley startup, has ambitious plans for Denver: In eight years, the cloud-based payroll services provider expects to have 1,750 people working downtown.

Tuesday’s announcement of the new Denver office — the company’s first outside San Francisco — came with plenty of fanfare. Gov. John Hickenlooper led a news conference on the sunny west steps of Colorado’s Capitol, hailing the news as perhaps the largest single jobs announcement in state history.

But it wasn’t just the promise of good weather and good quality of life that lured ZenPayroll to Denver and has spurred on others, like Businessolver, which plans to double its 50-person workforce here in a matter of months.

After some data mining, the metro region proved to have the right economic mix to support exponential employment growth, ZenPayroll CEO and co-founder Joshua Reeves said.

“There are cities that are incredible locations to be a 500-person-or-less office,” Reeves said. “But past that, you start hitting some bottlenecks.”

Denver’s growing population of well-educated residents, business retention rates and public-transportation infrastructure make it a prime candidate to support an office of “several thousand people,” he said.

“This is going to be a really, really important location for us,” Reeves said.

That sentiment was shared by Jon Shanahan, whose Des Moines, Iowa-based Businessolver

announced expansion plans Tuesday.

Businessolver, which specializes in benefits administration software and services, has been growing at a 35 percent annual revenue clip thanks mostly to the regulatory uncertainty around the Affordable Care Act . That has translated to a 30 percent year-over-year increase in workforce, Shanahan said.

Denver has been and will continue to be the beneficiary of those employment gains, he said.

“There’s a great, diverse employee base,” he said. “You’ve got a lot of service center folks in the Tech Center. Then you’ve got engineers as well.”

Denver’s booming economy, affirmed by June’s monthly job gain record, has led to some growing pains, notably rising rents and home prices.

“It’s still much more cost-effective when you look at comps,” Shanahan said, referencing cities such as Chicago and San Francisco. “What it costs to put employees in the Denver market, it hasn’t been prohibitive thus far.”

In addition to a to-be-determined business personal property tax exemption, Colorado officials offered ZenPayroll an incentive package totaling $17.56 million over eight years.

Those payments under the Job Growth Incentive Tax Credit are contingent upon ZenPayroll creating and maintaining jobs for at least a year. The credits are provided annually based on wages and the number of jobs created, said Holly Shrewsbury of the state Office of Economic Development and International Trade.

The company is in lease negotiations for 40,000 to 50,000 square feet of downtown Denver office space, Reeves said, and the company intends to hire 100 people right off the bat.

ZenPayroll, which was founded in 2012 and now processes billions of dollars in annual payroll for tens of thousands of companies, recently raised $60 million in an investment round led by Google Capital, bringing its total funding to $86.1 million.

At the time of the April investment, ZenPayroll employed 84 people at its San Francisco headquarters. The company was 225 people in size on Tuesday and should grow to more than 350 employees by the end of the year, Reeves said.

ZenPayroll’s website has job postings for more than 50 jobs in San Francisco and seven customer service, engineering and human resources positions in Denver.

As ZenPayroll ramps up hiring, the open positions in Denver will span every job function, Reeves said.

The company’s product simplifies the process of paying employees for small businesses and startups — from pricing and technology standpoints.

ZenPayroll offers its service for a monthly fee of $25 plus $4 per employee.

The features include automatic new-hire filings with the government, mobile and Web apps, tax calculations and e-mailed pay stubs detailing deductions.

A company built to serve small businesses should play well with Denver’s booming entrepreneurial and startup community, Hickenlooper said.

“We hope that they’re going to be a catalyst,” he said.

Alicia Wallace: 303-954-1939, awallace@denverpost.com or twitter.com/aliciawallace