Congressional Republicans have long talked about the need to reduce government spending.

Of course, that goal isn’t just a matter of not spending money. It also includes smart spending — investing in strategies that can save money in the long run.

One bill introduced last week by Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn of Texas seems at first to do just that, and would directly benefit the Rio Grande Valley. However, the overall long-term benefit is questionable.

Cornyn’s bill would fund efforts to combat the Zika virus, which is spreading throughout South and Central America and now threatens the United States, especially the Rio Grande Valley.

The bill would earmark $1.1 billion for the Department of Health and Human Services and State Department to combat the threat of Zika, which has been linked to brain birth defects.

“We must give those on the ground the tools they need to proactively address this threat, and I hope my colleagues on both sides of the aisle will support this commonsense, fiscally-responsible approach toward averting a potential health crisis,” Cornyn said in a statement announcing the bill last week.

The need to fight Zika is real and nowhere is it more needed than right here. The Valley has been labeled a “hot spot” for the threat of the virus that has been linked to babies born with underdeveloped brains and is spread by a mosquito that is common to this area.

One case of Zika already has been diagnosed in Reynosa.

Lawmakers debated Cornyn’s bill this week and could vote on soon.

However, if passed as currently written, the bill would take funds to combat Zika from the Affordable Care Act’s Prevention and Public Health Fund. Isn’t that funding one necessary healthcare program by robbing another?

And while Zika has attracted the public’s attention of late, the need to keep funding ACA programs that help Americans deal with other, more common health issues is just as important — especially here in South Texas, which has one of the highest rates of uninsured residents in the country.

President Barack Obama has said he would veto the bill. His administration has cited the funding amount as inadequate and would run only through September.

Nevertheless, this past week’s hot, rainy weather here creates perfect conditions for mosquitoes to breed, making the Zika risk even more pressing and immediate for our area.

Thus, if lawmakers and the administration agree on a funding source, it seems best to begin the prevention efforts as soon as possible and work on further legislation to continue those efforts later as needed.

Zika is a real threat to South Texas and we welcome efforts to address it. But we caution it should not be done in a way that threatens public health care, also.