Wisconsinites cherish the natural environment, so give a small donation with your hunting and fishing licenses to the Cherish Wisconsin Outdoors Fund. (Photo: Contributed)

Living in the lakebed of Glacial Lake Wisconsin, I explore and appreciate swamp plants such as the many species of sedges, willows, and wildflowers. I love the tenacious scrubby forests that brave the sandy soil and high water table, giving habitat to animals from badgers to wolves to sandhill cranes in my backyard. The wetlands that surround me give life to the numerous creeks and streams in Adams County, adding impetus to my mission teaching young people to value and protect the special places in Wisconsin.

The places we all cherish.

No matter what kind of outdoors enthusiast you are — a hiker or biker, a hunter or angler, a kayaker or birder, an ATV rider or skier — Wisconsin provides endless opportunities for each of us to connect with nature in a profound way. These experiences instill in us an appreciation for our state's woods, wildlife and w

aters and a commitment to ensuring that the legacy of enjoying our natural areas continues for generations to come.

Buy Photo A sandhill crane prepares to take flight. (Photo: Gannett Wisconsin Media)

Last year's hunting, fishing, sports and conservation patron licenses have just expired. For the next few months, hunters and anglers renewing their licenses, like me, have a unique opportunity to help manage habitat in the places they most enjoy hunting or fishing. When they buy their hunting or fishing license, they'll be asked whether they'd like to donate $2 to the Cherish Wisconsin Outdoors Fund — and if they cherish Wisconsin as much as I do, I hope their response will be "yes."

The Cherish Wisconsin Outdoors Fund will help cover costs for critical habitat management throughout the state. Setting land aside so it won't be developed is the first step in protecting it, but making sure those lands and waters stay healthy requires careful management, including controlled burns, invasive species control, trail maintenance and biodiversity projects. The Cherish Wisconsin Outdoors Fund is managed by the Natural Resources Foundation of Wisconsin to help forever maintain places such as Buena Vista Prairie Chicken Meadow State Natural Area.

Buy Photo Wild lupine blooms in rich blue masses of colorful flowers. (Photo: Rob Zimmer/Gannett Wisconsin Media)

We already know that hunters and anglers are a generous bunch. In 2014, the fund's first year, more than 25,000 license buyers gave to the Cherish Wisconsin Outdoors Fund through DNR's Automated License Issuance System when they were asked to give $2. These are individuals who are proud of what this state offers, proud of what may be a family tradition of enjoying time together outdoors, and proud to protect what they cherish.

This spring I encourage outdoors enthusiasts of all types to follow suit, either by giving to the fund through DNR's license registration process or by making a donation to the fund on http://CherishWisconsin.org. We hope you'll join us in celebrating this great opportunity to permanently care for the unique public lands we all love.

Diane Humphrey Lueck (Photo: Submitted)

hairwoman of the Natural Resources Foundation of Wisconsin's board of directors and former international director of the Becoming an Outdoors-Woman program, which teaches women across North America to hunt, fish and camp. She lives in a log home in the swamps of Adams County with her husband, Gary, and lots of animals.

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1FFHHEr