The sun is rising in America. I can't think of a time when I have been more proud or happy to be an American.

We have marriage equality; love has won. Almost 6.4 million Americans who were threatened with the loss of subsidies for their newly available health insurance were saved by a favorable Supreme Court decision in King v. Burwell. A housing anti-discrimination law was upheld. The Confederate flag came down in South Carolina, and our nation is taking a fresh look at racial inequality. It is almost as if we can see a visible bend in the long arc of the moral universe.

We are a nation founded on the principle that all people are equal and have an unalienable right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Yet these rights have never been fully afforded a number of groups — among them are lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender families, racial and ethnic minorities, women, and persons with disabilities.

We have had to fight, and continue to fight, for full inclusion in our society. Seneca Falls, Selma, Stonewall and many other places have been battlegrounds to attain the rights promised in the Declaration of Independence.

I write this as a person with a disability, celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Americans with Disabilities Act. This is cause both to celebrate and to urge further action. In honor of this anniversary I urge people:

•To urge Congress to ratify the U.N. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; 154 other countries already support it.

•To tell Congress not to continue to block reallocation of Social Security funds, a procedural action this Congress has done to attempt to cut Social Security Disability Insurance payments by 20 percent in 2016.

•To ask Congress to vigorously enforce the Help America Vote Act of 2002 so persons with disabilities have full access to voting.

•To support and maintain the Affordable Care Act, especially the provisions that prevent insurance companies from denying insurance (or raising rates) for persons with disabilities.

•To support funding for programs that give persons with disabilities the ability to live, study and work independently in our community.

Disability rights raise complex issues; it can be harder for people to see how those of us with disabilities can be fully equal when in fact we are differently abled than others.

Might I, for example, assert a right to be hired by the Eagles to kick field goals when I can only do so in a wheelchair? What if I could kick as far and as accurately in a wheelchair? I think that there would be disagreement about this even among disability rights activists. We have a long way to go.

Nevertheless, recent events have bolstered my belief. I still believe that there will come a time when our level of inclusion will be far beyond what currently exists or what I can currently imagine. I believe that the next generation of youth with disabilities will have opportunities that their parents' generation cannot imagine. I believe that the day will come when people will laugh at the idea that a hospital, university or hotel will not have full services for those who are blind or deaf or physically disabled. I believe in the day when no employer will secretly set aside the resumes of persons with intellectual disabilities.

I will likely not live to see that Promised Land, but I pray that my children will.

Martin Luther King Jr. said, "Change does not roll in on the wheels of inevitability, but comes through continuous struggle." This is particularly poignant for those of us who literally roll in on the wheels of walkers and wheelchairs.

It is morning in America; we must make hay while the sun shines. We must rededicate ourselves to realizing the dream of full civil rights for all. The issues of the disabled remind us that we can all be equal without all being the same. We are all equally beloved children of the same creator. We are all entitled to equal rights and equal opportunity, given freely, not grudgingly, and given with love and not resentment. Only when all Americans have equal opportunity will we all be free at last.

Scott Berman, a psychiatrist in Bethlehem, is president of the board of directors for the Lehigh Valley Center for Independent Living.