The nation’s third largest drug chain Rite Aid continues to expand in Tulare County with a new store planed in Farmersville. The company has submitted building plans for 10,559-square foot store at the north east corner of Walnut Avenue and Farmersville Boulevard.

City Planner Karl Schoettler says the drugstore will feature a drive-thru and a sort of Old West look with a false front and large overhanging porch.

“The design is basically a metal building but they gussied it up a bit,” Schoettler said.

Rite Aid is seeking a conditional use permit at the May 20 meeting of the Farmersville Planning Commission because the store will sell liquor. Farmersville residents are currently served by Womack’s Sierra Vista Pharmacy, the one locally owned pharmacy in the city for the past few decades.

Rite Aid has been on the march in eastern Tulare County recently with construction of new stores in Exeter and Woodlake coming soon. The Woodlake Planning Commission approved a construction proposal by Rite-Aid to build a 14,578-square foot new store at the corner of Antelope and Magnolia last October. The new development is across street from the city’s main shopping center and within a block from the town’s two health clinics. City Administrator Ramon Lara expects the new store should open next month.

Just a few months after that, Rite Aid announced it would relocate its long-standing Exeter location across the street onto the empty lot on the south-east corner of Visalia Road and Belmont. Exeter City Planner Greg Collins said he believed the move was motivated in part to accommodate national pharmacy chains’ move to add more drive-thru locations. The model should be similar to the Rite-Aid that sits on the corner of Ben Maddox and Walnut. The property, where the familiar Botkin house once stood, has been zone neighborhood/commercial which permits a large amount of uses that reflect the zoning that surround the property.

Currently the Site Plan Review is underway and the Exeter Planning Commission will review the plans. The Planning Commission will analyze things such as Parking, height of building, landscaping, internal circulation, fence and wall maintenance etc. If an appeal needs to be made Rite-Aid representatives will approach the Exeter City Council for a review of the Commission’s ruling.

The property encompasses 17,185 square feet. There has been no official word on what will become of the building the Rite-Aid currently occupies next to Savemart.

Rite Aid is doing well in the market thanks to its decision to expand its health and wellness services say analysts. Baby Boomers need both more prescriptions and potions and now more locals have health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.