In a long overdue tribute, I write in praise of bus drivers.

In Boulder, the express bus to Denver stops four blocks from my house. To put this in another way, I walk four blocks to get to Denver’s downtown, a state of affairs that stretches the powers of the adjective “convenient.”

Without a moment’s complaint, the bus drivers relieve me of the burden of traffic and trouble on the Boulder-Denver Turnpike. While they cope with unpredictable and dangerous motorist behavior, I enjoy rare interludes of uninterrupted reading. In truth, when traffic is thick, it is impossible not to look down — in every sense — on the automobile drivers who create the congestion and then feel its vexation with the greatest immediacy.

Moreover, on many occasions, the bus also provides a hospitable venue for salons and seminars. I often find myself seated next to people who carry with them treasures of experience and expertise. Thanks to bus-enabled conversations, I have gained new insights into land-use planning, movies, origami, philanthropy, poetry and matters of science and technology.

When it comes to recognizing the privileges and opportunities given to bus riders, there is no fudging the fact that the residents of the East Coast have traveled far ahead of Westerners. In a powerful undertow of the spirit, Western life has tempted many to believe that occupying an automobile’s driver’s seat comes with a guarantee of untrammeled freedom, even though this item of faith is not easy to maintain in a traffic jam.

For four years in Massachusetts in the early 1980s, commuting from Arlington to Cambridge, I underwent my own intensive course of assimilation into Northeastern transportational habits of mind. I started and ended every workday by relying on the work ethic of bus drivers. Possibly one or two of these individuals were grumpy and short-tempered, but those exceptions to the rule left no lasting impression, while the examples of kindness took a permanent place in my mind.

In Colorado as much as in Massachusetts, bus drivers draw on a psychological tool kit stocked with thoughtfulness and a sense of responsibility, as well as humor and wit.

On recent trip, an accident had turned the turnpike into a parking lot. As we went nowhere fast, the bus driver mobilized humor on our behalf. “Folks,” he said at one point, “I have bad news. The flight attendant called in sick today, so we won’t be able to serve peanuts and drinks during this delay.”

Plenty of similarly quotable remarks provide evidence in support of the proposition that the bus drivers’ seats give them prime positioning to observe and to psych out their fellow human beings. This has produced abundant material for folklorists — and for transportation decision-makers — to collect and ponder.

Recent reports suggest that the years of construction on the Boulder-Denver Turnpike will result in a diminished number of express bus trips. My initial response to this prospect has been, shall we say, not positive.

But here’s what I wonder: did the decision-makers sit down with the bus drivers to get their opinions and guidance on this plan for the RTD future?

If the answer is “yes,” I feel better about the plans.

If the answer is “no,” I would do anything within reason to get the job of facilitator for such consultations—if they are held in sites easily accessible by bus.

Patty Limerick is faculty director and chair of the Center of the American West at the University of Colorado.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.