SEBASTIAN SHAKESPEARE: For the queen of divorce, a £10k engagement ring



Wedding bells are about to ring a second time for one of Britain’s top divorce lawyers, Ayesha Vardag. And, yes, she does have a prenup arrangement.

Ayesha has raised eyebrows by setting up a website dedicated to her forthcoming nuptials with Stephen Bence, who has a PhD in astrophysics.

Pride of place is given to a supersize picture of her £10,000 Harry Winston peridot and diamond engagement ring.



Look of love: Ayesha Vardag and soon-to-be husband Stephen Bence



Bling: Ayesha's wedding website and her 10k engagement ring

‘It caught my eye amid the fields of diamond rings and the peridot spoke to me as peridots spoke to Cleopatra thousands of years ago,’ she says.

Ayesha, 45, who recently reached an out-of-court settlement with her former employer, Raymond ‘Jaws’ Tooth, after he accused her of trying to poach his clients, says her make-up for the big day will be done ‘by the artist who styled me for my first glossy magazine feature in Easy Living’.

Who says money can’t buy class?

Queen turns Palace into royal job centre





While William and Kate are said to be about to present the taxpayer with a new bill of up to £1million for renovation work on their home at Kensington Palace, the Queen is making sure her property portfolio is up to scratch.

Looking for staff? The Queen

The Royal Household has placed ads on its website for staff to help maintain the monarch’s buildings in and around London.



The eight jobs on offer range from a property supervisor on £27,000 to a project manager on £40,000.



They total more than £200,000 in salaries. ‘We are looking to recruit a number of high-calibre professionals to complement the existing team,’ the advert states.



‘The property section is responsible for the maintenance of the Queen’s official residences and for other properties within the royal estates.’



Last September, the Royal Household spent more than £250,000 on four newly created roles to help spruce up the estate, which includes Buckingham Palace and Kensington Palace.

Balls gets into an Eton mess

When George Osborne and Ed Balls — both privately educated at St Paul’s and Nottingham High School respectively — sat next to one another on BBC1’s Andrew Marr Show yesterday, the Shadow Chancellor had a parting shot for the Chancellor. ‘At least we can agree there are too many Etonians in the Government,’ he said.



Has he forgotten that his father, Professor Michael Balls, once taught at Eton and that Osborne’s father-in-law, Lord Howell, is an Old Etonian?

Talk about being a snappy dresser. Singer and actress Pixie Lott, 23, celebrated her new single, Nasty, on Saturday night at London’s Steam & Rye Americana-themed bar by posing for a picture in a shark-head costume.

Snap it up: Pixie Lott

It clearly still rankles with David Heyman, producer of the Harry Potter films, that J. K. Rowling vetoed plans for a musical about life at Hogwarts.

Heyman was being honoured at the Hasty Pudding Institute of 1770, Harvard University’s social club, when he said: ‘I only wish J. K. Rowling were here.



'She might have been less reluctant to allow a musical version of Harry Potter.’