No bipartisan love for E&C health savings bill

A $2,700 donation gets you an audience with Chelsea Clinton and Theranos CEO Elizabeth Holmes. But first: Fireworks on the Hill, and a surprise confession from the NFL.

NO BIPARTISAN LOVE FOR E&C HEALTH SAVINGS BILL — Will the Energy and Commerce Committee’s plan to scrap the ACA’s Prevention and Public Health Fund — a pot of money that Republicans have long derided as a "slush fund" for the Obama administration — turn into another fight about Zika money?

Story Continued Below

On Monday night, as the committee began considering a bill that would squeeze $30 billion out of health care programs over a decade, top Democrat Frank Pallone criticized efforts to eliminate the fund "in the midst of serious public health crises," Pro's Rachana Pradhan reports. "This legislation would defund critical public health investments in efforts such as preventing childhood lead poisoning and building epidemiology and laboratory capacity to respond to infectious disease outbreaks like Zika," he said in his opening statement.

… Democrats blasted the legislation as shortsighted while Republicans said it was needed to contain entitlement program spending. About $15 billion of the bill’s savings come from cuts to federal Medicaid and CHIP spending; the remaining $10 billion is from nixing the prevention fund. Look for fireworks today when the committee reconvenes at 10 a.m.

FIRST IN PULSE: SENATE HELP's MANAGER's AMENDMENT — The Senate HELP Committee will consider a manager’s amendment to its mental health reform and opioid abuse bill during a mark-up Wednesday, Pro's Brianna Ehley reports. The manager's amendment, shared with POLITICO, creates and reauthorizes grants for mental health and substance abuse, and establishes workforce training to detect eating disorders and other behavioral health issues, among other things. Pros can read the manager's amendment here: http://politico.pro/1M3IN3X

The manager’s amendment includes the following, among other provisions:

— A block grant for prevention and treatment of substance use disorders

— A provision to help states and local communities address emerging drug issues

— A reauthorization of mental and behavioral health education and training grants

— Education and training on eating disorders

— Encouragement of screening and treatment for maternal depression

— Instructions for the CDC to improve the National Violent Death Reporting System

NFL CONCEDES CONNECTION BETWEEN CONCUSSIONS, BRAIN DAMAGE — At the House's roundtable discussion on concussions, a NFL official on Monday admitted that there's "certainly" a link between playing football and suffering from neurodegenerative disease.

Rep. Jan Schakowsky was able to pin down Jeff Miller, the NFL's senior vice president for health and safety, and get him to confirm a connection between the contact sport and chronic traumatic encephalopathy. It's the first time that a senior league official has admitted to the link.

— Experts said brain-injury awareness is at an all-time high. "The sky is not falling," said Dr. David Cifu of Virginia Commonwealth University, pointing out that treatment is improving and that concussions are less of a public health challenge for America's children than obesity.

WELCOME TO ANOTHER SUPER TUESDAY PULSE — And if you're reading this, thanks for casting your vote with PULSE today. Tips to ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter, and with help this morning from Brianna Ehley, Jennifer Haberkorn and Rachana Pradhan.

20-WEEK ABORTION BAN GOES BACK TO JUDICIARY COMMITTEE — The Senate Judiciary Committee this morning will hold a hearing on the Republican proposal to ban abortion at 20 weeks of pregnancy over the (contested) claim that fetuses can feel pain at that point, Pro's Jennifer Haberkorn reports.

The Senate has already voted down the proposal, but it's the No. 1 priority of the anti-abortion movement, which hopes to build support for the day when there are enough Senate votes to pass it. Expect Democrats to point out the irony that the committee will hold a hearing on previously defeated legislation — at a time when it's refusing to even consider a Supreme Court nominee. The sparks fly at 10 a.m. http://1.usa.gov/21s2YdA

DEMS TO LINK SCOTUS OPENING WITH GOP's ABORTION BILL — Senate Democrats are trying to turn the GOP's refusal to move on the Supreme Court vacancy into the latest episode of the "war on women," POLITICO's Seung Min Kim reports.

Led by some of their most senior female members, Senate Democrats will take to the floor Tuesday to launch a new messaging offensive that ties the battle over replacing Justice Antonin Scalia to a GOP-led hearing on late-term abortions scheduled to occur later Tuesday. http://politi.co/1RKV5uC

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

EXPRESS SCRIPTS: DRUG SPENDING COSTS SLOWED — The pharmaceutical benefits giant Express Scripts reported Monday that prescription drug spending grew by 5.2 percent in 2015 — roughly half of the 12 percent spike the company saw the prior year, and despite a significant uptick in the price of some drugs. Brett Norman has the story for Pros: http://politico.pro/1TJEVro

— Taking the stuffing out of Sovaldi's impact: According to Express Scripts, last year's introduction of AbbVie's Viekira Pak — a Sovaldi competitor — helped halve the cost of treatment for Hepatitis C and saved the company about $1 billion.

— What the industry is saying about Sovaldi: Separately, the Senate Finance Committee's ranking member, Ron Wyden, and senior member Chuck Grassley released comments from the health care and patient community on Sovaldi, and its follow-on drug, Harvoni. The senators solicited the feedback after releasing a December report on the price and marketing of the blockbuster drug. Read the comments: http://1.usa.gov/1U2p9ID

SASSE BLASTS OBAMACARE EXCHANGES CHOICE — Sen. Ben Sasse on Monday issued a report that concludes that the insurance options available through the ACA exchanges in 2016 "are significantly less competitive" than the individual market was in 2013, before the ACA was implemented.

"Facts don’t spin," Sasse told The Washington Times. "Families are forced to choose between fewer insurers on the ACA’s exchanges."

— HHS says Sasse is comparing 'apples to oranges.' "Namely, he’s comparing the whole individual market in 2013 to the Marketplace alone in 2016," an HHS spokesperson told PULSE. "There are a significant number of issuers that offer off-Marketplace coverage, and those are left out of the 2016 analysis."

FIRST IN PULSE: SEIU SIGNS ON TO MA RETIREE FIGHT — The labor union just joined the Coalition to Save Medicare Advantage Retiree Coverage, which now counts 50 member organizations — including the National Association of Manufacturers, which has joined too. The coalition is pushing back against the Obama administration's plan to cut payments for Employer Group Waiver Plans by roughly 2.5 percent, bringing them more in line with other MA plans.

TRUMP PICKS UP ENDORSEMENT FROM ANTI-OBAMACARE FLORIDA AG — Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi endorsed Donald Trump on Monday, ahead of today's state primary. Bondi helped lead the 2012 lawsuit that challenged the ACA's individual mandate and, by extension, the entire law's legality.

THERANOS HOSTING CLINTON FUNDRAISER — CEO Elizabeth Holmes is hosting a "Conversation with Chelsea Clinton" next Monday in Theranos' Palo Alto offices, Re/code reported. The event is part of the Clinton campaign's swing of fundraisers through Silicon Valley.

— $2,700. That's how much it costs participants to attend a reception with Chelsea.

OSCAR HEALTH MAKES KEY HIRE — The health insurance startup this morning is announcing that Alan Warren — previously VP of engineering at Google — is joining Oscar as its chief technology officer and senior VP of engineering.

PUNS ON THE MIND? DIAGNOSIS: BROKEN BRAIN — More than a few friends of PULSE sent along this BBC report on how a pathological, compulsive addiction to wordplay can stem from neurological damage. No joke — here's the story: http://bbc.in/1XrohL9

BIPARTISAN EFFORT TO CLOSE GLITCH IN GME — Sen. Bill Nelson and colleagues on Monday filed legislation to fix a glitch in the Medicare Graduate Medical Education rules. The snafu in question? Hospitals that already accept part-time medical residents on a rotating basis face challenges when trying to establish their own full-time residency programs. The bill text: http://1.usa.gov/22gRN9S

— The Association of American Medical Colleges applauds the legislation. The AAMC had lobbied Medicare officials for years to make the change. "We thought CMS had the authority to interpret the statute," AAMC's Atul Grover tells PULSE. The Senate Finance Committee will now take up the bill.

PRIMARY CARE WORKFORCE CHALLENGES — A report out today from the National Association of Community Health Centers highlights that nearly all centers are struggling with at least one clinical vacancy and suffer higher vacancy rates for physicians than hospitals. According to the report, health centers are serving more than 24 million people — but would be able to serve 2 million more patients if all vacancies were filled. NACHC's report: http://bit.ly/1V8vJvY

FLU LEVELS AT HIGHEST POINT IN PAST YEAR — That's according to athenaResearch's weekly flu report, which finds that diagnoses of influenza-like illness (ILI) are now above the entire 2013-2014 season. Josh Gray from athena has the chart: http://bit.ly/251cMzT

HOW BURWELL HELPED BRING 'HAMILTON' TO THE WHITE HOUSE — Introducing the cast of the hit musical at the White House, President Obama said he had to "draw the line" when Secretary Sylvia Burwell "challenged me to a rap battle."

Event: Women Rule — Power and Purpose: Tune in live as panelists discuss women in executive office and lessons learned about educating girls in places where they risk their lives by going to school. Featuring : Fmr First Lady Laura Bush, Onaba Payab of The American University of Afghanistan, fmr HHS Sec. & Gov. Kathleen Sebelius, TIME Magazine Correspondent Jay Newton Small, and Afghan Institute of Learning founder Dr. Sakena Yacoobi. TODAY, 11:30 am. Livestream: www.POLITICO.com/live

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Brett Norman

Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker signed a comprehensive opioid abuse bill into law, WBUR reports, including a limit on first-time prescriptions of painkillers to seven days. http://wbur.fm/1nJJDr3

FDA says genetically engineered mosquitoes that could sterilize potential Zika carrying pests would not pose a significant threat to the environment, TIME reports. ti.me/250GlBo

Stat is suing for the release of sealed Purdue Pharma documents related to a case of false marketing claims in Kentucky. bit.ly/1M3QHdD

Classifying schoolchildren with high BMIs is not a helpful report card, Slate reports. slate.me/1XqYIKg

Treatment centers for eating disorders have gotten a boost from Obamacare — and are drawing scrutiny and allegations of ineffective practices, according to the New York Times. nyti.ms/21svoUH

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **