WESCO Senior Center

Let me start by saying that the WESCO Senior Center is totally funded by Escambia County (your tax dollars).

The WESCO Senior Center recently had to pay back Sales Taxes on a Thrift Store (no license to be operating according to the County License and Management Agreement).

The Officer's and Board Members refuse to follow all County License and Management Agreements and State Laws. This is due to the improper management of the WESCO Officer's and Board Members.

Two senior members of the WESCO Center were dismissed from the center due to slanderous accusations made against them from the Officer's and Board Memberts. According to the County Attorney (Alison Rogers) even though we were dismissed from the WESCO Center as members we are still allowed to attend functions at the center. The only time we are not allowed at the center is if it is a member only function.

Letters were sent to the Board Members requesting a meeting to discuss the two seniors dismissal and the Board Members have "REFUSED" to respond to the letters. The Officer's and Board Members "REFUSE" to take responsibility for their wrong doing.

— H.L. (Buck) Phillips

Pensacola

Health care is a right

In 1965 Medicare and Medicaid were put into law to remedy the inability of seniors, low-income, and disabled Americans to obtain affordable health care. In the 50 years since, health care has become increasingly expensive and still out of reach for many of our citizens.

As a person of faith I believe in a society where each individual is afforded health, wholeness and human dignity. That Florida or any state should try to limit the availability of health care because of political reasons fails to acknowledge the commitment of the founding fathers in creating a great nation that “promote(s) the general Welfare, and secure(s) the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity”.

All individuals regardless of status deserve equal access to health care and reducing health care options for some, based on any factor, is profoundly unjust.

Our founding fathers’ believed that all men were created equal and endowed with rights that included Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness. Moneys available under the Affordable Health Care Act will help Floridians gain access to the health care that is their right as fellow humans.

— David Coughlin

Pensacola

Moral and fiscal sense

This year an estimated 114,040 Floridians will be diagnosed with cancer and 43,050 citizens will die from the disease. People without health coverage are more likely to be diagnosed with cancer at a later stage, lessening their chance of survival while also increasing medical costs.

Governor Scott and the Republican Legislature have an opportunity to help in the fight against cancer and to improve the health of more than 800,000 Floridians. The Federal government has allocated funds to increase access to health care coverage for hard-working, low income families in our state. Many states have already taken advantage of this opportunity. Covering these people makes moral and fiscal sense. We can save millions of taxpayer dollars currently being spent by the uninsured in emergency rooms.

Current federal funding for low income people being received by Florida hospitals is being eliminated this year. This will dramatically impact the Florida healthcare system financially. Job reductions will most likely occur. This is the Republican Party that runs on job creation not reductions.

Governor Scott had made his millions running the largest for profit hospital system in America. For some reason he has waffled on this issue. Millions were contributed to his re-election by the Florida healthcare industry. His stance on this issue is inconsistent and political in nature. I urge Governor Scott and the Republican Legislature to accept the federal dollars already allocated for Florida and be a leader in the fight against cancer.

— Tim Mallon

Gulf Breeze

Trust Iran?

Sure we can trust Iran! Just recently, Ayatollah Khomeini yelled “Death to America”. I think we can trust what he is saying. He really is a nice guy worthy of our trust. After all, Iran ferments war in 8 to 10 Middle Eastern and African countries. Iran always can be trusted to comply with international agreements. Removing sanctions will boost their economy and allow them to promote more regional peace. Iran is responsible for killing Americans in Lebanon, Iraq, Afghanistan and other countries. Iran is the world’s sponsor of terrorism.

Does Iran need uranium enrichment for peaceful energy production? No, uranium for energy production can be purchased in the open market. What is the purpose of ICBM and uranium enrichment if it is not weapon production? The current framework for an agreement with Iran assures Iran will get a nuclear weapon. The only question is when. Is our government telling us another lie since the Iranian government refutes the terms indicated by our government. Can we trust Iran? Can we trust our government?

In summary, trust but verify. Without random inspection of all facilities insuring conformance with international standards this so called agreement is worthless.

— Larry Sessions

Gulf Breeze

Unsustainable

Recently, and just in time for the 45th anniversary of Earth Day, the U.S. Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee has made it official: Consumption of animal products is not environmentally sustainable. Their conclusions match those of a massive 2010 United Nations report, which concluded that a global shift towards a vegan diet is vital to save the world from hunger, fuel poverty and climate change.

Carbon dioxide, the chief greenhouse gas, is emitted by burning forests to create animal pastures and by combustion of fossil fuels to operate farm machinery, trucks, refrigeration equipment, factory farms, and slaughterhouses. The much more damaging methane and nitrous oxide are released from digestive tracts of cattle and from animal waste cesspools.

Moreover, animal agriculture contributes more pollutants to our waterways than other human activities combined. Principal sources are animal wastes, soil particles, minerals, crop debris, fertilizers, and pesticides from feed croplands. It is also the driving force in world-wide deforestation and wildlife habitat destruction.

In an environmentally sustainable world, just as fossil fuels are replaced by wind, solar, and other sustainable energy sources, animal foods must be replaced by vegetables, fruits, and grains. Our next trip to the supermarket is a great starting point.

— Paul Nix

Pensacola

The sound of liberal eye-rolling

We’ve a president who is floating ideas, like mandatory voting. Why not? We’re already saddled with mandatory healthcare enforced by the IRS.

His policies were rejected in two mid-term sweeps. It should’ve only taken one but Americans tend to be too ambivalent with young presidents, especially since rejecting White House policy too ardently could earn the label of racist.

The slavish liberal media bears culpability in our judicial, political, and cultural slide. The guardrails seem nonexistent, while God is moved to the back of the bus.

The president, resembling a treed cougar more than a lame duck, lashes out with executive orders and dictates to finish the national transformation he promised to all who’d listen.

His opponents on everything from gay marriage to climate hysteria, are labeled as being on “the wrong side of history”.

Studying history, it’s replete with civilizations which followed the same path America’s on (the sound you hear is a thousand liberals rolling their eyes). Nevertheless, study your history.

Dr. Ben Carson’s correct about our country’s solutions being found in scripture. Being on the right side of eternity trumps being on “the right side” of history, as defined by the left. Remember Psalm 9:17.

— Robert Towson, Pace

UWF’s Spring Fest?

It seems the University or West Florida has forgotten its own history.

The first Spring Fest was held in 1968 not the 1980's. The first real graduating class of which I was a part held it and we did not care who came. It was for our own entertainment.

The University was so far out of town that we really didn't feel part of Pensacola and at the time Pensacola didn't feel a part of us. When I first got here in 1967 I asked where the university was and was directed to the airport.

Spring Fest was a great get together for all of us, it is a shame the University has had it canceled.

— Dave Walby, class of 69' UWF

Gulf Breeze

Nine exclamations and a question

We do not need another Clinton or Bush in the presidential office!

We need someone who will do what “we the people” elected you to do!!

We need some “good old fashioned common sense” not another political hack that will pander to big govt!!!

We need to downsize our out of control spending, reduce the size of government, no more lifetime politicians, close our open borders, solve the immigration problem with the existing laws on the books, start reducing the national debt and eliminate the IRS with a national sales tax!!!!

This mess in Washington will only continue with another Clinton or Bush!!!!!

Enough is enough and we can not put up with anymore of the same political crap!!!!!!

Someone needs to step up and do what is right by the “constitution” for “we the people” and not what is politically correct!!!!!!!

Damn the political correctness and tell the world we are not sorry for being an American!!!!!!!!

Look for the person who can lead us on the right path to restore the “American Pride” and righteous feeling that we as Americans are not sorry for!!!!!!!!!

Ask yourself how did we get so far into this mess?

— J R Darnell, Pace

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1H9Z5or