NEW YORK (CBSNewYork) — A new CBS News poll showed most Americans sympathize with Israel in the current conflict with Hamas, view Russia as unfriendly or an enemy, and disapprove of President Barack Obama’s handling of foreign affairs.

The poll showed in the ongoing violence between Israel and the Palestinians, most Americans – 54 percent – sympathize with Israel. But 47 percent blame both sides for the violence between Israel and Hamas.

Americans do not necessarily think the U.S. should get involved. Fifty-nine percent of Americans think the U.S. does not have a responsibility to try to resolve the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, CBS News reported.

Over a decade ago, Americans were more divided when it came to the U.S.’s responsibility in this matter. In 2002, 47 percent thought the U.S. had a responsibility to solve the conflict, 46 percent said the U.S. didn’t have a responsibility to do so, CBS News reported.

Most Republicans (54 percent) lay the blame on Hamas, compared to only 24 percent of Democrats and 32 percent of independents, CBS News reported. Fifty-five percent of Democrats and 48 percent of independents blame both sides equally, compared to only 35 percent of Republicans.

On the subject of Russia, 56 percent of Americans now view that country as an enemy to the U.S. – 22 percent – or unfriendly – 34 percent. Few believe new sanctions against Russia will be effective in curbing Russian actions against Ukraine.

The U.S. late last month took diplomatic action against Russia in the wake of the downing of a Malaysian Airlines passenger plane by Russian separatists in Ukraine.

Obama’s approval rating on foreign policy remains low at 36 percent, and few – just 33 percent approve of his handling of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. His overall job approval rating remains stable compared with last month at 41 percent.

The poll also showed 50 percent of Americans think Obama has strong qualities of leadership, but 47 percent believe he does not.

A total of 54 percent of Americans also disapprove of U.S. House Republicans’ lawsuit against President Obama claiming he has overreached on his executive authority by unilaterally changing the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. But the responses on that issue were split along party lines.

Check Out These Other Stories From CBSNewYork.com: