ROSEBURG, Ore. (AP) - Chris Mintz spent a good half hour flexing one of the muscles he can still use at the moment: his right hand.

The 30-year-old U.S. Army veteran, confined to a wheelchair after he confronted the gunman at Umpqua Community College on Oct. 1, made a surprise appearance at the kickoff of a two-day memorial concert at Stewart Park. He was dressed in casual gray sweatpants and a hoodie while shaking hands with armed servicemen and women, concert-goers and musicians who poured on their thanks and well-wishes.

In spite of the tragedy that spotlighted Mintz’s heroics in the first place, he was optimistic. He was shot five times that day - in both legs, his abdomen, his shoulder blade and his finger. Before the incident, he had been seen taking citywide jogs throughout Roseburg.

“Soon enough you’ll see me running again,” he said as he shook a soldier’s hand.

It was a somber beginning for the Umpqua Strong Music Festival, a two-day event that hosted more than 20 bands hailing from all over Oregon and California. One hundred percent of the donations made at the free concert were given to the UCC Strong Fund. Roseburg residents Brody Jansen and the band Crossroads to Jericho performed original music, and covers of popular tunes were also performed throughout the day.

A food stand offered up complementary hot dogs and soda. Another table featured a silent auction for items like a football signed by Seattle Seahawks cornerback Richard Sherman and a specially made electronic snare drum, customized with the UCC’s green and white school colors.

The festival started with performances from the North Umpqua Violin Quartet and the Northern Oregon Scottish Bagpipe Band; the latter of which filled the already gloomy morning with heavy-hearted tones in a tribute to the shooting victims.

“Oct. 1 changed a lot of things for a lot of people,” said Matt Stubbs, a firefighter from Drain who helped organize the music festival. “Before, were just people going to our jobs every day, going home to our families, spending time with our kids - doing our everyday functions. And this brought our community so much closer together.”

Just before the concert formally started, representatives from the U.S. Army presented Mintz with a “Warrior Certificate of Appreciation.” Cpt. Brent Heller spoke of Mintz’s heroics and said his actions represented the values of the army, the country “and humanity itself.”

“In the face of a ruthless, deadly and premeditated threat, your complete disregard for your safety in an effort to save others is worthy of the highest commendation,” Heller said.

Two American flags were held high around the site: one large flag hoisted by the ladder of a large fire engine and another, attached to a scissor lift next to the stage, which was carried into the air during the North Umpqua Violin Quartet’s rendition of the “Star-Spangled Banner.” A third flag, the American flag that flew over the campus the morning of the shooting, was retired by the local Veterans of Foreign Wars. The flag was folded ten times in the retirement - a fold for each of the nine victims and one for the community itself.

The event itself was organized through that tenth fold. Stubbs, 36, neither attended UCC nor knew anyone who was directly affected by the shooting, yet he felt compelled to start something to help the victims and the community itself. The concert began as a Facebook event on Oct. 4, but gained momentum and turned into a two-day festival.

When asked what drove him to get involved, Stubbs said, “Why not? Ever have something reach out and grab a hold of you that you just can’t explain? And no matter which way you look at it and no matter how hard you fight it, you just can’t figure out why you’re doing what you’re doing? Why not?”

___

Information from: The News-Review, http://www.nrtoday.com