It was reported this past Thursday that more than 5,800 gas leaks were found in Washington, DC. Some manhole covers had methane concentrations as high as 500,00 parts per million of natural gas – about 10 times greater than the threshold at which explosions can occur.

Four months after phoning in the leaks to the city authorities, the research team returned and found that nine were still emitting dangerous levels of methane.

Nationally, natural gas pipelines failures causes an average 17 fatalities, 68 injuries, and US$133 million in property damage annually, according to the U.S. Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.

The United States is crisscrossed with more than 2.5 million miles of fuel pipelines, or enough to circle the earth about 100 times. U. S. regulators may step up inspections and increase the industry’s maintenance costs, said Mark Easterbrook, a pipeline analyst with RBC Capital Markets in Dallas.

“Much of the underground infrastructure in the U.S., which is also water and sewer pipes, has been in use for more than 50 years and needs to be evaluated and where needed, replaced,” said Blaine Leonard, president of the American Society of Civil Engineers. “Just because it’s old doesn’t mean it’s in bad shape, but the risk is certainly increased.”

“There’s a lot of hidden infrastructure and we can’t be complacent about it. so much of our economy and quality of life depends on it,” Leonard added.

Incidents with pipelines that carry natural, gas, gasoline, and crude oil can be inspected using devises called pigs that run through sections of pipe, deploying sensors and cameras to detect cracks, corrosion and other defects from the interior. Companies can also pump high pressure to test integrity, or dig up sections for visual inspections.

“The lack of computerized records for much of the U.S. pipeline network complicates efforts,” said Carl Weimer, executive director of the Pipeline Safety Trust. “Older pipelines are much more at risk because we didn’t have the protective technology that we have now,” adding, “Old pipes had either no corrosion protection or were wrapped with material that looked like tar paper.”

“Ruptures of natural gas lines are rare”, said Richard Kuprewicz, president of Accufacts Inc., a pipeline-safety company. Causes of ruptures can include manufacturing defects that worsen over time, work crews that hit a pipe while digging, or corrosion.

In addition to the explosive hazard, methane is a powerful greenhouse gas, and the leaked gas is a loss of $3 billion in unaccounted natural gas each year.