HOLYOKE - A year ago, Michael Feld, CEO of VertitechIT, had to be talked into looking at potential office space in Holyoke's Open Square.

He'd heard all the knocks on Holyoke. But his company was growing and needed space, inexpensive space but edgy, attractive space that fit with the company's high-tech work as information technology experts for businesses, especially venture capitalists and hospitals eager to cut costs and comply with electronic medical records requirements.

Today, as workers complete a 3,500-square-foot headquarters in Open Square, Feld sounds like the Paper City's biggest booster, raving about the space, about Open Square and its owner and developer John Aubin and about Holyoke.

"This is the perfect space for us," Feld said. "I never see us outgrowing this space. This gives us room to grow and access to the talent we need. It has the conductivity that we need."

The rent will run $4,500 to $5,000 a month, Feld said, depending on the cost of the final build out. That's considerably cheaper than similar space elsewhere. VertitechIT moved in September from Northampton into temporary space in Open Square. The new, permanent office space will be ready in April.



"What Northampton wants is retail and certain socially conscious businesses," he said. "And we don't need to be in an office tower in downtown Springfield. We don't bring clients here, or we only do so very rarely. This is for our employees."

VertitechIT doesn't do business with the Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center, but Feld says his company is in the same "ecosystem."

VertitechIT now has 20 employees in Holyoke and a few more in at three satellite offices around the country. But the plans are to grow to 30 employees by the end of 2014, then 60 to 90 employees by the end of 2015.

"There is no reason, given what we know is on the horizon, that we can't grow the businesses ten-fold in 10 years," Feld said. "And what we are is the people who work for us."

That means engineers, for example, start at $90,000 to $150,000 a year and the company pays all health insurance and matches 401(k) retirement contributions.

"The mayor's office was wonderful and even put us in contact with local schools about training new workers," Feld said.

The federal Affordable Care Act, with its emphasis on electronic medical records, is one driver of VertitechIT's growth. But so is the general budget constraints hospitals feel these days, Feld said.

"Most hospitals pay 30 percent too much for IT," he said. "They do it because they don't know better and it didn't matter. They could pass those costs on."

But now they can't, so they call on VertitechIT to upgrade their technology and shrink down their IT departments. Feld is the acting IT chief at Lancaster General Hospital in Pennsylvania, for example.

In the future, calls for IT help from VertitechIT clients will go to workers in Holyoke at an all-hours call center. Like if a Pennsylvania emergency room computer doesn't work at 2 a.m.

"Then we can have staff here find out where the on-site technician is ... then tell them to go to Emergency Room Two and fix computer four," he said. Such services are "only going to grow."

Walking through the soon-to-be completed space with Aubin and Feld, VertitechIT principal and co-founder Gregory R. Pellerin pointed out the curved walls.

"There is not a straight wall in the place," Pellerin said. "And all the walls will be treated so they can be used with dry-erase markers. They are really giant white boards. It's a physical manifestation of what we do."

The new headquarters also will have a room for computer servers.

Aubin, who did the architecture design, said he's using recycled elements from the building, including wood from old beams, in the new space. An old fire door sat nearby, ready to be reinstalled in a conference room.

Aubin said VertitechIT also fits in with other Open Square tenants, a list that includes website designers as well as T-shirt makers, a bridal shop, photo studio and other amenities.



Jessica Ryder, VertitechIT's operations manager, said she's become adept at using the company's neighbors. She sourced most of the company's holiday party at Open Square, from using event space to buying the invitations and renting tuxedos.

“It’s a fantastic group and we use as many of them as we can right here on site,” she said.