As an African-American woman, a voting advocate and a non-politician, I sometimes grapple with how effective one vote can be. I am certain there are those like me who do the same.

After all, some African-American women have overwhelming life challenges stacked against them — many from day one — something that people of privilege simply don’t share and thus might not be able to sufficiently relate. According to the American Association of University Women, African-American women are likely to work seven extra months for free to get the same paycheck as their male co-workers. African-American women are paid 63 cents per dollar paid to white, non-Hispanic workers.

African-Americans suffer health care disparities because of this wage gap trend and are less likely to live in adequate housing that is affordable. But then, I am writing to the choir, right? Many already know about these things simply by being observant and astute. By sharing this information, it doesn’t mean that there aren’t others who suffer the same fate, but the current focus is on African-American women and the effectiveness of voting.

Dr. Kelly Dittmar and Glynda Carr co-authored an article for the Huffington Post stating that black women voters “have turned out at the highest rates of any race/gender subgroup in the past two presidential elections.” They further stated that “More than 70 percent of black women voted in 2012, out-voting white women (65.6 percent), white men (62.6 percent), and black men (61.4 percent).”

The trial and tribulations noted in the African-American’s history of voting stands on its own. Many were ridiculed, bloodied, beaten and killed for the right to walk into a voting location to perform the simple act of casting a ballot.

History states that Thomas Mundy Peterson was the first African-American to vote in an election when he cast his vote on March 31, 1870. Our nation became fickle before the voting rights amendment and this fickleness continues today in the form of voter ID laws proposed to help the people when, in fact, they harm the process and the people.

African-American women have long been a foundational structure that help to guide the direction of families, and at many times stand as important decision makers of economic, legal, health and educational matters, so to find out how effective our votes are is encouraging. We cannot stop being a catalyst for ensuring our children, nieces, nephews and grandchildren, as well as those of our neighbors, are at the table in making the most important decisions for sustainability and survivability no matter the race, creed or color. We can do that through our vote, through our involvement and through the process of persistence.

Reflecting on party affiliation doesn’t give us justice because it doesn’t truly define who we are as people. We must be focused on issues that impact our lives. We share the ability to take care of our families, ensure they have excellent health care when needed, provide them with educational opportunities, guide them to ensure a sense of safety and security, and instill in them a spiritual connection.

To get these things done, we know we cannot afford to ignore the power of the ballot box. We have seen the difference it makes, and we are resolved to continue the effort. So, those who don’t have our best interest included with theirs, let it be noted that this exclusion can be leveraged at the box.