All my life I’ve been very active. As a federal law enforcement agent, my healthy lifestyle and fitness are a major aspect of my job performance. In 2013, I was stationed at the U.S. Embassy in Panama City, Panama, and was exercising in the gym, as I did most days before heading home to my wife and three children. After just a few miles on the treadmill I experienced sudden, excruciating pain in the center of my chest.

I was having a massive heart attack. I couldn’t believe it; I was not a high-risk individual, and I did not have a pre-existing condition. If this could happen to me, it could happen to anyone.

I was rushed to the hospital, where doctors removed the massive clot located dangerously close to my heart. I thought I made it, that I had dodged death. But in the middle of the night, doctors determined my heart was so damaged that it was not strong enough to beat on its own. I was too weak to be transported to a U.S. hospital and too weak for surgery. I was given a 6 percent chance of survival. My family prepared for the worst.

Meanwhile, doctors in Miami evaluated my case and knew my life could be saved by a new heart pump that would take the load off of my heart and allow me to rest and recover.

The device was inserted into my heart and allowed it to rest and become stronger. Finally, just a few hours after this life-saving procedure, I was strong enough to travel to a Miami hospital to continue treatment and begin recovery.

My brush with death gave me an increased appreciation for medical technology. I learned, firsthand, how innovative medical devices can save lives. I can also appreciate how harmful it can be to stifle companies — by way of the medical device tax — whose mission it is to make products like the one that saved my life.

Repealing the medical device tax — a two-year-old measure enacted as part of the Affordable Care Act — could be yet another positive step to advance innovation, research and medical technology. In the past year, we’ve seen policymakers bolster funding for medical research and the House of Representatives pass the 21st Century Cures Act, which would bring our health-care innovation infrastructure into the 21st century and provide necessary resources to uncover the next generation of cures and treatments.

Medical devices include some of the most genuine miracles of modern medicine: pacemakers, artificial joints, replacement heart valves and radiation-therapy machines, to name a few. The industry is also responsible for countless other devices that make modern medicine possible — from CT scanners to blood pressure cuffs and robots used in surgery.

As a sector of the U.S. economy, the industry employs and supports the jobs of about 2 million Americans, including more than 11,000 Virginians. The medical technology industry also contributes about $1.6 billion to the commonwealth’s economy each year.

In a recent study of its membership, AdvaMed, a Washington, D.C.-based trade association representing the medical technology industry, found that one-third of medical device companies have reduced R&D as a result of the tax. The leaders of the medical technology companies report that in order to pay the device tax, they have been forced to reallocate funds — that were previously marked for research — for other expenses, including the tax. Put simply, the tax drains resources for medical research. That’s not in the best interests of patients or economic growth.

It’s simple — without the innovations the medical technology industry creates, millions would suffer from disease, illness and medical emergencies that are now treatable thanks to innovative technologies and devices.

Absent this innovation, I would not be alive today to watch my kids grow up.

We have a responsibility to support innovation. I ask that you join me in that support by urging your member of Congress to repeal the medical device tax.

I am alive because medical technology saved my life; you never know when it might save yours. Modern advances in medical technology and health care are miraculous, but there are so many yet to come.