CHICAGO (AP) — The latest on the aftermath of the shooting of a black teenager by a white Chicago police officer (all times local):

8:15 p.m.

Chicago police have taken two protesters away in handcuffs during demonstrations over the shooting death of a black teenager by a white police officer.

A light rain fell Wednesday night as the crowd continued to march and disrupt traffic through downtown streets. The two protesters were taken into custody as the group marched through the financial district.

___

7:45 p.m.

Leaders of about a dozen community groups say protests they are organizing over the next few days will be about more than the black teen shot to death by a white Chicago police officer.

Activist JR Fleming says: "We are angry because this city has declared war on black people."

The groups met Wednesday night to discuss a unified response to the killing of 17-year-old Laquan McDonald, who was shot 16 times in 2014. The city released video of the shooting on Tuesday, the same day Officer Jason Van Dyke was charged with murder in the killing.

After the meeting, about 100 protesters marched roughly a half mile to Chicago police headquarters. A line of officers walked beside them to ensure they remained on the sidewalk.

Demonstrators say in addition to police shootings, they've seen schools and mental health clinics in their communities closed, a lack of jobs and a high rate of unsolved murders.

They say a Black Friday protest aimed at shutting down a major downtown shopping area will send a message by hitting Chicago where it hurts — in the pocketbook.

___

7:30 p.m.

President Barack Obama says he is "deeply disturbed" by video footage showing a white Chicago police officer fatally shooting a black teenager.

Prosecutors have charged Officer Jason Van Dyke with first-degree murder for the death last year of 17-year-old Laquan McDonald, who was shot 16 times.

Obama said on his Facebook page Wednesday that he is asking Americans to "keep those who've suffered tragic loss in our thoughts and prayers" this Thanksgiving, "and to be thankful for the overwhelming majority of men and women in uniform who protect our communities with honor."

Obama says he is personally grateful to the people of his hometown — Chicago — for keeping protests peaceful.

___

5:15 p.m.

Dozens of protesters are marching in downtown Chicago, demanding justice for a black teenager fatally shot by a white police officer.

The small crowd gathered Wednesday evening with chants of "indict, convict, send that killer cop to jail."

The marchers disrupted traffic along the busy State Street shopping corridor. A handful confronted police officers, staring them down and shouting in their faces.

Authorities on Tuesday charged Officer Jason Van Dyke with first-degree murder in the 2014 shooting death of 17-year-old Laquan McDonald. City officials released squad-car video of the incident.

__

3 p.m.

Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders says all Americans "should be sickened" by video footage of a white Chicago police officer fatally shooting a black teenager.

Sanders said in an emailed statement on Wednesday that there needs to be action beyond echoing the phrase "black lives matter." The U.S. senator from Vermont says there should be action and reform to criminal justice.

His comments come a day after the police officer was charged with first-degree murder and Chicago officials released a video of the 2014 shooting.

___

2:50 p.m.

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton says the family of a black teen fatally shot by a white Chicago police officer and residents in the city "deserve justice and accountability."

Clinton made the comments in an emailed statement Wednesday, a day after the officer was charged with first-degree murder and the city released a squad-car video of the 2014 shooting.

Clinton says the case is a reminder that larger questions about the safety and respect of citizens need to be addressed.

She adds that police officers across the country are doing their duty honorably "without resorting to unnecessary force."

___

2:15 p.m.

Advocacy groups and community leaders are calling for more investigations of the Chicago Police Department and authorities after the release of a video that shows a white police officer shooting a black teen.

The video was released Tuesday hours after the officer was charged with first-degree murder.

The Urban League of Chicago on Wednesday called for a federal Department of Justice investigation, alleging a pattern of "discriminatory harassment" against black people.

The Rev. Jesse Jackson says officers involved should be fired or at least suspended. He also wants a special prosecutor on the case, saying Cook County State's Attorney Anita Alvarez took too long to bring a murder charge in the 2014 shooting.

A group of activists is expected to meet Wednesday to call for an independent investigation of police conduct.

___

1:50 p.m.

A Cook County judge has dismissed a charge against a protester accused of hitting a police officer in Chicago.

Twenty-two-year-old Malcolm London was among five protesters arrested during demonstrations sparked by a video of a black teenager being fatally shot last year by a white police officer.

London was charged with aggravated battery of a police officer. Police said he struck an officer during one protest Tuesday night in downtown Chicago.

Judge Peggy Chiampas said during a hearing Wednesday afternoon that the state's attorney's office recommended the charge be dismissed and told London he was free to go.

London, who was wearing a T-shirt with the phrase "Unapologetically black" on it, walked outside the courthouse to loud cheers. A crowd gathered outside chanted, "We're going to be all right" and "Set our people free."

Prosecutors did not say why their office recommended dropping the charge.

___

1:45 p.m.

A group of activists is calling for people to protest the fatal police shooting of a black teenager and shut down a major retail corridor in downtown Chicago on Black Friday.

About two dozen protesters spoke Wednesday outside Mayor Rahm Emanuel's City Hall office.

The gathering followed the Tuesday release of a squad-car video showing a white police officer shooting 17-year-old Laquan McDonald 16 times. Officer Jason Van Dyke was charged with first-degree murder.

Several protesters said they were parents of black men who also had been shot and killed by Chicago police.

The group wants people to shut down Michigan Avenue, known as Chicago's "Magnificent Mile" on Friday. They also want the Department of Justice to investigate.

Protester Quovadis Green says: "You cannot kill our children and expect us to be quiet any longer."

___

8:15 a.m.

Chicago police say they arrested five protesters during overnight demonstrations sparked by a video of a 2014 police shooting.

The five people were charged with offenses including hitting a police officer, weapons possession and resisting arrest.

One of those arrested was 38-year-old Dean M. Vanriper of Murrieta, California. Police say he had a stun gun and a knife.

A 22-year-old Chicago man, Malcolm London, was arrested and charged with aggravated battery of a police officer. Police say he struck an officer during one protest Tuesday night in downtown Chicago.

The officer was treated for injuries that weren't life-threatening and released.

London and Vanriper were scheduled to appear in bond court later Wednesday. It was not immediately clear whether either man already had an attorney who could comment on his behalf.

Police say protests were largely peaceful and there was no damage to private property.

___

2:30 a.m.

Most protesters in Chicago seemed to honor pleas for restraint in the hours after the release of a dash-cam video showing the shooting death of a black teen by a white police officer.

Demonstrators took to the streets Tuesday night, at times numbering in the hundreds. There were a few tense moments, and at least two people were arrested. But the demonstrations dissipated in the early morning hours Wednesday without any reports of damage or injuries.

Protest groups are expected to stage more demonstrations in the days ahead, including one at City Hall scheduled for Wednesday and another seeking to block Michigan Avenue during Friday's holiday shopping bonanza.

The protests came after the release of the dash-cam video in the death of 17-year-old Laquan McDonald, who was shot 16 times. Jason Van Dyke, a Chicago police officer, was charged with first-degree murder in McDonald's death earlier Tuesday.

___

This story has been corrected to show that some of those arrested were women. Headlines on an earlier version incorrectly said the 5 people arrested were all men.