Dan van der Vieren (center) with his students and their Einstein portrait. The students are, from left to right: Janae Castillo, Tristan Gutierrez, Ryan Sparrow, Hunter Kriegh and Jon Baessler. (Courtesy photo / Fort Morgan Times)

The history of the Rubik's cube 1974 - A Hungarian professor of architecture, Erno Rubik, creates a twisting cube-shaped puzzle 1975 - Rubik patents the "Magic Cube" 1977 - The first Magic Cube is sold in a Budapest toy shop 1980 - The Magic Cube is renamed the "Rubik's Cube" 1982 - The first International Rubik's Championships are held 1990 - Rubik becomes president of the Hungarian Engineering Academy 2005 - The cube celebrates its 25th anniversary with a special edition pack

To most people, it's a colorful but frustrating puzzle. To Dan Van Der Vieren, it's a key to unlocking high school math students' potential.

The Rubik's cube has been a popular collector's item among numbers geeks for decades, but most are content to leave it on a shelf once they've solved it. Van Der Vieren, Weldon Valley High School's newest math teacher, didn't stop at solving the famous brain twister. He wrote his undergraduate thesis on the Rubik's cube, and now he's using it as the centerpiece for his students' work in the classroom.

"I've been collecting Rubik's cubes for a while now," Van Der Vieren said. "I love puzzles and using my brain to solve them."

His love for puzzles made it easy to decide on a thesis topic when he was approaching graduation at Regis University. He ended up writing a paper that connected the Rubik's cube to his studies in cryptography, exploring the possibility of using the game to make secret messages.

Advertisement

After graduating in 2010, he continued to collect cubes and also began pursuing a master's degree in secondary education. He started student teaching at Weldon Valley High School last year, and became the full-time math teacher for grades seven through twelve after his predecessor left in January.

"On the first day, I had a lot of Rubik's cubes on top of my desk," Van Der Vieren said. "Right away some of the kids were asking, 'Can I borrow a Rubik's cube to take home?'"

Rubik's cubes can be a good "attention director" for students. He tries to incorporate them into his lessons as much as possible in order to keep the students focused and interested.

"It gets kids interested because of the puzzle aspect," he said. "When we were starting, some of the kids said 'I hate math, I'll never like math'... but some of them this year—some of them told me today that over their lunch break they went to Walmart to get Rubik's cubes."

Some of Van Der Vieren's students have become even better than he is at solving puzzles. One boy asked him for help solving a 7- by 7-inch Rubik's cube instead of the traditional 6 by 6, but the teacher had to tell him, "That's beyond me right now."

The puzzles not only make math class more fun, they're also a good visual aid when learning about volume, surface area and other geometric properties. And they provide good opportunities for class projects. In a creative blend of art and numbers, some of Van Der Vieren's students started the school year by making a mosaic of Albert Einstein's face out of Rubik's cubes.

Van Der Vieren hopes to graduate with his master's in May, but he plans to keep teaching at Weldon Valley after completing his own education. He likes the small class sizes, which allow him to reach students more easily than he would in a Denver school.

"I'm having a good time here," he said. "I'm getting to know the kids and developing relationships."

Stephanie Alderton: 970-867-5651 ext 227, salderton@fmtimes.com or twitter.com/slalderton