By Elaine Williams, Lewiston Tribune, Idaho McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

March 16 --A new sign is hanging near the door of what used to be Inland Metals in Clarkston.

Mike's Heating and Air Conditioning has acquired the business, formerly owned by Dick Uhlenkott .

"I'm retired," said Uhlenkott, 68. "I've been walking in that same door for 50 years."

He and his wife, Muriel, are doing a little traveling and spending time with family. Just prior to her retirement, she was human resources director at Tri-State Memorial Hospital in Clarkston.

Uhlenkott said he and Jon Brotnov , the owner of Mike's, had been talking for a few years before putting together the deal that included Inland Metals' trucks and tools. The real estate is being leased to Mike's, which is covering warranty work for former Inland Metals customers, Uhlenkott said. "I felt good about turning our business over to him."

It's been less than a year since Brotnov was featured in Business Profile in July, but catching up with him is a great way to learn about the transaction.

Business Profile chatted with Brotnov via email about his connection with the Uhlenkotts, the recession and the Affordable Care Act.

Business Profile: Why are Mike's Heating and Air Conditioning and Inland Metals a good match?

Jon Brotnov : My family has a history with Inland Metals. When I was a kid, Dick Uhlenkott purchased the Grangeville heating and plumbing shop of my dad, Monte Brotnov . My dad was brought on as the service manager. My older brother, David Brotnov , worked for Inland Metals, cutting filters, when he was in high school.

Inland Metals was the exclusive Lennox Dealer for our area for nearly 60 years. They installed thousands of Lennox furnaces and air-conditioners in the Lewiston-Clarkston Valley that are still in operation today. Mike's later took on the Lennox brand in 2005 and Inland Metals switched to the Maytag brand. I find gratification in bringing the Lennox brand back to the company and building where its roots were planted and flourished for so many years.

I knew that Inland Metals had a talented and loyal crew, who would work harmoniously with my crew at Mike's and be a great addition to our team. With the addition of Inland Metals, we had six employees who joined our Mike's team. Our overall total is 77. Typically January, February and March are our slowest times. In the spring, when productivity picks up, we will add more helpers, apprentices and journeymen.

BP : What other ways does the deal benefit your business?

JB: The acquisition of Inland Metals expands part of my physical location into Clarkston. By having locations in both Lewiston and Clarkston, I will be able to better serve my customers with each of my services -- heating, air conditioning, plumbing, electrical and duct cleaning. Mike's outgrew our Lewiston location years ago. With the additional square footage, I will be able to spread out my employees, inventory and vehicles to make all operations much more manageable.

BP : Are there any plans to consolidate into a single location?

JB: The new location in Clarkston is excellent. It makes it much easier for customers to access us if they need a filter or a part, or just to talk to someone about their needs. I do not plan to move all my operations to Clarkston. I like the idea that two locations, one on each side of the river, will improve our services to our customers.

BP : How would you assess the economy?

JB: The recession's grip is loosening a bit. We are seeing both residential and commercial activity amplifying. I believe we still have a ways to go before we can say we are clear of the recession's affects, but it's good to see that currently we are heading in the right direction.

BP : What effect is the Affordable Care Act having on your business?

JB: The Affordable Care Act did not cause a lot of changes for the employees of Mike's, as we were already providing quality health insurance that met most of the requirements. It did, however, cause our health insurance rate to increase nearly 30 percent. I am happy to say that Mike's is still able to pay 100 percent for employee health insurance, even with the price increase. Mike's also offers 401k benefits with an employer match up to 4 percent and vacation pay. All of our Mike's employees are considered full time and are eligible for all benefits.

---

Williams may be contacted at [email protected] or (208) 848-2261.

___

(c)2014 the Lewiston Tribune (Lewiston, Idaho)

Visit the Lewiston Tribune (Lewiston, Idaho) at www.lmtribune.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 764

[jetpack-related-posts]