Topics: Barack Obama, CUNY, Democrats, economy, Editor's Picks, financial crash, Frances Fox Piven, Glenn Beck, GOP, left, Occupy, Occupy Wall Street, OWS, Republicans, right, Socialism, Sociology, Welfare

Frances Fox Piven is one of the nine most dangerous people in the world — according to Glenn Beck, who in recent years has foisted a new wave of notoriety on the eighty-one year-old academic. Now a professor of political science at sociology at the City University of New York, Piven’s five decades of scholarship include the 1977 book “Poor People’s Movements: Why They Succeed, How They Fail” (with her late husband Richard Cloward). In a Friday interview, she considered how Occupy and the Tea Party approach electoral politics, compared Obama to Hoover, and shared her theory about what made neoconservatives resent her. What follows is an edited and condensed version of our conversation.

What have the shutdown and debt ceiling fight revealed about who has power in Washington and how they wield it?

As crazy as it seems, you’ve got a kind of intersection of movement politics and electoral politics. Movement activists seek out conflictual issues and to try to polarize those situations because that’s how movements grow. Elected politicians are always pursuing alliances. So you had the really strange phenomenon of the right wing of the Republican Party defying the business interests that fund it.

There really is a right-wing movement – or several — at work in the United States, and they’re making difficult, if not impossible, the sorts of compromises and coalitions at which politicians are usually adept. I compared that to the 1850s: after several decades in which intersecting political parties crafted one compromise after another, their efforts were completely fractured by the rise on the one hand of the abolitionists who demanded emancipation immediately, and on the other hand, the ferocious reactions of the slaveholding south. It’s a different kind of politics, and it produces some wild and unexpected consequences. I don’t know if the business leadership of the Republican Party is going to be able to hold it together.

The Tea Partiers in the Congress — movements do this — they’re reviving ancient themes. In 18th century Britain, when the working class was beginning to organize you got a lot of sloganeering about preserving the rights of freeborn Englishmen. What rights? An imagined set of rights. In the same sort of screwball way, this movement is reviving the language of past movements: Nullification. States’ rights. The reactive movement trying to defend the right of the South to not only hold slaves, but go after fugitive slaves in the North.

Business is acting like an interest group, a series of interest groups. I read a comparison between the attempt of American business leaders to use the Tea Party and the way the big German cartel owners thought they could use the Nazi movement. There are a lot of strains between interest groups, electoral politics, and movement politics.

[The Tea Party] polarizes by raising issues that will inevitably create an opposition, and that’s the way they build support. The basic dynamics are exposing the rifts that are exposed when you bring up issues that are suppressed by elected politicians trying to build majority coalitions.

There’s been debate on the Left about whether the Tea Party represents an astro-turf rebranding effort by the same Republicans activists, or a significant shift in US politics. What do you think?

I think it’s both. They have attracted the some of the same people that were attracted by movements from the John Birchers to the Christian Right. But the Tea Party is also I think a little bit different. They’re not a religious movement. They are better educated than the public at large. They are not the people who are hurting as a result of this economic crisis — although they may be alarmed by some of the instability caused by the financial crisis. And they are terrified by their loss of status and political centrality as the country changes demographically.

For a long time, pollsters on the Democratic side have been looking forward to the demographic changes that would make minorities so important. Well, they have occurred, and not only minorities, but poor people turned out in large numbers for both Obama elections. [Tea Partiers], they’ve always had standing and authority in their little communities. And that’s being challenged. Not just by Obama — Obama is the symbol. That’s being challenged by these broad shifts that are occurring in the population and in electoral politics.

How do they react? They scream at their rallies. They say, “Take it back!” That’s a scream that reflects, I think, the loss or threat to the sense of ownership. Leaders in the business community, most of them are rational, sane, self-interested, greedy. But some of them have some other kind of Tea Party emotionalism. I’d put the Koch brothers in that category: rich, powerful people who are scared because they’ve stolen so much from the country, and electoral changes signal the possibility that they may lose what they’ve stolen.

The New York Times this week quoted the CEO of Deloitte saying, “The extreme Right has ninety seats in the House. Occupy Wall Street has no seats.” Lots of people have made that kind of comparison over the past couple years — what do you make of it?

Well, it’s obviously accurate. But Occupy — although it didn’t have either the inclination or the capacity to set out to win the state legislatures and gerrymander all the congressional districts — had a large impact on American political discourse. It had a big impact on Obama’s campaign rhetoric — he started talking about extreme inequality and fat cats — and even the Republican rhetoric changed, so they talked about jobs. On many, many issues, Occupy has a kind of majority — the anger toward the rich, towards Wall Street, toward the 1%. The Tea Party expresses that, but then they act to save the tax cuts for the rich, or to increase them. Occupy has been consistent.

Even though [the Right] seems always to be winning, it could change. And it’s that sense that somehow elected Democrats could score a win — that I think explains the hysteria of people like the Koch brothers.

“Score a win” of what kind?

There are actually quite a few left-leaning Democratic House members now, but they can’t move anything. In the aftermath of a run-up in inequality, such as we’ve had over the last thirty years, there have been times when electoral politics put enough people in positions of authority, backed by movement politics on the outside, to introduce which reduced inequality. The 1930s produced a very substantial reduction in inequality, a result of the election of FDR and a lot of liberal Democrats who were fueled by the movements that were emerging of the unemployed and the aged and ultimately workers. The same thing happened after the 1960s.

I don’t underestimate the extent to which the craziness on the Right, and the money that pays for that craziness, is driven by fears — it may sound quaint — fears of the people. They’re trying to take away the right to vote for a lot of people. I think the brashness reflects this latent fear that they could lose at the ballot box.