Last-gasp deal attempt on HIGHER ED -- ANTI-TRUMP ads to hit ILLINOIS -- Chicago police work ‘ground to a halt’ after LAQUAN MCDONALD video

By Natasha Korecki (nkorecki@politico.com; @natashakorecki) with Manuela Tobias (mtobias@politico.com; @manuelatobiasm)

Good Wednesday morning, Illinois. Super Tuesday saw Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton dominate contests and rack up delegates. But Chris Christie’s face may have stolen the show last night: http://bit.ly/21GHGei

Story Continued Below

A quick few sum-up stories:

-- “Super Trump Day,” POLITICO http://politi.co/1L4L8v6

-- “No Republican nominee has ever won all of the different states Donald Trump has,” WaPo’s The Fix blog: http://wapo.st/1T78tPo

-- 'Establishment Republicans Are Furious With John Kasich,' by BuzzFeed News http://bzfd.it/1TmHNdI

-- Six New Jersey newspapers are calling on Chris Christie to resign: http://bit.ly/1L4UPKc

Back to Illinois. The “Stop Trump” campaign was at work on Tuesday, even as he mopped up. A group of Republican business leaders -- including Todd Ricketts of Illinois’ Ricketts family, which owns the Chicago Cubs -- pushed for funding of an anti-Trump political action committee.

From the New York Times: “A number of major Republican business leaders, all of whom have backed candidates running against Donald J. Trump, held a conference call on Tuesday afternoon to solicit funds for a ‘super PAC’ that’s been singularly focused on stopping the rise of the real-estate developer as the Republican nominee ...

50 donors on call: “Meg Whitman, Todd Ricketts and Paul Singer, among others, all took part in the call with about 50 people, urging them to fund Our Principles PAC, which was funded largely by a member of the Ricketts family, and which started airing ads in Iowa before the caucuses to try to stop Mr. Trump ... Mr. Ricketts’s mother, Marlene, funded the effort aggressively with $3 million ahead of Iowa out of fear of the situation that the party is in now, with Mr. Trump set for a strong showing in the 'Super Tuesday' contests. On the call, it was noted that 71 percent of the delegates are up for grabs after Tuesday, meaning it is impossible for Mr. Trump to lock up the nomination this week. People on the call discussed Mr. Trump’s business record, among other issues they believe are potent lines of attack.” http://nyti.ms/1L4XxPQ

ANTI-TRUMP ADS TO HIT ILLINOIS -- “Ricketts-funded group preps attack ads against Trump in Illinois,” by Chicago Tribune’s Rick Pearson: “The super political action committee primarily funded by Marlene Ricketts, the matriarch of the family that owns the Cubs, is preparing to run its anti-Donald Trump ads in Illinois. Ricketts has put $3 million into the Our Principles PAC, which has been criticizing Trump for not being a true conservative and over his use on building projects of people who live in the country illegally. But in the new ad, running nationally as well as in Illinois, Florida and Michigan, it is Trump University that comes under fire. On Tuesday, a New York appeals court revived a fraud claim that the state's attorney general had brought against Trump University. ‘Donald Trump belongs in 3 a.m. infomercials," a narrator says in the ad, and not the White House.’” http://trib.in/1Qmr3iT

ON THE STATE SIDE …

Lawmakers are in Springfield, and as Illinois Playbook told you on Tuesday, there are some behind-the-scenes workings for a higher ed stopgap solution. On Tuesday, discussions were underway between both sides to find an immediate, but temporary, fix. One proposal would resolve higher ed issues right now, including funding Chicago State, restoring Monetary Award Program funding and reopening streams to four-year higher ed institutions. (Without the governor’s Turnaround Agenda items attached.) There was talk about emergency budget relief and “flexibility with money management.” No promises were made and a discussion is expected to reconvene today.

For those paying attention, a 3 p.m. press conference on Tuesday was supposed to feature GOP legislative leaders, who more than likely would have blasted Speaker Mike Madigan, blaming him for not coming forward on a deal. It was canceled. The fact that the press conference was shut down at the last minute (reporters were already waiting inside the Capitol Blue Room) was: “a first sign of good faith,” from Republicans, we’re told. Will Democrats respond in kind by not calling an override vote of Gov. Bruce Rauner’s vetoed MAP grant funding?

Reaching an agreement on anything in this pre-primary time is beyond a long shot and Madigan’s spokesman on Tuesday was still predicting an override vote. Reconstructing trust that’s been shattered into a million pieces will take time and likely come in baby steps.

BUT THERE ARE CONSEQUENCES -- From Western Illinois University: “With the budget impasse approaching nine months, Western Illinois University President Jack Thomas announced today (March 1) that mandatory furloughs and voluntary pay reduction programs will be implemented for all non-negotiated personnel (administrative/non-academic and civil service personnel not covered by unions). While the mandatory program will take place June 1-30, employees may voluntarily elect to spread out their furlough days or participate in the voluntary pay reduction program beginning April 2.” The release: http://bit.ly/1Rm5MU9

AND THIS LITTLE DISTRACTION -- "Contribution Limits Lifted in the 22nd House (Mike Madigan)," by Scott Kennedy: “With this latest independent expenditure disclosure Illinois United for Change has now spent more than $100,000 in the 22nd House race supporting Jason Gonzales/opposing Mike Madigan thereby exceeding the threshold needed to lift the campaign contribution limits for all candidates in this race for the remainder of the primary election cycle. This means that the Speaker’s candidate committee, Friends of Michael J. Madigan, can now raise unlimited funds, an advantage not shared by the candidate committees of any of the other three legislative leaders. The affected timeframe may be brief, the primary election cycle ends in two weeks, but the impact of this may be significant.” http://bit.ly/1oXW584

Welcome to the POLITICO Illinois Playbook. Have a tip, event, announcement, endorsement? Send to nkorecki@politico.com or @natashakorecki

SUBSCRIBE to Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1NTMQid

CRUZ STAYS ON ILLINOIS BALLOT -- “Judge tosses ballot challenge against Cruz in Illinois," AP: "A judge has dismissed a claim that Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz isn't eligible for the Illinois ballot because he was born in Canada. Cook County Circuit Court Judge Maureen Ward Kirby tossed the case on a technicality Tuesday. Kirby says the suburban Chicago attorney who filed the complaint, Lawrence Joyce, failed to give a copy of it to Cruz or state electoral board members, as required by Illinois law. Instead, Joyce served only lawyers representing Cruz and the board. Joyce says the Texas senator can't be president because he wasn’t born in the U.S. Cruz and some legal experts say he's eligible because his mother was a U.S. citizen when he was born. Joyce backs Ben Carson but says he acted on his own.” http://bit.ly/21GsZHX

RAUNER ROLE IN PRIMARIES -- “In Illinois's Democratic primaries, it's the governor, stupid," by Chicago Reader's Ben Joravsky: "As for the last left in Chicago, I'd like to offer the chieftains of the Democratic Party a few words of unsolicited advice as they prepare for the final stretch of the March 15 primary campaign: It's the governor, stupid! That's Bruce Rauner, our whacked-out Republican governor, who seems determined to eradicate unions and bankrupt public schools in the name of making Illinois more attractive to rich people. Don't blame me, folks—I didn't vote for him.” http://bit.ly/1QSz0jf



** A message from Nuclear Matters: Illinois’ nuclear energy plants provide 90 percent of our carbon-free electricity and contribute nearly $9 billion to our economy. Without Illinois policymakers’ support for the Next Generation Energy Plan, two plants – Clinton and Quad Cities – could be forced to close, jeopardizing these benefits and thousands of jobs. Learn more: NuclearMatters.com **

ILLINOIS GROWTH STAGNATES -- “Legislature: Illinois revenue to grow less than 1 percent," by The State Journal-Register's Doug Finke: “Illinois’ tax collections will grow by a mere $215 million in the next fiscal year, the legislature’s financial forecasters predicted Tuesday. The Commission on Government Forecasting and Accountability also warned that it expects revenue this fiscal year to be $442 million less than it previously anticipated. The commission put much of the blame on weaker-than-expected corporate income and sales tax receipts. The state’s new fiscal year begins July 1. The commission’s revenue forecast for Illinois' basic checkbook account – less than 1 percent growth – is one of the weakest in years. Exceptions were the 2009-2010 recession when revenues actually decreased and the last two years when revenues dropped because a major portion of a state income tax increase was allowed to expire.” http://bit.ly/1TmzE98

OBAMACARE LOSSES -- “Illinois Obamacare plan crippled by losses,” by Crain's Kristen Schorsch: "The operating losses continue to mount at struggling Land of Lincoln Health, totaling $90.8 million for the Obamacare health plan in 2015. That net loss is almost five times greater than the Chicago-based startup reported in 2014, when it totaled $17.7 million. The insurer lost about $40 million in just the last three months of 2015, according to a new financial statement filed with national insurance regulators. Jason Montrie, Land of Lincoln president and interim CEO, did not immediately respond to a message seeking comment.” http://bit.ly/1RlJLoq

--“EMO superintendent: Rauner’s education plan won’t fix issue,” by Brian Boesen for KWQC: “East Moline Schools Superintendent Kristin Humphries says the district has lost five-million dollars over the past five years because the State of Illinois doesn’t have the money to fulfill its education obligations ... Illinois Governor Bruce Rauner visited Glenview Middle School today to push his education funding reforms which he says are being blocked by Democrats in Springfield. ‘We haven’t put enough money into our schools and our school funding has been cut over the years,’ said Gov. Rauner ... Humphries says Rauner’s plan ... doesn’t fix the issue … ‘Even if they have the money to fully fund all schools, the disparity between the ‘haves and the have nots’ continues to grow in the state of Illinois,’ said Humphries. ‘The formula is broken, it must be fixed.’” http://bit.ly/1UxqOod

DURBIN BLASTS ABBOTT OUTSOURCING -- “Abbott's IT layoffs draw fire from Sen. Durbin," by Chicago Tribune's Ameet Sachdev: “Abbott Laboratories' recent move to outsource some information technology jobs has come under scrutiny from Sen. Dick Durbin. The Illinois Democrat is upset about reports that the health care company, based in north suburban Abbott Park, is replacing American workers with foreign workers. In a letter to CEO Miles White released Monday, the senator urged Abbott to cancel the layoffs ... The senator's staff.. confirmed ... 180 Abbott employees were given 60 days' notice and told their last day will be April 22.” http://trib.in/21BgqRJ

FERRO OSCAR TICKET GRAB ‘EMBARRASSING,’ ‘BAD JOURNALISM’ -- “Oscar spotlight a dim one for hometown L.A. Times," by Ken Doctor for POLITICO Media: "While old-fashioned investigative journalism took center stage in Los Angeles at the Oscars Sunday evening, hometown reporters for the L.A. Times found themselves scrambling to cover the event. The Times had been allocated six passes for entry to the Dolby Theater – essential access to tell the story of the night by the big broadsheet located in America’s entertainment capital – but until the last minute not one of them was allocated to a reporter ...

Guess who got them instead? “Tribune Publishing Chairman Michael Ferro and CEO Justin Dearborn reportedly used the passes, each along with a guest. The last two were earmarked for publisher Tim Ryan, who was persuaded to do the right thing and gave up his seats after receiving a flabbergasted email from the Times’ film desk. Those tickets — in the cheaper, mezzanine seats — allowed Times reporters Amy Kaufman and Steve Zeitchik into the theater to do their reporting.”

From the letter: "To fail to send a single reporter on a year when the Oscars are at the center of a cultural debate over diversity is not only embarrassing, it’s bad journalism." http://bit.ly/1TPN244

FERRO ON MORNING EARNINGS CALL -- “Tribune Publishing's Michael Ferro expected to take center stage Wednesday,” Chicago Business Journal’s Lewis Lazare: “Tribune Publishing's (NYSE: TPUB) earnings call tomorrow hardly represents a normal situation ... Michael Ferro is expected be on the call as well. And that's a game-changer ...Ferro now wields considerable power within Tribune Publishing ... He moves fast, and he likes his own people in key positions. In just a matter of four weeks, Ferro has unceremoniously ousted former Tribune Publishing CEO Jack Griffin and replaced him with close confidante and business associate Justin Dearborn, who has no previous journalism experience.” http://bit.ly/1nhy4He

CITY

AFTER LAQUAN MCDONALD, POLICE WORK ‘GROUND TO A HALT’ -- “Police brass, facing horrible homicide numbers, at last see frontline response,” by Chicago Sun-Times’ Frank Main: “Police stops have plummeted by 87 percent this year and homicides have soared to levels not seen since the 1990s in Chicago — creating a firestorm of criticism for the department. Still, police officials said Tuesday they’re at last seeing progress from their frantic efforts to get cops back to work on the streets. Police work nearly ground to a halt in the first six weeks of 2016 because officers were worried about increased scrutiny of their stops following the November release of the video of Laquan McDonald’s shooting. The video led to a murder charge against Officer Jason Van Dyke and a federal probe of the department.” http://bit.ly/1T6EdEj

MURDERS CLIMB, ILLEGAL GUN SEIZURES FALL -- “Chicago Homicides, Shootings Double Over Same Period in 2015,” by AP’s Don Babwin: “Homicides and shootings have doubled in Chicago so far this year compared with the same period in 2015, and police have seized fewer illegal guns — more possible signals that officers have become less aggressive in the aftermath of a shooting video released last fall. Interim Police Superintendent John Escalante said Tuesday that he was so concerned about officers possibly holding back that he filmed a video for the entire department in which he encouraged them to do their jobs and assured them that a federal probe of the force was not aimed at individuals. ‘We are aware that there is a concern among the rank and file about not wanting to be the next YouTube video that goes viral,’ Escalante said in the video before introducing a segment of his own to remind viewers ‘why we took this job and swore this oath of office.’” http://abcn.ws/1oNIZJM

VIDEO POLICY ALREADY IN QUESTION -- “Lawyer Accuses Rahm Of ‘Empty Promise’ On Video Of CPD Custody Death,” by Sun-Times Media Wire: “Two weeks after Mayor Rahm Emanuel embraced a new policy calling for the release of audio and video of police-involved shootings and other serious incidents within 60 days, an attorney is slamming City Hall for withholding video connected to a man’s death in police custody last summer in Brighton Park. Meanwhile, the unit in the Cook County State’s Attorney’s office responsible for investigating police misconduct is looking into the July 20 death of 24-year-old Heriberto Godinez Jr., an official confirmed to the Chicago Sun-Times.” http://cbsloc.al/1QK2jOH

A MORGUE TAXPAYERS ‘CAN BE PROUD OF’ -- “Cook County Medical Examiner's Office now 'national leader,’” by Chicago Sun-Times' Stefano Esposito: "With considerable fanfare, Cook County officials Tuesday declared the medical examiner’s office a ‘national leader’ — four years after the Chicago Sun-Times reported that hundreds of bodies were piling up in the morgue. 'We want this office, which last year handled more than 5,000 cases and performed nearly 3,000 autopsies, to be one that the taxpayers can be proud of,' Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle said." http://bit.ly/1XZKzo4

LESSONS IN CITY’S BLUE CART RECYCLING -- “More than 36,000 recycling carts slapped with contamination stickers,” by Chicago Sun-Times' Fran Spielman: "More than 36,000 blue recycling carts have been slapped with contamination stickers in the two months since Chicago embarked on its ‘Go Bagless’ campaign, but City Hall still has no plans to stop educating and start punishing homeowners.” http://bit.ly/1L4wtQN

TAMPON TAX -- “‘Sexist’ Tampon Tax Could Be History Soon in Cook County,” by DNAinfo's Joe Ward: “Cook County officials are working to make sure that suburban women won't be paying more in taxes for tampons than their city-dwelling counterparts. Both municipalities tax tampons and other feminine hygiene products the same as other commonly purchased goods. But Ald. Ed Burke (14th) is launching an effort to classify the products as medical devices, making them virtually exempt from all city and state taxes.” http://dnain.fo/1RFuHon

CHICAGO COST OF LIVING ‘REASONABLE’ -- “Chicago 14th most expensive city worldwide in livability study,” by Crain's Katherine Davis: "Chicago was ranked the 14th most expensive place to live and work in the world, according to a new study by New York-based research firm Savills Studley, which estimated it costs $44,700 a year for an individual to live and work here, up 10 percent from five years ago. Savills Studley's Live/Work Index study measures the combined costs of residential and office rentals per person per year, with the average total cost of accommodation per worker being $56,855. Chicago's cost of living is fairly reasonable compared with the $111,300 it costs to live and work in New York ... 'World cities can become a victim of their own success when rents rise to the point where affordability becomes an issue.’” http://bit.ly/1LTJbwo

UNIVERSITY PARK LAYS OFF COPS, RELOCATES PYTHONS --“Workers being laid off, animals shipped out as suburb copes with money woes,” by Daily Southtown’s Erin Gallagher: “As her beloved miniature pony Precious was led out of the barn, Keely Childress wiped away tears. For Childress, the parks and recreation director for University Park, the village's financial difficulties, budget cuts and layoffs suddenly became real. On Tuesday, 23 village employees, including seven police officers, were handed their walking papers, with potentially more to come, officials said. As a result, Precious was relocated along with about 150 other animals — including llamas, pythons and an alligator — from the town's recreational farm and petting zoo. ‘We were living beyond our means for years and it's caught up with us,’ said Johnna Townsend, the acting village manager in the south suburb.” http://trib.in/1QSqEbn

Washington

VA LINE NOW ‘ABSOLUTELY HUMMING’ -- “VA assigns new director to crisis line,” by BND's Mike Fitzgerald: “Less than a week after U.S. Sen. Mark Kirk, R-Ill., called for the firings of people connected to the U.S. Veterans Affairs much-maligned Veterans Crisis Line, the VA announced it will shift management of the crisis line to a VA official who successfully fixed the National Call Center for Homeless Veterans. As of last week, the Veterans Crisis Line reports to Matt Eitutis, the Veterans Health Administration’s acting director for member services, according to a VA announcement. According to Gibson, Eitutis repaired the homeless veterans line after a 2014 VA inspector general report found a quarter of its calls went to an answering machine. 'That line now is absolutely humming. You don’t see calls being dropped or sent to voice mail,' Gibson said, according to a story Monday in Military Times.” http://bit.ly/1QKhIi2

RYAN WANTS FULL REPUDIATION OF WHITE SUPREMACY -- “Paul Ryan rejects Trump’s KKK comments, but not his candidacy if he wins GOP nomination," by Washington Post's Paul Kane: "House Speaker Paul D. Ryan (R-Wis.) issued a stern rebuke Tuesday to his party’s presidential front-runner, calling Donald Trump’s recent equivocation about receiving support from white supremacists a 'fundamental' break from conservative orthodoxy. 'This party does not prey on people’s prejudices,” Ryan told reporters at the weekly House GOP leadership news conference. Without addressing Trump by name, Ryan noted that the Republican presidential campaign had veered into topics such as views on ‘white supremacists’ that should prompt 'no evasion' of the topic other than repudiation of those values.” http://wapo.st/1QqbQuW

TRUMP’S SECRET FAN CLUB -- “The Daily 202: Why Donald Trump’s support keeps expanding," by Washington Post's James Hohmann: “Elites bemoan The Donald at cocktail parties and take comfort in calling Trump supporters uneducated. But, while the Republican Party plunges into civil war, Trump keeps expanding his base. Many readers would probably be stunned by some of the people who are secretly supporting Trump and don’t want to admit it on the record. His coalition includes not just rock-ribbed conservatives and God-fearing evangelicals but Ivy-League-educated professionals. Some realize he’s not actually that authentically conservative and look the other way. Some, who fancy themselves moderates, admire the businessman’s malleability.” http://wapo.st/1XZKoJq

BUT THEY MATCH THE PURSE! -- “Safety over sexy: Airport stops woman with gun-shaped heels,” http://apne.ws/1OO0OgY

WHAT PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES LOOKED LIKE IN H.S. -- “These yearbook photos of 2016 presidential candidates will take you (way) back,” http://bit.ly/1QKhJ5A

TRIB’S TOP RESTAURANT PICS: “Tribune Dining Awards: Our critics pick the best of Chicago's restaurants,” http://trib.in/1oXx9xr

PURPLE PIG PURGES HARRIS -- “Scott Harris out at Purple Pig as dueling lawsuits are settled," by Crain's Peter Frost: “A messy legal spat between the partners at one of Chicago's best-known restaurants appears to be over. Restaurateur Scott Harris is out at the Purple Pig after he and the River North restaurant's other partners—Jimmy Bannos Sr., Jimmy Bannos Jr., Tony Manutano, Gary Veselsky and Laura Payne—reached a settlement out of court related to dueling lawsuits filed in late 2014.” http://bit.ly/1WU5Q1x

RAVINIA SCHED IS OUT -- Bob Dylan, Paul Simon at Diana Ross on Ravinia schedule this summer. Public sales begin April 26. Greg Kot with details: http://trib.in/1LU9IcQ

TOUR OF FORGOTTEN CHICAGO MUSICAL HISTORY -- "Sites that shaped Chicago's sound: from Louis Armstrong's spots to Kanye's crib," by Mark Guarino for The Guardian: "Chicago is known for many things: deep-dish pizza, improvisational theater and, yes, grim weather. Scratch deeper and there is a profoundly rich history of music, from blues and jazz to acid house and hip-hop. Because of its location – a healthy distance from both coasts – the city has always been a place where artists have felt free to experiment and collaborate without the constraints of commercial expectations, producing music that has shaped modern sound. Follow these addresses to see where the music lived first.” http://bit.ly/24AjZqh

TRANSITIONS – Mary Wisniewski, formerly a Chicago-based Reuters reporter (and before that, Sun-Times and Bloomberg) moves to the Chicago Tribune as the new Transportation reporter.

Mira Oberman, formerly the Midwest Correspondent for AFP for 11 years based in Chicago, is leaving to be a senior communications manager with the International Institute for Sustainable Development, a global think tank based in her hometown of Winnipeg, Canada.

TODAY'S EVENTS (H/T Intelligent Events, @CHI_IntellEvent)

Spike Lee is at Northwestern Dept. of Political Science, 5:30 p.m. "The event will feature a screening of ‘Chi-Raq’ followed by a Q&A with filmmaker Spike Lee as well as local Chicago activists involved with the film.” http://on.fb.me/1LRP4KA

Former CIA Director Michael Hayden headlines Chicago Council on Global Affairs’ American Intelligence in the Age of Terror at 5:30 p.m. http://bit.ly/1QQ0Yw2

Super Tuesday Fallout: Are We There Yet? - 6 p.m. - Institute of Politics - Experts discuss the results from Super Tuesday: Have Hillary & Trump wrapped up the nomination? Do Sanders, Cruz, and Rubio still have a shot? Participants in the discussion will be: Real Clear Politics’ Tom Bevan, Redeem the Vote’s Randy Brinson, BuzzFeed’s McKay Coppins, and IOP fellow Patti Solis Doyle.

Where’s Rahm? At Chicago Shakespeare Theater in the morning for a special announcement at Navy Pier.

Where’s Rauner? Big Brothers Big Sisters Illinois Association Event at Kingpin Lanes in Springfield in the morning. Then holds Criminal Justice Reform Press Conference at Governor's office where he’ll take media questions. Later, he’ll read to a 3rd grade class at a Taylorville elementary school for Read Across America Day.

** A message from Nuclear Matters: Some of America’s existing nuclear energy plants face early closure due to current economic and policy conditions. Providing more than 62% of America’s carbon-free electricity, existing, state-of-the-art nuclear energy plants play a vital role in achieving our clean-energy and carbon reduction goals.

In Illinois, our nuclear energy plants provide 48 percent of the state’s electricity and 90 percent of our carbon-free electricity. The existing nuclear energy plants also contribute nearly $9 billion to the economy and support approximately 28,000 direct and indirect jobs.

But today Illinois doesn’t properly value these plants for their carbon-free contributions, placing them in economic jeopardy. Without support from Illinois policymakers for the Next Generation Energy Plan to close this gap, two plants – Clinton and Quad Cities – could be forced to close, jeopardizing thousands of jobs along with many other economic and environmental benefits. Learn more at NuclearMatters.com **

FOR MORE political and policy news from POLITICO Illinois, visit: http://politi.co/1Ln6sIF

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw