Maybe the commissioners and staff at the Federal Trade Commission are fans of Tom Petty and his song “I Won’t Back Down”, or maybe they are just secure in their position that the Affordable Care Act doesn’t require hospitals to merge to survive.

Whatever it is, two high ranking officials of the FTC who addressed the ABA/AHLA Antitrust in Healthcare meeting in Arlington, Va. reiterated their view that pressures to coordinate care under the ACA isn’t a sufficient reason for two hospitals engaging in what the FTC views as an anticompetitive merger.

FTC Chair Edith Ramirez told the assembled health care and antitrust attorneys on Thursday that “vigorous enforcement of the federal antitrust laws is more important than ever.” Similarly, Deborah L. Feinstein, the director of the Federal Trade Commission's Bureau of Competition on Friday reasserted something that she has said many times before, namely that the ACA doesn’t conflict with the federal antitrust laws.

The statements by the FTC officials came at the end of a week that saw a federal judge in Pennsylvania refuse to block a proposed hospital merger. In that decision, Judge John E. Jones III of the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania faulted the FTC for using too narrow of a market definition in evaluating the proposed merger of two Harrisburg, Pa., hospitals.

The judge also said that the changes in the health-care industry because of the ACA created a “growing need” for smaller hospitals to merge to survive. In so ruling, the court said that he was dealing with “the healthcare world as it is, and not as the FTC wishes it to be.”

True to its word, the FTC has provided notice that it will appeal that decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, arguing among other points that “nothing in the ACA compels anticompetitive consolidation among competing hospitals.”

Given that another merger challenge brought by the FTC is proceeding in Illinois and that the parties in that action have made similar arguments, it will be interesting to see whether the FTC is vindicated in its view of the compatibility between the ACA and the federal antitrust laws.

Stay on top of new developments in health law and regulation with a free trial to the Health Law Resource Center.

Learn more about Bloomberg Law and sign up for a free trial.