A few years ago, Jeanne Nicholson developed a serious infection that required antibiotics. When hives broke out all over her body in a severe allergic reaction to the drugs, she raced to the hospital and told the woman at check-in she was going into anaphylactic shock. It was an emergency.

“The woman behind the desk said, ‘that’ll be a $20 co-pay,’” Nicholson remembers. “It’s kind of funny, but not funny.”

Nicholson’s story is an example, she says, of how money comes first in Colorado’s broken medical system. It’s a system that Nicholson, a state senator who represents District 16, and a coalition of others want to fix with a transformative ballot measure known as Amendment 69.

Amendment 69 would provide universal healthcare for every state resident by opting the state out of the Affordable Care Act and replacing it with a cooperative system called ColoradoCare. Nicholson says the measure would result in a system where the priority is quality health, preventative medicine and the wellbeing of residents — instead of profits.

“The first reason we need it is because not everyone in Colorado is covered with a way to pay for quality care,” she said. “There are 350,000 people in the state who still don’t have any health insurance at all. The other reason is that a lot of people are uninsured, meaning they have insurance, but because of deductibles and co-pay, they can’t afford to use their health insurance.”

Nicholson, who has a background in public health, will discuss the measure and answer questions on Tuesday at Arroyo during a presentation titled “Universal Healthcare for Colorado?” The event is hosted by the Progressive Women’s Caucus of the San Juans, a grassroots organization aimed at advocating for, educating and elevating regional communities.

Amendment 69 is the result of years of work. The seeds were sown in a series of legislative hearings in the Capitol in which legislators researched and brainstormed ways to ensure all state residents had access to affordable quality healthcare. There were meetings and hearings and subgroups and studies, and one idea that gained traction was to create a statewide cooperative.

But when the proposal was put before state legislators, it languished.

Advocates of the measure, Nicholson said, “were frustrated that they had come up with this practical and doable plan, and it didn’t go anywhere … That group of people stayed together and have worked behind the scenes for several years, gathering more and more people interested in the issue.”

Frustrated by lack of action in the legislature, they decided to take matters into their own hands. Last summer, supporters gathered more than 100,000 signatures to get the issue on the ballot — nearly 10,000 more than was required.

If passed, the amendment would create ColoradoCare, a resident-owned, non-governmental health care financing system aimed at ensuring comprehensive and accessible benefits that supporters say would go beyond the platinum plans currently available. ColoradoCare would be overseen by trustees elected by residents of the state and the system would be paid for by a 3.33 percent income tax and a 6.676 percent payroll tax for employers (up to 10 percent for the self-employed).

Nicholson acknowledged that these are significant hikes, but noted that most Coloradans would actually be paying less because they would no longer have premiums.

And by eliminating paper-shuffling administrative costs and unnecessary bureaucratic layers, she said, it would free up money to pay for high-quality healthcare at a smaller cost than the current system.

“It’s a transformation about the way we pay for healthcare in the state, not the way we give healthcare,” she said.

Nicholson noted that it’s a complicated issue that can be head-spinning.

“I think it’s very important for people to come to the event and learn about it,” Nicholson said. “The biggest challenge is getting the voters to understand how this would work and why it would be better for them and all the people they know.”

The presentation is the first major community event being put on the PWC of the San Juans. The grassroots organization is a pending nonprofit that formed in June of 2015 to activate, educate and support involvement in issues that matter. The organization, which has roughly 60 members, spent the first year laying groundwork and getting organized, and is thrilled to be debuting itself to Telluride with this event, said founding member Rain Almoney.

“I think this is a great opening event for us because it is a really interesting topic,” she said. “Sen. Nicholson will be able to really fill us all in, and clearly this issue is really important to all of us.”