Anthony Graf of Sellersburg lines up his shot during the St. John Paul II Catholic Church Turkey Shoot at St. Joe Hill was held at the St. Joe campus in Sellersburg on Sunday. (By Jenna Esarey, special to The Courier-Journal) October 4, 2015

Thousands attended the 58th annual Turkey Shoot, Chicken Dinner and Fall Festival on St. Joe Hill in Sellersburg, Ind., on Sunday.

St. Joseph Hill Catholic Church hosted the event for 57 years before it merged with St. John’s Catholic Church earlier this year, forming a new parish with two campuses. The event is now officially titled the St. John Paul II Catholic Church Turkey Shoot on St. Joe Hill.

“That’s a mouthful,” said event co-chair Margaret Popp Tschaenn with a laugh. “Everyone’s pretty much just calling it the St. Joe Turkey Shoot like always.”

Tschaenn and her sister, Darlene Popp Coleman, have co-chaired the festival — the church’s biggest fundraiser each year — for 20 years.

“Our raffle presales were up 30 percent this year,” said Father Tom Clegg, pastor of the parish. “And last year they set a record.”

With the combining of the two churches, the volunteer base has grown as well.

“We’ve got well over 600 — almost 700 — volunteers working,” Clegg said.

While the event is called a turkey shoot, not a turkey was in sight, except for the frozen ones handed out as prizes to the shooters taking part in the event. Guests lined up with their shotguns for each round, aiming at a paper target across the parking lot.

“I’ve come up here every year since I was ten years old or so,” Anthony Graf of Sellersburg said Sunday, after winning a turkey.

Jackson Ehringer, 10, attended with family members, including his cousin Jonathan Fleeman — a newly graduated private in the Marine Corps.

“I just started shooting last year,” Ehringer said. “I’ve been squirrel and deer hunting.”

Fleeman has been shooting longer, but said he doesn’t hunt. “I just like shooting targets,” he said.

Scott Rodman and Andy Kiel made a trip down from Indianapolis for the day to shoot at targets and eat.

“Everything’s been wonderful,” Rodman said. “The food was incredible. I’ll be stuffed the rest of the day.”

The chicken dinners are a favorite with more than 2,500 meals served each year with fresh fried chicken, homemade desserts and made-from-scratch chicken and dumplings.

Games of chance, quilt raffles, food booths, kids activities, bingo, and a cake wheel were also featured in the day’s activities.

Don Fusting, 82, says he has attended every one of the St. Joe Turkey Shoots.

“I just love it,” said the Louisville resident. “When we first started coming in was in a church basement with hot dogs and chili. And they shot at a real turkey.”

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1LcHvAV