There are words for what Dictionary.com's CEO does









Photo: Mike Kepka, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Dictionary.com CEO Michele Turner holds onto quaint relics of the past. Dictionary.com CEO Michele Turner holds onto quaint relics of the past. Photo: Mike Kepka, The Chronicle Image 2 of 3 Michele Turner, CEO of Dictionary.com, stands in her new corner office on Friday Oct. 18, 2013 in Oakland, Calif. Michele Turner, CEO of Dictionary.com, stands in her new corner office on Friday Oct. 18, 2013 in Oakland, Calif. Photo: Mike Kepka, The Chronicle Image 3 of 3 Dictionary.com CEO Michele Turner in her new corner office. She describes Dictionary.com as a "utility," but says users should still enjoy being on the site. Dictionary.com CEO Michele Turner in her new corner office. She describes Dictionary.com as a "utility," but says users should still enjoy being on the site. Photo: Mike Kepka, The Chronicle There are words for what Dictionary.com's CEO does 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

Just what is the proper way to use the word "irony" in a sentence?

That's one of the many reasons Oakland's Dictionary.com is consulted by more than 50 million people a month. Irony, in fact, is the most popular word referenced on the site, drawing some 900,000 queries a year.

Now Dictionary.com, a unit of IAC, is looking to refresh its site under the direction of its new CEO, Michele Turner. Formerly the chief product officer of mBlox, a mobile technology company, Turner joined the company in September.

Turner wants to update the site, which is almost 19 years old and includes both an online dictionary and thesaurus, as well as features such as a "word of the day" and several mobile apps. With the increase in online learning, she also wants to partner with local schools to develop tools to help students learn new words and practice their reading and writing skills. In a recent interview, Turner talked about her plans for the company, adding new words to the dictionary and "twerking," the dance move that Miley Cyrus turned into a buzzword in late August. This conversation has been edited for length and clarity.

Q: Why did you join Dictionary.com?

A: There were a couple of factors. I love the brand. This is a site that is eminently useful to everybody. I love words. I've always been an avid reader, and I love language.

I also joined because there is an opportunity for us to do a lot better. We just updated our thesaurus site and we're in the process of doing the same thing for the main dictionary site, which is definitely not looking Web 2.0 today. I think we can make it more functional but also a delightful place for our users to go.

Q: How can you do more?

A: For some people, we just need to make it a good experience and they'll come back because it's quick and easy and clean.

But a lot of students and teachers use us, as well as a lot of writers, musicians and composers. They're looking for more than just a definition. They're looking for context around the word. Students are looking for more along the lines of word learning, so we've included things like Word Dynamo, which is a vocabulary builder.

I have a small focus group of users at home. I have three kids, one in high school, one in middle school, one in elementary school. There's a lot of opportunity to create dedicated products and learning areas on our site that help students and teachers learn some of the broader things about words.

Q: Is it a challenge to be seen as an "old" website?

A: We'll be 19 years old next year, which is astounding. But I don't think about it as "how do I make this a sexy new site?" I just want to make it a place where people go and love being on. We're a utility.

We're a reference site, so let's stay true to what we are, while still being able to be a site that people enjoy being on.

Q: How can Dictionary.com help with online learning? How is it addressing Common Core, the new math and English standards for public school students in kindergarten through high school?

A: The Common Core gap is a big pain point for teachers. There's a lot of focus on how do we quickly move over to Common Core. So what can we do in the realm of word learning that will help students and teachers be able to close that gap quickly over the next year?

Our education team is talking to schools in the Oakland area. We're looking to partner with schools to figure out the problems and start working on how our apps can help bridge that gap.

Common Core is across 40 states, and the nice thing about it is that it's all common. So if we can fix it in the local schools, we should have something that will work for most of the U.S.

Q: Tell me about your team of word experts. What do they do?

A: We have a team of lexicographers. They are constantly looking at how do we refresh words, how do we evaluate new words. Like Obamacare.

How do you get a word into the dictionary? Presumably the word "Obamacare" will be here in five years, but we don't really know. So do you want to add a word to the dictionary that may not be relevant 20 years from now? That's why there are only a few words that are added to the dictionary every year.

Our team of lexicographers is constantly feeding new dictionary content (into our database), such as a new medical dictionary, rhyming dictionary or science dictionary. They're updating definitions to keep them fresh and also looking at new words to add.

Not every word gets into the dictionary right away, but there are words that people want to look up and understand. We're looking at how to address that - how do we expand our lexicon without adding unofficial words to the dictionary? ... and also provide a safe, clean place to find trending words.

Q: How did you handle the word "twerk?"

A: We answered it on the site, but we don't have it in our dictionary.

We don't have it in our lexicon, so if you search for "twerk," it's not on there. We do add new words. YOLO (which stands for "you only live once") is a word we added recently. It's always the question of how long is this going to be popular? Is this something that is going to stand the test of time?

Q: What's next?

A: We have a lot of new stuff in the works that I'm hoping we can roll out as quickly as we can. On the web, the core dictionary and home page are going to see an overhaul. Hopefully you'll also see us more on the web as well, with a much bigger social presence.