A tornado is seen north of Longmont on June 4. It touched down in northern Boulder County. ( Jenn Fields / The Denver Post )

Readers' picks 10. CU-Boulder hosts Republican debate 9. Omar Martinez stabs both parents, killing his father and self 8. New indoor pool and ice rink planned for Longmont 7. Longmont traffic stop leads to officer-involved shooting, standoff 6. Stores, theater begin opening at Longmont's Village at the Pea

When the haunting, downward tones of Longmont's tornado sirens sounded on June 4, a black funnel cloud already could be seen churning westbound north of the city.

Although it's unusual to see a tornado near mountains, it isn't impossible, according to the National Weather Service.

That's exactly what happened when the tornado touched down about three miles east of U.S. 287, just inside the Boulder County line.

The tornado moved to the west and northwest into Larimer County, going about six miles before disappearing back into the sky. Its wind speeds reached 140 mph at its strongest point, a 3 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale used to measure tornado strengths.

The tornado stretched a quarter of a mile at its widest point and lifted about 40 minutes after first touching down at 6:30 p.m.

Motorists along U.S. 287 could be seen stopped at Foothills Garden of Memory cemetery to watch the twister as it moved to the west, bringing with hail and skies black enough to make the early June evening seem like dusk.

A narrow path of rural Larimer County became a surreal hellscape in the immediate aftermath. The tornado twisted sheet metal and fences like paper clips, downed power lines and sheared branches off of trees.

Heavy rains made the Little Thompson top a bridge, and flashes of intense, purple lightning briefly illuminated the roof torn off an outbuilding and power poles hanging at 45-degree angles.

The real damage wouldn't be apparent to the casual onlooker until the next morning.

The tornado struck a Boulder County home near 95th Street and Yellowstone Street, taking with it most of the roof. Its windows had been smashed, and debris was twisted into the now foliage-free trees.

Another Boulder County home on 83rd Street was destroyed.

Further to the northwest, the storm struck a Larimer County home in the 2500 block of Blue Mountain Avenue and tore open half of it. Photographs could be seen still hanging on the walls inside.

Across the street, a pile of rubble no more than a foot high was spewed across a field, the only reminder that a home once stood 100 feet away.

Tupperware sat undisturbed in the home's basement, leaving a bystander to pose the question: "It's amazing how you can take the house, but leave the Tupperware. How do you leave the Tupperware?"

The storm damaged more than a dozen other homes.

Although no official injuries were reported, a resident told the Daily Camera that his niece had impaled her leg on a fence post while fleeing the tornado while she was at Highland Lake. She needed stitches.

A month earlier, a funnel cloud passed over Longmont but never touched down. The city decided to go ahead with a tornado siren test the next day.

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/jonbearwithme