Coming off concussion, WR has 125 receiving yards

DENVER — — Emmanuel Sanders appears to think he's bigger than he is. He willingly puts his body in harm's way, absorbing crushing hits. Somehow he shakes it off better than Taylor Swift, returning to drives, returning to highlight films with dives.

Sanders goes 5-foot-11, 180-pounds. Like his Lamborghini, he's built for speed. Yet he remains a sports car with chains on the tires, embracing the slippery roads, the mountainous terrain.

"We have a lot of guys on this team who are tough," linebacker Von Miller said. "But Emmanuel, man, he's a tough guy."

Trace it to playing high school football in Texas; connect it to his humble and hard-working childhood. Whatever the case, when the Broncos' season was flashing before their eyes on Sunday, Sanders repeatedly delivered big catches.

Sanders finished with nine receptions for 125 yards, an accomplishment even more impressive given that he barely practiced last week as went through the league-mandated concussion protocol.

"It didn't matter what happened before. I don't ever go into a game thinking about the negatives or what could possibly go wrong," Sanders said. "Once I was OK to play, I was going to give my full effort."

The significance of Sanders' performance in the 39-36 victory over the Dolphins lies deeper in the numbers. He turned four third-down receptions into first downs. The damage began in the second quarter. After failing to catch a pass in the first 15 minutes, Sanders hauled in six before halftime.

Advertisement

With the Broncos trailing 14-3 and needing a sustained march, Sanders converted on third-and-4 with an 18-yard catch. It was the first of two on a touchdown drive that spared 76,987 agitated fans their fingernails for a few more hours.

"Sanders, I ain't got nothing to say about that dude," said Dolphins safety Jimmy Wilson, whom Sanders beat multiple times.

For Sanders, Sundays have become a series of wows.

Sanders' best grab came on the next possession. Denver faced a third-and-20 on its 42-yard line, momentum fizzling after a hands-to-the-face penalty on center Will Mongtomery. Peyton Manning connected with Sanders on a 35-yarder, the receiver making the type of acrobatic play that has defined his first season in Denver on a stop-and-go move.

Did he have to dive?

Sanders answered, smirking: "Peyton gave me a hard time on that. It was a big time. I might have been able to run through the catch. I just wanted to secure it. We ended up scoring. It's all good."

Manning doesn't trust easily. Sanders gained his confidence early in the summer by playing through a calf injury and spending countless hours catching extra passes and working on Denver's audible language.

In 11 games with the Broncos, Sanders has eclipsed 100 yards receiving seven times. He didn't reach the total once in 56 regular-season games with Pittsburgh.

"They had an injury there with their other corner, so they were playing different guys, and Emmanuel was running good routes," Manning said. "And he has that deep threat, which is going to allow some of the shorter stuff and crossing routes to be open."

Manning pulled off the impossible, sailing the ball too long for Sanders three times.

"He's a hard guy to overthrow, so I take a little bit of pride in that — it means my arm might be hangin' in there this late in the season," Manning said.

Before the cameras arrived in the lockeroom Sunday night, Sanders slouched back into his chair. Broncos president Joe Ellis made his way through the locker room, personally congratulating the receiver. Sanders thanked him. He then turned and faced reporters, his engaging smile hiding his cold-blooded toughness.

"You aren't going to keep me down," Sanders said. "Not happening."