The rural community of Sayre, Oklahoma, was left without a major health care facility last month when the local Sayre Memorial Hospital shut down in the middle of a Monday afternoon.

Sayre is among the latest in a string of rural hospitals ending operations, citing the continuing fiscal challenges of the current hospital environment. At least 68 rural hospitals, or about 4 percent of all rural hospitals in the United States, have closed since 2010, according to the Sheps Center for Health Services Research at the University of North Carolina. Four closed in the first two months of 2016 alone.

The causes of this decline in the availability of rural health facilities are legion, but at the root of the problem is the crushing weight of regulation through the Affordable Care Act. The sum total of mandated automation, reporting requirements, shrinking reimbursements and increasing penalties for noncompliance with other mandates has left rural hospitals out in the cold.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

While larger facilities in bigger markets can adapt through acquisition, realignment and efficiency measures, small, remote hospitals that already operated on razor-thin margins have to fend for themselves. For many, it's just too much to stay afloat.

The consequences for patients in decreased access to timely, quality care are obvious. Less obvious are the potentially devastating effects on the broader community, where in many cases the local health facility is the largest employer.

One recent study by the National Institutes of Health found that the closure of rural hospitals reduces per-capita income by an average of $703 and increases the local unemployment rate by 1.6 percent. Not only do hospital closures have a direct impact on wage growth and unemployment, they also force migration to urban centers and create a scarcity of labor in rural areas.

Not every small town needs a world-class facility to conduct complex surgeries and rare treatments, but each does need a facility that can stabilize emergency cases and serve as a medical resource to extend diagnostic and treatment expertise via telehealth.



[READ: The CDC's Non-Binding Opioid Guidelines Won't Change Much]

Unfortunately, the market conditions for rural hospitals are unlikely to improve, which means these institutions will need to evolve if they are to survive. In practice, this means that many rural hospitals will need to reset the expectations of their communities about what services they can provide and remain viable.

Communities and patients served by rural hospitals have taken great pride in these institutions. However, as medicine has advanced, they have been challenged to make the investments needed to keep up with the latest technology and retain sophisticated, highly trained staff. And even with these investments, the question is whether they see enough volume to sustain skills and ensure optimal outcomes.



[READ: Supreme Court Shouldn't Let Religious Freedom Trump Right to Birth Control]

As it becomes easier for large urban facilities to provide care remotely, or for retailers like Wal-Mart and CVS to deliver services cost-effectively in smaller towns, rural health care providers with legacy facilities will need to focus on those unique services they can offer profitably.

Ultimately, rural hospitals must turn to a market-based, patient-centered approach that provides real value to patients and other stakeholders. By embracing transparency, increased accountability and a consumer-centered model for health care, rural hospitals can provide higher-quality care at a lower cost.

The challenge is stark. As the number of hospital closures continues to increase, the National Rural Health Association estimates that nearly 12 million Americans could lose direct access to care as a result of this growing problem. That doesn't even begin to account for the economic losses these communities will experience.



[READ: Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton Miss the Same Health Care Mark As LBJ]