government

Sheriff’s office admits mistake in letting him go with suspended license

By nick bonham the pueblo chieftain

Sheriff’s deputies allowed Pueblo County Commissioner Liane “Buffie” McFadyen’s husband to drive her home with a suspended license from a controversial incident earlier this year.

Related documents

Toward the end of the dash-cam video from the Jan. 25 incident, Deputy Eric Barlow asked Troy Manchego for his license.

Manchego told Barlow he didn’t have it with him, so the deputy asked for his name and date of birth.

That information was relayed to a dispatcher to scan the name for criminal history and warrants, which is normal procedure.

About a minute and a half later, the dispatcher radioed Barlow saying that Manchego was “clear suspended,” meaning he didn’t have any warrants but his driver’s license was suspended.

But by that time, Manchego and McFadyen had just left. The video records the deputy yell “Awwww!” Then the audio cuts off.

Manchego has a history of driving under suspension, according to a background and court record check.

In 2012, during his wife’s campaign for commissioner, Manchego was arrested on an outstanding traffic ticket after a heated argument at the couple’s home, where deputies had responded to a call.

The sheriff’s office said its policy is to issue a ticket for driving with a suspended license.

“We’re not perfect either, but that sounds like my deputies made a mistake,” Sheriff Kirk Taylor said Friday, back from a hunting trip.

The sheriff’s office issued a statement earlier this week standing by the actions of its deputies — three went out on the call, including a lieutenant — to allow McFadyen to call for a ride home.

She and Ron Greenwell, chairman of the Pueblo Democratic Party, were found in McFadyen’s vehicle suspected of being too intoxicated to drive.

No one was ticketed or arrested in the incident.

The two were found in McFadyen’s parked vehicle, which wasn’t running, and keys weren’t in the ignition. They had been dropped off at their cars after visiting a Florence hot springs with friends.

Early last week, in response to information requests from news organizations, McFadyen released the deputy report and video along with a statement about the events of that night.

Taylor has denied media requests for the information since March, when The Pueblo Chieftain started looking into the matter.

Taylor stood by his decision on Friday.

“It didn’t meet the threshold of an intoxicated driver. Fundamental fairness, isn’t that what the community wants? I think that’s what we’re looking for. We deal with facts as they are, not as what people want them to be. I think that encapsulates what I’m talking about,” Taylor said.

“That type of incident and that type of report I would not have released to a normal citizen and because it’s a commissioner, that doesn’t enter into the balancing test. If this was Jane Q. Public or Joe Citizen, my decision would’ve been the same and I think that’s what needs to be highlighted here.”

The county explains the “balancing test” in its response letter to The Chieftain on March 28.

“In balancing the competing public and private interests here Sheriff Taylor concludes that where there is a minor, incidental law enforcement contact and that combines with potential harm to individuals mentioned in the report through possible misunderstanding or distortion, then sound discretion calls for denial of a request to release the record.”

District Attorney Jeff Chostner said he had requested reports and evidence in the case for some time and finally received it last week.

Taylor said Chostner had asked for the information verbally and that he asked Chostner at least twice for a written request.

Taylor said he forwarded the information to the DA before leaving on vacation.

Chostner said his office has reviewed that information and forwarded it to El Paso County prosecutors for review.

The response letter from the sheriff is attached to the online edition of this story at chieftain.com.

nickb@chieftain.com