SAG HARBOR, N.Y. — Police on New York’s Long Island say former model and restaurateur B. Smith has been has been found safe, nearly 14 hours after she was reported missing.

Police in the village of Sag Harbor, where Ms. Smith lives, said she was found at around 2 p.m. Wednesday by her daughter, near her old apartment in New York City.

A missing persons report had been opened around 11:45 p.m. on Tuesday. Ms. Smith — an Everson, Fayette County native — is 65 and revealed earlier this year that she has Alzheimer’s disease.

Cleveland shooting

CLEVELAND — The police officer who fatally shot a 12-year-old boy carrying a pellet gun fired within 1½ to two seconds of pulling up in his cruiser, police said Wednesday. During those few moments, he ordered the youngster three times to put up his hands, they said.

The city released a surveillance video that shows the shooting of Tamir Rice, who was carrying an airsoft gun that shoots non-lethal plastic pellets.

The patrol officer who shot Tamir was identified Wednesday as Timothy Loehmann, a 26-year-old rookie who began his career in Cleveland on March 3. Officer Loehmann’s partner that day was identified as Frank Garmback, 46. Both are on paid administrative leave pending a decision by the Cuyahoga County prosecutor’s office whether to pursue any criminal charges.

FBI agents shot

ST. LOUIS — Two FBI agents were shot early Wednesday while helping execute a search warrant at a home in north St. Louis County.

The two agents with the St. Louis division were rushed to the hospital with non life-threatening injuries.

FBI spokeswoman Rebecca Wu said one agent was shot in the shoulder and the other was shot in the leg. She said the incident was not related to the unrest in Ferguson.

The agents had been searching for Major Washington, 33, who is charged with shooting and killing his mother late Monday night and shooting and injuring a police officer.

Health care signups

WASHINGTON — Nearly a half-million people chose health plans through HealthCare.gov during the first week of the new open-enrollment period in the online insurance marketplace, federal health officials announced Wednesday.

The figures show that nearly half of those who have just signed up for insurance do not currently have coverage through the federal insurance marketplace. That group — 48 percent of 462,000 who picked a health plan during the week that started Nov. 15 — is significant, because a major mission of the enrollment window this time is to attract uninsured Americans who did not get coverage through HealthCare.gov in its maiden year.

Romney still popular

WASHINGTON — Republican voters sure like nostalgia in their presidential candidates.A Quinnipiac University poll released Wednesday found Republicans “want 2012 presidential nominee Mitt Romney back in the game.”

They put him atop the leader board among possible 2016 Republican presidential candidates, as nearly 1 in 5 mentioned him as their top choice. Next was another familiar name — former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush.

The new breed followed. Third was New Jersey Gov. Christopher Christie and Dr. Ben Carson, each with 8 percent. No other Republican got more than 6 percent, and 16 percent were undecided.