Many fear it will take a long time to process ACA exemption applications near tax day. Get ready for Obamacare tax chaos

There are dozens of ways to escape Obamacare’s individual mandate tax — but good luck figuring that out come tax season.

Tens of millions of Americans can avoid the fee if they qualify for exemptions like hardship or living in poverty, but the convoluted process has some experts worried individuals will be tripped up by lost paperwork, the need to verify information with multiple sources and long delays that extend beyond tax season.

Story Continued Below

“It’s not going to be pretty,” said George Brandes, vice president of health care programs at Jackson Hewitt, a tax prep firm. “Just because you theoretically qualify for hardship, or another exemption, doesn’t mean you’re going to get it.”

( Understanding Obamacare: POLITICO's guide to the Affordable Care Act)

The worries may foreshadow a messy tax season next year as the one in 10 Americans who remain uninsured calculate their tax bill for the first time under Obamacare’s individual mandate.

Those without health insurance will have to cough up $95 per person or 1 percent of their income, whichever is greater. That penalty eventually jumps to $695 or 2.5 percent.

The White House expanded the list of exemptions allowing the uninsured to bypass the penalty for legitimate reasons, including religious restrictions, falling on rocky times or a death in the family. Another big out created after the controversy over canceled health plans was the so-called affordability exemption that allows people to opt out if premiums are still not affordable.

( Also on POLITICO: Can anyone fill the competency gap?)

The Congressional Budget Office expects 23 million of the 30 million Americans who remain uninsured in 2016 to qualify for exemptions. It’s part of the reason the CBO in June downgraded from 6 million to 4 million the number of people it estimates will pay the penalty.

The uninsured have two ways to opt out: The easiest way is fill out a new tax form for those exemptions that don’t require Obamacare marketplace approval. Some will be simple, including the exemption for being uninsured for under three months or those living below a certain income — about $10,150 for singles and $20,300 for married couples.

But many must be approved by the marketplace, including for people citing religious beliefs, like being Amish, or those who qualify for the dozen or so “hardships,” such as being evicted, experiencing domestic violence or having a health plan canceled because it doesn’t meet the law’s requirements.

( See POLITICO's full health care coverage)

There’s even one for being in jail, another for having medical debt and one for taking care of sick family members. An open-ended “hardship” exemption lets people try to explain situations not listed that stood in their way of coverage.

That’s where things get complicated. For marketplace approval, applicants must fill out an exemption application, gather proof of their situation, mail it off and wait a few weeks for approval.

Once they get the exemption certification number in the mail, they then fill out a newly drafted tax form to skirt the penalty.

( Also on POLITICO: Obamacare's surprises)

Some math may be required: If the exemption covers only a few months of the year, the individual is responsible for calculating how much of the penalty he or she will owe.

The process brings up a number of problems, the first being a time crunch. The marketplace is now taking about two weeks to process exemption applications, according to H&R Block. Many fear it will take much longer during tax season, particularly because the entire process is manual.

Given how most people wait until the last minute to do their taxes, there is concern delays could push beyond tax day, April 15.

“What happens on April 14 when you go to the marketplace and file for an exemption?” asked Kathy Pickering, the executive director of The Tax Institute at H&R Block.

Nina Olson, the IRS taxpayer advocate, said her team is “very worried that taxpayers will have returns coming in where they believe they’re covered by exemptions but they haven’t gone through the steps … particularly those needing” approval.

“What are we doing with that return in the meantime while the taxpayer goes … [for approval]? … Are we holding the entire refund?” she asked.

TurboTax estimates that less than 5 percent of exemption-eligible people have applied so far, suggesting a lack of education on how the process works.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services says it does not expect many people to apply for exemptions after Jan. 1, but many tax preparers predict the opposite. They say most uninsured individuals will come to their offices in early 2015 not knowing how to apply for exemptions — or even that they can opt out.

Authors: