Retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson is the first high-profile Republican candidate to formally enter the 2016 contest. He has a loyal following among the GOP's most conservative voters.

Ben Carson has created an exploratory committee to run for president, becoming the first high-profile Republican candidate to formally enter the 2016 presidential race. (Photo: Carolyn Kaster, Associated Press)

Retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson has created an exploratory committee to run for president, becoming the first high-profile Republican candidate to formally enter the 2016 presidential contest.

Carson, 63, the only African American expected to enter the race, grew up poor in Detroit and graduated from the University of Michigan School of Medicine. He rose to national prominence after criticizing President Barack Obama's health care law at the 2013 National Prayer breakfast. He quickly developed a loyal following among the GOP's most conservative voters.

"Obviously, this is a very big step," committee chairman Terry Giles said. "Today we begin the formal process of exploring whether or not Ben can win the presidency."

In the eyes of the law, there is little difference between a presidential campaign committee and an exploratory committee, which allows Carson to begin raising money for a White House bid.

Several other high-profile Republicans have been acting like candidates in recent weeks, including former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, who created a political action committee in January that allowed him to begin adding staff, raising money and campaigning across the country. Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker created a similar group. South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham recently launched what was called a "testing-the-waters committee."

The first GOP presidential primary debate is set for August.

While popular among conservatives, Carson remains virtually unknown to many others. "We realize we have to build a bridge from the far right to what I call the center-Democrats," Giles said.

Carson described his outsider status can be as an advantage in a recent interview.

"I see myself as a member of 'we the people,' " he said. "I see myself as a logical American who has common sense, and I think that's going to resonate with a lot of Americans, regardless of their political party or where they fit in that party."

Carson has for months — at book signings and other speaking engagements — struck chords that resonated with tea party conservatives and Republicans who openly criticize the party's leaders on Capitol Hill and other members of the party's establishment.

Carson has also compared Obama's Affordable Care Act to slavery and the Nazi government. He generally advocates flexible, individual health savings accounts and a more centralized medical electronic records system. Like the president, Carson has sharply criticized for-profit insurance companies as prioritizing profits over medical care.

At one time, he advocated government offering catastrophic care coverage, and he has called in the past for much heavier regulation of private insurers and pay structures for medical providers.

Carson draws from a personal story that began in Detroit, where he grew up in a single-family household. He would ultimately attend went on to attend college at Yale University and the U-M medical school, then become the head of pediatric neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital.

Carson's committee will begin announcing the names of his senior political team on Tuesday. The group includes Ed Brookover, who worked on various Washington-based Republican campaign committees. Carson will also name a likely communications director, campaign manager and two deputy campaign managers, Giles said, adding that they are also building teams in Iowa and South Carolina.

His national headquarters will be in the Virginia suburbs just outside Washington.

While the exploratory committee doesn't compel Carson to run, he is expected to launch a formal campaign in late spring.

"I'm certainly very hopeful that he will announce in May," Giles said.

Copyright 2015 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1BDusnu