Election Day is 10 months away, but a fresh crop of Republican candidates eager to challenge U.S. Rep. Elizabeth Esty has already emerged.

The sweeping 5th District — which includes 41 towns and cities throughout northwest and central Connecticut — is seen by many as the best chance for Republicans in the state to pick up a seat in Congress.

The district features a mixed electorate with many independent voters. Republicans are clustered throughout the smaller towns in Litchfield County and the Farmington Valley, but cities including Waterbury and New Britain — where Democrats enjoy an overwhelming voter registration advantage — are also part of the 5th.

Esty won an open seat in 2012, narrowly defeating Republican state Sen. Andrew Roraback. In 2014, Esty was re-elected by a wider margin, beating three-time GOP candidate Mark Greenberg. But the seat was held by a Republican as recently as 2006. That fall, now-U.S. Sen. Chris Murphy ousted Republican incumbent Nancy Johnson.

"It's ripe Republican territory," said Republican State Party Chairman J.R. Romano. "This could be a year that she's vulnerable."

Esty is the most junior of Connecticut's delegation, and her three years in office pales in comparison to the likes of John Larson and Rosa DeLauro, Democrats who have served 17 and 25 years in Congress, respectively. The state hasn't had a Republican representative in Washington since Chris Shays lost to Jim Himes in 2008.

Romano said the state is "not as blue as Democrats like to tell you" and pointed to gains the party has made in the state House and state Senate. He said Esty is "out of touch with her district."

Esty says she's a "problem solver" and through constituent work and legislation in Washington has helped out people across the 5th District. She pointed to bipartisan pieces of legislation that expanded the "Gold Star mothers" benefits to fathers who lost children in war and expanded funding for STEM education.

"My job is to get things done," said Esty, who is 56 and lives in Cheshire.

Areas that Esty said she plans to tackle in the next year include college affordability, transportation funding and gun violence prevention, as well as international issues like making sure the terms of the Iran nuclear deal are enforced.

Here are the Republican candidates who have officially declared or expressed an interest in running in the 5th District:

CLAY COPE

Sherman First Selectman Clay Cope is exploring a run and has been making calls and meeting with Republicans across the district. He expects to make a final decision about running next month.

Cope was first elected in 2011, upsetting the Democratic incumbent by 14 votes. He settled in Sherman while working in the fashion industry in New York but fell in love with the bucolic town. After being asked to join the library board, he helped oversee an expansion project there and moved on to the planning and zoning commission before running for first selectman.

Cope, who is 53, said he would apply what he has done in Sherman — a conservative fiscal agenda and a focus on constituent issues — to Congress.

"I want to bring that same philosophy to the 41 towns," Cope said.

Cope is openly gay, but he said he isn't making that an issue of his candidacy.

"If I run for Congress, I'm not running as a 'gay candidate,'" he said.

MATT MAXWELL

A small business owner in the Sandy Hook section of Newtown, Matt Maxwell is running on a platform of simplifying the tax code and reforming regulations on businesses.

Maxwell — who buys, renovates and resells homes — said he was driven to run by the slow-to-improve economy he sees across the state.

"People want to work, but they can't find careers," said Maxwell, who is 34.

Maxwell proposes a flat, 10 percent federal income tax rate that he says will create growth and give more money to families with children. He says current tax levels are "stopping the poor and middle class people from rising up."

So far, Maxwell's campaigning has been low-key. He's released a series of YouTube videos and visited with Republican Town Committees across the district.

Maxwell said Esty's actions in Congress — including votes against bills to expand background checks on refugees and increase oversight of the Department of Veterans Affairs — don't represent the views of the people in the district.

JOSEPH STANGO

Disability advocate Joe Stango of Southbury said he's considering running and would likely make a final decision by the end of January.

Stango — who founded the advocacy group Dora's Hope, named for his mother — worked to get the passage of 2008 state legislation that expanded "Money Follows the Person" Medicaid funding. The new law set aside money for families who wanted to take care of ailing relatives in a home setting rather than a nursing facility.

But Stango said more can be done on the issue at the federal level, and that would be a primary focus of his campaign. He said he worked with both Republicans and Democrats at the Capitol and would be prepared to do so in Washington, too.

"Is there room for someone who believes in statesmanship rather than partisanship?" Stango said.

Stango, who is 55, has made one previous run for elected office. In 1982, fresh out of college, he ran for state Senate in the 16th District but lost.

JOHN PISTONE