MGN Online

To fans, players, and probably even the officials themselves, the sound of whistles seemed endless in Friday night's home openers for the three Division I teams that call Kansas home. 66 fouls were called in the Wichita State game. The Kansas and Kansas State games weren't too far off from that.

"It was just one of those muddle through games. Two and a half hours we banged back and forth-- well you can't bang," smirked WSU Head Coach Gregg Marshall. "That's the wrong terminology. We danced with Charleston Southern."

The high quantity of foul calls did make the games difficult to watch. The irony, though, is that the emphasis on fouls is actually intended to help speed up the game. The goal in calling more fouls is to improve upon freedom of movement and, ultimately, create higher scoring games.

The 2015-16 NCAA Rule Book states:

The rules committee has embarked on an officiating initiative with the intent of reducing the amount of physical play and allowing more freedom of movement by requiring enforcement which is closer to the intent of the rules book.

"I guess they're not new rules, they're just calling the rule book is what they're telling us," explained Marshall. "So a lot of fouls and a lot of free throws so we've gotta adjust."

The hope of the NCAA Men's Basketball Rules Committee is that the players will do just that: adjust so that the games will eventually flow at a much better pace. But changing the way the game is played is easier said than done.

"You can't press as much. You can't trap as much because generally there's some body contact there," Marshall said. "You're just going to see a lot of zone and a lot of free throw shooting."

A total of 71 free throws were attempted in Wichita State's game against Charleston Southern.

"It's gonna be, that's what I told the referees. It's not their fault. They're doing what they're told to do and what they're supposed to do. But their edict is we will adjust. That's what the powers that be are telling the referees so we've gotta adjust."