Sara Rosenbaum

October 23, 2014

Months have now stretched into years, and there still remains no sign of final Treasury/IRS regulations interpreting the Affordable Care Act (ACA)’s provisions covering the expanded obligations of nonprofit hospitals that seek tax-exempt status under §501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.

The ACA amendments do not depend on formal agency policy to take effect. Nonetheless, Congress directed the Treasury Secretary to issue regulations and guidance necessary to carry out the reforms (26 U.S.C. §501(r)(7)). To this end, two important sets of proposed rules were issued: the first in June, 2012; and the second, in April 2013. While an informative IRS website lists various proposed rules and guidelines important to nonprofit hospitals, final rules seem to have performed a disappearing act.

Apparently recognizing the problems created by its delays, the agency has gone so far as to issue a special Notice letting nonprofit hospitals (and presumably the public) know that they can rely on its proposed rules. But this assurance overlooks the fact that the proposed rules themselves contained crucial areas in which final agency policy has not yet been adopted.

The ACA Reforms

Section 9007 of the ACA added a new §501(r) to the Internal Revenue Code, establishing a set of expanded obligations as a condition of federal tax-exempt status. The Hilltop Institute, which tracks state activities around hospital community benefit, reports that many states link their own tax-exempt policies to satisfaction of federal tax-exempt requirements.

The ACA’s expanded obligations span a number of important areas: community health planning; financial assistance for patients; and hospitals’ billing and collection practices.

Community Health Needs Assessment

The ACA requires hospitals to conduct a community health needs assessment (CHNA). This requirement took effect in 2012; it consists not only of planning with broad community and public health input but also adoption of an Implementation Strategy detailing how the hospital’s community benefit investment will meet the needs identified in the CHNA (26 U.S.C. §501(r)(3)). Following the issuance of preliminary 2011 guidance , the IRS issued a proposed rule in 2013, 77 Fed. Reg. 20523 (April 5, 2013) outlining a relatively robust CHNA process, even as it left certain aspects of its CHNA policy less than fully defined. Critical issues that remain outstanding include how hospitals define “community,” and whether the all-important Implementation Strategy component of the CHNA process — essentially a hospital organization’s community benefit investment blueprint — must itself be made available for public comment prior to board adoption.

Finalizing these regulatory policies is critical. The National Network of Public Health Institutes undertook a project funded by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, whose purpose was to test the feasibility of an online tool to support community health planning. Its findings suggest that hospitals vary widely in how they define the pivotal concept of “community” in relation to their planning obligations. The report found, for example, that despite the proposed rules’ emphasis on geographic community definitions that did not discriminate against medically underserved populations at risk for health disparities, only 23 percent of surveyed CHNAs expressly took geographic health disparities into account in defining the community to be served.

Financial Assistance/Billing and Collection Practices

The ACA reformed the procedures and standards applicable to tax-exempt hospital financial assistance programs, historically a core activity of tax-exempt hospitals, and one that takes on special importance in states that, to date, have failed to implement the Medicaid adult expansion. The ACA amendments (26 U.S.C. §501(r)(4)(A)) make several key reforms: they limit the charges that can be leveled against patients eligible for financial assistance; they require hospitals to establish written policies specifying financial eligibility criteria, how patients can qualify for assistance, and hospital collection practices in the event of non-payment; and they require that policies be “widely publicize[d] within the community served by the organization.”

The amendments also require written policies clarifying hospital compliance with Medicare Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA) requirements regarding emergency medical care. On June 22 2012, the IRS issued a proposed (77 Fed. Reg. 38148) rule implementing the requirements. Nearly two and a half years later, no final rule has been issued.

The statutory requirements are in effect, of course. On August 25th, public interest lawyers representing affected residents in Miami filed a first-of-its kind administrative claim with the IRS against Jackson Health System, alleging failure to comply with the ACA’s financial assistance and CHNA requirements. Relying on the proposed rules and the statute itself, lawyers from Florida Legal Services and the National Health Law Program allege that Jackson Health System’s failure to comply with the ACA has the potential to affect at least 165,000 indigent Miami-Dade County residents deprived of coverage as a result of Florida’s refusal to adopt the adult Medicaid expansion.

The implications flowing from the denial of Medicaid coverage are, of course, enormous for hospitals such as Jackson Health System, which play an absolutely essential role in the lives of their disadvantaged community residents. At the same time, the ACA makes clear that a hospital’s status as tax-exempt is to be tied to an increased level of transparency and community accountability — in community health improvement planning, in billing and collection practices used, in adherence to EMTALA, and in maintaining financial assistance programs that are fair and accessible. Legal challenges such as the Miami case, especially in the Medicaid opt-out states — where financial assistance is of the utmost importance — can be expected to grow, and thus the imperative for final Treasury rules increases.

A Community Health Improvement Dividend from the Affordable Care Act?

The most authoritative study to date estimates that hospitals apply less than 1 percent of their overall expenditures to community health improvement activities. Furthermore, the IRS defines community health improvement to include not only actual health interventions but also hospitals’ own health planning costs and costs associated with hospital fund-raising activities. There is no way of knowing just how much hospitals actually spend on community health improvement.

Nonetheless in recent years there have been numerous examples of hospital efforts to make community investments that can improve population health. As we pointed out in an earlier Health Affairs Blog post, the Affordable Care Act creates the potential for the modest 1 percent figure to rise as a result of increasing insurance coverage, especially in the Medicaid expansion states. With increased insurance should come a decline in the need for financial assistance for the uninsured. Indeed, early evidence suggests that gains in coverage are likely to have a salutary effect on hospitals’ bottom lines, as they realize gains in both patients and revenues.

It may seem strange, given the administrative complaint noted above, to focus on investments in legal supports for patients as an area of community health improvement. But this may be one of the most promising opportunities for hospital community investment programs, given the impact of legal barriers in areas such as housing, economic, environmental, and nutritional assistance on patient health. A striking example of an alliance between hospitals and lawyers to improve community health can be found in “medical-legal partnership (MLP)” programs — that is, programs under which hospitals integrate civil legal aid lawyers who specialize in resolving legal problems linked to the social conditions of health.

Pioneered by Boston Medical Center and now in operation in 135 hospitals and 127 community health centers around the country, the MLP movement offers the potential to bring legal expertise to bear on the underlying conditions of poor health among patients, both addressing and preventing such problems as substandard housing, domestic violence, food insecurity, environmental risks, unemployment, and poverty. The program, which is a response to a documented high level of legal need among the poor, has attracted national attention for its efforts to alleviate social conditions that affect health.

Examples of hospitals that have built support for MLP into their community benefit activities can be found at Seattle Children’s Hospital, Boston Children’s Hospital, and Southern Illinois Healthcare (SIH) System. Beyond improving community health, SIH in particular has demonstrated significant return on investment (ROI) through its medical-legal partnership. MLP activities fall squarely within the definition of community activities that have the potential to improve community health while addressing key cost drivers.

Going Forward

Whatever the reason for the delay in the Treasury/IRS regulations, it is evident that this major policy advance deserves to be rapidly formalized in final implementing policy. After all, the heavy lifting — proposed rules — has happened. As the IRS has made clear by its own signal to the public to rely on the proposed rules, hospitals (and presumably all of us) can rely on the proposed rules in moving forward. Yet critical issues await resolution.

Certainly some of the regulatory decisions raise complex implementation issues, but the ACA’s reforms in the areas of financial assistance, transparency, and community health improvement planning (including identifying need and creating and updating spending blueprints) are relatively straightforward. The statute has taken effect, but the agencies’ authoritative voice on these matters is of major importance.

Thousands of nonprofit hospitals — and the thousands of communities that depend on these hospitals — need clarity in policy and an official voice pointing the way forward. Lengthy delays in publishing the final regulations ultimately raise questions of agency fairness, not only for hospitals in need of final rules to guide their actions, but also the nation’s highest-risk communities, whose well-being depends in no small measure on the performance of their community health care institutions.