Topics: 2014 elections, 2016 Elections, Congress, Conviction, GOP, House of Representatives, Michael Grimm, staten island, the law, Politics News

Staten Island’s Republican Rep. Michael Grimm is having The Problems. He will reportedly agree to a plea deal following his multi-count indictment over federal tax evasion charges from when he co-owned a restaurant, before serving in Congress. That could mean jail time and, if so, he will almost certainly resign. He said during the most recent campaign — which he won while under indictment, that he would step down if he was “unable to serve.” It is very difficult to serve from within the slammer.

The terms of the plea deal are still unknown but, if it doesn’t include jail time, his congressional future is much more uncertain. He doesn’t seem interested in resigning as long as he is physically able to serve, and there technically aren’t any constraints that would bar him from doing so.

All eyes are on Speaker John Boehner now, and how far he’s willing to go to force Grimm to resign. He could deny Grimm committee seatings, direct the NRCC not to give him any funds, and warn him that the House Ethics Committee may end up recommending his expulsion. Boehner, as Politico writes, has “historically had little tolerance for beleaguered lawmakers, even for those he considers personal friends. Boehner gives his colleagues plenty of rope, but he will yank it back if they cross the line.” It’s taken far less than a federal felony guilty plea for Boehner to exert his will, too. He successfully forced New York Rep. Chris Lee out on the very day that shirtless photos of him, sent to his not-wife, surfaced on the Internet. He “pushed former Indiana Rep. Mark Souder to resign when it came out that the congressman was having an affair with an aide,” as Politico writes. “Cocaine Congressman” Trey Radel didn’t last too long, either, after getting probation for trying to buy coke from an undercover cop.

Why does Boehner care so much? He seems to buy into the media conventional wisdom when it comes to members’ extracurricular problems, whether it’s with extraspousal relationships, drugs, the law, or some combination. The conventional wisdom here is that it would be an unwelcome “distraction” for Boehner heading into the 114th Congress, in which he’ll have an expanded majority and a new Senate Republican majority to work with. That, were Grimm to keep showing up for work, it would taint the Republican party to have a felon loitering around within its conference. It could really hurt the “GOP brand” heading into a presidential electorate for a Republican member to face censure or expulsion from the Ethics Committee, etc.