Gov. Scott Walker (Photo: KAMIL KRZACZYNSKI, AP)

My bumper sticker reads, "I still support Scott Walker." As a former teacher, I may be in the minority of my profession. But in my opinion, Act 10 was the best legislation to come out of Madison in a long time. We citizens and taxpayers have seen the positive results in improved school budgets, more fairness in health care and pension contributions by government employees, lower property taxes, better efficiency in county work crews, a reduced impact of big union demands and improvement in our schools.

Alice Whitmore (Photo: Contributed)

In 1972, when I began teaching in Elcho, a small district in northern Wisconsin, I was immediately invited to join the teacher's union. At that time it wasn't mandatory but all of my peers were members. I was opposed to the philosophies of Wisconsin Education Association and the National Education Association but felt I should support the local group. I wrote my check for the full amount, but asked the union steward to withhold the state and national dues and contribute the difference to the local. No, join all three or none. He gave my check back.

A day later the principal called me in to discuss my health care insurance. I told him my husband's employer, the C&W Railroad, provided us with an unbeatable family plan. My boss explained that the teacher's union required that all teachers employed there be included in Elcho's policy, totally paid for by the district.

Every year for the five years I taught there, taxpayers provided me with Cadillac coverage that I didn't need and never used.

By 2012 I was re-married to a retired employee of Mosinee Paper, now Wausau Paper. We were both on Medicare and Wausau Paper paid half of our supplemental health insurance. We paid $495 a month and they paid $495 a month, and that was just the supplement to our Medicare. I was appalled to hear the pittance Wisconsin government employees were paying for their health coverage.

Yes, Act 10 did result in lower take-home pay for them. But for me, it seemed only fair, considering the disparity in benefits the rest of us had. In many districts, Walker's cuts to education didn't really result in large cuts at all. When school districts no longer had to pay union-demanded health care policies and teachers had to add to their contributions, districts that were in the red suddenly had balanced budgets.

Act 10 didn't hurt the schools. It helped make possible, for example, the remarkable technology purchased for use of Wausau students and instructors. And at long last, good teachers can get paid based on their performance rather than on their years of showing up at work.

The only one of the 424 school districts in Wisconsin that did not implement Act 10 was Madison. Mary Burke was a school board member of that district which pushed through a union contract for a new, two-year collective bargaining agreement. By not implementing Act 10, Madison schools lost millions of dollars and were stuck with all of the union demands.

Under Gov. Walker, school taxes of area districts have been stable for three years. Our property taxes have gone down. And those area school districts are turning out some amazing students. In the last round of ACT testing for college entrance, nationwide, Wisconsin students ranked No. 2 in the nation.

It was disgusting to watch the fiasco in Madison during the union protests. But the state has seen that the 75 percent decline in teachers union membership has actually had a positive effect on education. Perhaps those who protested should search their hearts to see if fairness did not prevail. They should look at then and at now. And vote for Scott Walker for governor for four more years, moving forward.

Alice Yoder Whitmore of Mosinee is retired from businesses she owned in Wausau and Mosinee and is a former teacher in Green Bay and Elcho school districts.

Editor's note: This post has been updated. An earlier version misstated Wisconsin's national rankings on ACT tests. We regret the error.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1wb92K4