After watching the only debate between Fourth District Congressman Steve King and Democrat challenger Jim Mowrer, it is easy to see why King opted out of appearing with Mowrer at other venues, and even considered cancelling this one. King’s little-known opponent consistently attacked King during the hour-long event.

The constant barrage was so over the top that audience members gasped and chuckled at times during Mowrer’s persistent negativity. The Democrat contestant often opted not to answer the moderators’ questions, choosing instead to criticize his opponent. Congressman King was clearly annoyed at the unyielding attacks, but did a good job maintaining his composure.

“We have a representative with a record of never working with anyone across the aisle to get the job done,” Mowrer claimed in his opening comments.

That type of hyperbole undermined Mowrer’s efforts. Is Steve King a conservative firebrand? Yes. Is Steve King adamant in his opposition to President Obama’s liberal agenda? Of course. But to claim he has “never” worked with anyone across the aisle is blatantly false.

In fact, you can find many instances where Congressman King worked across the aisle with other members of the Iowa delegation and beyond. One example cited by King during the debate was the Farm Bill.

“That was my job, reaching across the aisle. That’s why we were able to get a bipartisan vote and in the end, we got a good Farm Bill that was bipartisan. It had bipartisan support. I was engaged in all of that. I was engaged for three and a half years just to get to that point,” King said.

King was also a leader in a bipartisan effort to open the war memorials in D.C. for visiting veterans after President Obama had them closed due to the government shutdown.

The vicious cycle continued through the debate: King answered the moderators’ questions, Mowrer attacked King, the congressman rebutted.

Congressman King did manage to diminish Mowrer’s credentials early on. Mowrer has consistently claimed that he established the Army office of Business Transformation and that it saved taxpayers billions of dollars. Congressman King refuted that claim.

“The statement that my opponent has established the Army office of Business Transportation, I recall how it was established. I voted for that in 2008,” King said. “It was signed into law in October 22, 2008. The gentleman arrived to the Pentagon in early February of 2010. So the establishment of the Army Office of Business Transformation was done by Congress.”

King scored repeatedly by just stating facts, while Mowrer demagogued. The most egregious example was on the issue of Obamacare. Jim Mowrer claimed Congressman King wanted to take health insurance away from Mowrer’s son, who has a rare disease.

Mowrer falsely stated his son would not have health insurance coverage if not for Obamacare, due to the disease being a preexisting condition.

Congressman King’s calm, factual rebuttal was perfect. He correctly pointed out that Mowrer’s son would be covered under Hawk-I, an insurance plan for children established by the Iowa Legislature when Steve King was a state senator.

“By all measures that I can uncover, Mr. Mowrer’s children would be qualified for Hawk-I, so that exists, along with the high risk pool that we established. We buy down the premiums for preexisting conditions with state taxpayer dollars. I chaired the Iowa Senate State Government Committee that managed that program and that fund,” King said.

“But the important thing for people to remember is, Obamacare is a disaster,” he added.

It was interesting that Mowrer claimed he does not support Nancy Pelosi and he’s “got a lot of problems with” Obamacare. Mowrer is desperately trying to appear as a moderate, and like Democrats across the nation, he is running away from his party’s unpopular leadership and policies.

He even tried to tie Steve King to President Obama, a laughable notion considering Steve King is one of Obama’s chief critics in Congress.

“We’ve gone into Never Never Land in this debate. It’s completely ridiculous,” King retorted.

Mowrer’s constant attacks were the last ditch effort of a candidate who is way behind in the polls, has lost the financial support of his national party and is trying to do anything to change the direction of the race with just a week and a half left.

A more distinguished tack by the Democrat perhaps could have laid the groundwork for a political future for the Boone native. Instead, he came off just another Democrat desperate to tear down one of the nation’s top conservative warriors.

Republicans hold a 50,000-voter advantage in the Fourth District and Republicans are stomping Democrats in early voting there. Steve King is well on his way to another congressional term and despite Jim Mowrer’s attacks, King remains beloved by voters in northwest Iowa.

“People come to me continually across this district, all 39 counties, and I’ve been to all 382 towns, and they say stand your ground, keep doing what you’re doing. We need more Iowa values in Washington, D.C., not less,” King said.

Photo by Dave Davidson, Prezography.com