Sam Ray, an adjunct instructor of Spanish at Delgado Community College, thought five weeks was a long time to wait for his first paycheck this semester. Then, after classes began, he received a letter announcing that adjunct checks would be delayed for another two weeks.

By the time his first check is issued Oct. 3, Ray will have been teaching for seven weeks without pay. That does not include the two weeks he said he spent preparing for classes to begin.

"When I got that letter, I thought: 'Oh my god, I've made a gigantic mistake working here,'" Ray, 40, said. "But I'd already signed my contract. There was nothing I could do."

In an email sent to adjunct faculty in late August, Ronald Rodriguez, Delgado's vice chancellor of business, said that the check delay was due to new data requirements needed to comply with the Affordable Care Act.

Having expected to be paid Sept. 19, however, Ray is unsure how he will afford basic expenses in the coming weeks. Out of sympathy, he said, his department chair bought him a month's worth of groceries last week. A friend wrote him a check to cover rent and utilities.

Ray is one of many part-time faculty members at Delgado struggling as a result of the school's delayed pay schedule this year. But according to both full- and part-time teachers at the school, waiting for checks is nothing new. Nor is it the only problem confronting Delgado instructors, who cite low pay, burdensome course-loads and a denial of raises among their complaints.

In response to the lack of raises, Delgado spokesman Tony Cook issued a statement saying that the institution is "assessing its financial position for the 2014-2015 fiscal year, including the financial impact of adjustments to faculty and staff compensation."

The late checks, according to Rodriguez, stemmed from the fact that some Delgado adjuncts teach at other schools within the Louisiana Community and Technical College System, meaning their total hours could allow them to qualify for Obamacare. And with low enrollment causing some classes to be merged or canceled, he said, the school has had to wait longer than usual to submit its information.

Many adjuncts at Delgado, including Ray, doubt Rodriguez's explanation. A spokesman for the American Association of University Professors, one of the nation's leading faculty groups, said he had never heard of the Affordable Care Act causing payment delays for full- or part-time faculty.

But with classes already underway, adjuncts at Delgado say they have little choice but to continue teaching.

"Some of us wanted to organize a walkout, but with no teacher unions, we have no protection," Ray said. "If I walk out, I lose my job. Then I won't even get a check after seven weeks."

Adjunct instructors around the country face a similarly bleak reality. According to the American Association of University Professors, the median adjunct salary is $2,700 per three-credit course. Teaching four fall and four spring courses at that rate adds up to an annual salary of $21,600, beneath the national poverty line for a family of four.

At Delgado, adjunct Spanish teachers earn $2,150 per course. A four-course load for the full school year comes to $17,200, without benefits.

The introduction of the Affordable Care Act seemed to promise some relief on the health-insurance front. The new federal mandate requires employers to provide health insurance to adjuncts who work more than 30 hours a week, based on a combination of classroom, preparation and office hours.

But in some cases, institutions have responded by limiting part-time course loads to evade this provision of the law, according to the American Association of University Professors.

Adjuncts at Delgado are allowed to teach a maximum of four classes per semester, for a total of 12 classroom hours each week, said Betty Speyrer, the chairwoman of the foreign languages department. By capping the number of office hours and at-home preparation time, however, those four courses do not add up to 30 hours.

That Delgado's administration used the Affordable Care Act as an excuse for paying adjuncts two weeks late struck some faculty members as ironic. Speyrer suspects that the real reason for the delay is the length of time it takes to process the college's more than 1,000 adjunct contracts.

"The reason there are so many adjuncts is because the school doesn't want to pay teachers health insurance," she said.

The Delgado Spanish department's only full-time professor teaches six of the 25 Spanish classes offered at the school -- a course-load Speyrer described as "excessive." Adjuncts like Ray and John Mark Maust teach the remaining 19.

Maust, 26, has a master's degree in Spanish and lives in Metairie. He teaches three Spanish courses at Delgado's West Bank campus and a fourth at the City Park campus. To supplement his income, he teaches a fifth class at Nunez Community College, in Chalmette, and a sixth at Calvary Baptist, a private K-7th grade school in New Orleans.

Anticipating that he would not be paid until late September at Delgado, Maust saved his earnings from the two Delgado classes he taught over the summer. But the news that checks won't be distributed until Oct. 3 caught him by surprise.

"I'm kind of subsisting on peanut butter sandwiches right now," he said.

In addition to the concerns of adjunct instructors, full-time faculty have expressed dismay over the denial of salary increases this year in connection with academic promotion.

In August, a member of the faculty senate, who declined to be named for fear of angering administrators, submitted an open letter to the dean of communication voicing concern for the future of the college. The faculty member, who reported earning $32,000-a-year, has not received a raise in four years as a full-time instructor. In that time, the letter said, tuition has been raised twice.

A Delgado budget report, issued Aug. 18 and covering transactions over the previous two months, showed that 11 staff members resigned and 11 faculty left as a result of retirement, resignation, termination or death. But while the college hired 15 staff members during that period, they did not hire any new faculty.

Many teachers have a hard time reconciling such issues with the rapid expansion efforts now underway at Delgado. In the past year, the school has purchased a $1.3 million site in Federal City, built a $3.4 million Learning Resource Center Annex at the City Park campus, and opened the $21 million Sidney Collier Site in eastern New Orleans, among other developments.

"They're building all these fancy new buildings, and yet they can't afford to pay teachers a living wage," said Leeandra Nolting, 34, who teaches two levels of English composition at Delgado's West Bank campus in addition to the four courses she teaches at Nicholls State University in Thibodeaux.

Delgado spokesman Tony Cook noted that funds for the new campus projects do not come from the school's annual operating budget. They are financed by FEMA and special state funds like Act 360, which provides access to capital improvement funds for specific projects at community and technical college institutions.

Despite having the highest enrollment numbers of any higher education institution in New Orleans, Delgado has struggled with its budget in recent years. In May 2013, facing a budget deficit of $8 million, the school announced that it would be laying off 115 employees, including 64 non-tenured faculty members.

At the time, president Monty Sullivan said that the deficit resulted from cuts in state funding and reductions in the school's enrollment, which was listed at 18,684 for the 2012-2013 academic year.

So far this year, the total enrollment is 17,138 at nine locations, according to Cook. To raise that number the school is heavily promoting its Second Start program, which allows students to register as late as Oct. 7 for the fall semester and enroll in an accelerated eight-week schedule.

"We're really hoping people sign up," Cook said.