Topics: Bae of Pigs, Britain, british politics, David Cameron, The United Kingdom, News, Politics News

The words “Prime Minister” and “once took part in an outrageous initiation ceremony involving a dead pig” do not often appear side by side, but that is the situation British prime minister David Cameron found himself in on Monday.

These days, Cameron, a Conservative, likes to project an air of easy metropolitan affability. He has a lovely wife and some adorable children, is fond of friendly sweaters and is famously into “chillaxing.”

That image stands in sharp contrast to the sheer insanity of one of the allegations leveled at Cameron in a new biography, “Call Me Dave.”

The book, which is being serialized in the Daily Mail, comes from Lord Michael Ashcroft, a very rich former Tory bigwig who had a massive falling-out with Cameron. (The Mail helpfully put the word “REVENGE!” in giant type on its front page.) “Call Me Dave” makes no secret of its trashiness. Ashcroft and his collaborator Isabel Oakeshott were out for dirt, and what dirt they uncovered. There are rather uninteresting stories about “dope smoking” and the like, but they pale in comparison to what has now been dubbed the world over as “Piggate.” It seems that Cameron got up to some decidedly un-kosher behavior when he was trying to join a fancy Oxford University dining club.

Let’s let Ashcroft tell it:

A distinguished Oxford contemporary claims Cameron once took part in an outrageous initiation ceremony at a Piers Gaveston event, involving a dead pig. His extraordinary suggestion is that the future PM inserted a private part of his anatomy into the animal’s mouth….the pig’s head, he claimed, had been resting on the lap of a Piers Gaveston society member while Cameron performed the act.

The source also said there were pictures.

The best part of the whole thing may be the winking decorum that Ashcroft applies to such a squalid suggestion. We are left, somewhat ridiculously, to guess what “private part of his anatomy” Cameron may have stuck in this porcine corpse. (His toe, perhaps?)