Negative credit events can make it difficult to get loans, rent an apartment and, in some cases, even get a job. But understanding the circumstances that might trigger a nosedive in your credit score is the first step in avoiding them.

1. Bankruptcy

There are two types of bankruptcy: Chapter 7 and Chapter 13. Both provide relief to those who are unable to pay their obligations, but in different ways. In a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, the court allows you to keep certain property and liquidates the rest to repay your creditors. In a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, the bankruptcy court provides an opportunity to reorganize your finances under the protection of the court.

To help prevent bankruptcy:

Borrow responsibly : Each new loan payment gives you less financial flexibility. Before applying for a loan, consider the expense it adds to your budget. The higher your overall monthly debt payments, the harder it can be to keep up with other bills.

: Each new loan payment gives you less financial flexibility. Before applying for a loan, consider the expense it adds to your budget. The higher your overall monthly debt payments, the harder it can be to keep up with other bills. Get health insurance : According to a 2013 NerdWallet health study, three in five bankruptcies were due to medical bills. In a separate study, the Nerds also found that 63% of Americans receive medical bills that cost more than they expected. Having insurance isn’t a fail-safe against medical debt, but it will significantly reduce the risk of getting saddled with it. If you’re struggling to find affordable health insurance, the Affordable Care Act may help you get and pay for coverage.

: According to a 2013 NerdWallet health study, three in five bankruptcies were due to medical bills. In a separate study, the Nerds also found that 63% of Americans receive medical bills that cost more than they expected. Having insurance isn’t a fail-safe against medical debt, but it will significantly reduce the risk of getting saddled with it. If you’re struggling to find affordable health insurance, the Affordable Care Act may help you get and pay for coverage. Get help: If you notice your debt getting out of hand, contact your local credit counseling agency to get help starting a plan before it’s too late.

There are circumstances where bankruptcy is the best option. But the decision should be considered carefully, as it puts a black mark on your credit report that can remain for up to 10 years.

2. Foreclosure

When a homeowner doesn’t make his or her regular mortgage payments, the lender may choose to evict the homeowner and re-sell the property in a foreclosure. You can take steps to protect yourself and your home from foreclosure:

Maintain an emergency fund: Sometimes life throws a curveball. Job loss, the death of a loved one or divorce are all possibilities that can suddenly become your reality. Having a healthy reserve fund can keep the lights on while you’re getting back on track.

Sometimes life throws a curveball. Job loss, the death of a loved one or divorce are all possibilities that can suddenly become your reality. Having a healthy reserve fund can keep the lights on while you’re getting back on track. Don’t go for the maximum loan: A general rule of thumb for mortgage loans is that your total monthly mortgage-related payments should not exceed 28% of your gross income. But just because you’re approved for that maximum amount doesn’t mean it’s in your best interest to accept it. Carefully consider whether mortgage payments fit into your budget without forcing you to cut back in other areas that are important to you.

A general rule of thumb for mortgage loans is that your total monthly mortgage-related payments should not exceed 28% of your gross income. But just because you’re approved for that maximum amount doesn’t mean it’s in your best interest to accept it. Carefully consider whether mortgage payments fit into your budget without forcing you to cut back in other areas that are important to you. Call the lender: Telling your lender about your money struggles is probably the last thing you want to do. However, considering that a foreclosure is an expensive process for them, too, most lenders have options available to help make payments more affordable.

Buying a home can be an overwhelming experience, so keeping your budget and financial goals in mind is a best practice.

3. Loan defaults

Falling behind on loan payments is sometimes referred to as delinquency. This will negatively impact your credit, but lenders can usually work with you — by doing things such as putting you on an extended payment plan, refinancing the loan or changing the due date — to help you get caught up on your payments.

However, if a delinquency persists for several months, your bank will change its status to default. This will seriously hurt your FICO score, and may eventually result in a lawsuit or wage garnishments. To prevent defaults, follow these suggestions:

Again, borrow carefully: If you already carry debt, you’ll want to determine if it would be better to wait until you have finished paying off another loan before taking on a new one.

If you already carry debt, you’ll want to determine if it would be better to wait until you have finished paying off another loan before taking on a new one. Pay on time, every time: Missing a payment and having to double up on the following month’s payment will cost you extra in fees and penalty interest rates. It can also put the squeeze on your other obligations, making it more difficult to pay those, too. The Nerds recommend paying your bills on time, every time.

Missing a payment and having to double up on the following month’s payment will cost you extra in fees and penalty interest rates. It can also put the squeeze on your other obligations, making it more difficult to pay those, too. The Nerds recommend paying your bills on time, every time. Keep a budget: With a monthly budget, you can track and prioritize your spending and make sure you’re paying off your debt before dipping into discretionary funds.

The bottom line

Unfortunately, not all harmful credit events are avoidable. Extraordinary life circumstances can put you in a situation you never thought would happen. But planning proactively, borrowing cautiously and staying current on payments can help to preserve your credit for the long haul.

Ben Luthi is a staff writer covering personal finance for NerdWallet. Follow him on Twitter @benluthi and on Google+.

Image via iStock.