SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Democrat 2016 contender Hillary Clinton tweeted Friday that she would like to see Planned Parenthood obtain an increase in taxpayer funding.

In an interview with Fusion, Clinton said that–if elected president–she would urge Congress to give the abortion business a raise in taxpayer funding. Additionally, Clinton said that Planned Parenthood would be one of her “partners at the table” as president, assisting her in increasing access to abortion, particularly for black women in states that have instituted restrictions on the procedure.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

"I would like to see Planned Parenthood even get more funding." How to ensure all women have access to health care: https://t.co/kvD47CkwRR — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) January 15, 2016

“I am not only against defunding Planned Parenthood, but I would like to see Planned Parenthood even get more funding,” Clinton said. “Because, often times, it is both the first and the last resort for healthcare.”

Clinton has made it clear that while most Americans support restrictions on abortion, she is continuing the stereotypic feminist narrative that abortion is women’s health care.

As Breitbart News reported, Clinton also said she would repeal the Hyde Amendment, which prohibits taxpayer funding of abortion on demand.

Referring to Planned Parenthood–which was founded by eugenicist Margaret Sanger–as the “go-to place” for abortions for black women, Clinton said that when taxpayer funding for abortion services is blocked by federal law, “the people who are going to suffer the most are going to be low-income women of color, that’s just the fact.”

In a much-cited report released early in 2014, New York City’s Department of Health and Mental Hygiene found that more black babies were aborted in the city than were born during the year 2012.

Planned Parenthood’s recent historic endorsement of Clinton as a primary candidate comes following a series of undercover videos exposing the organization’s apparent practices of selling the body parts of aborted babies on the open market and altering the position of babies during abortions to harvest the most intact organs. On Thursday, Planned Parenthood announced a lawsuit against the Center for Medical Progress (CMP), the pro-life group that produced the videos, and referred to CMP as a “complex criminal enterprise” in its complaint.

Lily Adams, daughter of Planned Parenthood’s president, Cecile Richards, also serves as Clinton’s Iowa communications director and previously worked in a deputy communications role for the Democratic National Committee.

As Breitbart News reported, Planned Parenthood Action Fund plans to spend $20 million in the 2016 elections.