Starting in 2015, for 2014 tax returns, there is a new Form 1095, which will list the names of everyone in the family covered by health insurance in the new government marketplace and the months covered during the year. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

I hope everyone had a wonderful holiday season and is starting off 2015 with a bang. I want to spend today’s article on some things you need to be aware of for 2014 tax return.

As most of you know, the Affordable Care Act was signed by President Barack Obama on March 23, 2010. Ever since, there have been various parts of this bill that phase-in each year. This year, eligible small businesses can take a credit against their income tax if they meet certain requirements and they are paying 50 percent or more of the employee-only health insurance coverage.

The credit this year is 50 percent of the calculation based on having no more than 25 employees and an average salary of $25,000. In addition, this year, you must also get the insurance from the SHOP (Small Business Health Options Program) marketplace and you can only take the credit for two more consecutive years.

Also, keep in mind that this applies to any nonprofit entities that meet the requirements. They must file Form 990-T to receive the refund.

Now, the most onerous part that is going to affect everyone.

Starting in 2015, for 2014 forms, there is a new Form 1095. Form 1095-A is to be issued by the Health Insurance Marketplace. This new form will list the names of everyone in the family covered by health insurance in the new government marketplace and the months covered during the year.

Form 1095-B provides the same information but is to be issued by insurers and 1095-C is to be issued by employers. The catch is that 1095-B and 1095-C are optional for 2014.

Why are these new forms important? Well, they are supposed to show that you had the appropriate health insurance coverage for 2014 and for how many months you were covered. This will be used to determine if you owe the new tax (penalty) for not meeting the individual mandate.

The only thing that will keep you from owing this new tax is by meeting an exemption listed in the bill. A few examples are for religious reasons, below the poverty line, hardship or even part of a health sharing arrangement (such as Medi-share, a Christian health sharing organization based in Melbourne). Exemption forms will only be issued by the federal or state government if you applied for health insurance or an exemption with them.

Now, should you not have health insurance and not meet one of the exemptions, you and every member of your household without insurance will be assessed a tax. The tax for 2014 is $95 per person ($47.50 for children) or 1 percent of your taxable income, whichever is greater. This tax can reduce your refund or add to your existing liability.

However, the IRS can send you notices on this additional tax, but they cannot use the normal lien or levy tactics to collect it. They can, however, reduce future refunds should you be due one. If you are adamant about not paying this, it will take careful planning to make sure that you do not pay this in the future.

Also, don’t forget that all employers are required to report the cost of health insurance (Code DD in box 12) starting in 2014.

You report the cost of health insurance the employer paid and add the amount the employee paid and report it using the code DD.

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1BTdUss