Liberals claim that Donald Trump is considering creating a database to keep track of Muslim Americans. Not exactly true.

"I would certainly implement that. Absolutely," Trump said in Newton, Iowa, in between campaign town halls.

But that's not exactly what transpired. Breitbart has it more accurately.

NBC News’ Vaughn Hillyard confronts Trump: “Should there be a database system that tracks the Muslims here in this country?” Trump replies: “There should be a lot of systems, beyond databases. We should have a lot of systems. And today you can do it. But right now, we have to have a border, we have to have strength, we have to have a wall, and we cannot let what’s happening to this country happen any longer.” Hillyard asks: “But that’s something your White House would like to implement?” Trump: “Oh I would certainly implement that. Absolutely.”

Trump seems to be talking about a database to track potential terrorists, not all American Muslims.

But liberals are labelling it as the latter rather than the former and are predictably outraged about this.

But where is their outrage when under Obamacare the government keeps track of all our medical records? Why should the government have access to our private medical records? There is a great potential for abuse, even blackmail there.

Where is the outrage that the government keeps photocopies of all envelopes sent through the post office? What right does the government have to collect such information on the entire population?

Where is the outrage when the NSA keeps records of all our phone calls and emails, even when 99.99% of us are not under any suspicion? Remember pre-Obama when the government needed a warrant to do such things? Now they invade all our privacy with impunity.

Where is the outrage with the IRS for demanding to know every detail of our financial lives?

Liberals are completely silent in such matters. They love it when the government has total knowledge and total control over the citizenry. They only get up in arms (rhetorically speaking, of course!) when the "eye of Sauron" is said, in this case falsely, to focus on one of their pet groups, in this case Muslims. This is just another effort to tar Donald Trump as a racist. You never see the media playing this game with Obama when it comes to him smearing Christians, or Israelis.

I suspect that news of this false story will have the opposite of the intended effect, only causing Trump to rise in the polls.

This article was written by Ed Straker, senior writer of NewsMachete.com, the conservative news site.