"Twelve million aliens are here illegally, said Trump, because the Bushes failed to secure America's borders."

I guess this is why they call it the Grand Old Party and not the Grown-Up Party.

The reaction of so many leading Republicans to the impending presidential nomination represents the most childish temper tantrum in American political history.

Let's start with Mitt Romney, the bumbling incompetent who managed to lose what everyone thought was a winnable election against Barack Obama in 2012.

There are reports that Romney has been consorting with closet left-winger Bill Kristol about a third-party candidacy against Trump this fall.

There are only two kinds of people who talk about third-party candidacies: Really stupid people and really smart people.

The really stupid people actually believe the third-party candidate can defeat the major-party candidates in the presidential race.

This has happened exactly never.

But there have been many instances in which a third-party candidate spoiled the chances for one of the two, the most recent being the 1992 race when Ross Perot helped Bill Clinton win the White House.

Then of course there was the 1912 race, when Teddy Roosevelt's Bull Moose run helped put the worst president of the 20th century, Democrat Woodrow Wilson, in the White House.

The really smart people recognize a third-party candidate as a spoiler.

What Kristol and the rest of those closeted liberals known as "neo" conservatives clearly want is to help Hillary Clinton beat Trump.

Kristol has already said he would rather see Hillary win than the Donald. So this is just his means of helping the Democrats.

That's because they share her foreign-policy views, which are modeled on the disastrous "make the world safe for democracy" foreign policy of World War I.

Find me a Republican who opposes Trump and I will show you a closet liberal whose main priority is retaining the foreign policy that created chaos in the Mideast.

Trump has said he wants to halt that policy. The neocons can't accept that. Hence their disgraceful behavior.

Easily the most disgraceful is Paul Ryan. The House Speaker will also be the master of ceremonies at the July Republican convention.

For that reason alone you would think he would at the very least pretend to an air of objectivity in this race.

And then there's the fact that many touted him as the candidate after a contested convention.

So it sure sounds like sour grapes when Ryan went out of his way the other day to say he won't support trump because he's not conservative enough.

Not conservative compared to Ryan's 2012 running mate?

Romney was an affirmed moderate on almost every issue - except of course health care.

There, as Massachusetts governor he originated the health-care reform that became Obamacare.

Back when that plan was first adopted, Romney boasted of backing the individual mandate to buy health insurance, which was backed up in Massachusetts by hefty fines, just as it is in the Obama program.

Why did the mainstream GOP nominate the architect of Obamacare in an election when opposition to Obamacare was the main issue?

I'll leave that to you to figure out.

But if Ryan could run on a ticket with Romney then he certainly should have no objection to Trump.

And then there's "Lyin' Jeb" Bush.

Back when he was in the race, the former Florida governor signed a pledge to back the party's eventual nominee.

Now he and the rest of the family that singlehandedly wrecked the Republican Party are refusing to back Trump.

My fellow genuine or "paleo" conservative, Pat Buchanan, offers this thought in a column headlined "Bush Republicanism is Dead and Gone":

"Twelve million aliens are here illegally, said Trump, because the Bushes failed to secure America's borders.

"America has run up $12 trillion in trade deficits and been displaced as the world's first manufacturing power by China, said Trump, because of the lousy trade deals backed by Bush Republicans.

"The greatest strategic blunder in U.S. history, said Trump, was the Bush II decision to invade Iraq to disarm it of nonexistent weapons of mass destruction."

When you look back on it, the two Bush presidencies are what got us into this mess.

George H.W. inherited from Ronald Reagan a Republican Party that had put communism on the ash heap of history. He also inherited a tough new immigration law that, if enforced, would have ended illegal immigration.

Bush promptly screwed that up. He then screwed up the "peace dividend" by promptly getting us bogged down in Iraq, where we've been marooned ever since.

So goodbye and good riddance, Bushes. If Trump accomplished nothing else, he consigned you screw-ups to long-overdue obscurity.

And then there's Lindsey Graham. He is easily the worst of the fake conservatives in Congress.

On foreign policy, Graham to this day supports the nutty neocon idea that we need to be deposing more secular dictators in the Mideast - because that worked out so well in Iraq, Syria and Libya.

Meanwhile he's an open-immigration guy who did his best to pass yet another amnesty.

Yet there he was the other day attacking the Donald for proposing actual solutions to the problems he helped create.

You gotta love Trump's response:

"I fully understand why Lindsey Graham cannot support me. If I got beaten as badly as I beat him, and all the other candidates he endorsed, I would not be able to give my support either. Every time I see Lindsey Graham spew hate during interviews I ask why the media never questions how I single-handedly destroyed his hapless run for President. As a candidate who did not receive 1% in his own state - compared to my victory at nearly 40% with many others in the race - he has zero credibility. He was a poor representative and an embarrassment to the great people of South Carolina. Judging by the incompetent way he ran his campaign, it is easy to see why his military strategies have failed so badly --- we can't even beat ISIS!

And finally there's all this whining from these spoiled brats to the effect that Trump backed into the nomination despite failing to get a majority of the votes.

Here, former CIA spook Larry Johnson totally debunks that notion.

When you add it all up, Trump has 10.5 million votes at this point in the primaries.

Romney had a mere 7.4 million.

Yet all of these party hacks lined up behind Romney last time around as if he was somehow the choice of the Republican base. In fact he was the choice of the party leaders who failed to see how dumb it was to nominate the architect of Obamacare to run against Obama.

Oh and as for his running mate, perhaps he should consider some actual running.

He still hasn't attained that three-hour marathon he once bragged of completing.

PLUS: I'm not the only one who recalls that three-hour marathon Ryan didn't run. Here's Maureen Dowd of the New York Times weighing in on it in a column on a mythical meeting between Trump and Ryan:

"Look at that face!" the billionaire mocks. "Or should I say two? Two-Faced Paul. You're just mad because you and Mitt wanted to lead white male America and instead I'm going to. Romney choked. And what about that time you lied about how fast you ran a marathon? Cheatin' Ryan. A choker and a cheater."