After many months of focus on federal, state and local races, it’s Election Day, and here are our recommendations, published before early voting began. Whether you agree with our recommendations or not, please vote.

Proposition 1

Vote yes for this constitutional amendment that will put half the revenue collected by the Texas Rainy Day Fund into the highway fund.

U.S. Senator

John Cornyn, the Republican who is the minority whip in the Senate, has served Texas well and should be re-elected.

He has a common-sense, realistic and conservative approach to issues that seek smaller government, balancing the budget each year and a strong national defense and security.

U.S. Representative

Randy Neugebauer, who supports the conservative values shared by most West Texans.

Among them are opposing further increases to the national debt, supporting border security and concerns about harm to our health care system from Obamacare.

Texas House District 83

Dustin Burrows would be the stronger representative for West Texas in the House in this election to replace Charles Perry.

Texas House District 84

We recommend John Frullo to a third two-year term. He has effectively represented his district.

Governor

We share Attorney General Greg Abbott’s concerns about federal overreach in the state and believe he would work to continue to boost the economy of Texas.

Lieutenant governor

The strong conservatism of Sen. Dan Patrick makes him the more likely candidate to keep the state government as small as possible, defend Texas from Washington encroachment and effectively protect Texas borders.

Attorney general

Democrat Sam Houston would be the better attorney general for Texas. We think he’ll put the needs of Texans first, defend the state when necessary in the courtroom and do an effective job of child support enforcement in Texas.

Comptroller of public accounts

Glenn Hegar gets our endorsement. He plans to reduce waste and duplication and do a more efficient job of estimating revenue for Texas.

Land commissioner

The depth of experience of George P. Bush as a veteran, lawyer, businessman and former teacher and administrator would serve him well in this office.

Agriculture commissioner

Sid Miller, a conservative Republican legislator, is the better choice for this office.

Railroad commissioner

Ryan Sitton wants to modernize the office’s operations, establish a long-term energy strategy and prepare for downturns in the energy industry.

Chief justice, Supreme Court: Nathan Hecht.

Place 6, Supreme Court: Jeff Brown.

Place 7, Supreme Court: Gina Benavides.

Place 8, Supreme Court: Phil Johnson.

Place 3, Texas Court of Criminal Appeals: Bert Richardson.

Lubbock County judge: No endorsement