There is no right or wrong way to garden — only your way.

It's the mantra that guides my gardening and also motivates some local vegetable gardeners.

With the vegetable gardening season in full swing and harvest happening daily, we visit gardeners pursing three different kinds of gardening that can be used when you have no traditional gardening space in a yard.

They are newbies … they are experimenters … they are Master Gardeners. You decide which suits your style or create your own style gardening and do it your way.

Community gardening

With no suitable gardening spaces at home, some residents opted to raise veggies in the new 47-plot community garden at the Route 17 Sports Complex in York County.

For gardening novices Heather Mahr, 27, and Ryan Clayton, 35, their tomatoes, cucumbers, zucchini, bell peppers, lettuce and sunflowers are a source of pride and discovery.

"We've learned that things people normally think of as boring and tedious, like weeding, have become enjoying," says Heather, who works nearby and uses her lunch break to water the plants.

"Weeding is actually fun. We've learned a lot about plants — which ones grow vertically, which ones spread out, which ones need a lot of water and which ones grow the fastest. We've also learned you don't have to spend a lot of money on gardening — we bought seeds from the dollar store and small supplies from Walmart, but we probably haven't spent over $35 on the whole thing.

"It's an excellent way to relax and reconnect with nature after sitting in an office all day. The day we make a salad entirely out of the vegetables we grew in a garden is a day we look forward to."

For Mark and Jennifer Gates and son Connor, 10, an "as is" tilled plot has been improved with additions of composted soil blend, earthworms and eggshells to raise peppers, herbs, eggplant and zucchini, as well as tomatoes and cucumbers. The Gates family spends 30-60 minutes daily in the garden, doing whatever is needed — watering, pruning, weeding.

"For all, we are already thinking through our plants for improving the plot and what we can grow," says Jennifer.

"We'd like to construct raised beds and fill those with a better blend of soil and compost, along with a trellis for beans and cucumbers.

During this gardening season, the family has learned lessons from other community gardeners — such as working crushed eggshells into the soil, adding sugar to the water when the tomatoes just start to turn pink and pruning the "suckers" from tomato plants.

They've also learned the importance of nutrient-dense soil, adds Jennifer.

"We've learned that it's best to have loose, aerated soil, which is tough to achieve with the hard clay soil that is naturally in the plot," she says.

"We've learned that weed control is a beast of a task. We started by laying a natural, organic paper barrier and covering that with grass mulch, but that did not work out. The paper didn't stay in place despite multiple efforts to keep it down. We are now weeding by hand daily to get it under control. Next growing season, we'd like to have raised beds with loose, composted soil. We're researching the benefits of placing newspaper, then straw over the newspaper, as a natural weed control."

Mark, 47, and Jennifer, 39, work for fast-paced, high-stress Fortune 500 companies, and have been happily surprised with the peace and relaxation they find together and sometimes independently in the garden, she adds.

"There's something almost magical about stepping away from everyday pressures in the evening to have quiet space to think," she says.

We're looking at this first year as a learning year."

For Rachel Graf, 27, a garden is a combination of vegetables and flowers. Instead of the straight lines, trenches or mounds typically found in seasonal vegetable gardens, she opts for clusters of plants. To make harvests easy, she places compact plants like zucchini, peppers, lettuce and tomatoes along the outer edges so she can quickly harvest the bounty.

She arranged everything with companion gardening in mind — placing garlic near the cucumbers, basil next to tomatoes and onions beside cabbage. Marigolds and nasturtiums are planted to act as natural insect deterrents.

In fact, au naturel is her goal.

"I'm trying to stick with organic fertilizers," she says.

"Epson salt is highly beneficial, especially for peppers. I side-dressed all the plants a couple of weeks ago and saw them jump several days later. I get the majority of ideas from Pinterest, one of which was using cut off two-liter pop bottles or large plastic flower pots with holes in them buried most the way in the ground for watering. I place them near the plants and water into them instead of the plant; this promotes deep root growth and directly waters the plants instead of the weeds that might be on the surface."

Graf visits the garden three or four times weekly, watering and checking on plants. Gardening is teaching her that you can never stop learning, especially about organic fertilizers such as bottled fish and seaweed emulsion.

Most of all, she likes the neighborliness of the community garden.

"Everyone is very nice and it definitely has a community feel," she says.

"People are always asking questions and helping each other out."

For Rebecca, 35, and Andrew Shaw, 37, and their three boys, ages 18 months and two and four years, gardening helps them eat better organically while saving on their grocery bill.

"I tried to start conservatively this year, recognizing my own learning curve, competing interests in our home (we are still in full renovation mode), as well as the unique challenge of little ones with short attention spans," Rebecca says.

"I tried not to buy many plants and started many from seed. I also tried to recycle and re-use as much as possible. One of my goals this year is really just to learn.

"Extension agent Dan Nortman encouraged the use of recycled materials, educated us on how to begin gardens with very few resources and offered the extension service as a free resource for helping us troubleshoot pest control problems, etc.

"Our family is truly enjoying the experience of taking care of our plot. I find myself meeting new people each time I go, which is about every other day for about 15 to 20 minutes to water.

"Throughout strawberry season, my boys have each had a few 'snacks' waiting for them, which is fun for us all. We love to count the green ones and anticipate how many we will have the next time we arrive."

Straw bale gardening