ATLANTA | Due to a new state law that took effect July 1, private insurance companies must provide coverage for the best therapeutic treatment for children with autism ages 6 and under.

Ava’s Law, passed unanimously this year by the Georgia General Assembly, requires private insurance companies to cover Applied Behavior Analysis therapy for the first time in the state’s history. Georgia became the 41st state to require coverage.

Faye Montgomery, advocacy director of the Matthew Reardon School for Autism in Chatham County, works with families to help find resources and support. She played a major role in the seven-year battle to get Ava’s Law passed.

“A family who has a kid with autism and who has private insurance now can’t be denied services that are medically necessary,” she said.

While Georgia lags behind most states in providing insurance coverage for early autism treatment, it’s one of only three states that have created a statewide autism plan funded through federal grants.

Research shows that treatment at an early age can reduce or even negate the effects, as well as reduce the overall cost of treatment during an individual’s lifetime.

“(Therapy) is incredibly critical for anyone with autism,” Montgomery said. “I think it’s hard for anyone who doesn’t live with someone with autism to understand what makes it so different and why ABA is so critical.”

No standard price exists for ABA services, she said, even though Ava’s Law sets the coverage cap at $35,000.

Both Georgia’s executive and legislative branches have also recently appropriated additional state funds to expand autism treatment options.

Over the past eight years, the Georgia General Assembly has continually increased the amount of state funds appropriated for nonprofit organizations that provide diagnosis, care and treatment. The state provides $4.2 million to nonprofit organizations, such as the Matthew Reardon School, a year-round school for autistic children.

It costs $40,000 per year for the school to educate each student, said Patti Victor, the school’s president and CEO. State and private funding allows the tuition to remain low enough for families to afford.

Doctors diagnose around one in 64 children in Georgia each year with autism spectrum disorder, which includes autistic disorder and Asperger syndrome. That’s higher than the national average, which is one in 68 children.

“The thing that’s really important for us, and a lot of people in the autism world, is that (Ava’s Law) has opened the door for insurance,” Victor said.

Graham Thompson, executive director of the Georgia Association of Health Plans, said the employer community generally opposes state-mandated benefits, as those often lead to increases in premiums.

“They want increased flexibility to offer their employees the health insurance they need,” he said.

Montgomery said access to early therapy continues to be difficult to find in Georgia.

“Up until now, unless a family had some money to come out of pocket to pay for it, there really was no access to it at all,” she said.

And even though Ava’s Law has been passed, she said a lot of families still do not have private insurance and will not be covered because the law only applies to insurance companies selling policies. It doesn’t include large employers who insure themselves. However, the state’s insurance for government workers and teachers began including the coverage last year, before the law required it.

Victor said the law provides a “foot in the door” for future legislation.

“What’s happens when the child turns 7?” she said. “From a long-term standpoint, an important part of Ava’s Law is that it has put autism on the minds of people who have the ability to pass laws and to offer assistance.”