The new year gives Gov. Rick Scott, Florida's Cabinet and state lawmakers the opportunity to effect meaningful change in the lives of Floridians.

Scott and the Cabinet — Attorney General Pam Bondi, Agricultural Commissioner Adam Putnam and Chief Financial Officer Jeff Atwater — should right the wrong they committed four years ago when they adopted new rules that require felons to wait at least five years after release before they can even apply to get their civil rights restored.

The voter suppression effort, spearheaded by Bondi, reversed a policy by then-Republican Gov. Charlie Crist that allowed felons who committed non-violent crimes to regain their rights automatically. It makes no sense for the state to continue to punish people who have served their time.

An outlier as usual, Florida is one of only four states where a felony conviction means permanently losing the right to vote, hold public office and serve on a jury. Felons must petition the governor and Cabinet for clemency to restore their rights; which can take 10 years or more.

The state has a backlog of 20,000 clemency cases. More than 10 percent of Floridians are shut out of the voting process because of felony convictions. They are living, working and paying taxes in local communities. Many have turned their lives around, gone to college and have professional careers. They have paid their debt to society yet are denied the benefits of full citizenship.

The ACLU, NAACP, League of Women Voters and members of the Florida Restoration Rights Coalition are trying to get a Constitutional Amendment on the 2016 ballot that would let voters decide whether felons can vote again after completing their sentences. They would need to collect more than 683,000 valid voters' signatures by February 2016.

That's a lot of effort for something Scott and the Cabinet can easily rectify.

The Legislature can make up for two years of failing to provide health coverage to nearly 800,000 of the state's poor by finally taking action.

A coalition of business leaders, private citizens and prominent Republicans has come up with a plan that would allow the state to provide coverage to Floridians who are eligible for Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act through private insurers. The plan, A Healthy Florida Works, should be politically palatable to the GOP-dominated Florida House, which loathes the idea of expanding Medicaid.

"Trying Medicaid expansion as envisioned in the Affordable Care Act hasn't worked in Tallahassee," said Linda Quick, a coalition member and president of the South Florida Hospital and Healthcare Association. "So this proposal is a Florida solution."

Scott has said he supports Medicaid expansion but has done little to persuade the Legislature to act. It's time for him to step up and lead on this issue.

The coalition has offered what proponents call a viable "free market" alternative that promotes "personal accountability." Beneficiaries would pay monthly premiums and would be required to search for employment or enroll in job training programs. The federal government has approved similar alternatives in other states.

The coalition's proposal also makes good fiscal sense.

Florida is expected to lose $2 billion this summer the federal government pays to compensate hospitals for treating the uninsured. The state asked for double that amount last year but the government denied the request, noting that funding would be discontinued in July. The money, which goes into the Low Income Pool, does not cover all uncompensated care. Hospitals can offset $3 billion in costs for treating the uninsured if the state expands Medicaid.

The federal government pays the full cost of expanding Medicaid — and alternative programs — for the first three years. In subsequent years the state's share will never exceed 10 percent. By not participating Florida will be leaving $50 billion on the table over the next decade. That's tens of thousands of medical jobs that Florida will not see.

Since jobs and the economy is supposed to be a priority of Scott's and the Legislature, taking advantage of this money should be a no-brainer.

Rhonda Swan is a former editorial writer for The Palm Beach Post. She can be reached at thewordzlady@gmail.com.