Tired of watching Tom Brady and all the negative aspects surrounding Deflategate?

Go to the Internet and watch a genuinely uplifting sports story featuring Ernie Johnson.

The 36th annual Sports Emmy Awards show was Tuesday night in New York. Johnson was named the best studio host (TNT’s “Inside the NBA”).

But Johnson didn’t take home his award.

After accepting, he called Taelor and Sydni, the teenage daughters of the late Stuart Scott, to the stage and presented them with the award, telling them and the audience: “Stuart deserved this award.”

Scott, a longtime ESPN broadcaster, was 49 when he died of cancer in January.

Johnson, a cancer survivor, noted that he and Scott talked regularly about living — and fighting the disease.

Last week’s coverage shows the audience at the Lincoln Center, filled with emotion, standing and paying tribute to Johnson — and to Scott.

Critics of Emmy Awards shows often claim that the statues are passed out like grocery store coupons and that winners are forgotten.

But last week’s ceremony will be remembered because of its genuine emotion. The event produced anything but a deflated evening.

Other winners in major categories:

• Sports live special — Super Bowl XLIX, Patriots vs. Seahawks (NBC).

• Sports series — NASCAR coverage (Fox).

• Studio show, weekly — “College GameDay” (ESPN).

• Studio show, daily — “MLB Tonight” (MLB Network).

• Sports news anthology — “Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel” (HBO).

• Sports journalism — “Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel” (HBO).

• Sports documentary series — “30 for 30″( ESPN) and “All Access” (Showtime).

• Live play-by-play — Mike Emrick (NBC and NBC Sports Network).

• Live studio analyst — Harold Rey- nolds (MLB Network).

• Live action analyst — Cris Collinsworth (NBC).

Spooky setting. If Rod Serling were alive, he might have created a TV scenario by working in the Coors Field broadcasting booth Wednesday when the Arizona Diamondbacks defeated the Rockies 5-1.

Serling, as his numerous fans are aware, created “The Twilight Zone,” which featured dramas that turned everyday events into weird, macabre settings.

The Root Sports telecast Wednesday had such ingredients during the rainy conditions at a nearly empty ballpark.

The cameras roamed the field, the stands and the dugouts providing views of what Serling might have called “humans surviving in an unusual environment — their twilight zone.”

Fight fallout. Veteran broadcaster Jim Lampley joined the chorus of voices expressing disappointment — even disgust — about the “Fight of the Century” matching Floyd Mayweather Jr. against Manny Pacquiao on May 2. Lampley, as the announcer, had a ringside view.

In an interview with Rich Eisen on DirecTV last week, Lampley said the event was “highly unfortunate for boxing.”

“I feel terrible for those fans who spent four figures for a ticket. … I feel bad for the people who spent nearly $100 on pay-per-view who were never given proper information in advance about what they might be seeing,” Lampley said.

Lampley was referencing that Pacquiao, after the fight, announced that he knew beforehand he was suffering from a shoulder injury.

“I can’t imagine that a rematch would incite anything other than an embarrassing response after what we got the other night,” Lampley added.

He also noted the fight could turn off relatively new boxing fans making their first journey into the world of pay-per-view TV.

Longtime Denver journalist Dusty Saunders writes about sports media each Monday in The Denver Post. Contact him at tvtime@comcast.net.

Net result: It’s more money for McEnroe

We finally know why John McEnroe was often combative and nasty during tennis competition.

He was suffering from toenail fungus.

Sports personalities make a bundle in the world of TV commercials, often appearing in embarrassing scenarios.

But McEnroe’s current TV spot is beyond the pail — or is it the nail?