What is most interesting going into New Hampshire is who's going to come out. If the Republicans are serious about winning the presidency, Tuesday should be the end of the road for a number of aspirants.

Novak: The Iowa lesson that carries on into New Hampshire is that investment in the ground game trumps investment on airwaves in both these states. Ted Cruz had a tremendous ground game in Iowa. I don't know that he has it or is investing in it in New Hampshire. Donald Trump is going to win New Hampshire, and the story is going to be how close or by how much.

I foresee Rubio in this for the long haul. But right now, Republican financial backers are putting enormous pressure on Jeb Bush, John Kasich, and Chris Christie to do well.

Rooney: This cycle is different in myriad ways, but one way in particular is the super PACs. In elections past, if you didn't meet expectations in New Hampshire, donors, instinct, and momentum ruled the day and pulled the plug. Super PACs provide a false sense of security about the prospects of candidates who should otherwise hit the bricks.

If there is such a thing as a Republican establishment, then immediately after Tuesday's results are tallied, they should formally embrace the winner. The losers should not let a super PAC still flush with cash be their guide.

Novak: New Hampshire is not going to be this great divide where people who fare poorly suddenly are out. Some of these candidates are set up to make it through March's "SEC primary" in several Southern states (named after the collegiate Southeastern Conference). Super PACs have a lot of money, and that money by its nature translates to airwaves activity. The SEC is suited to that kind of messaging.

The problem is, it's unrealistic for candidates to expect to come out of the SEC primary moving from fifth to second place. At some point, the donors feeding super PACs have to say they are not putting any more money into this, and they will start figuring out who has the best chance to win.

Rooney: Another interesting thing about Iowa is who came out for whom and whether or not that will translate going forward. On the Democratic side, older voters were looking for someone with more experience and went with Hillary Clinton. Younger voters dismayed by the status quo went with Sanders. I imagine those same dynamics will carry into New Hampshire.

But presidential campaigns live in two different worlds - the real one and the political one. Think about what it was like in Philadelphia after the pope left: You gear up for something, it's here, and then it's gone. Iowa is done. New Hampshire is about to be done. The candidates have to do well and then move on.

The question then becomes: Who has the resources and infrastructure once they leave New Hampshire? Sanders and Clinton are moving on, but when they go south and to Nevada, that's when the real guts of the campaign will emerge, and that's where most people think Clinton has a decided advantage.

Novak: I'm watching how Sanders keeps pulling Clinton farther to the left and therefore farther away from where Bill Clinton was when he was president. That is either tactical or it says something about the Democrat voters and what issues resonate with them. Sanders is pretty far out there - free college, free this, free that. Clinton can't out-left Sanders. Her play is to find the Democrats who don't agree with Sanders' far-left approach and start pitching them.

Rooney: Alan is talking about putting the parties back together after the nominees have been decided. Putting Humpty Republican Dumpty back together again is going to be one heck of a task. Former Gov. Tom Ridge this past week said it would be impossible for him to support Trump for president. That's a big deal. Ridge speaks to the hearts and minds of a lot of Republicans.

For Democrats, if Clinton becomes the nominee, it's going to be a lot easier to get younger voters and disenfranchised Democrats back because the difference between Clinton and the Republican nominee will be so stark our voters will see the greater good in supporting a Democrat over supporting a Cruz or Trump.

Novak: It can't be an either/or for Republicans - establishment or antiestablishment. The key is to find a candidate who wins voters from both establishment and antiestablishment camps. Rubio, right now, looks like the candidate who is the acceptable alternative to the "one or the other" voter.

New Hampshire is a different primary for two different kinds of candidates. For the governors, it's about viability - who is still standing. For Rubio, we are going to see if he can attract voters from all the camps.

Alan Novak ( alan@rooneynovak.com) and T.J. Rooney ( tjrooney@rooneynovak.com) are principals of RooneyNovak Group Bipartisan Solutions and appear together regularly to discuss political issues and debate policy.