Hawaiian woman 'stabbed to death by 16-year-old foster son'

Honolulu police said they found a woman's body with stab wounds on Saturday morning

The victim has been identified by local media as Jolyn Kipapa

At the time of Kipapa's death, she and her husband were parents to 11 foster children

Friends and apparent family members have spoken to local media outlets and claimed the Kipapa's foster son is the suspect

A Hawaiian woman was found dead on Saturday morning - and her family and friends have said her 16-year-old foster son is the murder suspect.



Lt. Walter Calistro told HawaiiNewsNow Honolulu police found the body at Waimanalo Beach Park.



Scroll down for video



Killed: Jolyn Kipapa, center, was found dead with stab wounds on Saturday morning by Honolulu police

Victim: Jolyn Kipapa, pictured in 2001 file footage from HawaiiNewsNow, said she and her husband long wished to be parents

'Early this morning around 8:00 a.m., police were called to the caretaker’s residence here for assistance,' Calistro told the affiliate station.



'Upon arrival they discovered a female victim with stab wounds,' Calistro added. 'She was pronounced dead on the scene and a male suspect was taken into custody at that time.'



The victim was by local media as Jolyn Kipapa, wife of Kurt Kipapa.



Friends and apparent family members have spoken to local media outlets and claimed the victim's foster son is the suspect.



At the time of Kipapa's death, she and her husband were parents to 11 foster children, KHON2 reported.

Suspect: A teenage suspect - believed to be Kipapa's 16-year-old foster son - was seen in handcuffs

'Me and my husband been going together from school time, and we always wanted a lot of kids - and in fact when we first met and we first dated in the back of his football picture, he put someday we'll have ten kids,' Kipapa told HawaiiNewsNow of her wish to be a parent in 2001.



The teen suspect was filmed in handcuffs by HawaiiNewsNow.



Andy Jamila told KHON2 'This is really tragic. I know the Kipapas’ hearts. They’re not going to stop taking in and always helping to shelter foster kids. This was their lifelong dream.'