Make sure to have your say and join experts in daily live chats

Buy Photo During the past three years Metro government, in partnership with the community, has worked on a sophisticated urban planning experience to create a road map for how Nashville should look over the next 25 years. (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights NashvilleNext is a community planning experience to build a road map for the future

The draft report will be published March 27 for public input

The Metro Planning Commission is scheduled to vote on the plan in June

The time for action on carrying out NashvilleNext is finally upon us.

During the past three years Metro government, in partnership with the community, has worked on a sophisticated urban planning experience to create a road map for how Nashville should look over the next 25 years.

In the next quarter-century 1 million people are expected to move to Davidson, Williamson and Rutherford counties.

Nashville's population will get more diverse, with the greatest growth being in the Hispanic population, from 10 percent in 2010 to an estimated 34 percent in 2040.

How to manage that growth, embrace change and prioritize topics of concern is the focus of NashvilleNext.

Residents, through a series of community conversations, online surveys and other public feedback opportunities, have told city leaders what they care about most, namely affordable housing, access to good jobs, efficient transit and residential areas that are walkable and near commerce.

At the same time they want to see more open space — a testament to Mayor Karl Dean's administration's dedication to greenways and preservation.

A draft report is scheduled to be released March 27 for public comment and review. The Tennessean will report those details, and we encourage you to be engaged.

Go to one of the public review meetings, voice your support or suggestions and be an active participant in shaping Nashville for the next 25 years.

After the plan's release and the end of the public input time, there will be a June 11 public hearing before the Planning Commission, which will vote on the plan and it will be enacted as policy.

While the Metro Council will review it, it will not have to vote on the plan.

The hope is that all of the stakeholders' interests will align to make this vision a reality.

However, there are realities — and obstacles — to consider.

Nashville — also known as an "It City" — is among the 25 largest metropolitan areas in the country and has developed a cachet that is ever growing, but there are serious concerns that cannot be ignored if our community is going to be a city where people want to live.

People say they want to live in Nashville, but they may not be able to afford it.

We are in an economic boom, with commercial and residential real estate being constructed daily. Real estate prices are rising, but so are building costs and taxes. A new era of gentrification has entered into many neighborhoods of Nashville.

While the investment is increasing property values, it also is driving out low-income residents and keeping working-class people, young professionals and those looking to downsize from achieving home ownership near downtown.

This will have a great impact on all of Middle Tennessee, as eight adjoining or nearby counties have residents who commute to Nashville for work.

Driving new and existing residents to the suburbs will further challenge the strained transportation system. The regional Vital Signs report showed that most Middle Tennessee residents' commutes exceed 20 minutes and are getting longer.

And that's not what residents want.

More than 2,600 residents gave public input for Nashville's "Preferred Future," which will be reflected in the plan. There were 17,000 comments, according to the Metro Planning Department.

These are the six factors that helped shaped their "Preferred Future":

• Protecting sensitive environmental features

• A complete transit network

• Household affordability across income levels

• Activity centers throughout most parts of the county

• Strategic infill that supports transit lines and activity centers

• Protecting and enhancing the character of different parts of the county

Over the next three days, I'll explore three of these aspects in columns — transit and transportation, land preservation and open space, and affordable housing — and I'll ask you to weigh in on the future of Nashville.

In addition, experts will answer your questions in live chats on Tennessean.com from Monday through Thursday.

We should all be able to share in the success of our city.

It would be a pity if too many people who care discover that they can't make it in Music City anymore because of housing, transit or other livability issues that can be solved.

Nashville's better than that.

NashvilleNext timeline

March 27: Draft NashvilleNext plan to be posted online, ready for online comment

April 18: Public event celebrating NashvilleNext plan at Tennessee State University

April 20 and 27: Public drop-in sessions (another may be added on April 28)

April 30: Public comment period on the draft plan ends

May 11: Static draft to be posted online (tentative)

June 11: Metro Planning Commission to hold public hearing on NashvilleNext plan

Source: Metro Planning Department

Live chats with experts

The next installments related to NashvilleNext involve transit/transportation (Monday), open space and green spaces (Tuesday) and affordable housing (Wednesday). Join live chats with experts on different topics at 10 a.m. daily Monday through Thursday at Tennessean.com.

• Monday: Live chat with Richard C. Bernhardt on an overview of NashvilleNext

• Tuesday: Live chat with Steve Bland of Nashville MTA on transit

• Wednesday: Live chat with Kathleen Williams of TennGreen on open spaces

• Thursday: Live chat with Metro Planning Commissioner Jessica Farr on affordable housing

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Cf33IU