The deer hooves strapped to Thomas Wadena’s ankles clack when he dances, and the small mirrors attached to the animal hide on his chest are meant to ward off evil spirits.

“I’m dancing for my family. These people are my family and this is our way,” said Wadena, 58, in traditional Omaha Indian regalia Saturday at the Denver Art Museum’s Friendship Powwow.

Wadena, who also wore deer hair, beaver and eagle plumes on his headdress, was one of a few hundred people from numerous tribes who danced, drummed and sang outside the museum to celebrate American Indian culture.

Like many of the elders, Wadena grew up dancing in powwows and works to keep the tradition strong among younger generations. The water bird he beaded in royal blue on his dress represents the Omaha, including the reservation in Nebraska where Wadena grew up.

Ken Little, a 68-year-old Dakota Sioux, was there to drum. He grew up in Standing Rock, N.D., and was sent away each year to a Catholic boarding school in South Dakota, where the punishment for speaking his native language was whipping or getting his mouth washed out with soap.

Now, he teaches Lakota at the Denver Center for International Studies.

Little sat with other men around a drum named “Black Tongue Dakota,” keeping a steady beat for beaded and feathered dancers who circled the plaza with short, jaunty steps. With the drummers’ crescendo, the dancing intensified.

At the end of a song, a woman’s yodeling rang out. “It means I am honoring them. I’m like an eagle,” said Sue Kaulaity, a Denver resident in street clothes whose heritage is Kiowa and Lakota Sioux.

Each tribe brings something unique to a powwow — the Blackfeet created the chicken dance, the Ojibwe the “jingle dresses” covered in cone-shaped bells traditionally made of Copenhagen cans.

“It’s a way for all of us to come together and share our traditions, like Christians from all denominations,” said Paul Dearhouse, a drummer and an Ojibwe and Mohawk. “This is a great way to keep yourself grounded and to keep your kids involved in the culture.”

Jennifer Brown: 303-954-1593, jenbrown@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jbrowndpost