In August 2014, Ben Carson and his wife, Candy, hosted a multi-day meeting of around 14 influential fundraisers, political operatives and faith leaders at their home in West Palm Beach, Florida.

Related: Ben Carson says Muslim president would have to 'subjugate' beliefs

The session was in part a spiritual vetting, and in part strategic planning. The question on the table was whether Carson should run for president.



Bill Millis, a real-estate developer, flew in from central North Carolina with a fellow property executive, David Couch. Jeffrey Reeter, a financial adviser, came from Houston. Terry Giles, a longtime Carson friend and political adviser, was there, as was Armstrong Williams, a conservative radio host who is also a longtime friend, and Dean Parker, a technology entrepreneur.

At least one megachurch pastor, whose identity the Carson campaign has declined to reveal, was there too.

“We grilled him pretty good,” said Reeter, who now runs a pro-Carson Super Pac, in an interview in a car traveling to last month’s Republican debate in California. “Because I needed to know where his heart was, where his faith was.

“We came away from that time in Florida just blown away by his heart. And I think … talking about somebody else’s faith is … you have to be careful. But what you’re looking for, in my opinion, in this situation, is the heart, and sincerity.

“Dr Carson is truly sincere in his faith.”

A dazzling two-month surge in the presidential race by Carson – who is lapping most of his Republican rivals in favorability, familiarity rating and fundraising – has campaign insiders feeling that the presidential nomination is within reach.

And the Carson team senses a major, untapped opportunity. While the candidate can be vague or fluttery on the debate stage, the campaign has noted that in smaller settings, the master surgeon plies a bedside manner that is forceful and assured.

It appears to us that the evangelicals have not realized the magnitude of his faith, or the sincerity of his faith Jeffrey Reeter

Carson’s bedside manner is particularly effective, they have observed, at connecting with voters in search of a leader who shares their Christian values. Many of those voters, in turn, remain uncommitted, four months from the Iowa caucuses and 401 days until the election.



“It appears to us that the evangelicals have not realized the magnitude of his faith, or the sincerity of his faith, and how strong a believer he is, his evangelical faith,” said Reeter, whose group is called For Our Children’s Future.

“We are very optimistic that they will discover that and understand that. It’s not something that he will pound the gavel about or take the pulpit about.”

Carson’s campaign staff, however, still sense a major challenge at hand. Speaking independently, multiple members of the Carson team said the candidate will need to improve his performance in debates, and to avoid controversies like the one set off by his statement last month that a Muslim should not be president.

“Ben is a brilliant man, absolutely brilliant,” said Harold Doley, an ambassador in the Ronald Reagan administration and a Carson friend of 20 years. “But he is not accustomed to thinking and speaking in sound bites. And that’s really to his disadvantage. He’s doing a lot better in that regard, but that takes a lot of practice.”

The campaign insiders feel pressure to unveil major policy proposals, such as a novel budget plan they expect to roll out later this month. They acknowledge a need to build out their national organization and to persuade influential Republican officials – none of whom have yet come out on behalf of Carson – to pledge support.

In the meantime, Carson is leaving some donors “in awe”.

On Monday night, Millis co-hosted a fundraiser at a private residence in Charlotte, North Carolina, for more than 230 people.



“A number of those people knew of Dr Carson pretty well,” Millis said. “Others came because somebody twisted their arm and said, ‘Come hear this man speak.’ When they came in, I’m sure many of them didn’t know what to expect.

“But as they left, two-and-a-half hours later, they were just in awe. I mean, they could not believe that there could be anyone like Dr Carson running for the highest office in this land. I wish I could have taped the comments that these people said.”



When evangelicals and social conservatives realize who Carson is, his campaign believes, alternative candidates such as Texas senator Ted Cruz, Florida senator Marco Rubio and former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee could fall away, with Carson emerging as the 2016 standard-bearer for values voters.

Capturing the evangelical vote could be especially valuable to Carson in the form of a win in Iowa, the first state to vote, where more than a third of caucus participants identify as social conservatives. The last two Republicans to win the Iowa caucuses, former senator Rick Santorum and Huckabee, did so thanks in part to the strength of their support among evangelicals.

Russell Moore, president of the ethics and religious liberty commission of the Southern Baptist Convention, the nation’s largest Protestant denomination, said Carson’s name had come up repeatedly, among others, in conversations with evangelical leaders about the 2016 candidates.

“I often hear his name among evangelicals as they’re considering candidates, for a number of reasons,” Moore said. “There’s a good bit of affection for Ben Carson in terms of contrast with Donald Trump.

“Carson has the sort of quiet gravity that evangelicals will often speak of as ‘meekness’, in terms of the definition that Jesus gives as meekness.”

Carson’s positions on issues such as abortion and same-sex marriage track broadly with most social conservatives, although Carson has had to answer questions about past statements supporting abortion in cases of “severe medical problems”.

Carson’s appeal with evangelicals could be limited in other ways. His church, the Seventh-Day Adventist, is dismissed by some mainstream Christians for its relatively recent emergence, in the 19th century, and its unorthodox views, including observation of the sabbath on Saturday instead of Sunday.

But there has been no indication so far that such reservations would overcome the spark of recognition that many Christian supporters have had in encountering Carson in settings sufficiently intimate to allow room for his personal story, and personal spiritual testimony.

Robert J Brown, a top Carson adviser who served as Richard Nixon’s chief adviser on race relations, said the candidate’s dramatic biography – the son of a single mother who leapt racial barriers and left poverty behind to become a historically distinguished pediatric neurosurgeon – offered a key to his spirituality.

“Here’s a man who, time and time again, had the nerve and the compassion, and the spiritual guidance, to open up children’s brains,” Brown said. “Stuff that years ago was unthinkable. And make it happen.

“That not only takes a lot of nerve, but you’ve got to be a person who really is communing with the higher power, and making sure that your hands are steady and that your brain is right, and that your life is right.”

Carson is not relying on values voters alone for success – his support at this stage is much wider. On Wednesday, the Carson campaign announced it had raised more than $20m in the last three months, compared with $12m for the erstwhile establishment pick, former Florida governor Jeb Bush.

In terms of net favorability among GOP voters, Carson is nearly 20 points ahead of his closest rival, Rubio, charting a crushing plus-58 by Gallup’s measurement. The surge of support for Carson has been strong enough to push him into second place in national polling averages, behind frontrunner Trump, whose lead Carson has been steadily shaving.

‘The evangelical gatekeepers are less important politically’

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Carson speaks in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Photograph: MLIVE.COM /Landov / Barcroft Med

Related: For a teen aspiring to be president, being Muslim is a hurdle in post-9/11 America

The social conservative vote alone is not likely to propel any one candidate to the Republican nomination, because evangelicals do not vote with the unity they used to display, said Christian Smith, director of the center for the study of religion and society at the University of Notre Dame.

“Evangelicals could have some influence, but I don’t think they’re going to be as crucial or as unified as in the past,” Smith said.

“In the early days, in the 80s and early 90s, the Republican party didn’t know how to access evangelicals. And so they were handed to the Republican party by evangelical leaders. Whereas now, the party knows how to access them directly, so the evangelical gatekeeper leaders are less important politically.

“I just think all that adds up to a more diffuse effect.”

Timothy Hagle, a professor of political science at the University of Iowa, said it would be a mistake to characterize the state as up for grabs for any candidate who manages to win evangelicals alone.

In particular, Hagle said, it could be difficult to distinguish between the evangelical vote and the anti-establishment vote.

“Carson seems to benefit from maybe the folks that like that you’re going to get some straight talk, that you’re not so polished, no political double-speak or however you would characterize it,” said Hagle.

“The question will be for him whether he can learn quickly enough to avoid missteps of various sorts, and a good example of that is what’s been happening with his comments about whether a Muslim could be president.

He’s actually educated a population that I don’t think is very familiar with all the tenets of the Muslim faith David Couch

“His point, when he clarified it, made a certain amount of sense. But the way it was phrased initially of course opened him up to immediate criticism.”

The biggest controversy of Carson’s candidacy so far sprang up after a 20 September interview on NBC in which he said: “I would not advocate that we put a Muslim in charge of this nation. I absolutely would not agree with that.”

The candidate later said he was only talking about Muslims who did not reject Sharia law and other precepts he considered anti-constitutional.

“I would have problems with somebody who embraced all the doctrines associated with Islam,” he told CNN last week.

Couch, the CEO of a real-estate development, management and contruction company, said he had accepted Carson’s clarification.

“I loved what he had to say, when he was given the opportunity to expand on his ideas,” said Couch. “He’s actually educated a population that I don’t think is very familiar with all the tenets of the Muslim faith.”



Robert Brown and others expressed confidence that the force of Carson’s Christian faith, and the gist of his meaning, would pierce through his occasional missteps of delivery.

“Here’s a man who’s been through all of the rigors of life that people say that they could never handle, that most people could never handle,” said Brown. “And here he is standing tall. Standing tall.”