With a backdrop of shimmering rooftop solar panels, government officials gathered Monday to extol an energy-saving initiative at a Denver low-income housing project.

“We’re excited about local communities taking the lead and innovating like Denver has,” said Julián Castro, secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

The focus of Castro’s attention was a $2.5 million solar generation and energy-efficiency program at the Denver Housing Authority’s North Lincoln Homes campus southwest of downtown.

Appropriately, the media event on Monday took place under a blazing sun that forced suit-clad officials to find tree shade until they were called to an open air podium in the housing campus courtyard.

Castro is also visiting Denver to participate as a panelist at the Clinton Global Initiative forum, which began Monday.

In response to an Associated Press reporter’s question about possible vice presidential aspirations, Castro said he has had no contact with Hillary Rodham Clinton’s campaign and is focused solely on his HUD job.

Local and federal officials lauded the DHA’s energy-efficiency program as a key example of public agencies engaging in the U.S. Department of Energy’s “Better Buildings Challenge.”

Since its launch in 2011, the nationwide initiative has recruited 250 public and private building owners that collectively have invested $5.5 billion in efficiency measures. To date, the program has produced an estimated $840 million in energy savings.

“We know that we can cost-effectively drive reductions of 20 to 30 percent in our energy use,” said Maria Vargas, senior program adviser in the DOE’s office of energy efficiency and renewable energy. “Achieving national progress starts at the local level.”

The Denver Housing Authority has invested $10 million in solar photovoltaic systems at seven housing developments and $35 million in energy-efficiency improvements at 18 properties. The projects will save a projected $2.5 million annually.

North Lincoln Homes resident Eddie Chavez said that even though he realizes no personal gain — his electric bill is covered in his monthly rent — he is happy with the DHA’s energy initiative.

“I think it’s a real good program,” he said.

Jerry Tinianow,

Denver’s chief sustainability officer, noted that Denver recently was ranked No. 10 among big U.S. cities for energy efficiency by the Washington, D.C.-based American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy.

Steve Raabe: 303-954-1948, sraabe@denverpost.com or twitter.com/steveraabedp