Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

If you were still warm from the embrace of several beautiful young people when your copy of New York magazine arrived this week, you probably got a pretty good shock to hear that we Millennials are not, in fact, the hookup generation. I certainly was (wink emoticon). No, says writer Maureen O'Connor, we are "the breakup generation." Even more specifically, we're the generation of public breakups and public post-breakup damage control. Facebook released data earlier this year that said when people switch their status from indicating any type of relationship to "single," they immediately swoop into a transient 225 percent increase in the volume of interactions on the site. In those days and weeks (months?) after a relationship ends, it's also true that the theatrics of our social-media caricatures bend toward an audience of one. "I am fine," says the Instagram, in fewer words but so many more. "I am doing fine. Can't you tell?"

Of course the existence of that message proves it cannot be entirely true, but that doesn't stop us from trying. The better you are at lying, the closer you can come. In "Winning the Breakup in the Age of Instagram," O'Connor explores the idea of landing on the confident and successful side of a divide—or at least appearing to. And in looking superior to your former other half, feeling better about yourself. It's petty, she admits, but ubiquitous. A state of mind that really, if you ever find yourself consciously experiencing, you might do well to find a mirror and ask, "Am I evil?" We're instinctively wary of people pretending to be something they're not, as a matter of survival. "Winning the breakup" didn't enter the Urban Dictionary lexicon until 2012. Though it refers to a timeless pettiness, the modern concept generally includes social media. Facebook and Instagram have obviously turned the chance encounter with an ex into an inevitability. A "winning the breakup" advice column on the site Ask Men—which is seriously the name of a publication, even though that's basically the premise of every publication—does recommend "going cold turkey" at the end of a relationship. As in, severing all ties, including blocking on social media. I don't think that is generally necessary or cool. But if you don't do that, the chance that you will check in on an ex is roughly 90,000 percent. Though, on a personal note, I never check the Instagram or Facebook of my ex, Sharon. I really just have too much going on, and it doesn't even cross my mind. "Inevitably, no two people ever can desire a breakup exactly equally," O'Connor writes. "Which means at least one person comes out of it feeling like a loser—and as any résumé-padding overachiever knows, where there are losers there are also winners." The only real winners are the people who don't care how they look on social media, to their ex or to anyone. The loser in my case is Sharon. Unless you are a truly good person who wants to see that your ex is doing well no matter what, I suppose it's normal to hope that person hasn't immediately replaced you with anyone who can totally fill the you-shaped hole you just ripped out of their heart.