For Immediate Release

Chicago, IL - April 27, 2016 - Zacks.com announces the list of stocks featured in the Analyst Blog. Every day the Zacks Equity Research analysts discuss the latest news and events impacting stocks and the financial markets. Stocks recently featured in the blog include Emergent BioSolutions, Inc. ( EBS ), Molina Healthcare, Inc. ( MOH ), PAREXEL International Corporation ( PRXL ), Air Methods Corp. ( AIRM ) and Charles River Laboratories International, Inc. ( CRL ) .

Today, Zacks is promoting its ''Buy'' stock recommendations. Get #1Stock of the Day pick for free .

Here are highlights from Tuesday's Analyst Blog:

5 Stocks to Invest In for the Healthcare Rebound

Healthcare stocks bounced back this month after being mostly out of favor during the first quarter. This was primarily a fallout of Democratic Presidential Candidate Hillary Clinton's allegations on "price gouging." Strong gains in biotech stocks helped the healthcare sector to rebound this month.

Clinton's intention to support the Affordable Care Act (ACA), a slew of mergers and acquisitions, and an increase in innovative product pipelines and approvals also boosted the sector. Further, recent data indicates that the number of U.S. baby boomers have risen considerably, which ensures higher demand for healthcare products in the future. These factors indicate that it would be prudent to invest in this space going at this time.

Spectacular Recovery from Q1's Debacle

The Health Care Select Sector SPDR (XLV) fell 4.6% in the first quarter, following the price gouging controversy. However, the XLV has increased 3% month to date following gains in biotech stocks. The iShares Nasdaq Biotechnology (IBB) has also agreed by a similar degree over the same period.

Meanwhile, Clinton has gone on to emphasize that she intends to expand the coverage of the ACA. She aims to provide incentives to those 30 states who have previously refrained from participating in the ACA program. Clinton's campaign announcements have helped to boost healthcare stocks.

Promising Signs for the Future

Moreover, with valuations approaching reasonable levels, we have already witnessed several merger and acquisition (M&A) agreements and are likely to witness many more as the year progresses. Quite a few of the major healthcare companies are rumored to be on the look-out for suitable deals.

Additionally, many companies in this sector continue to deliver on their pipeline while key products continue to perform well. Also, several companies are experimenting with multiple new drugs and working on bringing innovative and new treatments to the market.

Further, the sector is positioned to grow in the future thanks to an ageing American population, which will require more medical attention. According to U.S. Census Bureau estimates, there are about 77 million U.S. baby boomers, which is quite a significant number.

5 Potential Health Care Stocks

Given the rebound in the healthcare sector, stocks from this sector could be a good investment option. However, it is important to find healthcare stocks with strong fundamentals in order to derive healthy returns. Further, it is important to identify winning stocks.

This is where our VGM score comes in. Here V stands for Value, G for Growth and M for Momentum and the score is a weighted combination of these three scores.

Such a score allows you to eliminate the negative aspects of stocks and select winners. However, it is important to keep in mind that each Style Score will carry a different weight while arriving at a VGM score. Our research shows that stocks with a VGM Score of 'A' or 'B' when combined with a Zacks Rank #1 (Strong Buy) or #2 (Buy) offer the best investment opportunities.

Emergent BioSolutions, Inc. ( EBS ) develops and sells healthcare related products both in the U.S. and the global market.

The biopharmaceutical company has a Zacks Rank #1 and a VGM Score of 'B.' The projected EPS growth of the company for the current year is 22.5%, compared with the industry average of 0.68%. The long-term expected EPS growth rate for the company is 10.43%.

Molina Healthcare, Inc. ( MOH ) offers Medicaid-related services mainly to low-income individuals and families to meet their healthcare requirements.

The company has a Zacks Rank #1 and a VGM Score of 'A.' The projected EPS growth of the company for the current year is 24.5%, compared with the industry average of 18.32%. The long-term expected EPS growth rate for the company is 20.89%.

PAREXEL International Corporation ( PRXL ) has different business segments.

The company has a Zacks Rank #1 and a VGM Score of 'B.' The projected EPS growth of the company for the current year is 25.09%, compared with the industry average of 20.59%. The long-term expected EPS growth rate for the company is 33.28%.

Air Methods Corp. ( AIRM ) offers air medical services in the U.S.

The company has a Zacks Rank #2 and a VGM Score of 'A.' The projected EPS growth of the company for the current year is 16.09%. The long-term expected EPS growth rate for the company is 17.41%.

Charles River Laboratories International, Inc. ( CRL ) has three different business segments.

The company has a Zacks Rank #2 and a VGM Score of 'A.' The projected EPS growth of the company for the current year is 15.55%. The long-term expected EPS growth rate for the company is 10.55%.

Want the latest recommendations from Zacks Investment Research? Today, you can download 7 Best Stocks for the Next 30 Days. Click to get this free report >>

About Zacks Equity Research

Zacks Equity Research provides the best of quantitative and qualitative analysis to help investors know what stocks to buy and which to sell for the long-term.

Continuous coverage is provided for a universe of 1,150 publicly traded stocks. Our analysts are organized by industry which gives them keen insights to developments that affect company profits and stock performance. Recommendations and target prices are six-month time horizons.

Zacks "Profit from the Pros" e-mail newsletter provides highlights of the latest analysis from Zacks Equity Research. Subscribe to this free newsletter today . Find out What is happening in the stock market today on zacks.com.

Want the latest recommendations from Zacks Investment Research? Today, you can download 7 Best Stocks for the Next 30 Days. Click to get this free report