Duck, duck, goose. Before the Nuggets tipped off against the Chicago Bulls on Tuesday night, Denver guard Nate Robinson chased teammate Alonzo Gee in a circle around their teammates in a pregame huddle. The game wasn’t ready to start until the goose caught up to the duck.

Robinson is a quick one. And Gee’s too tall to turn the loop. Duck, duck, goose. Tag. Game on.

The Nuggets, too, have been chasing themselves for three weeks. An ugly 1-6 start sent them reeling. Jobs were suddenly on the line — foremost for their coach, Brian Shaw, who admitted he might not see the New Year in Denver if the skid continued.

Since then, the Nuggets found a direction. For the most part, they’re no longer running in circles. And against the visiting Bulls, the Nuggets finally caught themselves.

A 114-109 victory over a hobbled Chicago team — behind Ty Lawson’s 20 points and Arron Afflalo’s 19 — got the Nuggets (7-7) even for the season, for the first time since they were 1-1.

“We’re not above water,” Shaw said. “We’re right there. It just means that the horrendous start we had, we kind of wiped that clean.”

The Nuggets never trailed the Bulls. Gee’s two-handed dunk over Pau Gasol with 8:25 remaining gave Denver a 14-point lead. They later led by 16.

Afflalo’s long jumper with 40.3 seconds left and Lawson’s jab-step two with 8.3 seconds remaining served as the Nuggets’ game-sealing tag-outs.

“It feels good to get back in the mix, to be playing for something,” Lawson said. “We had a late start. But we’re back to even.”

The Bulls (9-6) were bitten from the beginning. Chicago was without Joakim Noah (eye bruise, knee injection) and Taj Gibson (left ankle).

And star Bulls point guard Derrick Rose, easing back after several injuries, played just 10 minutes — he was on the court less than rookie Doug McDermott (11 minutes). Rose finished with just two points.

But the Bulls can’t buy a win in Denver. They’re now 1-14 at a mile high since 1998.

“I always look forward (to playing in Denver). It’s beautiful,” Bulls coach Tom Thibodeau said before the game. He might have been lying. “It’s like playing everywhere else. You just have to play. C’mon.”

Shaw said the Nuggets’ key to beating the Bulls was to play like an Eastern Conference team. Double-down on the 47-foot game. Attack quickly before Chicago can set up its defense.

“We have to be efficient with our half-court offense,” Shaw said.

By the time the Nuggets took a 16-8 lead early in the first quarter, every Denver starter had scored.

“That’s what we need to do,” Nuggets forward Danilo Gallinari said. “Get everybody involved.”

With 2:55 left in the first, J.J. Hickson hit Kenneth Faried on a give-and-go that Faried dunked leaning in from outside the inner arc.

And Lawson’s crossover from the right side in the third quarter put Bulls guard Kirk Hinrich on his rump. It led to an easy lay-in for Timofey Mozgov.

Jimmy Butler’s game-high 32 weren’t enough for Chicago, even though the Bulls scored 32 points from the free-throw line to keep the game interesting with a minute left.

Wilson Chandler added 14 points and seven rebounds for the Nuggets, who won a fifth consecutive game and a sixth in their past seven.

“We’re feeling good about ourselves,” Shaw said. “But we have a lot of work to do. We’re getting better.”

DENVER AT PHOENIX

7 p.m. Wednesday, ALT; 104.3 FM

Spotlight on Isaiah Thomas: The Suns have found plenty of playing time for the fourth-year pro in his first season in Arizona. Thomas, playing behind point guard Goran Dragic (14.1 points) and Eric Bledsoe (14.2), has still managed to lead the team in scoring at 15.5 points per game. He’s been spot-on from 3-point range, hitting nearly 40 percent, and at the free-throw line, nailing better than 90 percent. The former University of Washington star was the 60th pick in the 2011 NBA draft by the Sacramento Kings, who traded him to Phoenix in July for Alex Oriakhi.