Ensuring mothers and infants have a good start in breastfeeding is a focus at TMH. (Photo: istock/Tallahassee Memorial HealthCare)

With several initiatives underway to encourage and support mothers and infants, breastfeeding has become a Tallahassee community focus.

A new Breastfeeding Policy Group began meeting in September with the goal of promoting policies to help mothers breastfeed for a longer time period, and Tallahassee Memorial HealthCare is progressing with its efforts to earn Baby-Friendly accreditation.

The breastfeeding initiation rate has climbed to 80 percent in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control, but the rate drops dramatically with less than 20 percent of moms continuing to breastfeed at six months.

The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends exclusive breastfeeding until age six months. Solid foods should be introduced around six months, but babies should continue to breastfeed for a year or as long as mother and baby want to continue, according to the AAP.

A number of barriers prevent mothers from continuing to breastfeed, including difficulty pumping at work, a lack of support, difficulty accessing pumps and even public harassment.

“It happens more than you think,” said Dykibra Gaskin, public health nutrition program director for the Leon County Department of Health. “We get calls about women being in a store or in a restaurant and being told they can’t breastfeed there. A lot of companies just don’t know the law.”

Under state statute, “A mother may breastfeed her baby in any location, public or private, where the mother is otherwise authorized to be, irrespective of whether the nipple of the mother’s breast is uncovered during or incidental to the breastfeeding.”

The Affordable Care Act also provided workplace protections. Employers with 50 or more employees must provide a private place for mothers to pump up to one year after a child’s birth. That space cannot be a bathroom.

Even with those changes, moms face challenges, Gaskin says.

“They worry about being seen as someone who’s not pulling her weight with the workload. They don’t want to rock the boat and have a lot of anxiety. Do they have enough time to pump? Will their boss be supportive?”

The Affordable Care Act requires health plans to cover breast pumps for nursing mothers, but until recently, Medicaid in Florida did not require plans to cover pumps, leaving Medicaid moms with fewer options.

A hospital-grade pump can cost upwards of $200. Breastfeeding mothers returning to work must pump multiple times a day to maintain their milk supply, so a quality pump is essential.

The Breastfeeding Policy Group, which includes doctors and other health-care providers and representatives from local human service agencies, is examining these and other issues and plans to advocate on behalf of moms.



TMH progressing with accreditation



Ensuring mothers and infants have a good start in breastfeeding is a focus at TMH.

The United Nations Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization established the Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative to encourage and recognize hospitals and birth centers that offer a high level of care for breastfeeding.

Health care experts and scientists agree breastfeeding is the best way to feed babies, and breast milk is known to reduce the risk of infant death and other chronic illnesses.

“For the great majority of mothers and babies, the mother's breast milk really is the very best for that baby,” said Dr. Tanya Evers, an OBGYN and faculty member of the TMH Family Medicine Residency Program. “The benefits cannot be replicated by even the most expensive formula. Women have been given the privilege of providing this gift to their children. My hope is that during the process of achieving and maintaining Baby Friendly status at TMH, we as a health care community can maximize our efforts in supporting mothers and babies in this important endeavor.”

To be designated “Baby-Friendly,” hospitals must meet strict criteria that include a comprehensive written breastfeeding policy, training for staff and help for women to begin breastfeeding within an hour after birth.

Achieving accreditation is a multi-year process, said Connie Styons, administrator of women and children’s services. Steps TMH has already taken include delaying baths for newborns and giving them immediate skin-to-skin contact with mothers to initiate bonding and breastfeeding.

Nurses at TMH are completing training, which includes 15 hours of the curriculum approved by Baby-Friendly USA Inc. Nurses are also receiving training with lactation consultants. The effort includes a wide range of hospital staff, not just those directly connected to labor and delivery or family care.

“We’re getting everybody on the same page so we can help mothers around the clock,” Styons said.

Physicians will also undergo training. The most success in breastfeeding occurs when health care providers talk about breastfeeding during prenatal care, Styons said.

“If a mother doesn’t read or ask or understand, or if no one mentions breastfeeding to her during the prenatal period, she may perceive it as not as important,” she said.

Once mothers are discharged, TMH can refer them to local breastfeeding support groups. TMH and Capital Regional Medical Center, as well as other local organizations, have groups that meet weekly. The hospitals also have lactation consultants available.

TMH’s goal is to apply for accreditation by January. The next step would be a site visit and evaluation.

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1Sns1fS