Senator tours ag facility

Senator Cory Gardner talks about his busy schedule across Southeast Colorado during his visit Sept. 2. (Chris Frost / Lamar Ledger)

US Senator Cory Gardner took a trip to Prowers County Sept. 2, and visited JBS Five Rivers Cattle on his agricultural tour across the state. His visit was arranged by Colorado Farm Bureau.

He greeted well-wishers upon his arrival and took a motor tour of the facility.

After his tour he fielded questions from people attending, including one question about delisting the Lesser Prairie Chicken, which has stalled the development of a dairy planned for south of Holly.A judge recently ruled that the Lesser Prairie Chicken was not an endangered species.

"We are going to keep fighting on and the judge's ruling is great," he said. "Congress needs to go further and make sure that decision can't be reversed."

Senator Cory Gardner is greeted by Commissioner Henry Schnabel Sept. 2, as Gardner prepares to tour Five Rivers Cattle in Prowers County. (Chris Frost / Lamar Ledger)

He's written several letters about the chicken and said much more work needs to happen.

"The greater Sage Grouse issue on the western slope is going to be decided in the next 30 days," he said. "If there isn't a list, the plan to follow will be tough on the western slope. We've got to continue to watch what these regulatory agencies are doing. They are going to be coming hot-and-heavy on a lot of regulations as the (Obama) administration comes to a close."

In comments after the tour and meeting, Gardner called the tour his first annual agricultural tour.

"We're going to do this again next year and I think you are going to see this become something that grows among the Colorado Senate Delegation," he said.

Advertisement

Hemp

Gardner said he is co-sponsor of a bill that would allow industrial hemp to move across the country.

"The legislation hasn't moved yet but we are hoping that it will move," he said. "It will delist hemp, which is not psychoactive or THC-driven, and provides economic opportunities and medical opportunities to extract hemp oil and we've seen a lot of young people who suffer from epilepsy benefit greatly from CBD oil derived from hemp."

Senator Cory Gardner listens to comments about a man-made lake during his visit to JBS Five Rivers Sept. 2. (Chris Frost / Lamar Ledger)

He was active with the farm bill in 2014, he said, and was able to provide opportunities for Colorado hemp growers working with land grant universities.

"The legislation I hope will gain some steam this year," he said.

Iran

Gardner said Iran is already starting to "fudge" on its agreement before the ink is dry.

"We've seen conversations they held with Russia over ballistic missiles that they weren't supposed to," he said. "Ultimately what this deal will do is allow Iran to receive tens of billions of dollars in oil money that was unavailable to them because of sanctions and it will allow Iran's economy to grow and flourish."

That money can be used to sponsor terror, and after the tour he read a letter from Secretary of State John Kerry that said that "he (Kerry) doesn't expect Iran's behavior to change."

"They are going to use the money they've now gained to increase funding for Hamas, Hezbollah and the Houthis in Yemen," he said. "It will be very difficult once the sanctions are lifted to stop this money from going."

Instead, he advocates not letting the deal go forward, 'double-down' on sanctions, increase sanctions where they haven't already and pursue a better deal.

Cuba

The deal struck with Cuba, he said, gives them everything they want while the US gets nothing in return.

"I don't know if this is the case today, but at one point I asked if more civil society leaders are in jail now than before we started the deal and the answer was yes," Gardner said. "The Castro family still has an iron-clad grip on the economy and if you stay at a hotel in Cuba the money, will most likely, go back to the Castro family."

If things like that change the US can take a look at a deal, he said, but right now they are considering operating the way they are with no change of behavior.

His four-point plan

The list of responsibilities keeps growing for Gardner but he remains the champion of the people he represents.

"It's about making sure we are across the state covering every nook and cranny listening to people and hearing what's on their minds and talking about our vision for a better Colorado," he said. "That's based on our four corners plan that is focused on the economy, but not just the Front Range, for all points of Colorado."

The plan also focuses on education opportunities.

"We passed a bill last month in the Senate that will allow high school students in Lamar, Colorado to have more opportunity for dual and concurrent enrollment at Lamar Community College" he said.

The environment is focused on water, the conservation fund and energy efficiency.

"We also focused on energy," he said. "When you look at places in Eastern Colorado that have opportunities to develop energy, whether that's wind in Prowers County or oil and gas in Weld County, those are great opportunities for this state to create great economic benefit."

Gardner remains against the Affordable Care Act but there are things that can be done to fix it in the meantime that will enjoy strong bipartisan support, like restoring the 40-hour workweek and repealing the Independent Payment Advisory Board.

"That's the panel that decides what care you can or cannot receive under Medicare," he said. "Repealing things like the medical device tax, which is costing jobs and adding a tremendous burden to the economy, are things we can do now that will enjoy bipartisan support."

Republican presidential candidates

Looking forward to the next presidential election, Gardner said there are many Republican candidates.

"I think it's important that we have a number of candidates get their voices and messages out there and over the next several months that number is going to decline," he said. "You've already heard some presidential candidates that aren't going to hang on much longer because they don't have support."

He agrees with Marco Rubio's statement during the first debate, who said there are a number of good Republican candidates.

"The Democrats can't find one," he said.

For more information about Senator Cory Gardner, visit gardner.senate.gov.

Chris Frost: 719-336-2266, editor@lamarledger.com