CHESTER, Va., Jan. 13, 2015 (SEND2PRESS NEWSWIRE) -- "Many studies have been released in the last five years that indicate in some areas it can take months for someone to see a dermatologist," said Dr. Edward Boakye Co-Founder & President of Richmond, Virginia's recently opened Naz'Rene Clinic & Skincare. "Thank God most lesions are not fatal! However, you never know if an itching rash could potentially be a harbinger of something more sinister if it is not taken to someone who can review it accurately."



The amount of time an American has to wait to see a doctor has become a hot topic as the Affordable Care Act continues to seismically shift the healthcare landscape. The New York Times reported this summer that The Commonwealth Fund, a New York-based foundation that focuses on health care, released a report comparing wait times in the U.S. to those in ten other countries.



"We were smug and we had the impression that the United States had no wait times - but it turns out that's not true," Robin Osborn, a researcher for the foundation, was quoted as saying in the article, "The Health Care Waiting Game." In the same article, The Times reported that nationally, the average wait time to see a dermatologist is 29 days.



Dr. Boakye, an American Board of Internal Medicine certified physician, intends to provide relief from these long wait times with Naz'Rene Clinic & Skincare, which opened its door on December 3, 2014 to provide medical dermatology services. "I think it is unacceptable to wait for one to three months to finally see a dermatologist, only to be scheduled to see a nurse practitioner or physician's assistant during your first two to three appointments," he explained. Naz'Rene Clinic & Skincare will be hosting their first seasonal Open House on January 17, 2015 to introduce its medical and aesthetics services to the community.



Dr. Boakye and his son Kofi Boakye co-founded Naz'Rene Clinic & Skincare to offer primary care physicians in the community, and at some point internationally via Telemedicine, a trained eye for their patients' skin conditions.



Over the course of three decades, Dr. Boakye has practiced medicine on three different continents-Africa, Europe and North America. Dr. Boakye credits his practice of medicine in the English Commonwealth as the foundation of his skill at "spot diagnosis." "In the course of many years of service to medicine, I have matured into what one could consider a Sherlock Holmes of clinical practice and making the exact diagnosis with limited resources is my 'high,'" he explained.



His experience has led him to conclude that, "The skin is the largest organ in the body, but surprisingly it may be the most ignored. Honestly how many guys do you know that apply moisturizer to their body daily? It is not okay to accept 'the aging changes' to our face and skin. The Bible says, 'Ignorance makes my people suffer' - oh, how true this is with skin care and the maintenance of skin health."



Kofi Boakye shares his father's excitement in this new venture. A graduate of Virginia's College of William and Mary and a French International MBA program, Kofi Boakye believes Naz'Rene Clinic & Skincare offers an example of how to innovate in the medical field. "We've had the chance to be exposed to different business models outside of America and to various technologies," Mr. Boakye said. "We believe we can use these to roll out different businesses in the next two to three years, which can shake up the way certain skin conditions and concerns are managed both locally in Virginia and internationally in certain pockets of West Africa, including the expatriate communities working and living there."



Naz'Rene Clinic & Skincare's commitment to their guests - Dr. Boakye prefers that term to "patients" - has impressed their partners, one of which is the German company FotoFinder Systems, Inc. that provides and services the clinic's imaging equipment. "The fact that Dr. Boakye and his team have invested in imaging equipment for both the medical and aesthetic side of the practice demonstrates their commitment to offering their clients the highest quality care," said Vice President of FotoFinder Systems Ferdinand Mayer.



In fact, according to Mayer, "Naz'Rene is one of the first four offices in the U.S. to offer mole mapping with FotoFinder's Bodystudio ATBM (automated total body mapping), which will allow them to detect skin cancers at an earlier stage."



Naz'Rene Clinic & Skincare will also take its aesthetics service one step further than most clinics by clearly documenting the condition of a guest's skin before and after a procedure. "The aesthetic side of the practice will be using Adonia Deluxe for imaging and photo-documentation," Mayer said. "The clinic will use consistent photo-documentation before and after procedures, which will provide a more objective assessment of the results of procedures," he explained.



"The man considered to be the father of modern academic dermatology, Dr. Thomas B. Fitzpatrick, describes a dermatologist as a 'physician who can diagnose a rash' in one of his well regarded textbooks 'Dermatology in General Medicine,'" said Dr. Boakye, "and diagnosing a rash and other skin conditions is something I can do with great confidence."



Naz'Rene Clinic & Skincare is a self-pay (private pay) "Total Skin Health Solution" clinic located at 2 East Hundred Road Chester, VA and welcomes guests Monday-Thursday, from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., Friday from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.



Please visit the Naz'Rene Clinic & Skincare website, http://www.nazreneclinic.com or call (804) 571-6225 for additional information on the clinic's medical practice. For all other inquiries please email kofi.boakye@nazreneclinic.com.



*LOGO for media: Send2Press.com/mediaboom/15-0113-nazrene-300dpi.jpg .

News Source: Naz'Rene Clinic and Skincare