Dave Taylor (For the Camera)

Q: Last year I kept hearing about 3D television, and when I looked online for a new TV last summer, they were prominently featured. Coverage from the Consumer Electronics Show this year mentioned nothing about 3D TV, however. What happened?

A: You're right, there were no major announcements from any of the big TV companies about 3D TV. Replacing it were lots of UltraHD units and those are far more likely to be a good investment.

UltraHD is also known as "4K," but ,to be precise, 4K is one of the two UltraHD resolutions and it's 3840×2160, not quite 4,000.

The other UltraHD resolution is 8K and that's 7680×4320. The highest resolution HDTV is actually 1920x1080.

Got it? More resolution = better picture.

It's hard to say exactly what killed 3D, but the lack of a single unified standard was a major problem. The other issue was the great challenge of any new data or broadcast format, whether it's vinyl to CD, videotape to DVD, radio to HD radio or TV to HDTV or 3DTV: content.

There's an obvious chicken-and-egg problem because companies don't want to produce devices for which there aren't customers, and customers don't want to buy the latest and greatest if they can't enjoy it.

But the content producers don't want to make content available (and it's expensive to retool a broadcast facility for a new format) until there are sufficient customers to pay for it.

Enter "upscaling."

What helped the migration from DVD to Blu-ray and from TV to HDTV is that the modern devices have built-in circuitry to automatically convert lower-resolution, older content to a sort of mock high-res.

That's why an old black and white DVD looks terrific on a modern Blu-ray player hooked up via HDMI to a good HDTV.

It's also the needed intermediate step: customers get a visible upgrade, but broadcast doesn't need to immediately leap into an entirely new production and transmission infrastructure.

And that's where 3DTV failed: there was no decent way to add a sort of faux 3D. If you didn't have both a 3D video player and a 3D television, you weren't seeing 3D, and none of the major networks were broadcasting anything in 3D.

The only exception was ESPN, who launched ESPN 3D in 2011 just to shut it down last year due to "limited viewer adoption of 3D services".

I don't see UltraHD suffering the same fate, however.

First off, no annoying 3D glasses are required to get the higher res screen, and with advanced computer circuitry in the UltraHD televisions, they can not only upscale HD content to look even better, but can optimize each frame as it's pushed to the screen, hundreds of times per second.

I'm far more interested in an UltraHD television than a 3D television, I'll say that much!

Dave Taylor has been involved with the online world for more than 30 thirty years and covers the tech industry — including thousands of friendly tutorials — at AskDaveTaylor.com. You can also find him on Twitter as @DaveTaylor.