The claim

Radiation levels in Reno spiked to levels warranting concern in December.

The background

Phyllis Dudas of Reno wrote:

“I have a lady friend who … claims that the radiation levels in Washoe County are extremely and dangerously high. She claims the government is suppressing our radiation levels — hiding the truth! … She claims that certain men on the Internet are warning their listeners about the radiation levels.”

She wanted to know if this was true and, if not, how to calm her friend’s fears

The friend’s information likely comes from a Dec. 12 report at WND.com, formerly WorldNetDaily. It said:

“A private organization that monitors radiation data from network points across the United States issued email alerts today for two Western U.S. cities, Reno, Nev., and St. George, Utah.

“The alerts came from the Nuclear Emergency Tracking Center. …

“In Reno, ‘the current background radiation level has increased suddenly by more than 200 points from the typical average.’ …

“In Reno, the (counts per minute) suddenly surged to 462. The all-time high is 542. The average is 279 …”

It included a screenshot map from the Nuclear Emergency Tracking Center’s website NETC.com showing many sites designated with radiation symbols in the lowest “norm” range. The map also shows two dozen sites in the “rising” range, a dozen in the “elevated” range and four in the highest “concern/watch” range, one of which is Reno.

NETC.com founder Harlan Yother told Fact Checker:

“Your town, Reno, may have a radiation snow problem. For the past three years, according to EPA’s Radnet system that NETC.com uses to build the charts, it shows that each year in December or January, the radiation increases to the highest level for that year. Three times in three years, the snow is radioactive. … The government will say that it is within its NORM — natural occurring radioactive material — background level. That is the same thing the Japanese government is telling its people, it is safe!”

Yother emphasized he has no special knowledge in radiation or medicine. His expertise is in computers.

He said his alert levels are not based on any danger criteria, just his own personal levels signifying different amounts of increase, and that the site is not a medical danger system.

To learn more, Fact Checker spoke with Ted Hartwell, manager for the Desert Research Institute’s Community Environmental Monitoring Program in Las Vegas. The program oversees a network of radiation and weather monitoring stations in communities surrounding the Nevada National Security Site, aka the Nevada Test Site.

Hartwell is familiar with the NECT website. He doesn’t have an issue with Yother’s numbers or claims of higher radiation levels when it snows.

Snow and rain everywhere in the world cause similar small spikes and are not something to worry about, he said, adding that low-pressure systems release radon from the ground.

“My main concerns with (Yother’s) website have to do with his alert levels,” Hartwell said. “Even for the highest alert level, the range is within the natural variability.”

In the December alert, Yother’s figures show Reno’s radiation level jumped 72 percent, and this caused the most serious warning from his site.

But Hartwell said there are places on Earth with 10,000 percent higher natural background radiation without problems for residents.

If background radiation spiked 100,000 percent higher than average and you stood in the middle for an hour, Hartwell said, that exposure would be equivalent to two to three dental X-rays to the entire body or a few cross-country plane flights.

There’s a spike in radiation when flying because of more cosmic radiation, thanks to the thinner blanket of atmosphere between you and outer space. This is why cities with higher elevations have more background radiation.

University of Nevada, Reno radiation safety officer Myung Jo said Reno has two to three times more cosmic background radiation than San Francisco.

In other words, simply driving from San Francisco to Reno causes a “spike” in background radiation that is three to four times higher than the spike Yother’s website warned about.

This is why Jo thinks Yother’s website is creating fear where none is warranted.

Further, Jo disagrees there was a 72 percent spike in December. He showed Fact Checker a Radnet chart using the numbers that formed the basis for Yother’s alert. A spike is not noticeable.

Jo also said UNR’s radiation sensors did not show such a spike. He said even if that spike had been detected, it was such a small amount that it wouldn’t warrant scrutiny.

When asked why Radnet’s plotting of the data didn’t show the spike, Yother said, “The difference is we calculate the background radiation and then we can detect any changes. We recalculate the average every night — we take the previous three months and do some special calculations on it to calculate the background radiation.”

To learn the results requires a subscription to Yother’s website, where he also sells customized Geiger counters.

Jo said, “People want their radiation exposure to be zero, but it can’t because radiation is everywhere.”

Increased levels of background radiation have not been shown to be harmful.

A study in the October 2000 Journal of Radiation Research followed more than 100,000 people for 16 years in high background-radiation areas (HBRA) of China. The conclusion:

“We did not find any increased cancer risk associated with the high levels of natural radiation in HBRA. On the contrary, the mortality of all cancers in HBRA was generally lower than that in the control area, but not statistically significant.” (Emphasis mine.)

But maybe the government is hiding high radiation numbers?

Jo said, “Radiation detection is so easy and so many people have detection systems, there’s no reason to hide (spikes). And it’s not just this country. There are international bodies everywhere monitoring radiation, so it would be very difficult to hide.”

The verdict

Even if NECT’s Reno radiation numbers are accurate, the increase is still far below amounts that would prompt a health concern and far less than would be seen with a few plane trips or moving to Ouray, Colo. There is no cause for worry.

Truth meter: 1 (out of 10)