Topics: american sniper, chris kyle, Clint Eastwood, Editor's Picks, Iraq, police violence, Life News, Entertainment News, News

My neighbor is recovering from cancer, and last month his wife, a retired nurse who nursed him through the worst of his chemo, died of cancer. In mourning, my neighbor holed up at their second home—his second home—on Sutton’s Bay at the tip of the ring finger on Michigan’s mitten. While away, my neighbor asked if I’d go next door to water his wife’s African violets so they, too, wouldn’t die.

That night, I got a frantic call. My neighbor had received word that, minutes earlier, someone had broken into his home. I thought he was delusional; as I’d left his house, I’d taken care to set the burglar alarm. To reassure him, and worried I might be a suspect, I dashed next door.

Two windows were busted out. The alarm wasn’t tripped. I touched nothing but the ground beneath me, and just barely. When a pair of cops arrived, I let them in with my spare key. Once they secured the house, I checked the alarm.

I’d botched the setting of it. The robbery was my fault. At my admission of guilt, the cops shook their heads. The three of us stood on broken glass in my neighbor’s kitchen while I gave a statement. If I’d been a suspect in their eyes, I didn’t see it.

Done with formalities, the two cops told me stories. They recounted a spate of recent burglaries, and some tactics a homeowner can use to slow but not stop a robbery. I was struck by the words both cops used to talk about the burglars: idiots, bad guys.

*

Shortly after the killings of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Eric Garner on Staten Island, and Tamir Rice in Cleveland, followed in rapid-fire succession by the assassinations of officers Wenjian Liu and Rafael Ramos, the New York Times ran an op-ed by Steve Osborn. A retired NYC cop, Lt. Osborn seeks to explain, and excuse, his former colleagues for turning their backs to their mayor. A parenthetical in the op-ed, what is presented as an afterthought, reads: “(Mornings are the best time to catch bad guys.)”

This straight talk is often represented as the counterbalance to the linguistic bloat of political correctness. It’s cowboy banter, tough-guy American cant inspired by John Wayne and Clint Eastwood. This talk, like a lot about the eye-for-an-eye Wild West, can sound like the Old Testament as translated by President Reagan.

*

In his bestselling autobiography, “American Sniper,” Chief Petty Officer Chris Kyle details how he excelled at long-range killing, but make no mistake, CPO Kyle was no murderer, despite what Bill Maher might intimate. Murder, strictly speaking, is the crime of killing somebody. CPO Kyle operated in a moral no-man’s-land where killing was sanctioned. Kyle’s memoir—his life and tragic death—inspired Clint Eastwood’s Academy Award-nominated biopic by the same name, and, taken together, these testaments—book, movie—have spawned a tremendous amount of comment.

CNN confirmed that CPO Kyle’s first kill was a woman cradling a toddler who, in the other hand, stood armed with a grenade, but Robert Ito recently contradicted this claim. The scene—censored in Kyle’s memoir by the Department of Defense or the United States Naval Special Warfare Command—unfolds more true-to-life in Eastwood’s adaptation: Kyle takes aim at a 10- or 12-year-old boy sprinting toward a Marine convoy. The boy carries a Russian-made grenade. When Kyle shoots and kills the boy with a single bullet—his first kill—a woman takes up the armed grenade in an attempt to finish the boy’s suicide mission. Kyle then shoots and kills her. Welcome to war.

*

When the two cops left my neighbor’s house, I waited for the crime-scene investigation unit to come dust for prints. As I did, I took inventory.

The house was a disaster, both bedrooms tossed entirely, an ocean of clothes and personal effects on the floor—half belonging to a recently deceased woman. The biggest crime, it seemed to me, was not whatever the thieves made off with. The crime was the chaos. The mess left in their wake. The grim time it would take to reorder. But then there were the houseplants.

The robbers—the cops suspected at least two—took care with the plants. They thoughtfully set aside a thriving Easter cactus so that they could ransack a wedding chest.

A third cop arrived to dust for prints. He showed me a smudge mark on the window. “See that,” he said. “Bad guys wore gloves. When these idiots wear gloves, they don’t take them off inside. Best bet now’s to find some blood. Let’s hope one of the idiots cut himself on the broken glass.”

As this cop talked, I stared at the Easter cactus. A houseplant set neatly aside by a bad guy, an idiot. Again, I felt incriminated. As a teenager, I’d been arrested for theft, among other crimes, some of them felonies. I’d never broken into homes—my friends and I broke into cars. I’d been an idiot, a bad guy. As I stood there in that crime scene, one my idiocy helped bring about, I worried I was still a bad guy.

*

A large part of the American military machine is structured around training men—and now women—to kill, and to do so in the most efficient way possible. Military training is conditioning. This is no state secret. The world’s largest employer of psychologists is the U.S. Army Research Bureau. The U.S. military is doing its damnedest to turn voluntary motor responses—ready, aim, fire—into a conditioned response.

The gap between aim and fire is substantial. During wartime, we place a moratorium on murder and a premium on killing. We’re asking soldiers to violate what is arguably the greatest taboo of civil society: thou shalt not kill.

Even under the most ideal military situation—as in World War II, say, when the enemy was usually in uniform and the mission was plain if not simple—the U.S. had a 20 percent firing rate for riflemen. You get that bad guy lined up in your sights, idiot or not, and it’s tough to pull the trigger. But the U.S. military solved that quandary.

By Korea, the firing rate was up to 55 percent. Come Vietnam, it reached its historical peak: 95 percent. How was it accomplished? With words. The trick is to dehumanize the enemy before first encounter. Short-circuit the inherent sympathy most humans feel for one another. Among the infantry, the U.S. military seeks to encourage empathy failure.

In his groundbreaking book “On Killing,” Lt. Col. Dave Grossman, a former U.S. Army Ranger who taught psychology at West Point, notes that during the Vietnam era, extreme cases became the near norm. “One [cadence call] that was only a little bit more extreme than the majority was a running chant (with the emphasis shouted each time the left foot hit the ground):

Iwanna

RAPE,

KILL,

PILLAGE’n’

BURN, annnnn’

EAT dead

BAAA-BIES…

American soldiers are no longer so savagely trained, but, as Lt. Col. Grossman notes, for decades this conditioning was a “key mechanism for desensitizing and indoctrinating adolescent males into a cult of violence in basic training.” To this day, in the best-trained soldiers, there’s little room for premeditation. Response is nearly autonomic. The paradox is that when the firing rate was at its height, in Vietnam, we lost the war. When it was lowest, in World War II, we won.

*

In his memoir, CPO Kyle uses one phrase 33 times: “bad guy.” (Much has already been made of the use of “savage,” which appears 10 times.) But faced with an unflinching war story that details the tactical desperation inspired by asymmetrical warfare—an overmatched enemy commanding and coercing the suicide assaults of women and children—critics should be slow to fault CPO Kyle for the remorseless tone of his book. CPO Kyle was a sniper, not a writer.