Associated Press

What do Apple investors want this holiday season? Growth, a strong product cycle and a bigger stock buyback. That’s according to FBR & Co. analyst Daniel Ives.

Mr. Ives, in a research note Wednesday, maintained his buy rating on the stock, but lowered his price target to $150 from $175. He also lowered his forecasts for total iPhone shipments in a research note.

Mr. Ives joins a host of analysts who have recently downgraded their views on Apple’s shares in recent weeks. On Tuesday, Cowen & Co. analyst Timothy Arcuri cut his 12-month price target on Apple shares to $130 from $135. Last week, at least five other analysts lowered their price views amid what they see as indications of underwhelming iPhone sales.

He expects the release of the iPhone 7 to be a make-or-break moment for the company. “[The] iPhone 7 product cycle … will dictate the future growth story at Apple.”

The weaker-than-expected iPhone 6s demand could be good for iPhone 7, as Apple could benefit from some pent-up consumer demand for the product. Yet over the near-term that expedted weakness could cause Apple to hit some speed bumps.

Beyond the next iPhone, Mr. Ives said that new initiatives and products are also important for the company and its future growth: “We believe management’s laser focus on growth opportunities (e.g., streaming, augmented reality, Apple Watch, auto, etc.) beyond these core devices highlights the entrepreneurial drive that is alive and well at this large technology stalwart, a key ingredient to the company’s recipe for success.”

Still investors will be watching whether and how they deliver on those new product lines.

Finally, Mr. Ives said investors will be closely eyeing Apple’s cash and what it does with it, particularly its overseas cash. “[W]e believe a stepped-up $75 billion to $100 billion buyback would be music to ears of investors given this growing cash hoard.”

Apple’s shares rose 1% Wednesday, but its shares have slid in the past month and are down nearly 2% this year.

Apple did not return requests for comment.