Photo

The 30 women arrived on the South Korean side of the demilitarized zone proud and triumphant. “We have accomplished what no one said can be done, which is to be a trip for peace, for reconciliation, for human rights,” declared Gloria Steinem, the feminist icon and primary spokeswoman for the group.

They had spent some time in North Korea and then crossed the DMZ into South Korea on Sunday in a march intended to promote a real peace treaty to replace the armistice that had halted the fighting but never formally ended the Korean War. With Ms. Steinem and two women who had won Nobel Peace Prizes for leading peace campaigns in their respective countries — Leymah Gbowee of Liberia and Mairead Maguire of Northern Ireland — at the lead, the marchers succeeded in getting attention, but the event was not quite the dramatic feat Ms. Steinem made it out to be.

The activists had wanted to march across at Panmunjom, where the truce was signed in July 1953, but United States and South Korean officials nixed that and the demonstrators finally came over in a bus along a well-traveled transit route. Still, Ms. Steinem was convinced that the group had broken through “artificial barriers” in their meetings in the North and had scored a “triumph” for peace and reconciliation.

The sentiment was not universal, at least in the South. Alongside peace activists who cheered the group were protesters who accused the women of deliberately closing their eyes to the North’s appalling human rights abuses and of playing directly into the hands of the North Korean propaganda machine.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Indeed, one account issued by the North Korean news agency described how the marchers “paid tribute” to the despotic Kim dynasty.

The goal of Ms. Steinem and her group — to begin a long-term peace-building project with the full involvement of women — is no doubt worthy. But the question remains whether their approach can help achieve peace. As a correspondent in Moscow in the last years of the Soviet Union, I often met with American peace activists convinced that if only they and similarly minded Russian people could meet and talk, the Cold War would end. The Kremlin happily supplied carefully selected Communist Party interlocutors and used the visitors in propaganda intended to portray the Soviet Union as the victim of militaristic Western leaders. Liberal Russians I knew found these missions amusingly naïve.

The activists could certainly point to similar movements that helped bring about peace agreements in Northern Ireland and Liberia. But the violence in those lands was between factions who had to be forced to the negotiating table. The Korean Peninsula is divided between a hermetically sealed dictatorship armed with nuclear weapons and a prosperous democracy open to the world. North and South are not equally culpable for the absence of peace, and unification will probably come only with the collapse of the dictatorship in the North.

That said, Ms. Steinem and her colleagues deserve credit at least for trying. So far, other attempts in recent years to change the behavior of the North on human rights or nuclear weapons, through negotiations or sanctions, have been unsuccessful.