The former Republican congressman is in positive territory among voters. Pence earns high marks in GOP polls

Indiana Gov. Mike Pence earns strong marks from 60 percent of Indiana voters as he nears the end of his first year in office, according to a private GOP poll shared with POLITICO.

The former Republican congressman, who flirted with a campaign for president in 2012, is in positive territory with both men and women and among voters in every region of the state. Only 23 percent of poll respondents said they disapprove of his performance in office, and his personal favorability is a robust 53 percent positive, 24 percent negative.

Story Continued Below

Pence has kept a relatively low national profile since taking office earlier this year and won his 2012 gubernatorial race by an unexpectedly slim, 3-point margin.

Some Republicans in Washington and Indiana view him as a potentially intriguing candidate for the White House in 2016, thanks to his unquestioned conservative credentials and the his new profile as a state executive from outside D.C.

Republican pollster Kellyanne Conway, who conducted the survey and polled for Pence’s campaign last year, writes in a memo that the governor’s solid numbers contrast sharply with voters’ general pessimism about government.

“Gov. Pence and policies associated with the Republican Party find favor with Hoosiers,” Conway writes. “Hoosiers hold a much more optimistic view of their state than of the nation as a whole.”

Fifty-one percent of poll respondents said that Indiana is on the right track, including 47 percent of independents. That compares with only 23 percent of voters who say the country is on the right track.

The survey, which was commissioned by the Indiana Republican Party, tested 800 registered voters between Sept. 12 and 15, and has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.5 percent.

Given Indiana’s conservative lean, it is not a surprise that a GOP governor who has not sought out controversy would win a relatively warm reception from the public during his first year in office.

But Pence has faced – and continues to face – some thorny political challenges that could resonate in any bid for national office down the line. He has opposed expanding Medicaid in Indiana under the Affordable Care Act, and has sought instead to expand the state-based Healthy Indiana Plan.

The state is also in the midst of a debate over a constitutional ban on gay marriage.

Authors: