Paul Alexander (Photo: Special to the Register)

In the first wave of airstrikes carried out after the bloody terrorist attacks in Paris that left 130 dead and hundreds more wounded, U.S. warplanes attacked ISIS’s most vital asset in Syria — a convoy of 100 tanker trucks transporting oil controlled by ISIS to market.

For more than a year, U.S. military brass had wanted to bomb such convoys but had been prevented by the strict rules of engagement President Barack Obama imposed when he originally ordered the air assault on Syria and Iraq in an effort to combat the growth of ISIS. Following the horrific attacks in Paris, those rules of engagement were altered to allow convoys carrying oil to be bombed.

“Oil is the black gold that funds ISIS’s black flag,” the Financial Times observed in October. “[I]t fuels its war machine.” ISIS controls most oil fields in Syria, producing 34,000 to 40,000 barrels a day. It also controls oil fields in northern Iraq, producing 8,000 barrels a day. Charging between $25 and $45 a barrel, ISIS generates $1.53 million a day in oil revenues — or more than a half billion dollars annually — causing one U. S. Treasury Department official to describe it as the world’s “best-funded terrorist organization.”

As allied forces conducted airstrikes in Syria, two thousand miles away in Belgium, authorities were searching Molenbeek, a mostly Muslim neighborhood in Brussels. At least three of the terrorists involved in the Paris attacks were believed to have ties to Molenbeek, among them the operation’s mastermind Abdelhamid Abaaoud. For decades, the neighborhood has been home to young people who have embraced radical Islam. “[I]n the 1970s,” The Washington Post reported, “Saudi Arabia and other Persian Gulf countries sent funding for rigid religious schools [and] Whabbi mosques.”

There’s a long history to the use of oil revenue to foster radicalization and support terrorism. More recently, while the 9/11 Commission concluded the funding source of the Sept. 11 attacks on New York City and Washington “remains unknown,” Osama bin Laden was a member of the uber-wealthy bin Laden family of Saudi Arabia, whose construction business is heavily financed by state oil revenue. As a result, after Sept. 11, there was a national movement in the U.S. to reduce the consumption of foreign oil. Using Middle East oil was viewed as contributing to a risk to national security.

The best way to reduce oil consumption is to replace oil with another substance. Out of that concept came the Renewable Fuel Standard. Passed by the U.S. Congress in 2005 and beefed up in 2007 to become the Energy Independence and Security Act, the bipartisan legislation required U.S. oil companies to blend biofuels — mostly ethanol — into the national transportation fuel supply. When George W. Bush signed the bill, he said the RFS would make America “less dependent on foreign sources of energy.”

The RFS worked so well that by 2013 the federal government reported that ethanol comprised more than 10 percent of gasoline consumed in 22 states and the District of Columbia. So it was alarming to the renewable fuel industry and national security experts when Obama, who had supported biofuels and the RFS as a U.S. senator, as a presidential candidate in 2008, and then as president, did a sudden about-face and ordered the EPA to gut the RFS.

The first indication of a change came in November 2013 when the EPA disclosed its intention to reduce biofuels mandates by 15 to 20 percent a year, starting in 2014. Going forward, the new rules could even allow oil companies to refuse to distribute mandated levels of biofuels at their gasoline stations across the country — a potential death blow to the biofuel industry.

Ironically, after a lengthy delay, the diminished RFS is scheduled to become law on Nov. 30, the very day Obama will be arriving in Paris to attend the U.N. Convention on Climate Change. Since he has made climate change one of his signature issues, Obama will no doubt offer a spirited argument as to why his fellow world leaders — as many as 118 of them — should endorse efforts to reduce carbon pollution, the main cause of global warming. He will likely not discuss the fact that his own administration is gutting the RFS, the one piece of legislation proven to reduce oil consumption, which is not only a principal cause of carbon pollution but also, as the terrorist attacks in Paris serves as a reminder, a matter of national security.

Paul Alexander, formerly of Iowa City, is a best-selling author, a playwright and a former Time magazine writer. Contact: www.bypaulalexander.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1jpDZbp