It was a tough holiday for retailers. Struggling to sell winter gear with an unusually warm start to the season and facing ever-growing competition from online retailers, many companies are weighing difficult decisions on how to cut costs and raise profits.

For many retailers that has meant closing stores. Macy's, Gap, Kmart and Finish Line are some of the big names cutting stores, and just Friday Wal-Mart announced it, too, will be closing locations.

The supercenter chain will close 269 stores globally, 154 in the United States, laying off thousands of employees. It's the first ever mass store closing from the company, which operates more than 11,000 stores worldwide, including 4,655 stores in the U.S. No Indiana Wal-Marts will be closed.

The Gap at University Park Mall in Mishawaka will close Jan. 26; it is one of 140 stores the company is closing in its fiscal year ending this month. In total, the company expects 175 stores will be closed in North America.

Indianapolis-based Finish Line recently announced it would close up to 150 stores by 2020, but the company has not revealed locations. Macy's will close 36 stores and lay off roughly 2,600 employees, but the University Park Mall location will not be affected.

With all of these major store closings being announced in a short span, it may seem like a sign of dark days for retailers. But for some companies, cutting the least profitable stores is a strategic move that pays off in long-term growth, says Richard Feinberg, a Purdue University professor who studies retail management, consumer behavior and consumer psychology.

"It looks like these chains are struggling," he says, "but it's a strategic business decision. They are not in trouble."

It's saving the many by sacrificing the few, he says.

Companies that react quickly in response to falling revenue have a greater chance of success than those that wait, and acting now may be the best thing they do for the next 10 years, Feinberg says. Especially in the case of Macy's and Finish Line, Feinberg says, the companies probably didn't need to make the cuts yet, or didn't need to make such large cuts.

But Feinberg respects a company that is able to look at its data, make a decision and adjust.

"I think you'll see it pay off over the next two years," he says.

Although these companies are shutting down some locations, it doesn't mean new stores aren't in the works. Macy's has closed 52 locations over the last five years while opening 12. The company also plans to open many lower-priced Macy's Backstage stores.

Along with announcing its closures on Friday, Wal-Mart said it has plans to open more than 100 U.S. stores in the next year, including 50 to 60 supercenters. More than 200 stores also are set to open internationally.

While companies are closing low-profit locations, they are also scouting out new locations expected to bring in higher profits. As Feinberg explains, it comes down to deciding whether to invest in low-performance stores hoping to increase revenues, or to close them and open more profitable stores.

Macy's, which sees about a 5 percent profit margin, and other retailers can get a quicker impact on profits by closing an unprofitable store rather than investing money and time into trying to improve its revenues.

"When you save money, it right away goes to profitability," Feinberg says. "That's why cost cutting is important."

What is forcing companies to make these decisions is not a lack of sales, though. It's a shift in how consumers are shopping, specifically the growth of online sales.

"More business going online is a fact of life, but we have to understand that this dynamic is a bad one for profits," Citigroup analyst Paul Lejuez said in a report. "Retailers have to spend a lot of money to allow this channel shift to occur because the customer demands it, and the investment is ongoing to keep up with the latest technology."

Holiday sales in 2015 increased 3 percent to $626 billion compared with the previous year, according to the National Retail Federation, but online sales specifically saw the biggest growth. Online sales for the holiday season grew by 13 percent.

In apparel sales, brick-and-mortar stores saw a 5.7 percent decrease, but a 9.1 percent increase in online sales. The gains in online sales are making up for the losses in physical stores, though, especially when companies are competing with Internet giants like Amazon.

During the holidays, visits to Amazon's website about equaled the combined visits to eBay, Wal-Mart, Target and Macy's.

But companies will continue to invest in digital sales, Feinberg says, because CEOs see online as their "biggest stores." They are spending a great deal of effort and money to see future growth in their "biggest store," which means under-performing brick-and-mortar stores are lost in the shift, he says.

"That doesn't minimize the pain of employees losing jobs and malls losing rents," Feinberg says, "but it makes perfect sense to replace a low profit."

Have you heard?

Chipotle will close all of its stores, including those in the Michiana area, for a few hours on Feb. 8 for a national employee meeting on food safety.

The meeting will give the company the opportunity to discuss ongoing changes and answer questions following an August incident in which customers got sick from salmonella in Minnesota and others in California were sickened by norovirus. Those incidents were followed by other outbreaks in other places. In all, about 500 people have been sickened by Chipotle food.

The company has pointed out it hasn't had an incident in two months and is confident the problems have been solved.

Lincoln Wright's column runs on Wednesdays and Sundays. Contact him at LWright@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6324. You can also talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket.