Topics: Donald Trump, Elections 2016, political correctness, Life News, News, Politics News

America is having two kinds of conversations about political correctness, one of which Donald Trump’s violent campaign rallies bring more clearly into view. One kind of conversation is a well-meaning attempt to think about the limits of civility and of free speech. The other, which I’ve warned about, is an attempt to use “political correctness” as an epithet against those who oppose bigotry and violence. Donald Trump’s escalating rhetoric of violence—his vocal support for beating and roughly handling protesters at his campaign rallies—is telling, not just because of its brazenness, but because it’s so often accompanied by invocations of what’s “politically correct.”

Consider, for example, what Trump has said recently at his rallies about roughing up protesters and outsiders: “In the good old days, they’d rip him out of that seat so fast, but today everybody’s politically correct”; or “We had four guys, they jumped at him, they were swingin’ and swingin, the next day we got killed in the press, and we were too rough…give me a break…we don’t wanna be too politically correct anymore, right folks?”

To be clear, when Trump invokes political correctness in these moments, he’s obliterating the meaning of political correctness that even its most strident opponents have given it. The reason political correctness is so damaging, according to its opponents, is it’s an attempt to regulate words in the absence of physical harm. For the conventional anti-p.c. crowd, it’s a sticks-and-stones argument: Those who favor political correctness lack toughness because, in asking for “safe spaces” or speech codes, they’re asking for protection from words, not actual assault.

Trump, on the other hand, is using “political correctness” as a scapegoat for adverse reactions to his encouragement of violence. In simple terms, for Trump, “political correctness” means “we’re not allowed to beat up protesters anymore.” To be “too politically correct,” then, is to think that someone exercising their First Amendment rights at a political rally should be able to do so without being physically assaulted. By that standard, millions of reasonable Americans who favor the right to protest without getting sucker punched just became “politically correct.”

I’ve claimed for a while now that free-speech concerns about political correctness have been unfortunately entangled in larger and darker culture war battles, to the extent that opposition to political correctness quite often says a lot more than “I’m concerned about free speech.” By making it clear that political correctness is, as he sees it, not just a barrier to offensive speech, but to violent actions, Trump has brought this point all the way home.

At the Trump rally, political correctness becomes the force that would support the speech rights of protesters and the dissenting minority at Trump rallies, and opposition to political correctness becomes the hard shove and the swinging fist. The man who took a swing at an unsuspecting protester being escorted out of a Trump rally in Fayetteville, North Carolina, claimed he enjoyed hitting the protester because the protester was “not acting like an American,” suggesting further “the next time we see him, we might have to kill him.” In this new anti-p.c. scenario, speaking in protest safely is “politically correct,” and “acting like an American” means punching and threatening to kill people who disagree with you. The traditional understanding of political correctness as a gesture of politeness or consideration gives way to the opposing extreme, not just a lack of respect but a prerogative to physically attack.