Child Care Resource & Referral (Photo: submitted)

The Week of the Young Child was just observed April 10 through 16, and Child Care Resource & Referral has historically celebrated this week, while advocating for quality child care and resources for the care of young children.

However, we didn’t feel much like celebrating. Here's why. In recent news we have seen or read much to be concerned with. Here are three examples:

1. USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin recently ran an entire series titled “Kids in Crisis,” which address the mental and emotional health of our young people in Wisconsin. This is manifesting with an increase in teen suicides as well as other behaviors indicating a desperate need for help. Noted throughout the series was the need for additional mental health services as well as access to services. However, there was very little identified about root causes and how to combat those.

The entire Kids In Crisis series may be found here: post.cr/1NnWZOU.

2. “The Raising of America”, a documentary series which addresses early childhood and the future of our nation, shares these startling facts:

•Every child’s brain develops more connections before age 5 than they do the rest of their lives.

•The United States is the only nation in the industrialized world that has no mandate for paid maternity leave.

•The United States has more child poverty than any nation in Europe, except Romania.

Learn more at www.raisingofamerica.org.

3."Safe zones" have been created at police stations nationwide to exchange money for goods purchased on Craigslist. Yet, parents and providers advertise and seek child care routinely on the same website for our most precious asset, our children. We know this website can be a haven for predators who lie in wait for the vulnerable.

Greatest nation in the world?

We proclaim to be the greatest nation in the world, but we ask, for whom? Surely not for our children, as evidenced by the Gannett series “Kids in Crisis.” Not for the newborn whose parents must work to make ends meet. Not parents who are so desperate to find reliable child care, in order to work, they seek it from a website with questionable reputation and results.

So what then is the solution? Commitment: A commitment to turn our attention to our future, which will be carried out by our children. A commitment to providing quality care for young children. A commitment to ensuring they have time to bond with family. A commitment to ensuring their basic needs are met including economic and social needs.

Child Care Resource & Referral’s role

During the Week of the Young Child, and every week of the year, CCR&R will work to advocate for and increase the capacity of quality child care in the counties we serve. In addition, we will continue to educate and provide training to child care providers in all areas of early care and education including nutrition, safety, mental health, conscious discipline and family engagement. We will also advocate for regulated child care and the resources necessary to attain this. What will you do?

Judy Olson is executive director of Child Care Resource & Referral, which provides services in Calumet, Fond du Lac, Green Lake, Manitowoc, Outagamie, Sheboygan, Waupaca and Winnebago counties. The agency is a member of the Supporting Families Together Association and Child Care Aware America. Visit ccrrfoxvalley.org for more information.

Read or Share this story: http://fondul.ac/1SBtcIL