Gordon Christensen, a candidate for Missouri’s Fourth Congressional District this fall, spent most of his talk to the Boone County Muleskinners on Friday blasting incumbent Republican Vicky Hartzler and the GOP’s expected presidential nominee, Donald Trump, but he also said he would support the decriminalizing of drug abuse.

The latter statement came after a question from an audience member, Mark Stevenson, about crime in the area and what Christensen would do to try and help people who are likely to turn to a life of crime.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Christensen shared a personal story about his brother, who had a substance abuse problem that led him to begin robbing banks in Phoenix. His spree ended when he was shot dead by police.

“I remember him as a very gentle soul” whose life was ruined by drugs, Christensen said, adding that his brother did awful things.

More needs to be done to address mental health, substance abuse and other behavioral issues to deal with crime, he said.

Jack Truman, who is running against Christensen in the Democratic primary Aug. 2, was invited but did not attend the Democratic club’s weekly luncheon. Hartzler has her own primary opponent, John Webb.

The primary winners face off in the general election Nov. 8.

A physician and scientist, Christensen also was a whistleblower in the 1990s at Truman Memorial Veterans’ Hospital, helping to expose a series of suspicious patient deaths linked to a single nurse.

During his hourlong appearance, Christensen attacked Hartzler’s voting record, including her support of repealing the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, and her vote to reduce food stamp benefits.

“That’s really just a terrible thing to do,” he said. “We have a lot of poverty in the Fourth District.”

Christensen also talked about reforming the use of “dark money” whose donors could not be traced and limitless contributions in campaigns.

Trump, he said, has changed views on several issues over the years, including universal health care and abortion, two things the Republican establishment, including Hartzler, are staunchly against. Trump’s idea to build a wall at the Mexican border and force Mexico to pay for it, as well his idea to deport millions of immigrant here illegally, are mistakes, Christensen said.

“The forced, armed deportation of 11 million residents of the United States is a horrific proposal,” he said.

While Stevenson declined to comment on Christensen’s views on Trump and Hartzler, he said he liked the candidate’s comments about crime.