As the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act enters its second year, the effects of the new law and the federal government’s response to reining in rising health care costs are shifting into high gear.

Take the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act or HITECH, for example. It requires health care providers to enter patients’ test results into Electronic Health Records or EHRs in an effort to use this information at the point of care, while also making it more readily available among providers and regulatory agencies. The purpose of the requirement is to improve the quality of care through improved communication, thus reducing the cost for care by decreasing follow-up visits, procedures and complications.

Furthermore, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services has taken the aspect of improved care a step further by implementing an incentive program where providers can be rewarded financially for positive patient outcomes.

One method to improving care across the board is to modernize the way health care records are stored and shared. Electronic health care records not only are leading to better patient outcomes, but also to a new breed of professionals — those who work on the cutting edge of health care and technology, otherwise known as the emerging field of health informatics.

The term health informatics describes the acquisition, storage and use of information to improve patient care by allowing for direct collaboration among patients’ health care providers. In this manner, health informatics uses concepts, theories and practices to achieve improved health care outcomes. It is the perfect marriage of information technology and health care.

CareerBuilder.com recently ranked health informatics as the No. 1 job opportunity in an emerging field. The Bureau of Labor Statistics expects employment of health information specialists to grow by 23 percent through 2022 — far exceeding the growth of all other occupations in the country. The field is also well compensated, as the bureau reports the median salary for health information managers is $88,500 with the top 10 percent in the field earning about $150,600. The bureau projects the demand for this management segment to grow by 15 percent over the same period of time.

Across the country, institutions of higher education have responded to the demand for these highly trained health informatics professionals by developing programs that provide the training, experience and qualifications needed to work in the area of health care and technology.

Misericordia University, for example, offers two options in health informatics — an 18-credit master’s certificate and a 36-credit master’s degree. The courses, which are designed to give students real-life exposure to health information technology, are taught by full-time informatics professionals and executives in the field. The program is the only one of its kind in Northeast Pennsylvania. With it being fully online, interested students also are not limited by geography.

Virtually all program participants at Misericordia University work in the health care field and have a basic understanding of information technology. As the industry clamors for more highly trained professionals, we can expect health informatics to become a mainstream program at many colleges and universities in the not-too-distant future.

JOSEPH J. GRILLI, M.P.A., D.P.A., is the director of Corporate and Institutional Recruitment in the Center for Adult and Continuing Education and adjunct faculty in the health care management program at Misericordia University in Dallas.