HOPE Van visit coordinator Jeff Cole, from right, and lead visit coordinator Christopher Farley check in patients Wednesday in downtown Redding.

By Amber Sandhu of the Redding Record Searchlight

Shasta Community Health Center received $406,250 from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to expand services for addiction treatment by adding substance abuse counselors in its health center.

"We're very pleased to receive these dollars. It was a competition," said Dean Germano, chief executive officer of Shasta Community Health Center.

Shasta Community is one of the 36 health centers to be awarded grants in California. As part of a $94 million federal plan to fight the growing opioid addiction across the nation, money from the Affordable Care Act is divided among 271 health centers in 45 states, according to the state Health and Human Services Department.

The grant, which runs for 15 months, will allow Shasta Community to add more substance abuse counselors to work on the front lines with primary care physicians, help screen patients for mental health issues, drug and alcohol addiction, and then connect them to the right resources within the county.

"It's the best time to connect the provider with the person," said Harold Carlson, chief planning and development officer at Shasta Community.

Carlson said that the growing addiction issue in Shasta County has become more visible within the past few years, and by having patients come in for a medical visit, a counselor will help do an initial assessment to determine what addiction is at play and make a referral to a social worker. Further assessment is done by a physician, physician's assistant or nurse practitioner, before referrals are made for rehabilitation. The counselor will also follow up with clients for group therapy.

The grant will also allocate funds to increase activity with the HOPE van.

The HOPE van is a mobile clinic operated by Shasta Community Health Center that travels to various parts of Redding to provide healthcare services to the homeless population. More than 290 homeless people per month visit the HOPE van seeking medical and dental care. In addition, the HOPE van sometimes distributes food, toiletries, backpacks, sleeping bags and hygiene products.

"That's one of our areas of contact with individuals who have this problem," Carlson said about opioid addiction.

The goal is to channel homeless people into a healthcare facility so that they have a more regular source of care. And for some people who may find buildings threatening, the HOPE van is the primary way they get access to healthcare, Carlson said.

Germano said he knows it's going to be a difficult road to reduce addiction.

Medication assisted therapy can take longer than a year, there is always a chance for relapse, and the success rate for recovery is not high, he said.

"Sometimes people have to fail several times before they succeed," Germano said.