When it comes to presidential politics in Iowa, it’s all about relationships. This is something that previous caucus winners know well. Even though former Pennsylvania Senator Rick Santorum languished in the polls for most of the 2011, that didn’t stop him from building meaningful relationships across the state.

One of the people Santorum created a strong bond with was State Representative Walt Rogers from Cedar Falls. Rogers was one of the first legislators to endorse Santorum in July of 2011. Rogers told TheIowaRepublican.com that he had received several inquiries from 2012 presidential candidates, but Santorum’s personal touch made the difference.

“Rick was the only one who came to my house, met my family and took a real interest in who I was as a legislator,” Rogers told TheIowaRepublican.com. “We talked about family, faith, music, and issues. My kids loved him. I was impressed with his knowledge of issues, and his mature, practical way of governing.”

The relationship that was formed almost four years ago is once again paying dividends for Santorum. Today Santorum will announce that Rogers has signed on to lead his Iowa efforts in advance of a 2016 presidential campaign. Rogers, an Assistant Majority Leader in the Iowa State House, will serve as Chairman of Patriot Voices in Iowa. Patriot Voices is the grassroots organization that Santorum formed following his 2012 president run.

Rogers believes he’s a natural fit for Santorum. “We are very much alike as public servants, and he will work as hard as I will,” Rogers explained. “I will be actively working with his team on strategy, recruitment, Iowa contacts, issues and events. If I am fully on board something, I’m a pretty good player/coach,” Rogers added. Rogers explained that he will not be employed by Patriot Voices, but could potentially be in the future as the Iowa session winds down.

Patriot Voices provided TheIowaRepublican.com the press release announcing Rogers over the weekend.

“I am excited to announce the addition of Walt Rogers to our growing Iowa team,” Senator Santorum said. “I am confident that his support today will again be a terrific lift for our efforts in the Hawkeye State.” Santorum added, “Like me, Walt understands the importance of not just being a Party of business-owners, but being a Party that fights for the worker and hard-working families. Our movement cannot win unless we recognize that the 90% of Americans who do not own their own business and the 70% of Americans who do not have a college degree need a champion. I am prepared to fight for them and I am thrilled to have Walt Rogers standing side-by-side with me in Iowa.”

It’s obvious that relationships matter in states like Iowa, but it also helps when someone who signs on to work with a potential candidate is actually a natural fit. Rogers gives Santorum more than just a point of contact, he gives Santorum an Iowa point person who knows what caucus politics is all about. Rogers isn’t the type of guy who’s going to be touted in a press release and never heard from again. He’s the type of guy who will pour ever thing he’s got to help Santorum be successful.

Rogers also knows that Santorum will have to run a much different race in Iowa to be successful in 2016. “Rick won the Iowa caucus last time without spending much money,” Rogers noted. “This time if he gets in, he will work harder, have a better team, be better funded, and have a better strategy.”

Rogers also explained that Iowans don’t care about poll numbers or who the 24-hour news networks are currently focused on. “Iowans want the best qualified, most experienced person to be their President. I’m convinced Rick is that person.” Rogers understands that Santorum will once again be outspent by other candidates just like he was in 2012, but he noted that Iowa has a history of weeding out candidates who are not ready for the scrutiny that a presidential campaign brings.

Santorum’s blue-collar conservatism helped him win a large numbers of rural counties across the state in 2012, but with the potential of a much larger field and candidates like Mike Huckabee, Ted Cruz, and a revitalized Rick Perry who could all cut into Santorum’s base, Rogers and Santorum’s Iowa team will need to better organize the state’s larger communities. Rogers, who represents part of Black Hawk County, the state’s fourth most populous county, should be able to help Santorum better sell his message in more metropolitan areas.

Santorum finished third in Black Hawk County in 2012, Ron Paul and Mitt Romney edged Santorum by a little more than 100 votes. It’s not that Santorum did poorly in the more urban counties in 2012 – he was actually surprisingly competitive all across the state. But for Santorum to be successful in 2016, he will need to find an urban stronghold to go with his strong rural strategy. With Rogers on-board and involved early, Black Hawk County looks like an obvious place to start.

Below is the release that Patriot Voices will be sending out to announce Rogers: