ENLARGE Members of the Ukrainian ‘ethno chaos’ band, DakhaBrakha, at the Association of Performing Arts Presenters conference. Photo: Steve Remich for The Wall Street Journal

Joel Pierson has a message for concert hall and theater bookers: Who needs another string quartet, dance troupe or touring Broadway show when you can hire a jazz combo playing music from Bugs Bunny cartoons?

Mr. Pierson is the founder and keyboardist of the Queen’s Cartoonists, a six-man New York band that dedicates itself to playing tunes from swing-era animations, along with similarly silly and fast-paced fare from “The Simpsons, ” the Muppets shows, “Star Wars” and more.

“I think we’d be a great novelty act,” said Mr. Pierson, speaking shortly before the band launched into a 30-minute Saturday afternoon set designed to showcase and hopefully sell their concept.

The occasion was the annual conference of the Association of Performing Arts Presenters (APAP), a winter New York gathering where some 3,600 attendees from the U.S. and more than 30 countries—mostly programmers for theaters and concert halls—come to scope out acts that might help them fill their performance calendars in the seasons ahead.

The conference, the performing-arts industry’s biggest trade show, concludes Tuesday, with most events taking place at the New York Hilton in Midtown.

ENLARGE Tsering Phuntsok creates a sand mandala in the Mystical Arts of Tibet booth. Photo: Steve Remich for The Wall Street Journal

To spend any time at APAP, be it walking the exhibit floors where some 370 booking agents set up shop or attending any of the 1,000 trade-oriented performance showcases at the hotel or other venues throughout the city, is to see a kind of “America’s Got Talent” in person.

Gone are the days when arts centers fed their patrons a steady diet of fairly highbrow fare. Now, just about anything goes.

That “anything” ranges from the Red Hot Chilli Pipers, a nine-piece bagpipe ensemble from Scotland who call themselves “the masters of bagrock,” to Steve Trash, the self-proclaimed “rockin’ eco hero” who builds his music and magic-filled show around the theme of garbage.

Also featured: a Juilliard graduate and Army veteran named Janice Martin who performs as an aerial violinist and Benise, a one-name guitarist who bills his Spanish-themed show as “the Latin Riverdance.”

Such hype comes with the territory for APAP hopefuls, said Nate Linegar, a booking agent for Benise: “His name is Ron and he’s from Wisconsin.”

The talent roster also includes past TV and film stars who fashion shows recounting their days of glory. Dawn Wells, the one-time starlet who played Mary Ann on the hit series “Gilligan’s Island,” for example, offers an evening of memories billed as “What Would Mary Ann Do?”

John Castonia, Ms. Wells’s booking agent, says the actress is a solid draw on the arts-center circuit: “She’s 76 and she’s still smoking hot.”

ENLARGE A booth at the Association of Performing Arts Presenters conference. Photo: Steve Remich for The Wall Street Journal

Like others in the industry, Mr. Castonia said it isn’t surprising that the performing-arts world has increasingly emphasized popular entertainment and variety acts. With the older crowd of patrons who heavily favored classical music, ballet and traditional theatrical fare now dying off, presenters are trying to court the baby boomers and younger generations.

“The audience has changed,” Mr. Castonia added.

Today’s patrons have a “much broader appetite,” said APAP President Mario Garcia Durham, and they place fewer boundaries on what is considered art.

While traditional classical and dance artists are still well represented on the exhibit floors and in the performance showcases, it isn’t unusual to see even dyed-in-the-wool traditionalists venture into novelty-act territory.

We Want to Hear From You Have something to say about an article in Greater New York? Email us, along with your contact information, at gnyltrs@wsj.com. Letters will be edited for brevity and clarity. Please include your city and state.

Over the past few years, Melanie Gall, a trained opera singer who has performed widely in Europe has developed “Stitch in Time,” a one-woman cabaret-style show featuring songs all about knitting.

Ms. Gall came to APAP last year at a personal cost of $6,000, which covered all her convention expenses. She says she wrangled so many bookings for her offbeat show, she didn’t have time to attend this year.

“I even got one gig from somebody I met in the bathroom,” she said.