Today's Marco Rubio news: Three themes emerge in coverage of Marco Rubio this morning:

He lags in polls but that's okay with him (if not okay with others). It's the turtle, or surfer, approach. He's talking health care, as in repealing and replacing the Affordable Care Act. So are other candidates. He hit a kid with a football.

So in reverse order, since the football throw, not the policy agenda, has gone viral:

"Marco Rubio's visit to Des Moines spiraled out of control on Tuesday when he hit accidentally a child in the face with a football," writes Time magazine, with the headline, "Hard knocks on the campaign trail."

"The errant throw came while Rubio was tossing the ball around with a group of kids in Iowa. According to a Bloomberg tweet, the child is okay": Time.

Here's the Bloomberg Politics video:

And here's the GIF -- the errant throw, over and over -- posted by CNN Politics reporter Chris Moody:

Scott Walker released a health care plan today BUT MARCO RUBIO'S FOOTBALL TO THE FACE IS THE ONLY THING THAT MATTERS. pic.twitter.com/WfkugQNcn0 — Mudacris (@moody) August 18, 2015

On the health care front, Rubio presented elements of his proposal in a piece for Politico's magazine. The Florida U.S. senator said that as president, he would "work with Congress to create an advanceable, refundable tax credit that all Americans can use to purchase health insurance."

The value would rise every year -- but the value of the current tax preference given to employer-sponsored insurance would fall. While this could change the current system in which most people get coverage from employers -- which Rubio says drives up health costs -- it would make coverage more portable.

Rubio says he would cut regulations, create state-based high-risk pools and allow insurers to sell policies across state lines: Politico.

Steven Dennis writes in Roll Call that there could be a political problem with Rubio's proposal: People tend to prefer their current, often generous employer-provided plans and want to keep them. "And while taxes overall would be lower, millions who don't pay income taxes on their employer health insurance benefits would necessarily see a tax increase as the tax benefit shrinks": Roll Call.

Scott Walker, the Wisconsin governor who is also running for the Republican presidential nomination, laid out his own repeal-and-replace plan Tuesday.

As far as a plan to win the nomination, which will be made at the Republican National Convention next summer in Cleveland, Rubio lags behind several others nationally -- Donald Trump, Jeb Bush, Ben Carson and Scott Walker. Despite a strong performance in the Aug. 6 GOP debate, other candidates such as Ted Cruz and Carly Fiorina are in the same statistical space as Rubio in Iowa and New Hampshire.

Troubling?

Not to the Rubio campaign, says Politico. "Rubio World does not share the political class's consternation about which of the early states he plans to focus on or why he's yet to shoot to the front of the pack. The answer, of course, is obvious: He doesn't want to yet."

Rubio's campaign strategy is "to leave Republicans in early states, doted on far more by other candidates to this point, wanting more of Rubio — recognizing that, however many waves may come, the one you want to ride won't crest until December or January.

"It may be Jeb Bush's self-bestowed nickname, but if there is truly a 'tortoise' in this race, it's Rubio."

That's not convincing to some, however. Iowa political veterans told Politico they worry that if he doesn't start spending more time there, he'll get left behind. "The sky's the limit for this guy but the has to make himself available for Iowans," said Craig Robinson, a GOP activist who runs The Iowa Republican, a website focused on the caucuses: Politico.