The Beatles leave a Pan Am plane in Boston, Aug. 11, 1966, after a flight from London. (AP Photo) One part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act that’s hit American health care like the British Invasion is accountable care organizations, or ACOs. At first, there were just a few, then some more and now they’re all over the place, just as The Beatles, The Rolling Stones, the Who, the Kinks and other groups took over American pop culture in the 1960s. In an ACO, doctors, hospitals, Medicare, providers and patients come together like John, Paul, George and Ringo to coordinate health care with the idea of improving quality and reducing costs. When PPACA was passed, ACOs were touted as a way to lower health care expenditures under Medicare and encourage collaborative care among providers. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

“These innovative programs are showing encouraging initial results, while providing valuable lessons as we strive to improve our nation’s health care delivery system,” said Kathleen Sebelius, Health and Human Services Secretary at the time. “Organizations of various sizes and structures across the country are working with their physicians and engaging with patients to better coordinate and deliver high-quality care while reducing expenditure growth.” More and more health care providers are joining ACOs, too. Regional and local hospitals, physician groups, independent physicians associations and nonprofits are well represented in ACO agreements across the country. Some very large players in the health care began exploring ACOs before PPACA, such as Aetna, and others have gotten into the game as well, including Blue Cross and Anthem.

ACO skeptics have been quick to point out the similarities of the model to health maintenance organizations, or HMOs. There’s one key difference, though: Patients aren’t required to stay within a network to get health care. Read: HMOs vs. ACOs