Larry Long, now 47, murdered his father, mother and brother

Longmont investigators March 31, 1986 converse on Sumner Street alongside the Itasca motor home belonging to the parents of Larry Long, who had been taken in that morning for questioning in the stabbing deaths of his mother, father and brother. ( Daily Camera File Photo / Staff Photographer )

Larry Long (Colorado Department of Corrections)

When Longmont teenager Larry Long was arrested on Easter Monday 1986 near Loomiller Park for a grisly crime discovered just hours earlier, he was dazed. A bandage covered a bad cut to his right index finger.

As Longmont police Cpl. Jacqueline Tono processed him at the police station, Long was asked who could be contacted on his behalf in case of an emergency.

"Oh, I don't know," Long began. Prompted about siblings, parents, or relatives, he then said, "My father and mother I guess. Larry and Carol Long."

That wouldn't be possible. The reason police wanted to talk to the 18-year-old was that his dad, Larry Long Sr., his mom Carol, and 16-year-old brother Ronald "Randy" Long, had been found that morning brutally stabbed to death in their home at 2143 Frontier St.

Seasoned investigators involved in the case still remember it as one of the most disturbing crime scenes with which they have ever been confronted.

Sentenced to three concurrent 48-year terms after pleading guilty to three counts of second-degree murder, Long faces a parole hearing on Tuesday after serving nearly 29 years.

Long, who didn't respond to repeated requests for an interview, is currently at the Sterling Correctional Facility, where he has a minimum security classification and works as a general laborer, doing maintenance.

His disciplinary record there is unblemished since 1991.

Advertisement

Nevertheless, Longmont Police Cmdr. Jeff Satur said Deputy Chief Craig Earhart — who was a key department investigator on the case — authored a letter opposing Long's release. The department would not release it, classifying it as a "victim-impact statement."

But Satur said Earhart's letter cited, among other things, the department's perception that Long exhibited little remorse at his Dec. 8, 1986 sentencing in Boulder District Court.

Larry Long in the Boulder County Jail, following his December 1986 plea of guilty to three counts of second-degree murder in the stabbing deaths of his mother, father and brother in Longmont. (Daily Camera file photo)

"That was a terrible crime, and we would not be in favor of his release, and we would be concerned for the safety of the community," Satur said. "He murdered his own family. That's hard to reconcile, that that person would be safe, or that a community would be safe, with a person who had that disregard for life.

"I'd feel much more comfortable with him getting out at 48 years than 29 years."

Tom Fixmer, who retired as a commander in 2008 after 31 years with the Longmont department, was a sergeant at the time. He had a major role in the investigation and wrote the affidavits for case search warrants.

"I don't believe he should ever be released," Fixmer said. "During my tenure with the police department, I was involved with the investigation of a pretty fair amount of homicides, and without a doubt, that was the most heinous and gory homicide that I have ever been involved with."

And second place, Fixmer said, was "not even close."

Gary Schmidt, 64, also retired in 2008. He directed the investigation as Longmont's sergeant in charge of crimes against persons and represented the department in Long's court proceedings. Schmidt remembers the saga as vividly as Long's palm print in his own mother's blood outside the master bedroom.

"I was involved in about a half-a-dozen homicide investigations in my time in detectives but this case was a landmark case in my career," said Schmidt. "There was never another investigation that matched the scope of this one."

Three different knives were used in the attacks, Schmidt noted.

"In my opinion, the man needs to do more time," Schmidt said. If Long were to be released now, he added, "That's less than 10 years per murder."

Department of Corrections records show Long's last parole hearing was Nov. 20, 2012, and a decision at that time was deferred. He became eligible for intensive supervision-parole on Nov. 19, 2013.

Absent a granting of parole, Long is not scheduled to be released until April 2, 2025, when he would be 57 years old.

Retired Longmont police detective Gary Schmidt was a lead investigator for the Larry Long case. He called it a "landmark" experience in his career as an investigator. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

'A time bomb'

The warning lights in Larry Long's world in the months leading up to the murders were all flashing.

The Longs had only been in the Longmont community a short time. Larry Long Sr., 41, worked as a flight controller at the FAA facility in Longmont, having been transferred there the previous year from Washington, where the family lived in the city of Puyallup.

Carol, 39, was reported to have had an extremely harsh disciplinary approach with both of her boys, employing her fists, wooden kitchen utensils, sticks and even boards, in meting out punishments.

In a lengthy interview Long provided to the Daily Camera following his sentencing, Long said that from his mother he inherited her "vicious temper," and from his father, a "long fuse."

Before the fuse burned to its flashpoint, Long had already been incarcerated once, prior even to arriving in Colorado.

In a scheme to raise money for drugs, he concocted a plot just after his 17th birthday to a rob an elderly woman in his neighborhood at knifepoint. He set out to do so, only to abandon the scheme after she screamed in fright when, disguised with nylon stockings, a mask and hood, he confronted her in her garage.

The crime might have never been solved, had he not subsequently been reported to police in Washington by his mother, after he stole an antique firearm belonging to his father — also for drug money. It was in questioning about that incident that Long confessed to his aborted armed robbery. He was sentenced to 30-to-40 weeks at a maximum security juvenile reformatory in Chehalis, Wash., where he was still incarcerated at the time the rest of his family moved to Longmont.

His intake probation officer at that time wrote in her report to court officials that Long "was a time bomb ready to explode."

'It's really hard to understand'

Long, after reuniting with his family in Colorado, attended Longmont High School as an 11th grader from the start of the 1985 school year. He dropped out Oct. 25 of that year. Jobs at Taco Bell and a Wendy's didn't last long.

His reintegration into his family also did not go well.

He told a reporter, following the murders. that after he rejoined the family in Colorado, his younger brother once told him during a fight, "You haven't changed at all," and, "Mom and Dad don't like you; they wish you never got out."

Long harbored ambitions of going into the Navy, where his father had distinguished himself as a fighter pilot during the Vietnam War, earning four bronze stars.

Instead, just months before the killings, Long was evicted from the family home for repeatedly making use of his mother's blue 1975 Datsun 280Z without her permission — although his parents secured for him a modest apartment at the Columbine Mansions, 303 Coffman St. They paid his first two weeks rent and security deposit. He complained about its cockroaches.

And, a counselor he was seeing for his drug abuse issues -— speed was a regular part of his diet -— noted that he was frequently looking tired and pale, was dressing sloppily, had disheveled hair and on his 5-foot-5- inch frame carried a meager 110 pounds.

A psychiatrist's report after the slayings said he met all the criteria for children highly likely to murder.

Long told many versions of the events inside the family's Frontier Street home in the late hours of Good Friday, as the clock ticked over past midnight into Saturday.

One rendition came by way of an inmate at the Boulder County Jail who had spoken with Long, then put Long's alleged comments in a letter to the Boulder District Attorney's Office.

By that account, preserved in hundreds of pages of Longmont police case reports, Long had gone to the family's home to "ask for money from his parents. He went in through the rear patio door and had encountered his brother, an argument ensued, and at the culmination of that argument Larry had stabbed his brother.

"Larry then went up to the master bedroom where he found his parents sleeping in bed. Larry then slashed his father's throat and then attacked and stabbed his mother to death." Long then returned to the lower garden level of the tri-level residence, the inmate recounted, where his brother was screaming at the base of the stairs. "Larry then stabbed his brother repeatedly until he was silent."

That inmate also said "It was Larry's intention to burn the residence and thus destroy evidence of the crime. He poured kerosene over the bodies of his parents but then lacked the conviction to set the fire."

His mother was found stabbed to death on the couple's bed, lying in her nightgown in a fetal position. His father was discovered with his throat slashed in a kneeling position, his head and shoulders face down at the edge of the bed. His brother's body was on the ground floor at the base of the stairs.

Schmidt doesn't recall any evidence indicating that kerosene was deployed. And he believes the trigger was mostly his desire to get his hands on his parents' credit cards, cash, and wheels.

"His brother, who was just 16, was just in the way of that crime, and he just became the third victim; and it was obvious his brother suffered more than his parents," Schmidt said.

In talking to a reporter following his conviction, Long, who claimed he was high on drugs that night, gave few details.

"I went over to talk to my brother..." he said. "I'm still trying to figure out why it happened, but I'm trying to forget what happened as far as...I killed three people who meant more to me than my own life. It's really hard to understand why I did that."

Stolen credit cards and Easter candy

Fixmer, the retired Longmont investigator, cited the most mundane of incentives for the horror of that night.

"It's my understanding that he had been wanting to use a car that the family had purchased, and because of his recent problems and behavior, they took that away from him and told him he wouldn't be allowed to drive it," Fixmer said. "I think that had a lot to do with the motivation."

Police reports reflect that in the 48-hours-plus between the crime and its discovery, Long was seen driving his mother's Datsun 280Z. And, he was ultimately arrested in the vicinity of their 1984 Itasca mobile home, parked in the 1100 block of Sumner St.

"This was one of the most heinous crimes that I ever investigated, and the fact that he returned to that house several times after the crime, and stepped over the bodies of his family, certainly showed a lack of remorse and feelings, on his part," Fixmer said.

Police discovered that Long took certain items away with him on those return trips to the crime scene.

"Credit cards," Fixmer recalled. "And Easter candy."

Assistant Boulder County district attorney Ryan Brackley said Wednesday that his office is not taking a position on Long's bid for parole.

"We respect their (Longmont police) objection, and we always support and appreciate their efforts to keep this community safe," Brackley said.

However, Brackley said, Long has served nearly 30 years of a 48-year sentence "without any record of disciplinary issues or bad conduct" in the DOC.

"So, in the balance of recognizing how horrible this crime was, with the reality that he will get out of prison sooner than later ... we are deferring to the Parole Board to make the determinations as to when Mr. Long can re-enter the community safely and productively, and with the most appropriate level of supervision."

Enough time has passed that memories blur and fade.

Pastor Jim Duncan, the first minister to conduct a service at what was then the "new" Boulder County Jail, counseled Long there before he was transferred into state custody. But Duncan, who is now 71 and presides at the Bible Baptist Church of Erie, needed a reporter's prompting to remember the inmate.

Cases like Long's, Duncan said, eventually caused him to "back away" from prison ministry.

"I saw a lot of young men; it broke my heart too much," Duncan said. "What I saw was that while they were in jail, and incarcerated, there were very few choices (they had), at that time... There were young people like him that my heart went out to, that warehousing was probably not the total answer."

Mental health issues, abuse within a family, drugs, all are ingredients for a "time bomb" such as Long, Duncan said.

"I'm a great believer in second chances, too," Duncan said. "And someone who has exemplified their life, while incarcerated, tried to better it, I think often they are worthy of parole.

"That doesn't erase the hideousness of what was done."

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan