The spectacular string of doping confessions and convictions among bike racers has prompted one of my friends, a true cycling aficionado, to believe that there are just two types of world-class cyclists: the dopers who have been caught, and those who have not yet. I have argued adamantly otherwise, hoping against hope that he is wrong, but the list of dopers grows steadily. Still, my hopes are bolstered by memories of my former teammate John Stenner, who raced clean and utterly stomped the competition.

In 1985, I rode with the inaugural University of Colorado cycling team, which Stenner had organized with a few friends. And after I graduated that year, we raced together on the Colorado Road Club. The Boulder cycling scene had plenty of cocky racers, with biker tans, trendy sunglasses and chiseled muscles on their shaved legs. And then there was Stenner, a modest, unassuming fellow who always seemed a bit square compared to the other guys, and was just as focused on his engineering studies as he was on racing. But everybody loved him, especially for his goofy sense of humor that diffused any tension at our meetings and pre-race warm ups.

Advertisement

And man, could he go! Stenner finished high in virtually every race, as long as he didn't get a flat or otherwise mangle his equipment (he was famous for this). And he defied logic. On training rides up the mountain roads west of Boulder, skinny guys like me were supposed to dust stocky guys like Stenner. But he would ride smoothly away, sometimes looking back over his shoulder with an apologetic shrug, while we lurched, wheezing in his wake, pedaling squares.

Even then cyclists sought performance-enhancing substances. For a time, Stenner and another teammate sold "super blue green algae" as a nutritional supplement. It tasted like pond water, and was likely just as effective at enhancing performance. It was also perfectly legal, and I'll bet that was the strongest stuff Stenner ever took.

Stenner was a well-rounded racer — he won the road race at the first national collegiate championship in 1988 — but time trials were his forté. Time trials are brutal, individual races against the clock. They reward fit, powerful riders with the discipline to push themselves to the very edge and pedal there for an hour.

By 1989, Stenner made the U.S. national team, and spent the next two seasons competing worldwide. Then he was ingloriously dropped from the team while trying to overcome a nagging knee injury. Discouraged but undeterred, he rehabilitated his knee and kept training on his own, with the support of his family and friends.

In 1992, he traveled to the national cycling championships in Pennsylvania, which were also that year's Olympic trials. In a race where the margin of victory is often just seconds, Stenner won the time trial by nearly a minute. I was thrilled to open VeloNews and see his photo. On his helmet he had written in tape, if memory serves, "Thanks Mom and Dad."

Stenner's performance earned him a trip to the Barcelona Olympics to race the four-man, team time trial. Beset by mechanical problems, the team placed 16th. He took some time off after that disappointing finish, but he began training with renewed vigor when he learned that the team time trial would be replaced with an individual time trial in the 1996 Olympics.

He was a great cyclist in his prime, a medal in his eyes. But he never got to Atlanta. On a ride in May 1994, 20 years ago this month, Stenner was hit by a truck and killed.

He's not been forgotten by the cycling community. USA Cycling awards two John Stenner Memorial Scholarships annually, for collegiate cyclists who also excel academically, and serve their communities. And the Colorado State Time Trial Championships bear his name.

He would not want us to turn him into an icon. Still, I often think of Stenner, about how a person like that can embody the best in sport. He was a generous, funny and hard-working teammate. And he won the old-fashioned way, by leveraging his natural talent with disciplined training and sheer force of will.

When it seems that all world-class bikers are dopers, remembering Stenner keeps my cynicism at bay. There must be a few more people like Stenner out there. And on the best days, the good guys win.

Murray Carpenter, of Belfast, Maine, is a freelance journalist and the author of "Caffeinated, How Our Daily Habit Helps, Hurts and Hooks Us." The CU graduate lived in Boulder from 1980 to 1990.