Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

By leaving protagonists' preferences open to interpretation, video games like Assassin’s Creed and Tomb Raider have been including characters not defined by gender or sexuality.

These characters are gay, but that is not spoken to directly. It’s Hemingway’s iceberg theory of writing, except enforced upon writers by anxious suits with money at stake. A watchful playthrough of Tomb Raider while interpreting Lara as having romantic feelings for the story’s damsel in distress, Sam, works perfectly, with nothing in the game universe that contradicts it. (Though whether or not Lara’s feelings are reciprocated is more open to interpretation.) The character of Aveline de Grandpre, protagonist of Assassin’s Creed: Liberation, and with cameos in Assassin’s Creed IV: Black Flag, is another example of an LGBT character whose orientation is there for the keen-eyed and open-minded to interpret. Aveline is the only playable assassin to eschew the gender-neutral robe and hood of the Assassins, instead donning a man’s tricorne hat, shirt and trousers. Indeed, in the PlayStation-exclusive Aveline mission in Black Flag the soldiers chasing her repeatedly say such things as, “He’s getting away!” “After that man!” etc. Because the focus of the story is forced to be about something else, these LGBT characters are not defined only by their orientation. The developers must have been aware of this incorrect use of pronoun—likely an artifact of the game’s main campaign being centered on a man—but they did not bother to correct it. It actually makes more sense like this. The soldiers would indeed think the figure they were seeing was a young man or boy, because Aveline is appareled as a man, literally from head to foot. If one finds the hidden audio log “Subject 1 Interview” in Black Flag, it is made clear that the person who is reliving this female ancestor’s memories is, in fact, a man. The entire tenor of the interview Subject 1 has with the researcher in the audio log is thus about being transgender. Subject 1 describes at length his experiences reliving the memories of a woman, Aveline. When the researcher asks about a possible sexual liaison with a male acquaintance of Aveline’s, Subject 1 replies: “I never experienced her…consummating anything. That would be … I think maybe she was confused.”