President Barack Obamashakes hands with President Juan Orlando Hernandez of Honduras after also meeting with President Salvador Sanchez Ceren of El Salvador, left, and President Otto Perez Molina of Guatemala, second from left, in the White House. European Pressphoto Agency

A number of factors explain why young Hondurans could be first in line for a U.S. government plan to allow them to apply for entry as refugees, an idea floated by the White House as a possible means to get control over the flow of Central American migrants to the U.S.

For starters, the biggest group of unaccompanied minors flooding the U.S.-Mexico border since October come from Honduras, although kids from other Central American nations and Mexico aren’t far behind in making the journey north, according to U.S. government data.

Also, Honduras also ranks among the world’s most violent societies and as Central America’s poorest, key “push factors” behind the surge, according to immigration experts.

“If you’re going to pick a country for a pilot program, you can make a good case for Honduras,” said Marc Rosenblum, of the Migration Policy Institute, a Washington, D.C., research group.

The White House hopes that such a program – which would allow people to apply in their home country – would discourage people who don’t qualify for refugee status from trying to enter the U.S. on their own, and President Barack Obama cautioned Friday that eligibility for any in-country program would be limited.

“There may be some narrow circumstances in which there is humanitarian or refugee status that a family might be eligible for,” the president told reporters. “If that were the case, it would be better for them to be able to apply in-country rather than face a very dangerous journey all the way up to Texas to make those same claims.” The White House didn’t comment on why Honduras could be first, but a senior administration official indicated the program could be quickly expanded.“If this option is adopted, the first step would be to implement it as a pilot. In looking at how this would work, Honduras has been the example used but if this moves forward, there would be discussions with the other countries focused on doing the same,” the official said. One person involved in the administration’s conversations said Honduras may be first up because its government is more willing to participate. It is not easy for leaders to acknowledge that things are so bad in their countries that people need refugee status to escape, she said. But she said the Hondurans have already begun thinking about their problems in similar terms and looking for solutions.

Of the more 57,000 unaccompanied minors detained at the U.S. Mexico border since October, about 16,500 were Hondurans. Guatemalans weren’t far behind, with 14,000 apprehensions during the same period, followed by 13,300 Salvadorans and 12,600 Mexicans.

Perhaps more to the point, the number of Honduran kids caught this fiscal year was more than double the 6,700 detained in 2013. The number of child migrants from Guatemala and Salvador spiked as well, but to a lesser extent.

Hondurans also account for a large chunk of the 55,000 members of “family units” — adults attempting to migrate with children — detained at the U.S.-Mexico border in the past 10 months. The Border Patrol stopped only 9,350 such people in fiscal year 2013.

Honduras is by far the deadliest country in Central America, which in turn ranks as the corner of the world most affected by criminal violence, according to the United Nations. Honduras’ Caribbean Coast, anchored by the city of San Pedro Sula, is particularly violent and has sent the most migrant children north this year of anywhere in Central America, according to U.S. government figures.

“Of the three countries, Honduras is the one that it’s easiest to see a relationship between the violence and the communities that are sending migrant children,” Mr. Rosenblum added.

Honduras suffered 90 intentional murders per 100,000 people in 2012, according to the latest statistics from the UN’s Office on Drugs and Crime. That’s more than double the rate of El Salvador and Guatemala, each with about 40 murders per 100,000 people, according to the UNODC.

Analysts note that El Salvador’s murder rate has ticked up this year as a gang truce brokered by the government and the Catholic Church frays. In Honduras, an independent think tank focused on violence at the national university calculated the 2013 homicide rate at about 80 per 100,000 people, as the government deployed the armed forces in some of the country’s bloodiest communities.

In comparison, Mexico’s murder rate last year declined 12.5% to 19 per 100,000 people, according to the government’s census agency, reflecting an easing of the gangland wars racking large swaths of the country.

President Obama called his Mexican counterpart, Enrique Peña Nieto, on Thursday to consult ahead of Friday’s meeting with the Central American leaders. Mexico has tightened enforcement near its own southern border in recent weeks, adding a further impediment to the Central American migrants.

Last year, some 3,300 Hondurans were officially classified as refugees, compared with 6,600 Guatemalans, 9,400 Mexicans and 9,600 Salvadorans, according to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. Refugees fled both Guatemala and Salvador during their civil wars in the 1980s and some might not have returned.

More