SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“Hunger Games: Catching Fire” is currently on pace to break the record for the biggest November opening of all-time. The previous record holder is 2009’s “The Twilight Saga: New Moon,” which brought in $142 million. Analysts predict the “Hunger Games” sequel will stick a landing at somewhere around $145 million. That is just short of the $152 million opening for the first “Hunger Games.”

My colleague Christian Toto believes that in the age of Obama, the “Hunger Games” film franchise, and popular novels upon which they are based, are reaching audiences in a way they might not have otherwise:

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

When The Hunger Games hit theaters last year, Americans didn’t know the extent of NSA domestic spying, that ObamaCare would wipe out health insurance plans for millions despite the president’s solemn promise or that a weaponized IRS was targeting Tea Party groups.

So watching a dystopian future in which reality television distracts the masses, the government fears a popular rebellion and dissent must be wiped out at all costs is a tad more chilling than usual.

The Hunger Games: Catching Fire repeats these themes in new, darker shades, and while there’s certainly no overt connection to current events it’s impossible not to connect a dot or two while watching Fire. The diabolical President Snow (Donald Sutherland) is in no way a direct or indirect reference to President Barack Obama, nor are the more wicked deeds Snow commits connected to real events.

Here are this weekend’s top 5, per Deadline:

1) The Hunger Games: Catching Fire – Weekend Total: $145.5 million.

2) Thor: The Dark World – Total: $14.9 million. Total domestic gross: $168.7 million.

3) The Best Man Holiday – Weekend Total: $11.7 million. Total domestic gross: $49.6 million.

4) Delivery Man -Weekend Total: $8.9 million Total domestic gross: $8.9 million.

5) Free Birds – Weekend Total: $5.3 million. Total domestic gross: $48.6 million.

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC