San Miguel County Sheriff Bill Masters’ disgust is evident as he narrates a video of an illegal encampment in a wilderness area outside Telluride.

“Can you imagine what the clean up cost of this is gonna be?” Masters said on the video. “Absolutely outrageous.”

The sheriff is calling for more aggressive enforcement of illegal camps outside the popular mountain town, known for its series of summer festivals, including the Telluride Bluegrass Festival.

The sheriff’s office is investigating two newly reported sites of illegally established residences. One is on private property north of the Lone Tree Cemetery. The other is in the Bear Creek wilderness, according to the sheriff’s website.

“What we are seeing is beyond illegal. These trashed sites are a threat to public health, the environment and also pose enormous obstacles physically and financially to clean them up,” Masters said. “Human waste, beer cans, liquor bottles, garbage and other hazardous waste have been found at numerous sites over the last year.”

The discovery of two new illegal sites follows the discovery of one of the worst cases of an illegal campsite ever found d in the county, off the Jud Wiebe trail in Telluride.

A man has been charged with violations relating to illegally residing and littering in a National Forest and is scheduled to appear in Federal court in Durango.

The sheriff hiked through the woods to record trash left at the encampments. He sometimes is short of breath and apologizes for having a shaky camera.

At one point, he expresses surprise as he sees what he believes is a wedding dress.

“It gets to the point where it is so much piled up you can’t get through without climbing over this refuse,” Masters said on the video. “Unbelievable mess.”

The sheriff fears a spike in illegal encampments as the festival season approaches. He is asking residents to support social services available in town, rather than give money to transients.

“Some of these alcoholic and borderline, insane-transients have made a conscious lifestyle decision to come here and then degrade our environment,” Masters said. “We should not encourage them. Many of these transient panhandlers impacting the area are simply trying to get money for drugs or alcohol.”

Noelle Phillips: 303-954-1661, nphillips@denverpost.com or twitter.com/Noelle_Phillips