Eyes on the prize: Matthew Wade has enjoyed time spent batting and captaining the Bushrangers. Photo: Pat Scala

As a captain, he's learning. As a wicketkeeper, he faces more competition than ever. As a batsman, he backs his record against any other gloveman in the land.

So, what is Matthew Wade's best path back to the Australian team?

It's not a conversation Wade has had with the new chairman of selectors Rod Marsh. But his most recent call up was for a flying visit to Townsville to play for Australia A as a specialist batsman, where he ran around in the field and made a grinding half century at No.5. No one has suggested he should give up the gloves - least of all Wade himself - but he drew his own conclusions.

"It was a different experience, but one that I really enjoyed," Wade said. "To get picked as a specialist batter and to have a field, I understand the direction that they still view me as a top six batter, that's all you can take out of it."

Advertisement

"You can only assume that if there's an opportunity to go away [with the Australian team] as a specialist batter, hopefully I've done the right thing and got runs on the board.

"I still feel like 'keeping is my best spot, and the best way to get back into the Australian team, so for me it hasn't been that much of a talking point. In first class cricket and one-day cricket for Victoria I want to be a wicketkeeper-batsman and if an opportunity presents itself and I'm playing well enough, I can get an opportunity in any of those positions."

The race to replace Brad Haddin when he eventually retires is wide open, with NSW gloveman Peter Nevill and emerging Western Australian Sam Whiteman given a chance to audition in the Australia A series during the winter. Given a legendary wicketkeeper is in charge of the panel that will make the call, one can expect a premium on clean glovework, and that is an area in which Wade had work to do when he was last behind the stumps for Australia.

The strengths of Wade, the batsman, are well known. Although he hasn't had the greatest start to the domestic one-day competition (an unfortunate run out at the non-striker's end against South Australia didn't help) he boasts a first-class average nudging 40, a reputation for gutsiness and two Test centuries. He is expected to bat higher in the order for Victoria in the Sheffield Shield this summer, perhaps as high as four. "If we're talking up until this point, [about] competition with 'keepers, I certainly think my record speaks for itself in one-day cricket and shield cricket above the other keepers in Australia."

When Wade was dropped from the ODI team after last year's post-Ashes series in England, he threw himself into his new job as captain of Victoria. It was a difficult season, both for the new captain and his state, which finished on the bottom of the shield table. He is still dirty about his one-match suspension for pitch tampering, which he felt was unwarranted and halted his season after he'd scored 119 in tough conditions at Bellerive Oval.

"I was bitterly disappointed in what happened. I wouldn't have appealed it if I was doing the wrong thing," Wade said. "Personally, it probably stalled the momentum in my season. I was coming off a good hundred and would have gone to the WACA and hopefully played well there. To go and watch the boys play in Perth and not be able to play, that was devastating. It probably took three or four games to get me going again."

Not everyone thinks wicketkeeping is compatible with captaincy and some interstate observers questioned the decision to end Cameron White's tenure after a largely successful decade in charge. But Wade enjoyed being able to influence the team from behind the stumps.

"It was actually good for my 'keeping to be honest; in between balls to have stuff to focus on rather than just being focused on yourself. I 'keep at my best when I'm relaxed and not thinking too much about it, so in that sense it was a good thing. Especially in one-day cricket you're getting the best look at the game when there's no slips in consistently. It's the best seat in the house," he said.

"I enjoyed the experience of being captain, coming out of the Australian team and being able to focus a lot of attention on the Victorian Bushrangers and where we want to go as a team in the next couple of years. I learnt a heap by doing it, and experience is everything in this game. So to have that behind me is positive going into this season.

"There were difficult times throughout the year but there were never problems, infighting, anything like that, which when things are going bad can happen to a team. On the field we can go as hard as we want at each other but it's all good over a beer at the end of the game."

Wade will have to pick the team up again for Sunday's one-day match against NSW at North Sydney Oval after a bad capitulation to Tasmania in Brisbane last week. He is adamant that if he devotes himself to helping Victoria get better, "individual stuff will take care of itself. The phone will ring at the right time and you'll be right to go."