NEW HAVEN >> Residents of six city neighborhoods will be asked about their health and lifestyle as a step to turn around rates of chronic disease, according to a release by the Yale School of Public Health.

Community Alliance for Research and Engagement, part of the school, will conduct its third survey of about 1,300 adults starting Aug. 31, continuing into October, and each person surveyed will receive a $10 grocery store gift card and a chance to win $500. Topics will include access to health care, diet, exercise, tobacco use and neighborhood environment, according to the release.

The neighborhoods that will be surveyed are Dixwell, West River/Dwight, Fair Haven, Hill North, New­hallville and West Rock.

“It is important to hear directly from residents so that we can develop programs and policies to continue improving health in New Haven. Every voice is crucial to this effort,” said Jeannette Ickovics, director of CARE, in the release. “To transform New Haven, we must address the stark health disparities we experience as a city. If we can combat this, I believe that New Haven can be a model for the nation.”

Advertisement

Ickovics is also a professor at the School of Public Health.

City residents have been hired and trained to conduct the surveys, which also were done in 2009 and 2012. Those surveys found high rates of chronic diseases such as heart disease, diabetes, obesity, high blood pressure and asthma, the release said.

Other findings included: 40 percent of residents were hungry, 30 percent smoked daily, a third felt unsafe during the day and two-thirds did at night.

CARE has worked with neighborhood groups and others to build community gardens, bring farmers markets into neighborhoods and create other health-related programs.

The Partnership for a Healthier Greater New Haven, which includes CARE, the city Health Department and Yale-New Haven Hospital, is developing a health-improvement plan for the region, the release said. The survey also helps fulfill a requirement of the Affordable Care Act that requires hospitals to conduct such assessments.