“The cancer’s back,” a dear friend casually mentioned on the phone the other day. I gulped. Emily was diagnosed with an early-stage breast cancer more than 25 years ago. She had surgery, it was successful, and she went on to live a full, beautiful life as an artist, an architect and a Buddhist. Now, in her early 70s, she discovered that another cancer was growing in her breast, and malignant cells were found in several lymph nodes. Her doctor ordered a PET scan, to see where else the cancer cells might have spread.

“I’m going to let him do his PET scan,” Emily said, “but that’s it. There’s no way I’m taking chemo, not at my age. I don’t care what the doctor says. I’ve already made up my mind.”

Making up your mind about what medical interventions to have — or not have — is one of the toughest decisions you’ll ever have to make. It’s a deeply personal choice, and depends on your age, your attitude and your approach to life ... and death.

And according to a powerful, bestselling book by Dr. Atul Gawande, “Being Mortal,” it also depends on your ability to deal with high-pressure salesmen with medical degrees, doctors who are trained to believe that death is a failure, that there’s always another drug to give you or treatment to try, regardless of how effective it might be or how much sicker it might make you.

“I learned a lot of things in medical school,” Gawande writes, “but mortality wasn’t one of them.”

It’s a terrific book, and even though it’s not what dear pals are expecting from me in their Christmas stocking this year, I’m giving it some serious thought.

Ezekiel Emanuel is another doctor who can help educate you when it comes to making informed choices about what to do and what not to do, when the time comes. He’s an oncologist, a bioethicist, and just recently, the author of an eye-opening op-ed piece in The New York Times called “Are Good Doctors Bad for Your Health?”

“One of the more surprising — and genuinely scary — research papers was published recently in JAMA Internal medicine,” he writes. “It found that patients with acute, life-threatening cardiac conditions did better when the senior cardiologists were out of town. And this was at the best hospitals in the United States.”

And not just a little better — a lot better. “Mortality decreased by about

⅓ for some patients when those top doctors were away.”

Emanuel calls the results “truly shocking and counterintuitive.” And while he’s not 100 percent sure how to explain it, he’s got some theories.

One is that while senior cardiologists are great researchers, it’s actually the junior docs — just out of training — who are more adept clinically. Another explanation has to do with interventions. Senior docs are trained to keep trying more and more things, even though the data shows that often, more is not only not better for the patient, it’s actually worse.

“We — both physicians and patients — often forget that every test and treatment can go wrong, produce side effects or lead to additional interventions that themselves can go wrong. ... We find it hard to refrain from trying another drug, blood test, imaging study or surgery.”

Let the patient be aware. But awareness isn’t enough. Next time your doctor is proposing an intervention, whether an x-ray, genetic test or surgery, Emanuel suggests you ask your doctor a few basic questions: First, what difference will it make? Will the rest results change the approach to treatment?

Second, how much improvement in terms of prolongation of life, reduction in risk of a heart attack or other problem is the treatment actually going to make?

Third, how likely and severe are the side effects?

Your doctor might bristle at the questions, but be brave and ask anyway.