Landlords, tenants: property provided 'beacon of light' during flood

Lyons residents Emma and Scott Young have spent the past three months repairing their rental property which was damaged in the flood. ( LEWIS GEYER )

After more than three months of cleaning and repairs, Lyons residents and landlords Emma and Scott Young watched their tenants move back into 109 Park St.

Few signs of the September flood remain inside the rental property, located at the corner of Park Street and Main Street in Lyons, but the oven holds a reminder for the Youngs and their tenants.

"The water went all the way up to that line," Scott Young said, pointing to a faint streak on the glass of the Frigidaire appliance. "I wanted to have something to show my grandkids when they ask about the 500-year flood."

New paint covers the drywall that was replaced throughout the house. The wood floors that survived the flood were mucked, scrubbed, mopped and refinished. Dirt covers the ground outside of the house where grass once grew and eventually will grow again.

Early in the morning on Sept. 12, tenants Brent Marshall and Janis McLaughlin left the house with some of McLaughlin's paintings, their computers and a bench made from wood salvaged from Red Rocks Amphitheater. Thursday, ironically the same day of the week they evacuated, Marshall and McLaughlin moved home.

"After the power came back on, Scott left the porch light on at the house, like a beacon of light that we could see from the road every time we drove by," McLaughlin said. "Last night, ours was still the only light on the street."

Many of the houses on Park were badly damaged during the flood, including another of the Youngs' rental properties, located just south of Park Street.

Advertisement

Water marks, at least 6-foot high in some places, stain the outside of the house. Debris is pressed between windowpanes and broken furniture is smashed against the glass inside.

Cleanup and repairs will be more time consuming and costly for the Youngs at this property compared to the other, but watching tenants move back in to the Park Street home will provide motivation for the job ahead.

"It could have been a lot worse," Emma Young said. "But we are a good team. We get down to it and get the job done and that's how we get through."

Community reporter Whitney Bryen can be reached at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.