Charlene Lentini’s class at Pinelands Regional Junior High School loved releasing 150 Rainbow Trout into Toms River as part of the Trout in the Classroom program. (Photo: COURTESY OF PINELANDS REGIONAL SCHOOLS)

You can often find students in a classroom and trout in a riverbed, but what about the other way around? That was the case at the end of March, when Charlene Lentini’s seventh-grade class at Pinelands Regional Junior High School released about 150 Rainbow Trout into the Toms River at the Forest Resource Center in Jackson after raising them through the Trout in the Classroom (TIC) program.

TIC, which started more than 20 years ago, is an environmental education program in which students from Kindergarten through twelfth grade raise trout in a hands-on experience to learn the importance of clean water and the effects that good conservation habits have on all living things, especially in a watershed. According to the website, students raise trout from eggs to fry, monitor tank water quality, engage in a stream habitat study, learn to appreciate water resources, begin to foster a conservation ethic, and grow to understand ecosystems.

“Through the Trout in the Classroom program, my students learned the importance of clean, cold water and that it is an ideal habitat for trout. They learned how everything we do in our watershed affects the quality of our water and the health of the wildlife,” said Lentini.

In October, Lentini’s class received 350 Rainbow Trout eggs and over the months witnessed the eggs’ transformation to fingerlings, which they then released. Throughout the process, students monitored the conditions of the classroom habitat, tested the water, and analyzed their reports. Lentini’s class was aided by a TIC volunteer, Robert Powell, from the Rey Neirle Chapter of Trout Unlimited.

"I learned the stages of a trout and a lot about nature when we let the trout go,” said student Jillian Maher. “I know how important it is to keep our water clean."

When students noticed a decline in the number of live fish, they problem solved by researching the part of the lifespan the trout was in and determining the cause of the issue, then implementing a solution.

Although TIC is a national program, it is tailored by each teacher to meet curriculum needs, therefore it is unique in every school. The lessons taught have interdisciplinary connections to science, social studies, mathematics, language arts, fine arts, and physical education.

Students loved the project, especially the final part of the process when the students released the trout, once they reached the fingerling/fry stage, into Toms River.

"My favorite part of having the trout in the classroom was, letting them go in the Toms River. I know that they will be safe as long as we help keep our watershed clean,” said student Orion Heffernan.

"I liked our trout because I liked their color. I loved learning the stages of the trout’s lifespan, and I had a great time letting them go in the Toms River,” said Jeremey Jiminez.

Lady Cats Softball

The Lady Cats blew out B-South foe Barnegat on April 21. They scored 10 runs in the first inning, added 5 more runs in the next two innings.

At the end of 5 innings the score was 15-0 and the Wildcats went home with a win.

In that 5 innings of play Kurstin Binshedler, Jesse Rising, Madison Dancisin, and Nicole Burke all had multiple hits with Binshedler and Burke scoring 2 runs apiece.

Naomi Stas threw another shut out game for Pinelands.

On Thursday, 23, the Lady Cats hosted the Piners of Lakewood. It only took 3 innings for the Lady Cats to score 18 runs.

The final score was 18-0. The hitting was led by freshman Brianna Suralik who belted out 2 home runs and tallied 4 RBI’s in the game. The team combined for 17 hits and recorded zero errors. Stas added 2 RBI’s and was once again the winning pitcher in the contest.

On April 24, Pinelands traveled to Lacey to face off against a undefeated Lady Lions team. Pinelands struck first by scoring 1 run in the first inning. But it did not take long for Lacey to retaliate, they put up 3 runs in the bottom of the first inning themselves. The score remained the same until the bottom of the fourth inning when Lacey added another run and the final score of the game ended in a loss for Pinelands, 4-1. Stas was tagged with the loss for the Lady Cats. Then on Saturday, April 25, the Lady Cats continued their Ocean County Tournament play by hosting Toms River East.

Pinelands looked a bit sluggish in the field as the game started and the Lady Raiders were able to score 2 runs.

But then it was the Lady Cats turn to shine.

In the bottom of the first inning Pinelands swung the bat well, T.R. East made a few errors and the Lady Cats were able to hit through the entire lineup, thus scoring a total of 7 runs in that inning.

Pinelands continued to score 1 in the second inning, 1 in the third inning, and 2 more in the fourth inning.

Pinelands led 11-2 after 5 in-nings but then in the top of the sixth inning the Lady Raiders hit a 3 run homer to bring the score to 11-5.

The Lady Cats held their opponent scoreless in the final inning to end the game at 11-5. Steph Healy and Lexi Carman led the Lady Cats in this quarterfinal game.

Healy went 3-for-4 with 3 runs, 1 double, and had 1 RBI. Carman went 2-for-3 with 2 RBIs and Stas struck out 9 batters as Pinelands advanced to the Ocean County Tournament semifinals to face division rival Jackson Liberty at a date to be deter-mined.

The Lady Cats improved to 10-4 overall and 7-1 in the conference. In addition, Pinelands is the #3 ranked team in the Shore Conference Top 10.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1GUKBpy