A worker washes glass railings Wednesday, Nov. 5, 2014 at the Golisano Children's Hospital of Southwest Florida, part of Lee Memorial Health System.

By Liz Freeman of the Naples Daily News

Uninsured and low-income patients who get medical care at the public hospitals run by the Lee Memorial Health System will get a more generous discount off their medical bills, thanks to a revised financial assistance policy.

The elected board of directors for Lee Memorial approved the revisions Thursday and the changes will take effect Jan. 1.

Lee Memorial has a long-standing and written charity care policy but the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, required adopting some terms from the Internal Revenue Service, Anne Rose, vice president of revenue cycle, told the board.

"We looked at this as a great opportunity to take a great policy, add to it and make it better than it was," she said.

The IRS rules require all government hospitals, like Lee Memorial with its nonprofit status, to have written charity care policies that use clear and simple language for the public to understand, she said.

That includes how and where to apply for charity care based on income and having the documents in multiple languages, she said.

Lee Memorial's current policy says anyone who is uninsured and with income at or below 200 percent of the federal poverty level is eligible for full financial assistance, so the patient's entire bill will be written off.

For a single person, 200 percent of the federal poverty level is income limit at $23,540, according to 2015 federal poverty guidelines. For a family of four, 200 percent of the federal poverty level is $48,500.

Lee Memorial's current policy also provides a 40 percent discount off a hospital bill when a patient's income is between 200 percent and 300 percent of the poverty limit. For a single person, the maximum income is $35,310; for a family of four, the maximum is $72,750.

A 30 percent discount is available now for a single person whose income ranges from $35,310 and $47,080, and for a family of four, it applies with an income range of $72,750 and $97,000

The updated policy taking effect Jan. 1 eliminates the 40 percent and 30 percent discounts. An 80 percent discount will apply for anyone with income between 200 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level. For a single person, the income range is $23,540 to $47,080. For a family of four, it is $48,500 to $97,000.

"It's a very generous policy," Rose said.

The charity care policy also applies to employed physicians and their care of patients for hospital-based services, she said.

Board member Nancy McGovern wanted to know which residents are eligible for charity care and discounts and whether the system would screen people in the United States illegally.

The policy applies to anyone who lives in the Southwest Florida market which Lee Memorial serves, and staff members do not screen to see if someone is in the country illegally, said Mary McGillicuddy, Lee Memorial's in-house attorney.

"If somebody presents, we got them," Jim Nathan, president of Lee Memorial, said. "If they don't have any money, they don't have any money."

The NCH Healthcare System in Collier County, also a nonprofit hospital, updated its charity care policy in March 2015 to ensure compliance with the health reform law, spokeswoman Debbie Curry said in a statement.

"To ensure compliance, NCH has established written charity, financial assistance, and emergency medical care policies," she said. "NCH makes every effort to determine if an individual is eligible for assistance under the hospital's charity and financial assistance policies. In addition, NCH assists the uninsured or underinsured patients to qualify for Medicaid or other public assistance programs."