The Washington Post has 20 reporters assigned to dig up Donald Trump's past; fewer for Hillary Clinton, but be assured, they've got people on her. Top people.

WASHINGTON, May 17, 2016 — In an act of self-parody, America’s “newspaper of record,” the New York Times, ran the headline, “Little is off limits as Donald Trump plans attacks on Hillary Clinton’s character.”

Hillary Clinton enabled husband Bill’s sexual assaults, instigating after-the-fact intimidation campaigns against his traumatized victims. Her deals with foreign governments and corporations as Secretary of State enriched herself, her husband and the family foundation. The Times might ask whether she has sufficient character to attack.

The Times says Trump “intends to portray Mrs. Clinton as fundamentally corrupt, invoking everything from her cattle futures trades in the late 1970s to the federal investigation into her email practices.”

Why Bill Clinton will not lead Hillary’s economic agenda

The Washington Post’s Bob Woodward told a convention of the National Association of Realtors, “We have 20 people working on Trump, we’re going to do a book, we’re doing articles about every phase of his life.”

Appearing on “Fox News Sunday,” Woodward assured host Chris Wallace that an “equivalent effort will be made on Hillary Clinton … And I think, particularly in this campaign, which is one of those pivot points in the history of the country, we need to tell people everything we can find out. That means a massive effort.”

Asked if the Post was dedicating equal manpower to the effort, Woodward backpedaled a bit. “Well, it’s not necessarily the number of people, it’s whose working on it.”

“So, there’s smarter people on Hillary?” asked Wallace through his laughter.

Woodward looked into the camera and affected a tone of deep sincerity. “Believe me, the goal here is the best obtainable version of the truth … As we know, biography is character.”

As Marxist literary critic Walter Benjamin said, “History is written by the victors.”

In 1922, before the USSR was formally established, Russian commissars established the Chief Administration for the Preservation of State Secrets in the Press.

“Its function was ‘to effect political, ideological, military and economic control of all kinds over printed works, manuscripts, photographs, pictures, etc.’,” writes Arup Banerji in his book, “Writing History in the Soviet Union: Making the Past Work.”

When the Soviet program to collectivize agriculture began in earnest in the early 1930s, resulting in the famine-genocide in Ukraine, the word “starvation” was banned from reporting by state censors.

Problem solved.

As Obamacare—called the “Affordable Care Act” by the irony-free members of our press—causes insurance premiums to rise and insurers to leave state exchanges rather than face bankruptcy, President Obama’s failure is heralded by the Boston Globe as “an unheralded success.”

The program is an unpopular albatross around the neck of working Americans. So the Globe says, the Democratic Party’s signature accomplishment “is playing an increasingly critical role in reducing inequality … Immigrants saw the sharpest rise in [Obamacare] coverage.”

If you have recently crossed our southern border illegally, if your offspring have been designated “dreamers” by the Obama administration, if you have never paid taxes in support of the American welfare system whose benefits you now enjoy, the wealth-redistributive powers of Obamacare are there for you.

If you are an American citizen, you’ve more likely had your truly affordable healthcare plan cancelled. Obamacare has reduced your work status to part-time, and the zero-growth Obama economy ensures that the next generation of Americans is worse off than the previous one, something new in America.

As Woodward said, this presidential campaign is “one of those pivot points in the history of the country.” And the mainstream media would like to fill your head with their version of the truth concerning illegal immigration and Hillary Clinton’s biography.

Trump and Cruz: Shifting America’s politics

Shortly after announcing his intension to seek the Republican presidential nomination, Trump was interviewed by CNN’s Anderson Cooper.

Cooper presented Trump with a manufactured poll showing him losing to his GOP primary rivals. “The people don’t trust you,” Trump told Cooper, leaning into him, “And the people don’t trust the media … I find that fifty to seventy percent of the political media is really, really dishonest.”

Trump was right.

Michael Lynch, professor of philosophy at the University of Connecticut, expressed his and the mainstream media’s worries in a New York Times op-ed. “Mr. Trump’s willingness to be inconsistent—even in a single interview, or the same speech—has baffled political strategists for months. Even more puzzling is his followers’ happy toleration of it … But how could this be? After all, other candidates are seemingly held to different standards, by their supporters and others. They are held responsible for what they say.”

Really? Place this quote:

“I want to say one thing to the American people. I want you to listen to me. I’m going to say this again: I did not have sexual relations with that woman, Miss Lewinsky. I never told anybody to lie, not a single time, never. These allegations are false. And I need to go back to work for the American people.”

Now this one:

“This has been a difficult week for the State Department and for our country. We’ve seen the heavy assault on our post in Benghazi that took the lives of those brave men. We’ve seen rage and violence directed at American embassies over an awful Internet video that we [the U.S. government] had nothing to do with.”

Both statements were lies. Who held the Clintons responsible?

Character, as Bob Woodward said, “is biography.” But America’s media class is as corrupt as the Clintons.

News is geared to fit the prejudices, fantasies and outright fabrications of the Democratic Party. As MIT economist Jonathan Gruber, a chief Obamacare architect noted, “Basically, you know, call it the stupidity of the American voter, or whatever, that was really, really critical to get this thing [Obamacare] to pass.”

Media lies are designed to foster and expand that stupidity.

There is some good news for Trump, though. The Associated Press said of a Media Insight Project Survey, “Trust in the news media is being eroded by perceptions of inaccuracy and bias … Just 6 percent of people say they have a lot of confidence in the media, putting the news industry about equal to Congress … In this presidential campaign year, Democrats were more likely to trust the news media than Republicans and independents.”

The media can no longer count on stupid Americans to carry Hillary into the Oval Office, and Donald Trump is about to give the nation an education on “corrupt Hillary’s” sordid character.