Well, he didn't listen to me. So maybe he should listen to Alan Steinberg.

Steinberg is a former Bush administration official and part-time pundit at politickernj.com. On his Facebook page last week, Steinberg offered this prediction: "Christie will be leaving sooner than you think. The nightmare of the Christie years will be over. Kim will be a fine governor."

That's Kim Guadagno, the current lieutenant governor who would become governor if Chris Christie were to resign. I would not go as far as Steinberg and predict Christie will resign. But I certainly will say that he should quit his job if he won't quit the campaign for president.

Recently I suggested he should drop out of that race, given his big drop in the polls. But he's not going to take my advice.

Christie's campaigning like crazy. He was in New Hampshire again last week telling a town-hall audience that story about how his Irish father was a passenger in the automobile of life, while his Sicilian mother ... well, you know the rest.

The Guv's out of state so much that one of my readers joked that if Christie had a sharp accountant he could escape paying New Jersey income taxes.

Anyone spending more than half the year out of state can claim residency elsewhere and pay that state's income tax instead of New Jersey's. As of Saturday, Christie had spent 111 days so far this year out of state according to "The Christie Tracker" kept by Matt Katz of WNYC. (Update: As of Monday he had spent three more days out of state for a grand total of 114 of the 236 days so far this year.)

That's just a few days shy of half the year. By the end of the year, Christie could pull ahead and perhaps declare residency in New Hampshire, which has no income tax.

I would encourage him to do so – and also to make Guadagno the governor.

Not right this minute, of course. That would prompt a replacement election in November. But if Christie waits till Sept. 3 to quit, he can hand Guadagno the job until the November 2016 election.

That would give her a running start for re-election. And it would free up Christie to go on the campaign trail every day of the week and stop pretending he's running the state. He's clearly lost interest in that.

A good example was Christie's decision to take that Americans for Tax Reform pledge to never raise taxes. That pledge is pure political posturing. A politician can borrow billions without breaking that pledge.

That's exactly what Christie has done, especially regarding the Transportation Trust Fund. When he came into office in 2010, Christie promised to put that fund on a "pay-as-you-go" basis. Instead he bonded for it, using schemes worthy of his predecessor Jon Corzine.

Now the fund's broke and the governor's got to pay all those bonds back. But if that governor is Christie, then that pledge will keep him from raising the gas tax. The only alternative is to borrow even more money, further denting our bond rating.

And then there's the property-tax issue. That 2 percent cap was nice, but the big problem is the unequal distribution of state aid.

Last week The Star-Ledger ran a piece in our "Sold!" real-estate series that illustrated the problem perfectly. It told of a four-bedroom rowhouse in Hoboken that sold for $2.35 million. The property taxes? A mere $15,127 a year.

Plenty of suburban homeowners pay that much on a house worth a fifth that much. But thanks to the state Supreme Court's Abbott decisions, Hoboken remains listed among the so-called "poor" school districts that get disproportionately high state tax relief.

Conservative Republicans wanted Christie to make changing the property-tax formula a statewide issue in the 2013 election. That might have helped GOP legislative candidates. Instead Christie cuddled up to urban Democratic mayors in order to win a personal landslide that was supposed to propel him to the White House.

He still seems to think he'll get there. And if he stays in the race long enough, maybe Donald Trump will stop hogging the microphone and let another loudmouth get a word in edgewise.

That's a possibility, though a remote one. But if the governor wants to pursue it he should let someone else run the state.

Unlike Steinberg, I wouldn't say the Christie years have been a nightmare. But for him they were a dream – one from which he awakened the minute he started getting mentioned as a possible president.

So good luck, Guv. Go pursue your new dream.

And don't let the Statehouse door hit you on the way out.

ADD: I am among the many commentators who are skeptical that Christie has any realistic chance at getting the nomination in the post-Trump era. Christie's shtick was being the guy who "tells it like it is" - but no sitting governor can risk telling it like it really is.

Donald Trump does not suffer from that problem. His act is so outrageous that there's not much Christie can do to get attention.

But maybe he knows something the rest of us don't. He must think he does. When I read that he's got Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones holding a big fund-raiser for him Sept. 21 in Texas, I have to conclude Christie thinks he's in it for the long haul.

I can't read his mind, but here are two theories on why Christie's staying in the race despite being on the bubble for making it to the Adults' table at the Sept. 16 debate.

One is that he simply loves to perform before people. That incessant retelling of that tale about his dying mother makes me think Christie is narcissistic even by the liberal standards of politicians.

The other theory is that he believes Trump's headed for a fall eventually, and that when that happens the public will take a fresh look at the remaining candidates and conclude Christie's the most likely to defeat the Democratic candidate.

One factor in his favor is that he does have the best TV persona of the rest of the field. So maybe that will carry him through.

If so, good for him. But in the meantime, he should stop sticking New Jersey taxpayers with the tab for his security detail. That tab is well in excess of $1 million. Christie's fought successfully in court to keep the details of how it's spent public. But that's no the real issue. The real issue is that it was spent at all.

As I've noted, when Christie is out of state he is not the governor. Guadagno is.

And if he keeps this up, he should hand her the job for good.