DOWNTOWNS Lambros Psounos and wife Nicole Jacoby owner of Greens and Grains the newest business coming to Ventnor's business district getting ready for their opening Thursday, May 14, 2015. After years of economic decline, then the slam of Hurricane Sandy, Ventnor business owners say that their downtown areas are finally seeing some signs of revitalization.

Downtown Ron Rotatori (right) looks over a newly renovated store on Pacific Ave in Wildwood, where Jill Cataldo (left) will be opening a store called Tickle Your Fancy. Ratatori opened a new business on Pacific Avenue in Wildwood, into a store that had been vacant for nearly 15 years. His business, G Spot Vapor Shop, is one of a handful of new businesses on the street that officials say is breathing new life to the downtown area. Wednesday May 12, 2015. (Dale Gerhard/Press of Atlantic City)

Downtown Ron Rotatori (right) oversees the renovation of a store front on Pacific Avenue in Wildwood, where he will open a second new business, a hookah lounge called Goodfella's Vaporium. Rotatori recently opened a new business on Pacific Avenue in Wildwood, into a store that had been vacant for nearly 15 years. His business, G Spot Vapor Shop, is one of a handful of new businesses on the street that officials say is breathing new life to the downtown area. Wednesday May 12, 2015. (Dale Gerhard/Press of Atlantic City)

Downtown New businesses are opening up along Pacific Avenue in Wildwood, that officials say are breathing new life to the downtown area. Wednesday May 12, 2015. (Dale Gerhard/Press of Atlantic City)

Downtown Ron Rotatori, of Wildwood, owner of Goodfella's Vaporium in Wildwood, said he canceled a vaping convention at the Wildwoods Convention Center this month because of threats of a ticket blitz for violations of New Jersey's Smoke-Free Air Act.

Downtown Ron Rotatori (left) looks over a newly renovated store on Pacific Ave in Wildwood, where Jill Cataldo (right) will be opening a store called Tickle Your Fancy. Ratatori opened a new business on Pacific Avenue in Wildwood, into a store that had been vacant for nearly 15 years. His business, G Spot Vapor Shop, is one of a handful of new businesses on the street that officials say is breathing new life to the downtown area. Wednesday May 12, 2015. (Dale Gerhard/Press of Atlantic City)