Given the proven failure of Obamacare—to secure liberty, to control costs, and even to cover anywhere near the number of people it was supposed to cover when it was passed— Carson’s first principles, and his call for a replacement , will likely resonate with the bulk of his fellow citizens.

Carson calls for personal control, advancing technology and innovation, granting states maximum flexibility, recognizing that doctors are the backbone of American medicine, and ensuring that Americans are always “free to buy coverage and benefits consistent with their moral and religious beliefs.” If these sound like the opposite of Obamacare, another of Carson’s principles makes the contrast even clearer: “Centralization and bureaucracy are the antithesis of personalization, and only discourage choice and innovation.” Another declares, “Large-scale change should not be imposed from above. Instead, we must have the freedom to choose what is best for our families and build on proven successes.”

The Weekly Standard http://assets.weeklystandard.com.s3.amazonaws.com/tws15/images/logo-large.png

The Weekly Standard

2014

Washington, DC

Politics

http://www.weeklystandard.com/dr.-ben-carson-calls-for-replacing-obamacare/article/786451

2014-04-03T10:10

2014-04-03T10:10

Dr. Ben Carson Calls for Replacing Obamacare

Dr. Ben Carson has just launched the Save Our Healthcare Project, the goal of which is “to replace Obamacare with positive, patient-centered reforms to ensure all Americans have access to high-quality care.” In the launch’s initial phase, Carson lists his seven core principles of real health care reform. Carson calls for personal control, advancing technology and innovation, granting states maximum flexibility, recognizing that doctors are the backbone of American medicine, and ensuring that Americans are always “free to buy coverage and benefits consistent with their moral and religious beliefs.” If these sound like the opposite of Obamacare, another of Carson’s principles makes the contrast even clearer: “Centralization and bureaucracy are the antithesis of personalization, and only discourage choice and innovation.” Another declares, “Large-scale change should not be imposed from above. Instead, we must have the freedom to choose what is best for our families and build on proven successes.”

Barack Obama, Ben Carson, Health Care, Jeffrey H. Anderson, Obamacare

http://cdn.weeklystandard.biz/cache/280x280-.jpg