ZURICH–Now we know the identity of at least one Swiss bank that may participate in a U.S. Department of Justice program designed to punish lenders here for aiding tax evasion.

The chief executive of Corner Bank Group, a small lender in Switzerland’s Italian-speaking southern region, said in an interview with local media that it is considering signing up for the DOJ program’s dreaded “category 2,” designed for banks that have had undeclared American accounts on their books. Banks in this category will be on the hook for fines equal to 50 percent of the problematic U.S. assets they declare. Third and fourth categories have been set up for banks with no issues to declare, while the first category is made up of about a dozen Swiss banks that have already been under DOJ investigation.

A Corner Bank spokeswoman confirmed the report, but declined further comment.

The DOJ program is highly controversial in Switzerland, because it has compelled a large number of the roughly 300 lenders here essentially to participate in high-stakes gambling. On the one hand, a bank that steps forward to come clean may have the necessary cash on hand to deal with resulting fines and move on. On the other hand, if a bank has had relatively little to do with undeclared U.S. accounts, the idea of avoiding the program entirely may be appealing. After all, the DOJ’s resources are limited, and perhaps it won’t be able to muster the energy to hunt down every last little bank here. Perhaps.

In the interview published Thursday in Handelszeitung, Corner Bank CEO Paolo Cornaro complained that the DOJ program makes no distinction between a Swiss bank that went out and actively sought undeclared U.S. money, and a bank that accommodated a client who may have a U.S. passport (among others) and also may have some undisclosed tax issues. At this point, the CEO said, Corner Bank just wants to “finish this chapter and finally look forward again.”

Swiss banks must report to the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority, or Finma, by Monday about whether or not they’ll participate in the DOJ program, and if so which category they intend to apply under. Both Finma and the DOJ have made clear that Swiss banks should think long and hard about their options, and consider the example of banks here such as UBS, Wegelin and Bank Frey, which have either paid heavy fines for aiding tax evasion or folded under the pressure of the U.S. crackdown.

The deadline for handing related information over to the DOJ under the program comes at the end of this year.