Connecticut ranks at or near the bottom of all 50 states in a number of key comparative financial indicators. Only New Jersey has higher total liabilities and unfunded promises per taxpayer. The Connecticut State Employees Retirement System and the Connecticut Teachers plan are among the poorest-funded pension plans in the country. Connecticut is also failing take meaningful steps to address its structural fiscal and competitiveness challenges.

Many states are well-managed and financially sound. But other states are facing serious fiscal problems, and the finances of several states are nearing the breaking point.

One factor that accounts for these differences is the way state governments choose to compensate public employees. A 2014 study co-authored by one of us, Andrew G. Biggs, with Jason Richwine showed that states vary widely in the salaries and benefits they pay to their employees. Some states, such as Indiana, Virginia and Minnesota, pay salaries and benefits that are very close to what employees with similar education and experience would receive from large private sector employers.

But other states compensate public employees far above comparable private sector levels. Connecticut, for example, pays its employees an average of 42 percent more in wages and benefits than large private sector employers. Pennsylvania pays a 35 percent premium and Illinois a 26 percent premium. The real money isn't in salaries: Few states pay higher salaries than the private sector. But government pensions and retiree health coverage are far more generous than in the private sector. They are also underfunded or unfunded in most cases.

High-paying states pay a price for their generosity. Data from Truth in Accounting's State Data Lab show that states that pay public employees a 20 percent or greater compensation premium have double the unfunded pension and retiree health liabilities as states that pay public employees at comparable private sector levels. The same relationship holds for explicit government debt: States that pay more, borrow more.

Such is clearly the case in Connecticut. In addition to poor pension funding, the state offers employees a retiree health plan that is twice as generous as offered by the average state government. And these retiree health benefits are almost entirely unfunded. Pension and retiree health benefits explain why Connecticut has the second highest liabilities and unfunded retirement obligations per taxpayer of any state. Additional debt and unfunded retirement obligations mean even higher taxes and a less competitive state over time.

Analysts and public employee unions can argue over the best ways to measure government worker pay and benefits. But there is no denying that certain states compensate their employees far more handsomely than others, and the higher-paying states suffer larger unfunded retirement obligations, weaker financial positions and poorer competitive postures.

The current situation is inappropriate, inequitable and unnecessary. There are rarely complaints about the quality of public employees in states like Virginia, Utah and Washington, which pay about evenly with private employers and have been ranked as among of the best-managed states in the country. And states that pay market-level compensation aren't hiring less-qualified employees. In fact, their employees have slightly higher average educational qualifications than states paying large compensation premiums. Nor do states need to overpay in order to retain employees. There is no correlation between the compensation premium paid by states and the average job tenure of their employees as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

There is a need and opportunity for state governments to restructure their compensation packages in ways that are fair to employees, retirees and the taxpayers. The Supreme Court's recent decision on the Affordable Care Act lifts a cloud of uncertainty regarding a way to restructure retiree health care coverage. The act's "Cadillac tax" on excessively generous health care plans, which begins in 2018, will punish states (and their taxpayers) that fail to reform their current health plans. Rising pension debts and changing accounting rules are already causing state governments to receive bond downgrades. Reforms should include revisions to both benefit design and funding provisions, to ensure that employee benefits are reasonable and governments fund adequately to keep their promises.

David M. Walker is a senior strategic adviser for PwC, an adviser to Truth in Accounting and former U.S. comptroller general. Andrew G. Biggs is a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute.