After praising the dealers for building their successful businesses, Bush said, "It's harder to do what you all have done. Fewer and fewer people are rising up economically."

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush speaks at the National Automobile Dealers Association convention in San Francisco, Friday, Jan. 23, 2015. (Photo: Jeff Chiu/Associated Press)

Jeb Bush presented a list of moderate proposals before a receptive audience of car dealers and their families here that sounded like a blueprint for a 2016 presidential campaign.

He talked about his Right is Rising political action committee, which is already attracting significant contributions, but assured the dealers this wasn't a fund-raising speech.

"Your checkbook is very safe here today," he told the National Auto Dealers Association convention here.

Then he launched into a series of criticisms of the Obama administration and policy suggestions that could form an outline for a presidential run.

"Americans are frustrated. We are in the fifth year of a recovery, but 60% of Americans think we're still in a recession," said the former Florida governor and younger brother of President George W. Bush.

After praising the dealers for building their successful businesses, Bush said, "It's harder to do what you all have done. Fewer and fewer people are rising up economically."

To change that he urged less government regulation and major reform of our education system.

"Our nation's economy used to grow at 31/2 to 4% a year," Bush said. "In spite of the last few months when we've seen positive job growth the new normal is 1 1/2 to 2%. If we were to grow at 2% more each year we would create the equivalent of an additional Germany of economy growth in the 10th year."

He then called for health care reform, calling the Affordable Care Act "clearly a job killer.

"We need to invest in the long-term things like infrastructure and research and development," Bush said.

Next, he proposed a "stem to stern transformation of our education system" and immigration reform that recognizes the contributions immigrants make to our economy.

"According to a recent article in Inc. magazine immigrants start twice as many new businesses as native-born Americans," Bush said. "We need to find a path to legalized status for those who have lingered in the shadows."

On a positive note he saluted what he called a revolution in energy exploration, created by the advances in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing.

"The great news is the United States is becoming the largest producer of oil and gas in the world," he said. "But the first thing we should do is approve the Keystone XL pipeline. That's a no brainer.

"This (energy) revolution allows us to re-industrialize this country and it lessens our balance of payment deficit with trading partners," Bush said.

Contact Greg Gardner: (313) 222-8762 or ggardner@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter @GregGardner12.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1Jw33E2