This coming week is dedicated to showing appreciation and raising awareness of people like Phillip Chalker and Jackson Whaley.

They’re among the self-made business owners that embody Small Business Week, which kicks off Monday.

About 85 percent of Wiregrass jobs are provided by small businesses, according to Dothan Area Chamber of Commerce President Matt Parker.

“It is the backbone of our economy,” Parker said.

The sheer number of people employed by small businesses is staggering compared to larger businesses.

“Small businesses are really the engine of our economy, if you’re talking Dothan or anywhere else in the country,” said Judy Callin, director of Troy University’s Small Business Development Center.

The relationship between small businesses and the community is often symbiotic.

“Most small businesses usually take care of a niche audience that isn’t covered by big box stores or large appliance stores, so I feel like small businesses genuinely connect with a smaller audience and offer a better quality of service for a niche market,” said Phillip Chalker, who founded the gaming store Fanatix alongside his wife, Genie, about five years ago.

Without a connection to your target audience, he said, it’s difficult for a small business to survive.

“In my experience, since we’re a game store and comic store, we’re always talking with other community members that may be interested in what we do, but at the same time we’re able to give back,” Chalker said. “A librarian may come in, and she didn’t realize we sold comics, and all of a sudden we’re connected with kids. I live here, so any money I make or any steps we take genuinely get put back into the community.”

Word of mouth is often essential in building the engine, as the high cost of advertising limits what upstart stores and restaurants can do.

“Word of mouth is number one,” said Whaley, owner of The Bar-B-Q Shack, located at the intersection of Fortner Street and Brannon Stand Road . “Without that, you don’t have a chance. You can advertise all you want to, but without that, you’ve got nothing. We have a lot of customers say, ‘I don’t go to chains. I don’t know what I’m going to get.’ I have no problem showing them exactly where my food comes from.”

The challenges of building a brand are real.

When Whaley opened his restaurant in 2003, it took years to build up the reputation needed to survive.

Once that success came, though, it brought its own troubles.

When The Bar-B-Q Shack opened, there were only about three restaurants within a three-mile radius.

“But since I’ve been here, there’s probably in the neighborhood of 25 different restaurants in that three-to-four-mile radius. It’s a dog-eat-dog world now. Every dollar that goes that way is a dollar that comes away from here, potentially. So long as we continue to climb, we can hang in here, but it’s hard. It’s a challenge.”

Chalker’s biggest challenge early on was building a customer base.

“That was our biggest challenge was just properly marketing the game store and making sure we connect with new people so they weren’t unsure of what we did,” he said. “I think the most challenging thing for small businesses is usually finding the market, because they don’t have the resources like a big box store has to dump into newspapers and radio.”

Small business owners also face an exceptional workload.

Whaley employs about 15 people but still works 13-hour days, and the Chalkers run their Dothan store by themselves.

“It’s still tiring,” Whaley said. “That’s the luxury that a chain does have that we don’t have: they’ve got two managers. Their volume is so high they can actually afford that. If my volume was twice what it is now, I’d have a nighttime manager and I’d go fishing.”

When Chalker decided to expand Fanatix into comic books and open a store in Enterprise, it meant any hope of reducing his workload went out the window.

“It’s always been just me and my wife,” he said. “Of course we’ve had help from friends and family here and there, luckily, if one of us gets sick. Employment, fees and spending money on payroll is always a challenge for small business, especially with rising cost of minimum wage and benefits. We don’t hire people. I wish we could, but between what we want to grow the store at in terms of putting comics on the shelves, these are all new expenses. It does get tiring, but we love it.”

What ultimately drives these businesses, though, is the passion of those who start them.

Without that passion, the engine that drives the Dothan economy is bound to fail.

“Small business owners will know that. You’re married to it, and especially in retail, you’ve got to know your product,” Chalker said. “These types of businesses don’t survive unless the people selling it also enjoy it. We’re not selling lawnmowers and we don’t cut grass. We’re not selling stuff we don’t connect to. This is genuinely what interests us. That’s key to any small business.”

Whaley also has some advice for those looking to start their own businesses.

“Check out the demographics and find out how many people are in that area,” he said. “If you can get 10 percent of the demographics, you can make it. Don’t think that you can do it all by yourself, (but) don’t think there’s no work involved. It’s all work. If you’re going to make it, you’ve got to be there.”

And when the worst happens, ego needs to be left at the door.

“The biggest thing is be willing to walk away from it,” Whaley said. “Set you a goal – either you’ve got a six-month goal, a two-year goal or whatever – and if it’s not doing a certain amount of business in a certain amount of time, walk away from it. Be man or woman enough to walk away from it.”

But for those who succeed, hustle is key .

“Stan Lee said that with great power comes great responsibility. If you want to be powerful and make your way in the small business world, you have to first have that responsibility, and the responsibility means doing the work,” Chalker said. “There’s always more work to be done, whether it’s marketing the business yourself or making sure you connect with your audience. Someone who puts the work first in anything they do will be successful.”

The Eagle will be offering more detailed explorations this week of the many aspects of small businesses and their relationship with the community.