Welcome to The Lid, your afternoon dose of the 2016 ethos… Donald Trump on Tuesday said he will "keep whining and whining until I win," which is the most detailed plan he has rolled out so far this campaign.

Get The Lid straight to your inbox each afternoon -- click here to sign up.

'16 AT 30 THOUSAND

Jeb Bush will target Hillary Clinton during a foreign policy address at the Reagan Library tonight. And in addition to slamming the Democratic presidential frontrunner for instability around the world, Bush is looking to prove his own toughness as the potential GOP presidential nominee. It was less than two weeks ago when Clinton knocked Bush around at the National Urban League conference in his home state of Florida. "I don't think you can credibly say that everyone has a right to rise and then say you're for phasing out Medicare or for repealing Obamacare," Clinton said, referencing the name of Bush's political operation. When Bush took the stage moments later, he did not respond, drawing criticism from some within his party being overly passive. That's why Bush, in addition to laying out his national security philosophy, is hoping he can use tonight to calm GOP concerns that he's just not tough enough.

POPPING ON NBC POLITICS

Trump continues to lead in recent polls, even after his recent battle with Megyn Kelly. One of us (!) take a look back some other early frontrunners to find what this means for Trump's staying power. (Hint: No a lot).

On a related note, from one of us: FOX News anchor Megyn Kelly said Monday night that she will not apologize for her questions to Donald Trump in Thursday's debate, saying "we agree to disagree."

NBC's Jordan Frasier previews Bush's foreign policy speech tonight at the Reagan Library.

"Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker took to Twitter Tuesday to respond to Hillary Clinton's campaign for criticizing comments he made about racial discord," NBC's Shaq Brewster writes.

CAMPAIGN QUICK READS

TRUMP: A new poll in New Hampshire shows he is still in the lead in New Hampshire.

He is also leading in Iowa, according to a Suffolk University poll, those he support did take some bruises after the debate and its fall out.

FIORINA: She saw a bump in a Suffolk University poll of like Iowa GOP caucus-goers after getting good reviews during last week's debate.

CRUZ: Chris McDaniel, who fell just short in a primary battle against Sen. Thad Cochran in 2014, stumped for Cruz in Mississippi today.

FOR THE RECORD…

"I want to win and I'm not happy about not winning and I am a whiner and I keep whining and whining until I win."

-- Donald Trump on CNN.

TOMORROW'S SKED

Jeb Bush holds two events in Nevada.

Ted Cruz continues his southern swing, with three stops in Arkansas.

Rand Paul and John Kasich campaign in New Hampshire.