The Supreme Court will hear arguments Wednesday in King v. Burwell, the latest challenge to the Affordable Care Act. The plaintiffs argue that four words in the health care law prevent Americans who have purchased health care on federal "exchanges," or online marketplaces, from receiving subsidies to alleviate the cost. Thirty-seven states rely on healthcare.gov, meaning an estimated 8 million people could lose their health coverage if the judges side with the plaintiffs.

David Catron at the American Spectator believes that government overreach, specifically by President Barack Obama, is at the heart of King v. Burwell. “Obama obviously believes the law is what he says it is, a delusion evidently shared by his party and the press,” he wrote. The challenge “has nothing [to] do with any ‘plot to kill health care,’ as the New York Times recently put it,” nor an attack on Obamacare, he wrote. “It is rather an attempt to prevent the President from doing further violence to the Constitution.”



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

“This blatant disregard for the law has put millions on the hook,” argued Republican Reps. John Kline of Minnesota, Paul Ryan of Wisconsin and Fred Upton of Michigan, “because if you received a subsidy and lose it because of the administration’s illegal actions, you’ll face big insurance bills you can’t afford.” Writing in the Wall Street Journal, the lawmakers expressed support for the plaintiffs and proposed an Obamacare "off-ramp,” which they said will return choice and affordability to consumers and lift “burdensome” mandates. “Under ObamaCare, government controls your choices,” they wrote. “Under our proposal, you will.”

Jackie Bodnar accused the IRS of “enforcing a version of Obamacare that doesn’t exist” by extending tax credits to Americans using the federal exchange. “I guess in the Obama White House, if you like your health care law, you can keep it,” wrote Bodnar for U.S. News & World Report. “If you don’t, just have the IRS enforce something different and hope nobody will notice.” Keeping the law intact, she wrote, would send the message that “it’s okay to illegally legislate from the executive branch.”

“The strongest part of the plaintiffs’ argument is that four-word phrase,” acknowledged David Leonhardt at The New York Times. “The weakest part of the plaintiffs’ argument is everything else about the law.” Leonhardt agreed that, read alone, the phrasing at issue supports the plaintiffs' view – only state-established exchanges can provide subsidies – but the rest of the law discounts that entirely. The reversal of such a large social safety net program, for which there is no true precedent, could further polarize the Supreme Court in an already partisan nation, he warned.



[VOTE: Should the Supreme Court Strike Down Obamacare Subsidies in King v. Burwell?]