SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

The grassroots are on fire against ObamaTrade. Conservatives are outraged that the same politicians who said, “Elect me and I will stand up to Obama,” would actually vote to give him more power.

House members are getting scorched from both the right and left. Labor is already running ads against Democrat House members Ami Berra and Kathleen Rice who are supporting ObamaTrade.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Now Republicans are on notice: Obamatrade will be an issue next year, and if you don’t get the picture, we’ve made an ad to help you figure it out.

For ObamaTrade-loving incumbents who think they’re safe because they have overwhelmingly Republican districts, we’re here to tell you no one who betrays the will of the people is safe. Your vote on fast track will be an issue in the primary.

The politics of ObamaTrade are poisonous. Poll after poll shows a majority of Americans across the political spectrum oppose these phony “free trade” deals – and conservatives oppose them in even greater numbers than Democrats.

It’s especially toxic for Republicans because the white blue collar voters the GOP relies on to win elections positively loathe ObamaTrade. They correctly see it as part of the open borders agenda pitting them against cheap foreign labor. Whether the competition is from illegal/foreign guest workers at home or cheap foreign labor overseas, working Americans take it in the rear, as Mike Huckabee so succinctly put it.

Our message to the traitor politician is clear: if you fast track ObamaTrade, the voters will throw you under the train. And we’ll be there to help them.

In case these pols are too busy at fundraisers to get the picture, we’ve put together a “Your Name Could Be Here” spot showing what’s in store for them next year.

Watch the :30 spot “Surrender” here.

Here are a few a simple questions any Congressman can answer to find out if you’ll be seeing our ad in your district next year.

Did you promise voters to stand up against Obama’s agenda but instead voted to give him more power? Did you bow to the man who brought us Obamacare, executive amnesty and more regulations? Did you vote to help Obama shred the Constitution, erase our borders, kill jobs and surrender our sovereignty and tax dollars to international authorities?

If you answered yes, congratulations! You’re a candidate for a one-way ticket home on the Fast Track Express. All aboard!

And when the Chamber of Cronies tells you they’ll have your back, remember these two words: Eric Cantor.

Primaries are low turnout elections. A few thousand, even a few hundred, motivated voters can end the career of the most senior entrenched incumbent. And we’ll be there to help them.

If you are a primary challenger, drop us a line. And if you want to help send a treasonous congressman a one-way ticket home, drop us a dime.

See you next year!

Curtis Ellis is Executive Director of the American Jobs Alliance and served as communications director with the Campaign for Primary Accountability, the SuperPAC that unseated several long-term House incumbents in primary battles in 2012. Emailinfo@obamatrade.com.