Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Chris Christie endorses Donald Trump for president; Deal Police Captain was impaired in fatal crash; 2016 Academy Awards

Police say a Sloop Creek Drive home was used to manufacture marijuana and narcotics.

William Faiges. Source: Ocean County Jail (Photo: Ocean County Jail)

BERKELEY — Police say a Sloop Creek Drive home in the Bayville section of the township was used to prepare and distribute marijuana and other narcotics.

Sloop Creek Drive residents Larry MacTaggart and Jean Brewer were arrested Feb. 23 along with William Faiges of Ocean Gate during a search of the home, Berkeley police said in a news release on Facebook.

Police said they discovered marijuana, paraphernalia related to the sale of narcotics, a digital scale and packaging material.

MacTaggart, 52, was charged with possession of marijuana with the intent to distribute.

Brewer, 57, was charged with possession of a hypodermic syringe.

Faiges, 60, was arrested on an outstanding warrant related to a theft in Berkeley. He was taken to the Ocean County Jail, Toms River, and held in default of $5,000 bail, according to jail records.

Toms River home burglarized while residents slept

MacTaggart and Brewer were charged and released, according to Berkeley police.

"It should be noted that this successful investigation was the result of concerned citizens who reported suspicious activity to police," Berkeley police wrote on the department's Facebook page. "Residents are reminded to call the Berkeley Township Police Department TIP line at 732-341-1132 ext. 611. Tips can remain anonymous."

The Ocean County Regional SWAT and the Ocean County Sheriff's Department K-9 unit assisted.

Photos of MacTaggart and Brewer were not immediately available.

Deal cop suspended on suspicion of drug use before death

Ex-Monmouth prosecutor drove drunk, charge says

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@GannettNJ.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/214WK2X