Transcript for Bernie Sanders Says He'll Win New Hampshire, Iowa, and the White House

? Dannon ? Look at the crowds coming out for our next guest, nearly 5,000 there in Colorado, and that is not all, so many headlines right now for Hillary Clinton's top challenger, senator Bernie sanders, he joins us now from Concord, new Hampshire. Senator, thank you for joining us this morning. We looked at the kean seventh Nell. You're up with the crowd in Keene, New Hampshire, let me tell you a secret, we're going to win New Hampshire, care to repeat that prediction now? We are going to win new Hampshire, we're going to win Iowa, and I think we're going to win the democratic nomination and I think we're going to win the presidency, I'll tell you why, the American people are sick and tired of seeing the disappearance of the great middle class of this country, they're sick and tired of working longer hours for low wages, while at the same time, 99% of all new income generated is going to the top 1% and the top 0.1% now owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90%. Geoge, we have seen a massive shift of wealth and income from ordinary Americans to the very richest people in this country and the American people are saying, enough is enough, we need to create an economy that works for all of us and not just for a handful of billionaires. You're drawing fire as well, particularly on your record in guns. Martin O'Malley put out a video this week. Bernie sanders voted against the Brady bill. And Bernie sanders voted to give gun manufacturers protection from the victims. Bernie sanders is no Progressive when it comes to guns. I saw you smiling when it was being played, what is your response? Well, I think the people of Vermont know differently, they know every single race that I have run in with the exception of one, the NRA and the gun lobbies and the people who are most interested in guns supported my opponent. I have a lifetime voting record with the NRA of somewhere between D and F, coming from a state that has virtually no gun control at all, I cast what I think was a pretty brave vote banning assault weapons, doing away the gun show loophole and fighting for instant background checks, so that we make sure that guns do not fall in the hands of those people who should not have it. A strong record. But let me tell you this, George, in terms of gun control, if we're going to have any success, what we need to do is bridge this cultural divide between rural America and urban America and come up with some commonsense legislation, which includes everything that I just voted for and maybe more, and we can't have people demagogueing against folks because they go out hunt. Rural America has to understand that guns in Vermont is not the same thing in guns in Chicago where they're used to kill kids or shoot at police officers. So, I think we need a national dialogue and, frankly, coming from a state that has virtually no gun control but having voted time and time again for strong gun control, I think I'm in a position to make that happen. You also come from a state that's 95% white as well. A poll out this week showed how this might be affecting you and your potential race right now, support among nonwhites, it said Clinton has 91%, Bernie sanders just 3%. How do close that gap? Well, I tell you how you do that, George, as somebody who's been involved in the civil rights movement for my entire adult life, I was arrested as a student protesting segregation of schools in Chicago, fought against segregated housing in Chicago. Marched with martin Luther king in the great March on Washington, I have a long history in fighting for civil rights. I understand that many people in the african-american community may not understand that, but I think the issues that we are dealing with, combating 51% african-american youth unemployment, talking about the need that public colleges and universities should be tuition-free, raising the minimum wage to $15 an hour, creating millions of jobs by rebuilding our infrastructure. These are issues should apply to every American. But to be honest with you, given the disparity that we're seeing in income and wealth in this country, it applies even more to the african-american community. And to the hispanic community. What we're going to do is make a major outreach program to those communities. Let people know my background and my record. How about the issue of health care coming out of the supreme court case, saving obamacare for the second time. The supreme court led by chief justice John Roberts. You consistently called for a single-payer system, medicare for everyone, now, if you were president, would you continue to fight for that and is that responsible -- would it be more effective use of your time and energy and presidential resources to strengthen the obamacare that's already in place? Well, let me just say this, I haven't been a great fan of the supreme court, their decision on citizens united, opening up the opportunity for billionaires to buy elections will go down as history as one of the worst decisions ever made. But I applaud them for the two decisions they made this week on the affordable care act and on gay marriage. In terms of the affordable care act, I'm on the committee that helped write that bill. This was really a no-brainer, no one thought we should look at the exchanges any differently than state exchanges. Despite the gains of the affordable care act, we still have 35 million Americans without any health insurance and many more who are underinsured. Meanwhile, we end up spending almost twice as much per capita on health care as do the people of any other country. We need to join the industrialized world. We are the only major country on Earth that doesn't guarantee health care to all people as a right. So, I do believe that we have to move toward a medicare for all, single-payer system, I don't think it's going to happen tomorrow. Finally, you're going to be the next president of the united States, if that's true, you'll be the oldest president ever elected, 75 years old on election day, I believe, what do you say to people who might be concerned about your age? Well, why don't you follow me around this weekend in new Hampshire, where we're doing seven separate events and understand that, thank god, I'm blessed with very good health, I don't think I have taken a day off because of sickness in several years. So, I believe, as a kid, a long-distance runner, I'm blessed with endurance and I'm blessed with health, and we're going to do everything we can to win this campaign be good a president I possibly can be. Senator sanders, thanks very much for joining us this

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.