January is National Radon Action Month. Each year, nearly 22,000 people die from radon-induced lung cancer. Roughly 54 percent of those diagnosed with early-stage lung cancer are expected to live no more than five years after diagnosis. Radon, which is an odorless and colorless gas, is the second leading cause of lung cancer in the U.S.

The Robeson County Health Department is partnering with the N.C. Radon Program to provide free short-term radon test kits. A limited supply of these test kits is being made available to the public on a first-come basis at 460 Country Club Road in Lumberton beginning on Tuesday. Further information can be acquired by calling Whitney McFarland at 910-671-3442.

Statewide, only 15,000 kits are being distributed and only one kit is needed per household. Once the supply of free kits is exhausted, they can be acquired by going to the N.C. Radon Program website, where they can be purchased at the reduced price of $6.

While radon is oftentimes not thought to be ultra-present in Robeson County, there are areas that have been proven to have high radon levels. Through the use of a mobile application, the N.C. Radon Program website assists in determining the highest radon level in a zip code. It can also be used to identify a certified professional in fixing radon issues within the home. The cost to lower unacceptable levels averages about $1,500 per home. The Self Help Credit Union has created a loan program specifically for radon mitigation. If you are below the federal poverty level, you may be eligible for other programs.

Lung cancer can strike anyone at anytime, even a non-smoker. Test your home for radon and lower the risk. For information, visit www.ncradon.org.

Bill Smith http://robesonian.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/web1_Bill-Smith_cmyk.jpg Bill Smith

Free kits available at Health Department

Bill Smith

Bill Smith is the director of the Robeson County Health Department.

Bill Smith is the director of the Robeson County Health Department.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus