A largely ignored but significant health crisis is taking place in the United States: The rate of diabetes in our population has grown to epidemic proportions. The Center for Disease Control’s recently released estimates indicate 29 million people or 9 percent of the population had diabetes in 2012, which demonstrates a 12 percent increase in incidences between 2010 and 2012.

In adults, type 2 diabetes accounts for approximately 95 percent of all diagnosed cases of diabetes; most of these cases can be prevented through diet, exercise, and weight loss. The report found that more than 86 million Americans have prediabetes, a condition that is known to progress into type 2 diabetes without the aforementioned early intervention efforts. The CDC projects that one in three U.S. adults will have diabetes by 2050, if the current trends continue. This could create a crippling burden to the health care system and exponentially increase the already high economic and human costs of the disease.

Diabetes is a serious and chronic condition that is often accompanied by severe complications. These include heart disease, stroke, blindness, kidney failure, and limb amputation. Many of these complications are costly to treat and require long-term types of treatment. In fact, medical costs for people with diabetes are 2.3 times higher then for those without the disease. If the growing rates of diabetes remain unchecked, the number of patients seeking treatment for diabetes and its many complications will greatly increase the demand for all types of health care, eventually overwhelming the system with this single disease.

Already, the utilization of physician office, emergency department, and hospital outpatient visits by people with diabetes increased by 6 percent and inpatient stays increased 9 percent between 2007 and 2012.

The economic burden of diabetes is staggering, totaling $245 billion, in both direct medical costs, and indirect costs including disability, work loss, and premature death.

Diabetes is the seventh leading cause of death in the United States. The cost in dollars fails to account for the human cost of the disease through pain, suffering, and loss in quality of life.

These burdens to our nation are projected to grow with the epidemic. Eventually, these costs will be passed along to all of us in the form of higher insurance premiums and taxes, reduced earnings, and reduced standards of living.

Colorado is considered a healthy state enjoying relatively low rates of both obesity and diabetes. However, that does not mean that we are immune to the health trends of the nation.

In 2012, in Colorado 290,245 people, or 7.2 percent of the adult population, had been diagnosed with diabetes. While this number is below the 9 percent national average, the incidences of diabetes have been slowly increasing here as well. In 2007, only 5.6 percent of Coloradans had been diagnosed with diabetes. The total economic cost of the disease in 2012 for Colorado was $2.52 billion. Coupled with the growing national epidemic Coloradans are unlikely to remain unscathed by the economic and human cost of diabetes.

The good news is we can do something to stop this disease from becoming a crippling burden to our society. Most cases of type 2 diabetes are completely preventable through lifestyle changes. As concerned citizens, we can advocate at both the state and federal levels for policies that address prevention, education, and the coordination of diabetes programs. For example, the National Diabetes Clinical Care Commission Act is an important policy that would help to coordinate and streamline the numerous federal programs for people with diabetes and prediabetes. The policy would impact the problem by establishing a commission that will evaluate existing federal programs and make recommendations to improve diabetes care delivery, patient outcomes, and reducing national and individual costs for people with diabetes.

It is important that we act now to avoid this unnecessary epidemic, call your representative today and ask him or her to support the National Diabetes Clinical Care Commission Act.

Vanessa Fernandez is a native of Denver, and is currently earning a master’s of social work with a concentration in health care, at the University of Southern California.