Topics: Ayn Rand, Donald Trump, Election 2016, GOP 2016, John Boehner, Mitt Romney, Paul Ryan, Ted Cruz, Elections News, News, Politics News

As if he hadn’t made Paul Ryan fix his mistakes enough already, former Speaker of the House John Boehner said on Wednesday that he thinks the one-time vice presidential nominee — and current House speaker — should be the Republican Party’s presidential pick if no one has won the nomination outright by the time of the party’s convention.

Here’s how the first orange speaker in U.S. history put it, according to Politico:

“If we don’t have a nominee who can win on the first ballot, I’m for none of the above,” Boehner said at the Futures Industry Association conference here. “They all had a chance to win. None of them won. So I’m for none of the above. I’m for Paul Ryan to be our nominee.”

Not exactly a clarion call, to be sure. But when you keep in mind that Boehner referred to Sen. Ted Cruz, the only guy with a realistic shot (and it’s not that realistic) at defeating Donald Trump, as “Lucifer,” the subtext is pretty clear:

Boehner … had long whispered to friends that he believes Ryan could be the party’s political savior if it came to that. But Boehner never said it publicly until now. In the same question-and-answer session here, Boehner referred to Ted Cruz as “lucifer.” He previously called the Texas senator, who led the failed Republican effort to shut down the government over Obamacare, a “jackass.”

Ryan, for his part, has said he is not interested in being commander-in-chief. He says he “consciously” decided not to seek the office, in fact.

But because Ryan didn’t take a so-called “Shermanesque” vow that he would rather be eaten alive by a pack of ravenous squirrels than accept the Republican Party’s presidential nomination, some folks in the media have decided that what he really meant when he said he didn’t want to run was, in fact, that he very much did.

For example, check out the way a writer at the Washington Post’s “The Fix” blog — a reliable font of conventional wisdom for those who cannot bear to wait until Sunday morning’s “Meet the Press” — reacted to the Ryan interview. They don’t make a mountain out of molehill so much as they erect a new tower of Babel from a grain of sand:

Ryan’s interview is creating buzz … for two reasons: One, he’s one of Republicans’ undisputed leaders. He’s the speaker of the House. He’s in charge of presiding over the convention itself. And he’s the party’s 2012 vice presidential nominee.

So far, so good. All of those things are definitely literally true. What about the second reason, though?

[T]wo, his interview with Harwood came as Donald Trump was in the process of sweeping at least three, and possibly four, of the five states voting in the GOP nominating process on Tuesday. The realization is sinking in among Republicans, Tuesday by Tuesday, that Trump is the most likely candidate to be their nominee (though a contested convention is also possible).

How does the Republican Party leadership’s becoming (incredibly belated) aware that the man winning their presidential primary is likely to win their presidential primary lead to Ryan’s “no” actually meaning “yes”? I honestly couldn’t tell you; I only speak beginner’s pundit, at best.

That said, the Fix is certainly right about this much: Donald Trump is in the best position, by far, to win the Republican Party’s nomination — and GOP leadership has no idea what the hell they should do. It’s also not outside the realm of possibility that some of them believe Ryan will, once again, take the job that no one else seems to want. So, sure, it’s conceivable that a Draft Ryan movement could take hold.