PEORIA — The Caterpillar Visitors Center in Downtown Peoria was the site of a reunion Tuesday between Toby the Clown and Dr. Dirt.

The occasion was the opening of the center’s latest exhibit, providing a glimpse of the five power parades that Caterpillar Inc. held between 1964 and 2000.

The power parade was a demonstration of the company’s product line put on for Caterpillar employees and their families. Along with synchronized excavators and a review of the latest earth-moving equipment, the parades also provided entertainment.

Some of the entertaining was provided by Ken Gerber, a Caterpillar employee from 1955 to 1990 who played both Toby the Clown and Alexander Botts, the erstwhile tractor salesman, a character made famous by Joe E. Brown in the 1936 film, “Earthworm Tractors.”

As for Dr. Dirt, that was Bill Nelan, who, as a Caterpillar employee, earned the nickname by directing big-machine traffic behind the scenes at the power parades.

Gerber, 82, and Nelan, 76, traded stories at the visitors center in front of images from parades held in 1964, 1973, 1978, 1988 and 2000.

Nelan’s son, Mark, 55, who attended several of the parades, still recalls Gerber’s performances.

“He was really funny,” said the younger Nelan.

Gerber and others who participated in the programs also were really busy. The power parade schedule called for multiple shows — as many as 28 one-hour shows usually held during August — that involved hundreds of Caterpillar employees, said Ed Smith, Caterpillar’s global brand manager who organized the last power parade in 2000.

As many as 100,000 people would attend shows during the course of the month, with the last four parades held at Caterpillar’s demonstration facility in Edwards, said center manager Kathryn Spitznagle.

“The parades helped forge a connection between the employees and the company. It was a chance to show what workers had done as well as demonstrate new products to employees,” she said.

More than two dozen artifacts from past parades are on display along with photographs and videos in an exhibit that will be on display through Oct. 2, said Spitznagle, who spoke of her own memories of participating in a power parade as a Caterpillar employee — selling cotton candy to visitors.

Gerber, who serves as a docent at the center, offered more power-parade background.

“Fred Dooley, a past manager of the Edwards facility, served as narrator for a number of shows. He had a voice that sounded like John Wayne’s,” he said.

“Ron Little, a Caterpillar employee who had been the football coach at Limestone (Community) High School, was the first Toby the Clown.”

Then it was Gerber’s turn to play the clown.

“I figured I did 61 shows at Toby and 72 as Botts,” he said.

Steve Tarter is Journal Star business editor. He can be reached at 686-3260 or starter@pjstar.com. Follow his blog, Minding Business, on pjstar.com and follow him on Twitter @SteveTarter.