Even though it may be out of necessity, Jason Oden is moving in to a new football home this spring at Colorado State and he isn’t planning on being a short-term tenant.

He’s moving to running back from safety to fill an expected void left by the unexpected departure of Donnell Alexander and he ran with the first team Saturday when the Rams made their annual spring visit to Denver.

Coach Jim McElwain put his team through a spring scrimmage session at Dick’s Sporting Goods Park in Commerce City. Oden led the offense in rushing with 69 yards on 15 carries and scored two touchdowns. He shared time with freshman Bryce Peters, who ran for 27 yards on 11 carries and scored two touchdowns.

The running back position is a critical part of CSU’s spring practice that concludes Saturday with a spring game at Hughes Stadium in Fort Collins. Not only have the Rams lost Alexander, but also Kapri Bibbs, last season’s star running back who left school early to try the NFL.

“I can play both sides of the ball,” Oden, a junior out of Buffalo, N.Y., said. “I’m trying to get things going at running back. Right now I’m studying the playbook. It’s all about developing confidence. I had fun out there today, but it’s a big jump going from defense to offense.”

Even with the loss of personnel, coach Jim McElwain indicated he wasn’t overly concerned about the position. But he still is looking ahead to adding some freshman running backs and a possible junior college transfer to the mix in preseason practice in August.

“If we can find a good one out there, we’ll be keeping our eyes open,” McElwain said of a possible addition of a JC transfer.

But he wasn’t downplaying what he saw in the scrimmage.

“I feel good about what we have at running back,” McElwain said. “We lost some good ones. But I think Oden is making the best of a position move. I’m excited to see how he is keeping his pad level down, how he’s moving the pile, and he made some good cuts out there today. He has some skills.”

Oden wouldn’t speculate where he is on the depth chart, but he welcomes additional competition.

“We’ll let the coach make that decision,” Oden said when asked if he’s the No. 1 running back. “Bring on the freshmen, the more the better. We’ll compete and hopefully they can help us have a better offense.”

McElwain was positive about the move to the Denver area for the scrimmage.

“We played with some energy,” McElwain said. “I thought our offensive line did a really good job. It’s good to see how our younger players respond to being in different surroundings.”

Quarterback Garrett Grayson was upbeat about spring practice.

“I’d say we’re ahead of where we wanted to be.” Grayson said. “We’ve met our expectations.”

Irv Moss: 303-954-1296, imoss@denverpost.com or twitter.com/irvmoss