Thousands of people drive by the sprawling building every day.

Owned by the Cleveland County Health Department, the modern-looking building in east Norman is used to treat some of the most vulnerable, at-risk individuals in the area.

Most of those who pass by are unaware as to why the building is there to begin with.

Still fewer know it’s named for Cal Hobson, the former state senator who was arrested twice in 2014 after police suspected him of driving while under the influence of alcohol. He also was charged with bribery, accused of offering a Noble police officer $50,000 to let him go after his late afternoon arrest on U.S. 77, the main drag in the Cleveland County town.

Hobson currently is facing three separate felonies — two for driving under the influence and one for attempting to bribe a police officer — although those charges are pending in Cleveland County District Court. The former lawmaker has a 9 p.m. nightly curfew and court documents indicate that he is electronically monitored, part of a stringent pretrial release program.

While Hobson has many defenders across Oklahoma because of his accomplishments as a lawmaker, some believe his recent behavior is more than enough to warrant removing his name from the building, which is situated in the 200 block of 12th Avenue NE.

Cleveland County Commissioner Rod Cleveland said he will take steps to do just that next month.

“I will be bringing it up in January, at a public meeting,” Cleveland told The Oklahoman. “It’s not personal ... I like Cal and he was a great legislator for the area ... but addiction is one of the big things they treat over there.”

Cleveland said he started thinking about changing the name after Hobson’s second arrest in 2014, in May, but felt like the timing wasn’t right because Hobson was running for public office at the time. Hobson was trying to win a seat on the Cleveland County Board of Commissioners, the same body that could vote next month to remove his name from the buildings he helped to get built a decade ago.

Reached by phone Sunday evening, Hobson expressed little emotion when told that current county commissioners were talking about removing his name from the building he helped to get built.

“Whatever they decide ... they have the power to do it,” Hobson said. “I worked with their predecessors in a bipartisan way to get this done, but what matters is that the building is there ... not some letters on a wall.”

Hobson said he is more concerned that many elected officials in Oklahoma “are turning away our own money” for health care services and resources available through the Affordable Care Act — a law commonly referred to as Obamacare.

“Thousands of (Cleveland County) residents don’t have access to health care ... people are dying because they can’t get help,” Hobson said. “I know Obama is a dirty word in Oklahoma, but let’s use the money, it’s Oklahoma taxpayers’ money after all.”

“That’s what I think Rod (Cleveland) and his daddy (State Rep. Bobby Cleveland) should do instead of sitting around thinking about me.”

According to a news story published in The Oklahoman in late 2003, the building was named for Hobson because he helped raise the millions of dollars necessary to construct the building while he served in the then-Democrat-controlled state Legislature.

The new, 42,000-square-foot facility Hobson helped to build doubled the office space available to the Cleveland County Health Department, which had used a much smaller space at the county fairgrounds. Newspaper archives indicate the Cal Hobson Center had its grand opening ceremony in December 2003 after 18 months of construction.

Ongoing struggles

Cleveland, who hails from a political family, said he’s known Hobson “since I was like 10.” Cleveland said it’s common knowledge in political and social circles that Hobson “struggles with addiction ... and has for a long, long time.”

“He has a disease,” Cleveland said. “It doesn’t mean that he wasn’t great for the state, because he was a terrific legislator. But, given his current situation, it just looks bad.”

Hobson was arrested on suspicion of drunken driving in May and again in late August of this year.

Court records show that he drove into oncoming traffic before he was arrested May 18 in Noble. Just over three months later, Hobson was picked up again when Lexington officers found him apparently drunk in his vehicle at a convenience store.

After he was elected to the state House in 1978, Hobson would go on to serve in the state Senate. In 2003, he was elected Senate president pro tem and was re-elected to the post two years later.

In March 2005 — two months after being elected a second time — fellow Democrats requested that Hobson resign his position as president pro tem. He would leave the Senate the next year due to term limits.

As for a new name for the building, Cleveland said he thinks the generic approach is best.

“I think we should just go in and take his name off and leave the rest,” he said.

“That way it just says Cleveland County Health Department ... that’s what it is.”