WESTBROOK, Maine--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Common Census announces alliances with four national third party administrators who provide services for employers to complete required reporting for the Affordable Care Act. This includes preparation of Forms 1094 and 1095. Collaborations with any of these vendors may qualify for use of the Common Census Benefits Operating System® with no ongoing cost as part of the Common Census Zero PEPMTM campaign.

“Employers now have ACA reporting plus benefit administration for just the price of ACA reporting. Common Census has a reputation for impartiality, reliability and high quality service. With this recent ACA reporting expansion we are attracting and serving even more customers,” explained Stephanie Whitman, Marketing Manager for Common Census. “Users export data with one easy selection and it is sent to any of the cooperating vendors. This is supplemented with any payroll file resulting in the needed ACA reporting.”

Whitman continued with, “This is a practical extension for our strategy to broaden the use of our platform to employers with as few as 50 employees. Zero PEPM has already been adopted by numerous well known insurance companies and other financial services enterprises. Expanding to ACA third party administrators makes our services more accessible across the nation.”

For more information visit www.commoncensus.com/zeropepm or contact Jonathan Ide at +1 800 552 7373 or jonathan.ide@commoncensus.com.

About Common Census

Common Census, Inc., based in Westbrook, Maine, develops and markets a Benefits Operating System® to enroll and manage employee benefits coordinated with a Home Office Portal®. The enrollment system seamlessly transitions into an online benefit administration platform providing EDI for payroll, file feeds and data for ACA exporting. Common Census helps insurance brokers and agents obtain and retain clients by providing a branded platform that completely integrates core and worksite insurance products. For more information, please call 800-552-7373 or visit www.commoncensus.com.