WASHINGTON - Senate leaders closed in Monday on a deal to reopen government and extend its ability to raise money, bidding to resolve a two-week old shutdown and reassure markets as an Oct. 17 deadline for raising a government borrowing limit nears.

"I'm very optimistic that we will reach an agreement that's reasonable in nature this week to reopen the government, pay the nation's bills and begin long term negotiations to put our country on sound fiscal footing," Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) said on the Senate floor after a lengthy meeting with Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.)

"I share optimism that we're going to get a result that will be acceptable to both sides," McConnell said moments later.

In a sign of progress, the White House postponed a 3:00 p.m. meeting with the top four congressional leaders to give Reid and McConnell "time to continue making important progress towards a solution."

Stock markets rallied on the news.

McConnell on Monday was reviewing a proposal from Reid to fund the government at current levels through Jan. 15 and to raise the federal debt ceiling until mid-February, Senate aides said.

Once a short-term government funding bill passes, lawmakers would set up a budget conference to negotiate issues like entitlement savings and replacing across-the-board spending cuts known as the sequester.

Rep. George Holding (R-N.C.) was caught napping earlier this October while presiding over a House session. (C-SPAN)

Democrat aides said Reid is considering Republican proposals to replace a medical device tax imposed to fund Obamacare and impose income verification requirements for individuals who qualify for subsidies under Obamacare the healthcare law. But Democrats said those steps will require additional Republican concessions.

A Reid-McConnell deal would probably clear the Senate easily, putting pressure on the Republican-run House to accept the agreement or risk missing the debt ceiling deadline which would likely rattle markets due to the risk the government will default on its debts.

While conservatives in the House were already reacting angrily Monday to the potential deal, senators believe House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) will have no choice but to bring the Senate bill up for a vote, and allow it to pass with mostly Democratic votes.

Democrats believe Republican leaders are desperate for a way out of the showdown amid polls that show public blame for the shutdown putting the Republican Party at record low approval ratings.

An ABC News/Washington Post poll released Monday found 74% of Americans disapprove of the way congressional Republicans are handling the budget crisis, up from 63% when the shutdown started.

dfriedman@nydailynews.com

On a mobile device? Click here for video.