As he berated his team after a disheartening loss to the Phoenix Suns on Friday night — lamenting its effort and decrying its woeful inability to guard the perimeter — Nuggets coach Mike Malone made time to include a note of optimism.

“The good thing,” he said, “is we have three easy games coming up.”

Sarcasm has a way of taking the sting out of reality.

Denver (6-7) will be unfamiliar with “easy” as it concludes the rest of its homestand with a three-game stretch against Western Conference teams with a combined record of 29-9. And for starters, as if facing the defending NBA champions isn’t a tall enough task, the Nuggets will be charged with standing in the way of history.

On Sunday, the Golden State Warriors will bring a 14-0 record into the Pepsi Center. One more victory would tie them for the greatest start to a season in league history. Led by reigning MVP Steph Curry, who has elevated his game to another stratosphere this season, the Warriors have become performance art on hardwood, a motivated Beethoven with no designs on slowing down.

“It’s a goal that’s right here and now, and it’s something that we want to experience,” Curry told reporters after the Warriors beat the Chicago Bulls 106-94 on Friday night. “It’d be a huge accomplishment (to set the record for best start) because doing something that hasn’t been done in the history of the league is special. You never know if this opportunity will come back again. There are so many variables that go into winning this many in a row, especially at the start of the season.”

Two NBA teams have started 15-0 — the 1948-49 Washington Capitals and the 1993-94 Houston Rockets. If the Warriors defeat the Nuggets on Sunday, they’d be able to set the record with a victory at home over the woebegone Los Angeles Lakers on Tuesday.

Malone, a former Warriors assistant, at this point would settle for finding more sustained effort from his team.

“I think we have some guys on this team who pick and choose when they play hard, and those guys aren’t going to play,” he said after Friday’s loss to Phoenix, during which the Nuggets blew a 17-point second-half lead. “You play with effort or you don’t play, and I didn’t like the effort of a bunch of our guys tonight. I can’t even fathom how, in a home game and up by 17, our guys could not play hard. It’s unacceptable.”

After the Suns hit 15-of-27 shots from 3-point range Friday, Malone called his team’s perimeter defense “a joke.”

Things certainly don’t get any easier against the Warriors, who entered Saturday averaging 12.3 made 3-pointers per game, by far the most in the league.

“We just have to keep giving effort on the defensive end,” Nuggets guard Gary Harris said. “It’s not on one person. It’s on the whole team. We have to continue to get better.”