Shawn Braue and Bill Berry live in very different types of neighborhoods but they share something in common.

Both got quite a jolt recently when they received their property tax assessment notices in the mail.

The assessed value of Braue’s home in Springwood, a newer, upscale Clay Township subdivision northwest of University Park Mall, shot up from $229,000 last year to $319,000 this year. The assessment on Berry’s home in Harter Heights, an older neighborhood southwest of the Notre Dame campus, grew from $109,000 to $180,000.

“Based on what?” Braue said. “I didn’t do any upgrades. It’s the same home it’s been the last 12 years or so.”

They are just two of the thousands of St. Joseph County property owners who are seeing big increases in their assessments this year. Assessed values in some neighborhoods of Granger, in both Harris and Clay townships, jumped by more than 20 percent.

County Assessor Rosemary Mandrici insists there’s nothing sinister going on. There are four reasons assessments can change dramatically, she said:

• The state can issue a new cost scale, a formula that factors an area’s changes in the prices of labor and materials involved with home construction and renovation, which happened this year. Mandrici said she didn’t know what effect this year’s cost scale might have had on assessments.

• A “trending factor” can be imposed, either positively or negatively, if enough home sales in an area occurred over the prior 14 months. This area is called a “neighborhood” by the assessor’s office, and it’s an area typically larger than a person’s street or even subdivision.

• The area’s land value increases according to annual reassessment, which is performed on a quarter of the county’s properties each year, on a rotating basis.

• Mistakes made during the assessment process in recent years are corrected.

Mandrici said her office this year “stratified” the Harter Heights area, redrawing some neighborhood boundary lines because some properties had been placed in the wrong neighborhoods in the past. Berry said his neighborhood number did change this year. And while Mandrici could not say specifically if that was the reason for Berry’s increase, she said land values vary among neighborhoods.

In another example, a Harris Township neighborhood had been assessed too low for years because the wrong base rate had been used in the 2012 assessment, but was corrected this year, resulting in a larger increase, Mandrici said.

The likely culprit for most increases, however, seems to be the area’s recovering housing market. The National Association of Realtors in May reported that the South Bend-Mishawaka area was the country’s third-hottest real estate market during the first quarter of this year. (The federal government defines the South Bend-Mishawaka metropolitan area as Cass County, Mich., and St. Joseph County, Ind.) The report, which the Wall Street Journal covered, said the median price for homes sold in this area during the first three months of 2015 was up 19 percent compared with the same period in 2014.

This year there were eight assessment neighborhoods in Harris Township, containing a combined 2,545 properties, whose assessed values increased an average of 19 percent, according to data that Mandrici has printed up and made available to the public in binders sitting on the counter of her third floor offices in the County-City Building.

Twelve neighborhoods in Clay Township, containing a total of 2,160 properties, had a 61 percent average increase.

By contrast, five neighborhoods in Portage Township, located largely in urban areas of South Bend, saw their assessed values decline by an average of 88 percent. Those areas contained 5,485 properties.

Countywide, Mandrici said about 60 percent of the county’s 120,000 properties saw their assessments decline this year, for taxes payable next year, while 21 percent stayed the same and 19 percent increased.

Republican County Council member Jamie O’Brien, who represents parts of Granger, said he’s heard complaints from about a dozen constituents. He’s also experiencing it firsthand. The assessment on his Knollwood Quail Ridge South home rose about $60,000, from $400,000 to $460,000.

Assessed values are supposed to reflect a property’s market value. O’Brien said he paid a little less than $400,000 for his home about five years ago.

“I’m not confident my house has appreciated much, if any, but it could have,” O’Brien said.

He said he has hired an appraiser to estimate the market value of his home, and said he was still deciding whether to appeal his assessment. Braue and Berry said they certainly plan to appeal.

The deadline for filing petitions for review with Mandrici’s office is Oct. 29. With a little less than a month to go, her office had received 742 petitions as of Friday, and typically receives 3,000 to 3,500 each year, she said.

“We’ve been doing this since 2006 and it’s not new,” Mandrici said. “Taxpayers, in their minds, think their taxes are never going to change. That’s the purpose of the appeals.”

To discuss the assessments with taxpayers, Mandrici’s staff has been staying open later, until 6:30 p.m., on select days, and plans to do so one more time on Oct. 27.

Property tax rates vary by township, but generally speaking, a property owner’s annual bill increases by a little more than $100 for every increase of $10,000 in assessed value, O’Brien said. For Berry, a retired Notre Dame electrical engineering professor, that could increase his bill by about $700.

Berry and his wife, Lois, live on a fixed income, but they have more resources than some of their retired friends and neighbors who also have seen large increases, he said.

“This will be difficult for some of them to pay,” Berry said.