NewsContraception

DENVER, November 15, 2013 (LifeSiteNews.com) – Are you “hot to trot?” If you’re a Millennial, born in 1982 or later, the people in charge of promoting ObamaCare’s health insurance exchange in Colorado hope you are. And they’re hoping it will motivate you to sign up for ObamaCare.

This outdated slang features prominently in at least one lewd new ad promoting ObamaCare, featuring an open-mouthed, smiling young blonde woman giving the “thumbs up” to a packet of contraceptive pills while lustfully eyeing her male companion. Neither wears a wedding ring.

“Let’s Get Physical,” reads the ad’s copy (another outdated cultural reference likely to be lost on the ad’s target demographic), which is written from the girl’s perspective. The ad copy reads:

“OMG, he’s hot! Let’s hope he’s as easy to get as this birth control. My health insurance covers the pill, which means all I have to worry about is getting him between the covers. I got insurance. Now you can too. Thanks Obamacare!”

Below the pair’s photo, the text reads, “Susie and Nate. Hot to trot.”

The ad is just one in a series aimed at young adults in Colorado which portray the Millennial generation as overgrown adolescents with terrible grammar who are interested mostly in casual sex, binge drinking, and questionable athletic pursuits.

Adam Fox, director of strategic engagement for the Colorado Consumer Health Initiative, which co-produced the ads with ProgressNow, told the Daily Caller the ads were intended to appeal to the state’s target market, “young adults and women, primarily.” This demographic is critical to the success of ObamaCare in order “to stabilize the insurance prices throughout the nation and Colorado.”

“I don’t think that we’re encouraging any particular behavior,” Fox told the Daily Caller, “but I think we’re acknowledging the reality that a lot of different behaviors happen whether we like it or not.”

Although the ads have been widely criticized for encouraging immoral and unhealthy behavior, along with poor grammar, Fox said they were intended to be realistic.

But the behavior displayed in the ads is so over-the-top that many people have mistakenly assumed that they are satirical, including Planned Parenthood VOTES of Colorado, which took to Twitter to condemn “anti-Obamacare folks” for producing the ads, which they called “slut shaming.”

After users flooded the group with replies, pointing out that the ad was created by ObamaCare’s supporters, not its detractors, Planned Parenthood quickly changed its tune.

2 B clear, ads encouraging women 2 B healthy are good! So is dialogue about birth control #ThanksObamacare http://t.co/g5gkA1NZAk — PPVotesColorado (@PPVotesColorado) November 12, 2013

The new ads’ portrayal of lust as a motivator for women to engage in activities as varied as working out, binge drinking, taking birth control pills, and petty theft has led many observers to call this round of the campaign “Hosurance.”

Another ad features five young women holding a snow ski with shot glasses full of alcohol balanced on top. “Get your shots,” proclaims the ad. “Shotskis keep us happy. Flu shots keep us healthy. Saving money on flu shots leaves us more money for fun shots.”

Still other ads play on the popular Ryan Gosling “Hey Girl” internet meme, showing women lusting after a cardboard cutout of the star.

Popular Millennial blogger Matt Walsh called the ad campaign “boring,” “lame,” and “tedious.”

“Sleeping around? Begging for free birth control? Self indulgence? Hedonism? That’s how our parents’ generation rolled,” Walsh said.

Walsh added, “As Chesterton might say, that idea has been tried and found wanting. It’s been tried for 40 years. We’ve got a whole bunch of divorce, disease, and depression to show for it.”