CASA GRANDE — Former state Sen. Kelli Ward compared her GOP primary race against U.S. Sen. John McCain to a “David and Goliath” situation.

McCain, a five-term senator who ran for U.S. president in 2008, has greater name recognition, Ward admitted, and will likely always have more available cash to spend on campaigning. McCain reported having about $5 million on hand at the end of 2015, according to the Federal Election Commission.

But she told a handful of supporters in Casa Grande on Monday that the Biblical David, the underdog, still came out the victor.

Ward proudly presents herself as an outsider ready to shake up the “Washington Establishment.” The physician from Lake Havasu City said the country has reached a turning point where both Republicans and Democrats are fed up with “career politicians” they’re voting to represent them.

“Politically, the landscape is such that people are ready for a change,” Ward said. “They don’t like the direction that the country is going in and they don’t like what’s happening in Washington, D.C..”

Her political views fall in line with a conservative ideology: shrinking government influence, protecting constitutional rights and cutting taxes.

During her campaign stop at the Big House Cafe on Fourth Street, she told local supporters that McCain is no longer the conservative he claims to be and it’s time for a “bold, fresh, fearless” voice to replace him.

Ray Jorgensen, a Casa Grande resident, attended Monday’s event and agreed that McCain has been in office for too long. He added that he’s tired of the present politicians who haven’t done much productive in the last four years.

In an interview with the Casa Grande Dispatch, Ward said the most common issue Arizonans voice to her on the campaign trail is securing the U.S.-Mexico border.

“We need to have some kind of physical infrastructure,” she said, “whether it’s a fence, whether it’s a wall. Something has to be there as a barrier.”

She supports increasing the number of “boots on the ground” at the border as well as eliminating government funding to sanctuary cities that shelter illegal immigrants.

Before being elected to the state Senate in 2013, Ward worked full-time as a physician in primary and emergency care. She said she’s witnessed a business model in medicine that is slowly failing and has worsened since the Affordable Care Act was implemented.

“Our emergency departments are overwhelmed and they’re overcrowded,” Ward said. “And many of the people who come don’t come for emergency conditions.”

She blamed the country’s expansion of Medicaid, the health care program for low-income individuals, as part of the reason why hospitals are becoming overwhelmed and unsustainable.

Her vision for America’s health care involves repealing the Affordable Care Act and introducing what she’s termed the Patients Power Plan, which would establish health savings accounts for each citizen.

Health savings accounts were created in 2003 and allow individuals to place tax-advantaged money in an account to pay for future health expenses. Ward said this type of economic model would increase competition among insurers and lower health care costs.

In an email response, a campaign spokeswoman for McCain stated the senator has led the charge against the Affordable Care Act since day one and has continued trying to replace the country’s “broken” heath care system.

“John McCain has an unmatched record of service and sacrifice to Arizona and our nation,” the spokeswoman stated. “Whether it’s stopping President Obama’s attempt to retire the A-10 fleet or securing tens of millions to help secure the border, John McCain has proven he’ll always fight for what’s right for the people of Arizona.”

As a state legislator, Ward said she wasn’t afraid of challenging the status quo. She pointed out how she was the only senator to not vote for establishing the Arizona Department of Child Safety in 2014 — a decision she said in hindsight has proven to be right.

ADCS has made unflattering headlines since its creation regarding case backlogs and staff turnovers, she said.

“I hate to say ‘I told you so’ on something so important as our children and family welfare in this state,” Ward said.

It is Ward’s integrity that Peggy Weathers, a Casa Grande resident, admires most about the political candidate. She said McCain no longer represents her conservative views, and she is ready for a change.

The preservation of constitutional rights is what Weathers appreciates about Ward’s campaign platform and thinks she has a good chance of defeating McCain in the primary election on Aug. 30.

Three other Republicans besides McCain are declared candidates along with two Democrats.

Ward further demonstrated her support of Second Amendment rights by posting a giveaway contest of a limited edition AR-15 rifle on her campaign website.

“What better way than to enhance (gun rights) and showcase it than by giving away a beautiful AR-15,” she said.

And manufactured in her campaign colors too, Ward added.