t sounds like the sort of tall tale you’d find in a chain email, one meant to shock and outrage any potential reader with its lurid but implausible details: A eight-year-old boy suffering from several disabilities left shackled in handcuffs for fifteen minutes as he cries out in pain.

Unfortunately, as the above disturbing video shows otherwise, it’s anything but.

This past Monday, the ACLU, in conjunction with the Children’s Law Center, announced that it had filed a federal civil lawsuit against Keith Sumner, a deputy of the Kenton County Sheriff’s Office in Kentucky, for having illegally detained and mistreated not only the boy in the video but another nine-year-old girl at a nearby school. The ACLU has stepped in on behalf of the two children and their respective parents.

In the complaint , made publicly available, the plaintiffs allege that Sumner, working as a School Resource Officer at both of the schools where the two children attended, violated their constitutional rights under provisions of the American With Disabilities Act by handcuffing them unnecessarily.

Both incidents occurred in the Fall of 2014, when Sumner was summoned to the area by school personnel. In the case of the boy, named S.R. in the lawsuit, Sumner handcuffed him after he refused to comply with one of his directions to sit down. The third-grader had been diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) as well as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), which all present adults were aware of beforehand. At the time, S.R. was experiencing “disability-related difficulties” in listening to school personnel and so was sent to the Vice Principal’s office to wait for his mother to arrive.

It was at that point that Sumner decided to handcuff S.R. behind his back, the handcuffs needing to be placed above his elbows because he was simply too small to wear them normally. “You can do what we want you to do or you can suffer the consequences,” Sumner appears to tell the boy in the video as he places the handcuffs on, right before S.R. shouts out, “Ow, that hurts!”

As ghastly as that may seem, it may pale in comparison to Sumner’s treatment of the nine-year-old girl, coined L.G. in the lawsuit. The fourth grader, also diagnosed with ADHD, had been first sent to the back of Sumner’s police cruiser after she began acting out in August 2014; then later that October, after another incident, she was similarly handcuffed for twenty minutes, which traumatized her to the point that she needed to be taken to the hospital in an ambulance for psychiatric treatment.

By the time she saw Sumner again three weeks later — while behaving perfectly fine — his very presence caused her to run away in fear, which led to her being restrained one final time.

“Plaintiff L.G. remained kneeling on the floor, handcuffed and struggling, for about thirty minutes until her mother L.J. arrived,” read the complaint.

They accuse Sumner of having used physical restraints illegally because at no point was he or anyone else in danger of immediate physical harm from the two children. According to reports filed by Sumner that the lawsuit cites, Sumner excused his use of handcuffs in each incident by claiming the children had tried to assault him.

The ACLU has named the Kenton Country Sheriff’s Office and its reigning Sheriff, Chuck Korzenborn, in the lawsuit as well, for having failed to properly train and supervise Sumner.

“The lawsuit seeks an order requiring a change in policies by the Kenton County Sheriff's Office, and additional training for school resource officers in dealing with young children and children with special needs,” read the ACLU’s statement on the lawsuit, filed in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Kentucky. “It also seeks an unspecified amount of monetary damages against Sumner.”