Whether you fell asleep early, stayed out too late, or simply want to watch it again, we realize it's not always possible to get your entire "Piers Morgan Live" fix from television. As an answer to this, we offer the below labor of love – "Piers Morgan Live, Rewind" – dedicated and designed to getting you caught up and connected to the conversation.

Bubba's Back: Watson Returns After PGA Win

As regular viewers of "Piers Morgan Live" are all too aware, the primetime host has no shortage of jokes and jabs for his celebrity guests. As such, it came as little surprise a week ago when Morgan teased professional golfer Bubba Watson about his recent victory drought.

Having not won a tournament since the 2012 Master's, Watson promptly responded by capturing the championship of the very next event he entered, The Northern Trust Open.

In his return appearance Tuesday evening, Morgan sought praise and appreciation for his role in the win and Watson sarcastically obliged:

“You're an inspiration to millions of people,” Watson teased. “Now I know what not to do in life, and so you inspire people to be better than you.”

From Bullied to Beautiful: Plastic Surgery to increase Self-Esteem

With counseling and harassment prevention programs popping up in schools nationwide, bullying has proved to be an epidemic that adults are committed to protecting their children from. But when bullying reaches unbearable levels, and traditional means seem ineffective, Dr. Thomas Roma’s foundation is offering an unconventional solution: a trip under the knife. The NYC nonprofit Little Baby Face Foundation provides free plastic surgery to low income children who are severely harassed for their physical appearances, and in a live interview with Piers Morgan on Tuesday night, the founder explained his reasoning.

Seated across from the host, Romo acknowledged that altering the victims, as opposed to addressing the bullies’ behavior, may not be the most socially acceptable answer. However, for children with physical impairments it may be the most practical:

“To think that we're going to stop bullying by attacking the bullies – I mean, it may or may not occur,” Dr. Romo explained to Morgan.

As part of his visit to the program, Roma was joined by one of his patients – 15 year-old Renata, who had plastic surgery to alter her appearance after years of social ostracizing and verbal abuse from her peers.

Fox had been out of school for two years, and a psychologist recommended seeking help to alter her appearance, a suggestion that ultimately lead to increased self-esteem and acceptance:

“I felt like I was a normal kid again,” Renata said of her life post-treatment. “I could actually look at myself without wanting to cry.”

Three years later, "The Square" tells the story of Egyptian unrest

Political unrest has exploded across the globe of late, as violent protests have rocked Venezuela, Ukraine and Thailand. Such movements have captured worldwide attention before, particularly a 2011 revolt in Egypt which transformed the face of the country as part of what was quickly labeled the Arab Spring.

On Tuesday night Piers Morgan was joined by a woman who knows the political struggle in Egypt from the inside out, as Jehane Noujaim discussed her film, the Oscar-nominated documentary “The Square.”

Noujaim's movie follows the protest’s origins and growth from the heart of Cairo’s Tahrir Square, and three years since, she told Morgan that though the struggle in Egypt is far from over. “The Square” brings the Egyptian people’s plight further into the public eye, ensuring that change will eventually come.

“Our story will never be able to be silenced,” Noujaim said, referencing her film’s Oscar buzz. “And that's what is so important about this nomination, is the fuel that comes with it, because this is about the civil rights struggle and the struggle for human dignity of our time.”

For the next edition of "Piers Morgan Live," watch CNN every night at 9.

-

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Twitter

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Instagram