People with bad dental hygiene less likely to develop oral cancers , study says

It's the type of study that will encourage some people to stop brushing their teeth altogether. Maybe. According to a new study, adults who have a lot of cavities in their teeth are less likely to get mouth or throat cancer.

Don't throw away that toothbrush just yet -- Highlights By Catholic Online (NEWS CONSORTIUM) Catholic Online (www.catholic.org) 9/13/2013 (2 years ago) Published in Health Keywords: Cavities, tooth decay, mouth and throat cancers, study

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - Researchers think that this is due to the lactic acid produced by bacteria in cavities, which can prevent cancer cells from developing. People with a lot of cavities are thought to be about 32 percent - one in three, are less likely to develop mouth or throat cancer than those with no cavities.



"This was an unexpected finding since dental cavities have been considered a sign of poor oral health along with [gum] disease, and we had previously observed an increased risk of head and neck cancers among subjects with [gum] disease," lead researcher Dr Mine Tezal, at the University of Buffalo, New York says.



A medical team studied 399 people with head and neck cancer, comparing these people to 221 people who did not have cancer. The study found that the participants who had the most dental cavities were the least likely to also have cancer.



Tezal explains that tooth decay and cavities result from lactic acid, produced by bacteria in the mouth. These bacteria are similar to those used in yogurt. They are also associated with a reduced chance of inflammatory diseases, allergies and some other types of cancer.



Tezal believes that the next step for the team is to discover whether it is possible to find a way of harnessing the beneficial effects of the acid - without leading to tooth decay and gum disease.



"We see a mechanism that may protect against mouth cancer, and may be a potential strategy either as part of prevention or treatment of oral cavity cancer," Dr. Dennis Kraus at Lenox Hill Hospital, in New York City says. "This is a fascinating first step," he added.



Other experts, such as Dr. Joel Epstein at the American Board of Oral Medicine, say that this study was flawed as it only involved a small group of people and it only looked at existing cavities. So don't throw away that toothbrush just yet ...



Click here to learn about our 'Saint Michael the Archangel' conference this Nov 1-3!





---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.