RAISE YOUR VOICE: Share your own opinion online at dallasnews.com/sendletters. Sign up for Sounding Off or submit a guest column (and include your full name and contact information) by visiting dallasnews.com/voices.

What should city and school officials focused on 2015?

Irma MyersDonihoo, Plano: I would hope Plano ISD officials will seriously look into adding coding classes in elementary school. It’s truly the language of the future and something girls and boys will benefit from. It fits into the STEM education. Also, there should be fewer standardized tests. They are of little value and only help to give the test architects profits.

Olan Knight, Murphy: God belongs in church, not in the classroom. Let’s let science classes teach science and fact and leave everyone’s personal beliefs out of the classroom and out of the class materials. Religious bigots who try to force their personal beliefs into the school system are an embarrassment to all Texans.

Neldon Miffleton, Plano: School officials should be focusing on education, discipline and clean, neat schoolyards. Dump the computers, calculators and cellphones. Teach children manners and to read, write and add. Get tougher lawyers and quit giving in to ignoramus parents who are too lazy to help. Finally, school officials need to clean up their own act. The worst kept yards in Plano are our schoolyards; they are terribly unkempt. If schools cannot keep the school grounds weed-free, covered with grass and litter-free, get rid of them. Sell the grounds to homebuilders so someone who cares will keep the grounds neat and clean. Today’s schools and parents both get a failing grade in my book.

Aaron A Kaplan, Plano: I believe the most important issue right now is the education of our children because they are our future. The Common Core curriculum is a terrible idea unless you live in a controlled socialist state. Just ask the teachers: A majority of them, especially the more seasoned ones, believe that it is a big step backward in educating our children. The basics 40 years ago worked pretty well before there was a Department of Education, and we would all best be served if it was dissolved as well as Common Core.

Ted Gold, Plano: Just three little words: “Use common sense!”

Jerry Frankel, Plano: For decades, Texas has led the nation in the percentage of residents without health insurance, causing untold suffering and thousands of deaths annually. Metropolitan areas like Dallas, Fort Worth and Houston have public hospitals and out-patient centers to care for the poor and uninsured. Plano is fortunate to have the necessary resources to take care of our own, since neither the county nor the state seem to value life or access to care. All it takes is leadership by city officials. There are numerous ways to provide care for our less fortunate neighbors, ranging from out-patient clinics and establishing a hospital plan with one or more of the hospitals here, referring such patients to Parkland or building a city hospital or a county facility (which existed for quite some time before the county decided to abandon the less fortunate).

Vicki Hill, Plano: I would like to see city and school officials focus on compassion. Plano has plenty of high-end stores and soccer fields. But Plano still has homeless people sleeping beside dumpsters. Plano has schoolchildren going to bed hungry. Plano has people with disabilities who can’t find supported housing in the town they grew up in. Plano has senior citizens who contributed to the city for many years, but now need help for the little things that could allow them to stay in their own homes. Wouldn’t it be nice to get to the end of 2015 and be able to say, “We made a difference in the lives of the people of Plano”?

Garry Beckham, Plano: The No. 1item for city officials should be the water problem. The school officials need to do internal audits and get rid of the fluff, which includes administration and staff fat. The past couple of years the property values have risen to overload the school coffers such that they will want to expand spending. They should do the opposite and pay off any debt.

Sandy Elkins, Plano: Quit building “stuff.” It’s like Plano won’t be happy until every blade of grass is “developed.” They should realize that, yes, more tax dollars will come in (minus the abatements we have given them), but we are in a Stage 3 drought, and traffic is so bad right now I can’t imagine what it will be like when Toyota and other developments on the west side, and State Farm, a city within a city, on the southeast side are completed. As all the new people move into these “apartment/shopping” complexes, we’ll need more schools. Has that even been considered?

Peter Perry, Plano: The schools should focus on curriculum, leaving as much autonomy with the teachers as possible. Ensure that class sizes are conducive to learning. If that necessitates more or larger schools, build them. Enforce obedience and school attendance, but use discipline wisely. Get rid of bad teachers. If administrators don’t know who they are, ask the other teachers. Businesses rarely put up with bad employees; students and taxpayers shouldn’t either. Anything that requires money, bond issue or not, city governments (Plano, Richardson and Murphy, all with students in the Plano ISD) should encourage businesses and residents’ support. Finally, develop practices to increase parental involvement. Involved parents are crucial to students’ success. Successful education is a result of effective partnering: teachers, students, parents and the community.

Arnell L. Engstrom, Plano: Plano and other cities in this rapidly-increasing-in-population area should focus on further enhancing their future water supply in addition to the $300 million cost and 75 million gallons/day pipeline from Lake Texoma to a treatment plant in Wylie which was completed last May. Plano ISD and other local school districts should raise students’ learning and competency levels by emphasizing math, science and U.S.A. and World History subjects without just preparing students to take standardized tests.

Don Proeschel, Plano: For the city officials, I first of all want to tell them to keep up the good work. Every interaction that I have with a city department is handled professionally and effectively. Second, keep the jobs flowing into the city; and third, keep our streets safe and well-maintained. For our school officials, remember that our students are the customer, so keep the schools up-to-date with technology, add more vocational training opportunities for those not going to college and help ensure that we have creative, dedicated, committed and caring teachers.

Gerry Hudman, Plano: I think Plano does a great job of providing all kinds of services and infrastructure for its residents. We are about to experience growing pains with new employers moving into the area. For the city officials, I would like them to consider how to incorporate affordable housing, pools and recreation centers, libraries and roads. We have recently closed a couple of pools; they should be repaired or replaced. New developments should include parks and schools and housing for different income levels. I would like school officials to consider where they are going with our school system. Are mega high schools really the best way to go? Plano is a great place to live; what can we do to keep it that way?