A recent state Department of Health surprise investigation of Regional Hospital of Scranton found nursing staff shortages in three units — including intensive care — that overwhelmed staff and led to poor recruitment and low morale.

An inspection that began April 8 with “an unannounced on-site complaint investigation” and was completed April 14 also said the hospital failed to properly equip, operate and maintain several units and now must fix deficiencies, according to a 130-page compliance report containing its findings and corrective measures that the hospital made available Monday to The Times-Tribune.

In a statement released to the newspaper Monday, Regional Hospital disputed the state’s determinations but noted the hospital also has submitted a required corrective action plan and already has implemented many of its measures.

“We disagree with the survey’s findings and conclusions and are engaged in discussions with the Pennsylvania Department of Health,” the hospital statement said. “While we await the outcome of those discussions, we are following the established survey process by submitting our plan of correction which has subsequently been approved by the state.”

On Wednesday, The Times-Tribune reported that the state had limited admissions at certain nursing units at the hospital, but neither the hospital nor the state would provide details.

The Times-Tribune asked both the department and the hospital for the compliance report that, under state law, must be maintained by each entity and made readily available to the public for inspection upon request. The state then provided to the newspaper a website link containing a listing of compliance documents of hospitals throughout the state. However, Regional Hospital’s current report was not posted on the site and a department spokeswoman said it would not be posted until 41 days after the investigation is completed.

Regional Hospital on Friday made arrangements to provide the compliance report Monday to the newspaper for review on site by a reporter. The state made no such accommodation and could not explain why it waits 41 days to post reports online, other than stating it has up to 41 days to post the report.

The report reveals that the hospital had nursing shortages in the Intensive Care Unit, fourth floor Telemetry Unit, and 7 East Medical/Surgical Units. As a result, the department on May 5 issued an order, which was carried out May 7, limiting the number of patients in those units.

The report said the hospital also failed to properly equip, operate and maintain eight units. For example, two rooms in the emergency department had unlocked cabinets containing syringes, needles, sutures and iodine, and two patients were unattended at the time of the inspection. These supplies have since been secured. Various maintenance issues must be addressed, such as replacing carpeting, countertops and furniture, repairing damaged walls, floors and plumbing fixtures and cleaning.

A Medical Staff Executive Committee, a liaison between staff, administration and trustee board, was faulted several times in the state’s report.

During the prior 12 months, the committee had minimal discussion about nursing shortages and did not have a plan to address the problem. Staff members said they told the committee that nurses were “overwhelmed,” and recruitment and retention were issues, as many new employees “get experience and move on.” Nurses also reported to the committee that morale was low and other issues “snowball” from short-staffing.

The report suggests several options to reverse nursing shortages including using overtime or contract labor, transferring patients to other units or other hospitals or limiting admissions to particular units.

“In response to the state survey, we have implemented more thorough documentation of our nurse staffing, which is adjusted based on the number and acuity of patients in our care,” the hospital’s statement said.

Regarding retention and recruitment, nurse managers attended three job fairs regionally and held a job fair on campus on April 29; criteria were redefined for RN and LPN career ladders; sign-on and enhancement bonuses have begun; weekly recruitment meetings are held; and staffing assignments are better documented.

Contact the writer: jlockwood@timesshamrock.com, @jlockwoodTT on Twitter