Josephine Stapleton stands in front of her milk jug flag. (Photo: Photos by Mark Moran / Weird NJ)

For many many, years motorists traveling along Route 40 in the Mizpah area, between Buena Vista and Mays Landing, were treated to the sight of a work of art comprised of meticulously arranged multicolored milk jugs. Using food and fabric dyes as her medium, one-gallon plastic jugs as her palette, and her yard as a canvas, lawn artist Josephine Stapleton worked on her Technicolor masterpiece for more than 30 years.

The display changed seasonally in celebration of the different holidays. Josephine paid homage to Easter, Halloween and Christmas, and even had a Disney themed Mickey and Minnie Mouse design which included a vibrant full spectrum rainbow. (Better watch out for those copyright lawyers Josephine!).

Josephine even crafted a life-sized self-portrait of sorts out of milk jugs that she named Jug-a-bell. The figure wore a brightly colored housecoat, wig, hat and glasses, and hung beneath the eaves outside the front door of Josephine’s house.

This 2002 photo displays the milk jug flafg (Photo: Photos by Mark Moran / Weird NJ)

Originally designed to keep her kids off the lawn, the piece attracted art enthusiasts from all over the country. Visitors often donated their used jugs to support jug display, which was much appreciated by Josephine, who ironically was lactose intolerant and not able to stomach milk. She hoped to one day build a map of the entire United States out of jugs, with each state being represented by a jug from its home state.

The longest running motif of this front yard gallery was the enormous red, white and blue American flag, which was part of Josephine’s permanent collection. We asked her why the flag had remained such a constant fixture in the lawn design, while her other creations were always in a state of flux.

“Those jugs are so old,” she told us, “that if I tried to move them they’d fall apart!”

Unfortunately, the flag had been desecrated in the past by 4-wheeling lawn jockeys doing a little off-roading across Josephine’s lawn. It seems some people just have no respect for the flag, or the arts!

In this 2002 photo, Josephine Stapleton stands next to her Jug-a-Bell. (Photo: Photos by Mark Moran / Weird NJ)

Josephine moved away from her home on Route 40 several years ago and the milk jug display is now another part of Weird NJ history. This past week we received the following message from Josephine’s niece Lee Ann Farrell:

“Dear Weird NJ – My aunt, Josephine Stapleton, the Milk Jug Lady of Mays Landing, NJ, is still around though she is now battling a serious illness. She wanted me to reach out to you and all of her followers that had stopped by at one point or another to see her milk jug creations. Thank you for highlighting her work. It was a labor of love and she misses it dearly.”

Those who would like to offer well wishes to Josephine, a truly unique fixture of our New Jersey culture, may post their comments at the Weird NJ web site (www.WeirdNJ.com) and we will be sure to pass them on to the Milk Jug Lady.

Weird NJ magazine, “Your Travel Guide to New Jersey’s Local Legends and Best Kept Secrets,” is available on newsstands throughout the state and on the web at www.WeirdNJ.com.

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1jruYi4