CHATSWORTH, Calif., May 17, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- NATEL Engineering Company, Inc. and OnCore Manufacturing, LLC announced today that the merged company will be named: NEO Technology Solutions (NEO Tech). The name NEO Tech captures and combines the company's legacy members; NATEL Engineering, EPIC Technologies, and OnCore Manufacturing, while creating a name on which to build a brand.

"We are excited to introduce our new name – NEO Tech – to our current and future customers and business partners", said David Brakenwagen, NEO Tech Chief Sales and Marketing Officer. "Our new name embodies the proud heritage of our roots and captures our combined value proposition which is to be the technology and manufacturing partner of choice for OEM's requiring a complete suite of end-to-end solutions."

"Our name now represents the breadth of our offering, from concept to volume production, and microelectronics to top-level assemblies," said Sudesh Arora, NEO Tech Chief Executive Officer. "The new NEO Tech brand provides a very unique value proposition to the market place."

With vastly expanded capabilities, complementary manufacturing footprint, and similar market sector focus, the new organization offers unmatched excellence in electronics assembly, engineering solutions, and product realization in the three primary markets served including:

NEO Tech in the Medical device market: The market faces continued cost pressures due to the device tax and the Affordable Healthcare Act. NEO Tech offers a full suite of product realization services at multiple manufacturing locations supporting customer needs for regulatory compliance to FDA 21CFR820 and ISO13485 standards compliance. NEO Tech's microelectronic products also offer unique miniaturization opportunities as demanded in wearable and implantable devices, as well as RF ablation devices.

NEO Tech in the Aerospace and Defense market: Products manufactured at NEO Tech have been deployed in numerous marquee programs including the Joint Strike Fighter, Patriot Missile system, Mars Rover, and the International Space Station. NEO Tech has delivered high-reliability microelectronics solutions including hybrid devices, microwave integrated circuits, ceramic substrates, and RF filters. The company also has a legacy in building advanced circuit card assemblies and systems requiring precision IPC Class 3 soldering and advanced testing, coating & under-fill; all manufactured in ITAR and AS9100 certified facilities.

NEO Tech in the Industrial market: The market is being deeply influenced by IoT product enhancements in almost every product category. NEO Tech offers a deep understanding of wireless and connectivity engineering services to help Industrial OEMs respond rapidly to advancing technology trends, and tailored manufacturing solutions that span from miniaturized devices to gyro-stabilized assembles to large and complex systems.

About NEO Tech

NEO Tech combines the strengths of three leading contract manufacturers: NATEL, EPIC, and OnCore. With over 40 years of heritage in electronics manufacturing, NEO Tech focuses on low-medium volume/high-mix, high-complexity products primarily in the medical, defense/aerospace and industrial markets.

NEO Tech is favorably positioned among mid-tier EMS manufacturers to "make amazing things happen." NEO Tech offers full product lifecycle engineering services, manufacturing and testing of microelectronics, cable & harness interconnect products, PCBA, full box build assemblies and aftermarket repair and fulfillment services. The companies that form NEO Tech have been known for solving tough engineering problems that result in high-reliability, high-quality electronics for customers.

Headquartered in Chatsworth, CA, NEO Tech has manufacturing and engineering locations in California, Colorado, Illinois, Massachusetts, Nevada, Ohio, Tennessee, Mexico, and China. NEO Tech holds and maintains industry specific certifications that include ISO9001, AS9100, ISO13485, ISO/TS16949, ISO14001 and MIL-PRF-38534. To learn more, visit www.NEOTech.com or on Twitter, @NEOSolves

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140226/LA72895LOGO

SOURCE NEO Technology Solutions