Capt. Ray Miller started with the Loveland Police Department in 1978

Loveland Police Capt. Ray Miller poses Thursday in front of the department headquarters. Miller is retiring after 35 years on the force. ( Jenny Sparks )

Not long after joining the Loveland Police Department in September 1978, then-patrol officer Ray Miller was sent to his first disturbance call.

He was ready; he was exhilarated. For as long as he could remember, he'd wanted to be a police officer.

Miller knocked; a man opened the door.

The door promptly slammed in his face.

Sitting in his now-bare office on Thursday, Capt. Miller laughed at the memory, calling it an "eye opener."

"I said, 'Can he do that?' I had no idea that people did that," Miller said. "I had no experience whatsoever; my law enforcement experience was just what I'd seen on TV."

On Monday, Miller will retire just more than 35 years after starting his career. His retirement will leave a hole in the administrative structure of the department, where three captains serve under the police chief, and which has not changed in nearly a decade.

But perhaps more significantly, the department will lose Miller's vast experience. During the Loveland Police Department's annual awards ceremony on Friday, Police Chief Luke Hecker presented Miller with a display case of every police shield in the department, because Miller has worn them all.

"He's worked his way up from a line officer to a captain's rank with dignity, justifiably high levels of performance and high levels of competency, and that's very difficult to ever replace," Hecker said.

Advertisement

Learning the Ropes

Miller's early dreams of being a cop didn't involve Loveland. He wanted to serve the city he grew up in and applied to join the Denver Police Department. When that didn't work out, he applied to a few other places.

Loveland was the first to call.

"As I look back, it was a blessing to come to Loveland," Miller said. "Things happen for a reason, I truly believe that."

Things were different back then -- a time newer officers refer to as the "stone age." Today, officers come out of the police academy and then move into rigorous training. Four weeks after Miller started, he was thrown the keys to a patrol unit car.

"I was naive and green as grass," he said.

As he learned the ropes, Miller said one particularly valuable lesson stands out.

"I learned to talk to people, and that's key even today," he said. "You have to be able to treat people with respect and then most people will respect you."

Capt. Rob McDaniel, who started in the department just a year after Miller, said that Miller's personable nature is among traits that have contributed to his success and esteem among colleagues.

"He's highly collaborative and a good teammate about working together and hearing everybody's ideas, and he's a highly effective problem solver," McDaniel said.

Hecker said he was first introduced to Miller's kindness and empathy when he was a new officer 28 years ago. He had made a DUI arrest on the night shift and was still unfamiliar with the paperwork he needed to have filed on then-Sgt. Miller's desk in the morning. Miller walked into his office that morning to find a nervous and apologetic Hecker sitting there with paperwork laid sprawled out all over the sergeant's desk.

"I was stunned -- he had a quiet kindness and said, 'Don't you move a thing; do what you need to do,'" Hecker remembered. "I've watched him treat people like that for 28 years."

The Right Time

Miller always thought that he'd retire at his 30-year mark. Now, he said he knows it's the right time, though he has still watched in disbelief as the 'countdown to retirement' clock on his desk moved from double to single digits.

There's no hesitation about what he'll miss most.

"I'll miss the people," he said. "This department -- in my opinion, and I might be biased -- I think is the best in the state. I've seen a wide variety of departments, and I think Loveland is the best and the reason it's the best is the people inside."

Miller and his wife, Linda, plan to split their time between Loveland -- where their two children and four grandchildren live -- and with family in Missouri. That he'll still be around is good news for McDaniel and other friends in the department, which Miller said is built like a family.

"It's been a good ride and we will miss him," McDaniel said. "He leaves with a lot of history of our organization, and you can't replace that easily."

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 516, or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaMaherRH.