It's the first Monday in October, and it's also a significant day in politics -- as of today, we are officially less than 400 days out from the presidential election. Who's excited? Two people who should be are Marco Rubio and Hillary Clinton, both of whom have had an excellent few days. Let's talk shop in today's Power Lunch.

Hillary's hat trick: The Democratic presidential frontrunner came to South Florida Friday, her first trip to the area since she declared her candidacy. The trip was really about raising money at three private fundraisers (one each in Miami-Dade, Broward and Palm Beach counties), but Hillary Clinton tacked on a public appearance at Broward College in Davie. Senior political reporter Anthony Man and I were at the event, and here is our report.

With the recent shooting at Umpqua Community College, and the fact that broadening gun rights will be the topic of several bills in the upcoming state legislative session, our story focused on what Clinton had to say about gun control, but the candidate touched on a wide range of topics, everything from her support for Obamacare and President Barack Obama's plan for free community college to the Florida Legislature's failure to expand Medicaid.

Later that day, Clinton put in an appearance at a Marc Anthony concert in Miami before heading up to New York City the next day to deliver a Saturday Night Live performance that's already gotten big thumbs up from reviewers.

Live From Palm Beach County, it's Saturday Night! While Clinton was going for laughs on SNL, local Democrats were trying to do the same at the Palm Beach County Democratic Party's annual fundraiser, the Truman-Kennedy-Johnson Dinner. U.S. Rep. Ted Deutch, D-Boca Raton, castigated Republicans for not talking about the issues. "What issues are they talking about? Nothing. Nothing but race baiting against undocumented immigrants and inventing bizarre lies about Planned Parenthood. These aren't policies, these aren't solutions. These are distractions."

Deutch followed that up by criticizing Donald Trump's hair.

According to the Sun Sentinel's Anthony Man, who was at the soiree, keynote speaker Julian Castro, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, "echoed the theme of the evening: Democratic policies are good for average people; Republican policies aren't. 'There is a very clear choice in 2016 between a Democratic Party that wants to expand opportunity and embrace the future and a Republican Party that wants to take us backward,' Castro said."

The Republican Race: Florida's favorite son (no, not Jeb! The other one.) had at least as good a weekend as his possible general election opponent, Hillary Clinton. A poll by Investor's Business Daily showed Donald Trump in second place, the first poll to do so since mid-July. It also showed Marco Rubio in third place, with Ben Carson in the lead. Politico Florida's Marc Caputo has a lengthy piece on Rubio's rise. That ascent comes as Jeb! Bush experiences serious trouble, from foot-in-mouth disease to queasy donors to what the heck to do about George W.

Rubio's success was always going to come at Jeb!'s expense, if it came at all. There's only enough room in the race for one establishment candidate to go up against the outsider. But which candidate that is will be determined months down the road.

The Murphy-Grayson feud: In an interview with Jorge Ramos of Fusion, U.S. Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Jupiter, sounded like a general-election candidate, promising that he was ready for a Senate race against Marco Rubio, should the man drop out of the presidential race (yeah, right) and try to keep his seat. But Murphy first has to worry about U.S. Rep. Alan Grayson, D-Orlando, who blasted his Democratic primary opponent Friday for the congressman's vote to create a congressional committee to look in to the terrorist attacks in Benghazi, Libya.

The Benghazi committee is a ripe target for Democratic sniping. The likely incoming Speaker of the House, U.S. Rep. Kevin McCarthy, all but admitted the committee served largely to attack Hillary Clinton, not investigate the attack in Libya. And the investigation has now gone on longer than the Watergate hearings, though it is not -- as the Clinton campaign claimed -- the longest investigation in Congress' history.

Who will be your congressperson in two weeks? The truth is, you can't really answer that question with any degree of certainty. A judge is set to rule on new congressional districts sometime before Oct. 17. I've looked at all the maps, talked with some data experts, watched a brain-dashingly boring trial, and I've summed it all up into the most likely outcome, here. You're welcome!

Speaking of your representatives, the Miami Herald asks a perennially important question: How many votes does it take to elect a Florida legislator?

The Herald's Kristen Clark and Mary Ellen Klas point out that many legislators gain their seats without a single vote cast because they run unopposed, while many more got into office with very few votes to show for it -- so how representative are they?

This truism of state politics comes up every election cycle, and it's not likely to change this time around. By my calculations, of the 50 state representatives and senators who represent South Florida, only about half a dozen races have uncertain outcomes in the 2016 election. And of those, most are only uncertain because several candidates are running in a Democratic or Republican primary that will effectively decide who wins the seat.

So, of the 50 seats that represent South Florida, how many have the potential for a reasonably close race in the 2016 general election? My guess is two state House seats in Miami-Dade County. And given the Democratic candidates in those barely Republican districts, neither of whom have raised much cash, the number falls from two to zero.

A few primary elections will see some serious competition, but by November, your representation in Tallahassee will very likely be set in stone. Yay, democracy!

MEANWHILE IN THE TWITTERVERSE... (The All-Cornelius McGillicuddy edition)

.@realDonaldTrump has finally added another position to his website, bringing his grand total to…3. Lame. #DumpTrump pic.twitter.com/fuK4sEsEBn ≥140 CHARACTER HOT TAKE: At some point, GOP pols need to stop ragging on Trump and start addressing what made his candidacy possible. Connie Mack @ConnieMackIV Reports show that we could be headed for a government shutdown in December. Congress needs to address this budget crisis now. ≥140 CHARACTER HOT TAKE: At some point, GOP pols need to stop complaining about gov't shutdown and start addressing what makes it possible. Connie Mack @ConnieMackIV $5.00 to take out your own money. Outrageous! You're paying record ATM fees cnnmon.ie/1Ng331K ≥140 CHARACTER HOT TAKE: At some point ... Oh, just forget it. As always, I'm @Daniel_Sweeney. Troll me there.