Topics: Books, Conservatives, John Wayne, Entertainment News, Politics News

“Professional American,” wrote Greil Marcus in “John Wayne Listening.” “He wears the mantle of Manifest Destiny easily, happy to represent America to the world, to itself, and to himself.”

Exactly. That explains why John Wayne was the most popular American movie star for decades before his death in 1979 and for years afterward. And maybe even today. A 1995 poll asking “Who is your favorite movie star?” ranked him first, ahead of Clint Eastwood, Mel Gibson, Denzel Washington and Kevin Costner. (He was the only dead movie star in the top 10.)

That’s also why Wayne is the symbol of conservative – that is to say, white – America. As Garry Wills wrote about the big showdown scene in “Red River,” “Here was Manifest Destiny on the hoof.”

Wayne’s legend, or, more precisely, his screen image, means nothing at all to me, strikes no chord of shared dreams. Bogart lived my unlived lives, and Bogie’s world and the Duke’s didn’t even intersect. Which is why I can with all honesty say that Scott Eyman’s “John Wayne: The Life and Legend” is one of the greatest movie star biographies ever written: If someone impervious to Wayne’s persona can enjoy it so much, anyone at all interested in movies should.

Eyman, author of John Ford (“Print the Legend”) and Ernst Lubitsch (“Laughter in Paradise”) bios, manages the rare critical feat of appreciating his subject’s qualities while maintaining distance. “John Wayne’s story,” he writes, “is about many things – it’s about the construction of an image, the forging of a monumental career that itself became a kind of monument. It’s about a terribly shy, tentative boy reinventing himself as a man with a command personality, of a man who loved family but who couldn’t sustain a marriage, and of a great friendship [with John Ford] that resulted in great films.

“And it’s also about twentieth-century conservatism, considered dangerously extreme at the time that became mainstream in the twenty-first century. “It is, in short, a life that can only belong to one man.”

Eyman is certainly right about that. Gable never had the good fortune to latch onto two directors as great as John Ford and Howard Hawks. Gary Cooper’s image has been eclipsed by Wayne’s. James Stewart, in his heyday as big a star as Wayne until the mid-1960s and a far more versatile actor as well as a real life war hero, never allied himself with Manifest Destiny.

Clint Eastwood, once regarded as the late-20th-century version of Wayne, has dropped out of the running. “Does anyone expect Clint Eastwood to be America’s favorite star a decade-and-a-half after his death?” Garry Wills asked rhetorically in 1997. I don’t think Eastwood is as popular as Wayne is right now.

* * *

Marion Robert Morrison — not Marion Michael or Marion Mitchell — was born May 26, 1907, to Scottish-Irish parents in Winterset, Iowa — a town of less than 3,000 souls, only two of them black. He never went back, though the Winterset Chamber of Commerce restored the house with period furniture. His parents never got along; his father was amiable but ineffectual, and his mother was regarded by many who knew her as a scold. (They separated in 1921.) By 1914 the family was living in the small town of Palmdale, Calif., on the edge of the Mojave Desert.

Young Marion enjoyed an idyllic adolescence: president of his senior class and the Latin Society, and even on the staff of the school newspaper. He graduated with a 94 average. He haunted the town library to read boys’ magazines and the adventure novels of Sir Walter Scott, James Fenimore Cooper and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.

There were only two drawbacks: When the Morrisons first moved to Palmdale, his father raised corn, giving Marion the job of patrolling their land with a small caliber rifle to shoot rattlesnakes. He later recalled, “I kept my fears to myself.” Then there was his name. The Morrisons had an Airedale named Duke, and every time boy and dog passed the firehouse, men would call out to big and “Little Duke.” Marion grabbed the nickname, sans the “little.”

Duke played high school football and pursued nothing in life, not even girls, with any particular enthusiasm. He drifted into the movie business with a summer job on a Tom Mix movie lot. Soon he met a silent film director named John Feeney, aka John Ford, who needed a prop man. The rest is history, though history took its own sweet time getting started.

Sometime around 1930 a studio head decided that the name Marion “Duke” didn’t have much heat — “John Wayne” would look better on a marquee. (This made me think of that scene in “Shanghai Noon” when Jackie Chan tells Owen Wilson that his name is “Chon Wang.” “John Wayne?” says Wilson. ‘That’s a terrible cowboy name.”)

Richard Widmark famously said, “John Ford invented John Wayne,” but it was Raoul Walsh who gave Wayne his first big role in the 1930 Technicolor epic “The Big Trail.” (“I don’t want an actor,” Walsh supposedly said, “I want someone to act natural.”) The picture bombed; most theaters couldn’t accommodate the widescreen format. It was the last A-list picture Wayne made for 10 years.

Ford, surely one of the most perverse figures in Hollywood history – James Cagney thought that one word described him, “malice” — cut Wayne dead until 1939. Even when Wayne became the biggest star in movies Harry Carey Jr. thought, “He was always frightened of Ford … Duke didn’t have to be that scared of him, but he was.”

Eyman does a splendid job of leading us through Hollywood’s transition from silents to talkies, from black-and-white to color, from B-movies to A-listers. An account of Wayne’s penance in low-budget movies is great reading. Of an early hockey film he writes, “If you always wanted to see John Wayne on skates, ‘Idol of the Crowds’ (1937) is the movie for you.” In “Overland Stage Raiders” (1938) Wayne had the great Louise Brooks for a leading lady. (It was her last film.) Eyman is also good on late career clunkers like “The Conqueror” (1956), in which Wayne was cast as Genghis Khan: “One of those unusual pictures that really are as bad as their reputation would indicate … the world’s biggest Ed Wood movie.”

Finally, in 1939, Ford dropped his mysterious grudge and gave Wayne the role that would change his fortune, the Ringo Kid in “Stagecoach.” Eyman calls it, correctly I think, “more than a piece of movie history; it becomes American history.” Even Pauline Kael, who was less susceptible to Wayne’s image than I was, wrote of “Stagecoach” that “ [it] had a mixture of reverie and reverence about the American past that made the picture seem almost folk art.”

But, as Garry Wills points out in “John Wayne’s America” (published in 1997, reprinted by Touchstone), Wayne did not become a superstar until the release of Howard Hawks’ “Red River” in 1948. Upon seeing it, Ford is reputed to have said, “I never knew the big son of a bitch could act.” No other major star except Bogart, 42 in 1941 when “The Petrified Forest” and “The Maltese Falcon” were released, had to wait so long for stardom.

Eyman may cut Wayne down to size a bit, but his warts-and-all approach makes Wayne seem more human and approachable than in previous biographies. For instance, Hollywood’s biggest Republican got a union card in 1929, No. 34854 of Local 37 of the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees and Moving Picture Machine Operators, and was proud of it all his life. And the man who will forever be associated with westerns didn’t like horses: “I don’t get on a horse unless they pay me.”

One of his favorite albums was Sinatra’s “The September of My Years” (mine, too). George Plimpton once listened to Wayne recite John Milton from memory. He read Winston Churchill’s speeches, and in his library had copies of Tolkien’s books and – this really floored me – Nabokov’s “Lolita.” (Maybe he knew that Nabokov’s politics were similar to his own.)

There are great stories, such as the time Wayne ran into Michael Caine in the lobby of the Beverly Hills Hotel, pointed a finger at him and asked “What’s your name?”

“Michael Caine.” “That’s right. I saw you in that movie – what was it called?” “Alfie.” “That’s right.” Wayne put his arm around Caine, told him he was going to be a star and gave him some advice: “Talk low, talk slow, and don’t say too fucking much. Also never wear suede shoes.” “Why not?” “Because one day I was taking a piss and the guy in the next stall recognized me and turned towards me and said, ‘John Wayne – you’re my favorite actor!’ and pissed all over my suede shoes. So don’t wear them when you’re famous, kid.”