The Eye

Chris Brown, Karrueche Tran SPLIT: 'Loyal' Singer SLAMS His Ex-Girlfriend In A Rage-Fueled Instagram Rant, Accuses Tran Of Cheating With Drake [SEE PHOTOS]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images: Imeh Akpanudosen) Chris Brown and Karrueche Tran lash out at each other via social media.

As news of Chris Brown and Karrueche Tran's relationship end makes waves throughout Hollywood, it seems things are getting even uglier between the former couple. In addition to publicly dissing his ex during his Cali Christmas concert on December 5, by publicly telling the crowd "f--- that b--ch" in regards to his now ex-girlfriend, it seems Brown still has some things to get off his chest. In a new heated message posted to Instagram, the "Loyal" singer bashes his ex, claiming she cheated on him with former enemy Drake.



Hollywood Life reveals that Brown, 25, has always been a part of a love triangle with Drake, 28, who famously dated one of the R&B singer's other ex girlfriends, Rihanna, however, this time around it involves Tran. In an intense message posted to Instagram on December 6, Brown slammed the model about cheating on him with the "Take Care" rapper, in addition to how she treated him while he was in jail.



Brown shared the following message on December 6, shocking fans with his allegations. Brown quickly deleted the message, however, several media outlets captured the outburst before the star deleted the post.



"We've got scars, some of them u gave me, some of them I've caused. That ride or die act we have been fooling the world with obviously ain't working. I was locked up for damn near 4 months and only got 1 visit from you while u was hosting parties and taking secret trips to Toronto, going on dates with Drake! When this relationship first started u knew what it was and even participated in threesomes. I slowed all that shit down. So let's not try to save face for public opinion because I don't need to play victim so people can take my side. All these celebrity n***as ain't shit and focus only on themselves. I made it clear to the world who my girl was and made your life equal to mine even at the cost of me not focusing on my career at times. So miss me wit the bulls**t. Now yall know the real."







Brown also posted a tweet as a picture on the photo-sharing site as he continued his rant, writing, "It amazes me that you can change and evaluate somebody's life completely and they treat you like a regular n--a...BUT IM SLEEP."

If Brown's attack seems unwarranted, Tran and Drake have caused problems in the couple's relationship before. In 2012, Brown allegedly broke up with the model because she was talking to the Canadian rapper behind her boyfriend's back, before stirring up rumors yet again that Tran and Drake were texting in 2014 after his split from Rihanna.

Will Tran respond to the harsh criticism?



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.