At the May 2 meeting of the North Kingstown Town Council, I was very pleased to see Councilor Jason Albuquerque respond to the evidence against the wisdom of locking our town into federal Housing and Urban Development by participating in its “nationally controversial” Community Development Block Grant program. The councilor offered the simple and effective expedient of requesting that the details of the contract documents HUD expects Town Manager Thomas Mulligan to sign be provided to each member of the Council prior to an actual vote. Imagine how much more pleased I was to see Albuquerque’s motion passed by the full Council.

Sadly, my euphoria over the sudden maturity of North Kingstown’s elected officials was short lived. At the May 9 North Kingstown Town Council meeting, the town Planning Department staff made the excuse that the actual terms of the new contract would not be available until the final documents that will cover this grant are prepared. Naturally, it was said this could not happen until after approval was granted. I was not the only one in the room who heard the echo of former U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s famous dictum about Obamacare that we would have to “pass the bill” to find out what’s in it. (I heard the barely suppressed murmur in the room.)

Even at that point of the meeting I still hoped the motion, which had been made and passed a week ago, would bind the Council to get to the bottom of the terms of this HUD CDBG deal. Then Town Solicitor James Reilly chimed in that the actual documents will be more than 200 pages in length and will be too complicated for the members of the Town Council to fully comprehend.

What? Where is it written that the job of an elected official of a good-sized municipality is going to be easy? Is the solicitor offering his professional opinion that the members of the Town Council are incapable of grasping the details of a federal government contract? Does that learned jurist customarily spank his clients in public that way? Imagine my shock when four out of five of the councilors agreed with their solicitor and voted to buy that pig-in-a-poke simply so they could get on with the evening’s agenda.

The dollar value of this year’s CDBG grant request is so tiny as to be well within the scope of direct payment by the Council if they simply reallocated existing appropriations. The potential liability to the town, however, is in the millions, which is hundreds of times the amount initially in question. Many in the audience later lamented that all counselors except Albuquerque blindly risked their constituents’ money so they could simply be done with the nettlesome issue of “possible consequential damages” rather than spend the time to understand it. Would any of us sign a contract with HUD and its associated acronym CDBG and affirmatively furthering fair housing rule without reading and fully understanding it? Sadly, should you really vote for someone who did?

Jim McGuire

North Kingstown

The author is the chairman of the North Kingstown GOP Town Committee.