Ashley Gibbons and her boyfriend, Chris Hopper, hang out at her family’s home in Mays Landing, N.J. Gibbons, who first tried heroin four years ago, is battling addiction, and her mother has been pushing to get her the treatment she needs.

That time, Ashley got into a rehab facility for two weeks of treatment and then into a halfway house, where the state paid most of her bill through a program for people younger than 25. But Ashley turned 25 while she was there and was told she had to leave, in part, she says, because she hadn’t been following the rules. She now owes the facility $3,000.

“I don’t have it,” she said. “I make $8.75 at ShopRite, and that’s $150 a week. I’m an addict, not a rich bitch.”

Through it all, Alicia has kept pushing to get Ashley the treatment she needs. At one point, the mother got so desperate for help that she called the cops in hopes of getting her daughter arrested.

“I just wanted her away,” Alicia said. “It takes getting into trouble to get mandated to go away. I kept pressing charges against her. Charges, charges, charges.”

Rates of heroin addiction and fatal overdose are skyrocketing in the United States, and a political consensus has emerged to emphasize treatment over criminal prosecution. But there’s little agreement on how to pay for more treatment, leaving addicts facing obstacles so daunting even a healthy person would struggle to overcome them.

Treatment centers are often prohibitively expensive, overcrowded, underfunded and subject to byzantine government rules. Health insurance coverage is stingy to nonexistent. And the social stigma of heroin addiction is still so potent that many users and their families are reluctant to seek help in the first place.

That leaves one sure route into rehab: “Treatment in the overwhelming majority of cases begins behind bars,” said Jim McGreevey, the former New Jersey governor, who runs an experimental treatment program in Jersey City.

The need for more treatment is acute, said Obama administration drug czar Michael Botticelli, who estimates that up to 80 percent of heroin addicts are never treated.

“We’re approaching the same mortality rate as at the height of the AIDS epidemic,” he said. When addicts first get treated in jail, “it means we have missed so many opportunities.”