Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Corbett calls for additional $400 million for education in 2014-15

Extra spending relies, in part, on reducing state's and school districts' pension payments for employees, and one-time revenue shots.

Corbett's election-year budget totals $29.4 billion for 2014-15, a 3.5 percent increase over this fiscal year. It's the biggest proposed increase since the Republican took office in January 2011.

And public schools are going to get a big chunk of it.

HARRISBURG — Gov. Tom Corbett, stung repeatedly in polls over his previous education cuts, proposed $1 billion in new spending Tuesday.

Gov. Tom Corbett presents his annual budget proposal on the floor of the… (CHRIS KNIGHT, SPECIAL TO…)

Polls show education remains a weakness as Corbett preps for re-election. Some voters blame him for thousands of layoffs and program cuts in public schools and universities after state and federal education funding was reduced in 2011-12.

Whether he finds firmer footing by the Nov. 4 election depends partly on whether the GOP leaders who run the Legislature back his priorities during a budget debate that runs through June.

"It was his best budget speech yet," said one of them, Senate Majority Leader Dominic Pileggi, R-Delaware. "I think he realized the importance of support for investments in education."

Beginning July 1, Corbett would invest nearly $400 million more in public schools and create a $25 million college scholarship fund for middle-class students.

"Every child in this state should be ready to learn, ready to grow, ready to succeed, and my budget sets an agenda in that spirit," Corbett said Tuesday in a speech that included accolades for teachers, students and parents. "At every level, from early childhood to high school and beyond, every dollar we spend is an investment in the future of our commonwealth."

But Corbett may not have the money he wants for the schools and job-growth initiatives he has planned. Unlike many states, Pennsylvania is projecting red ink by mid-year.

To cover its extra spending, his budget relies on several one-time revenue sources, plus others that require the federal government or state Legislature's approval. The budget also is contingent on rosier-than-expected state revenue projections of 4 percent.

That is worrying lawmakers in both political parties.

"Was it risky? I suppose," said Sen. Jake Corman, R-Centre, chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee.

Democrats were less congenial.

"This was an extraordinarily disappointing budget address," said Rep. Dan Frankel, D-Allegheny, Democratic Caucus chairman. "This budget proposes $1.2 billion in unsustainable funding sources."

The seven gubernatorial Democrats running in the May 20 primary also ripped Corbett's proposal.

January's revenue collections came in slightly below estimate. That tracks with the Legislature's Independent Fiscal Office, which forecasts a $150 million revenue shortfall by the end of the current fiscal year, June 30.

In December, the Corbett administration's own Office of the Budget was projecting a $1.4 billion cumulative deficit by the end of 2014-15.