Levin explained that the GOP’s problems stem largely from party leadership. In a metaphor invoking the idea of House Speaker John Boehner as a Republican in drag, Levin said:

[Boehner] is essentially delivering for Barack Obama everything Barack Obama wants. Just because you’re dressed up as a Republican doesn’t make it so… By his actions, he has demonstrated that he is not a conservative. He spends his time with [Rep. Kevin] McCarthy (R-CA) and [Rep. Steve] Scalise (R-LA) conspiring against the Tea Party and the more conservative elements of his caucus… I can’t think of one significant advance in the cause of liberty or limited government under John Boehner. When he and [Sen. Mitch] McConnell (R-KY)—who’s equally bad— surrendered the power of the purse right out of the box… they just delivered Obama everything he wanted. So these men have helped Obama oversee the biggest explosion of government both in spending and in power ever.

Levin explained that under current leadership, the Republican Party has been an abject failure:

The Republican Party is a disaster. It has lost its way, I don’t think it even knows what its way is. We have a couple of self-serving powerful politicians at the top—in the House, in the Senate, and in the RNC [Republican National Committee] and various other places that empower themselves, they like exercising power. And they fear conservatives more than the Democratic Party… They hate conservatives, they hate constitutionalists, they hate the Tea Party. They don’t care for the Democrats, but they’ll work with them… They have no strategic vision whatsoever—and, of course, they have no tactical vision at all either—and they keep saying, ‘Vote Republican, Vote Republican.’ But they are doing more to dispirit Republicans and conservatives than Barack Obama, because people go to the polls, they give them the House, then they give them the Senate, and they get nothing. They also seem to think that bipartisanship is the reason they’re in Washington. No, the reason they’re in Washington is to advance the cause of liberty and prosperity and constitutionalism. Why would you want to participate in a bipartisan government when the President of United States is openly usurping the rule of law and openly attack the private sector and individual sovereignty?… Why wouldn’t you do everything you can to throw a wrench in his agenda?

Levin declared that, “The Republican Party won the majority on a lie.” Levin argued that on every issue from Obamacare to executive amnesty to Obamatrade, the establishment Republican Party has refused to represent the interests of Americans. Perhaps nowhere is this more acutely noticeable than on the issue of immigration. Levin explained:

I’m offended by this notion that if you’re the child of a foreigner and you’re a foreigner, that you’re a ‘DREAMer.’ Do we talk about American citizen children as ‘Dreamers’?… Do you ever hear [the establishment parties] talk about young American children, or kids graduating college… and the impact that these outrageous policies have [on them]?

These observations led Levin to conclude that above all else, “The one thing the Republican Party can do is insist that its leaders resign.” When asked whether he thought the efforts to oust Boehner as Speaker — such as those led by Congressman Mark Meadows (R-NC) — would prove successful, Levin was not overly optimistic:

Probably not, but to me that doesn’t matter. You have to start a movement, a force, an effort somewhere. If this were easy, John Boehner wouldn’t be Speaker right now. I expect the entrenched Republicans to do everything they can to trash someone like Meadows… because they are protecting the system, they are part of the system, and [Meadows is] challenging it.

Levin called for the emergence of “a new Civil Rights movement,” in which Americans insist that their leaders represent their interests. I want to generate a new Civil Rights movement, not led by hucksters, not led by liberal frauds who use that nomenclature to justify every big government agenda item that they can — the left has stolen that phrase, ‘Civil Rights’ — we need to take it back using new media, old media,using every available tactic. It’s time for young people to stand up for themselves. Levin explains that his new book — whose intended readership includes both what Levin terms as the “governing generation” and the “rising generation”– aims to “counter the textbooks that are pushing the left’s agenda” and “undo the propaganda that media, culture, [and] professors are constantly spewing.” Levin asserts that “Younger people are being manipulated,” and that far too many liberal-indoctrinated youths “are voting for their own demise.” Levin hopes that with this book, he will give Americans the facts they need to generate this new Civil Rights movement and force politicians to represent their interests.

Prior to his remarks, Levin sat down withand diagnosed the failings of the Republican Party — namely, that “The Republican establishment is the problem.”