According to the Evansville Police Department, officers went to the 200 Block of East Delaware Street Monday morning to do a welfare check after a woman's co-workers became concerned for her safety when she didn't show up to work.

According to the Evansville Police Department, officers went to the 200 Block of East Delaware Street Monday morning to do a welfare check after a woman's co-workers became concerned for her safety when she didn't show up to work.

The man accused of stabbing a person in the neck at an east-side convenience in April has been arrested, city police said.

The man accused of stabbing a person in the neck at an east-side convenience in April has been arrested, city police said.

The Arizona Department of Public Safety has identified the suspect in Tuesday night's shooting spree and carjacking along the Beeline Highway (State Route 87).

The Arizona Department of Public Safety has identified the suspect in Tuesday night's shooting spree and carjacking along the Beeline Highway (State Route 87).

We have a crew at the scene. Stay with Tucson News Now for the latest.

We have a crew at the scene. Stay with Tucson News Now for the latest.

Tucson Police on scene where child was hit by a car near Rita Ranch (Source: Tucson News Now)

Tucson Police on scene where child was hit by a car near Rita Ranch (Source: Tucson News Now)

Joel Sanchez, 30, is a father to 8-year-old Anissa, and whose passions include bowling, cooking and baking. He said he used to be in a few bowling leagues with an average of 190.

It wasn't until June of 2012 that Sanchez got the ALS diagnosis after he went to the ER and had tests performed.

“Tests for MS and other similar diseases came back negative, which left ALS as the sole possibility. It was a hard day,” Sanchez said.

He said he didn't know it at the time, but he started to exhibit symptoms for Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, more commonly known as Lou Gehrig's Disease, in 2011. They were little things, like falling or tripping when he was normally sure-footed. Then he noticed it was progressively harder to walk, as if weights were attached to his feet while knee deep in mud, he said.

Even today, people at the bowling alley still recognize him when he goes with his brothers. Now he enjoys watching animes and cooking shows.

“My biggest challenge is being a dad to Anissa. I am unable to do things a dad does with their child,” Sanchez said. “I am unable to wrap my arms around her, I can't go bike riding with her, I can't cook with her the way we used to. I can't dance with her.”

He goes to the ALS clinic at the University of Arizona South Campus every three months. He said it's nerve-wracking to get the physical, breathing and speech tests because it's scary to wait to see how much the disease progressed.

Dr. Katalin Scherer and Dr. Holli Horak are associate professors of neurology at the U of A and are the two physicians in the ALS Clinic at the UAMC South Campus.

“This is the only clinic in Southern Arizona with true multidisciplinary care for ALS where we incorporate speech therapy, occupational therapy, physical therapy, respiratory therapy and a dietician, in addition to the MDA health science coordinator,” Dr. Scherer said.

Dr. Scherer said ALS primarily affects muscle function and progressively paralyzes essentially every voluntary muscle in the body in a fast pace. She said it has psychological affects, not just for the patient, but the whole family.

She said it's also an expensive disease because a patient becomes unable to work and provide for his or her family. Also, losing one's physical ability comes with the cost of expensive medical equipment such as a motorized wheelchair, feeding tube and a speech generating device.

They said doctors who suspect a patient in Southern Arizona has ALS will refer them to the clinic for confirmation or a diagnosis. Between the two physicians, they see between 30 and 40 patients.

Dr. Horak said the clinic has an advantage of working with a research lab at the U of A that's trying to break down the components of the disease.

They're doing just that by studying fruit flies.

Dr. Daniela Zarnescu, an associate professor in the UA Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology and researcher, oversees the lab on campus for ALS research.

The lab has been on campus for eight years. Undergraduate and graduate students, as well as post-doctoral fellows work in various aspects of the research.

“We use fruit flies to understand how a motor neuron acquires this disease. What is it that we can do to maintain healthy motor neurons?” Dr. Zarnescu said. “We think we can put together what are the important pathways and processes that are disturbed or disregulated in this disease.”

Zarnescu said they're looking for what they call “biomarkers,” like molecules that are altered in ALS patients. They test whether some of the proteins that are defective in the fruit flies are also defective in the human samples.

Zarnescu said a fruit fly in the lab usually lives for about 60 days, but a fly with ALS lives about 10 days.

Zarnescu said there aren't many efforts of basic research for ALS in Tucson, though there are more in Phoenix. She said the lab is making headway, despite not having many researchers, because they are interconnected to various associations, and they interact with researchers from all over the world through meetings with various societies.

The lab, though on the University of Arizona campus, does not receive money from the school. Zarnescu said they write grants and compete for funding at the national level against other labs, making it a competitive field. In total, the lab works off of $1.3 million in funding from various organizations, including the National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, The Muscular Dystrophy Association and private funding from the Himelic Foundation, a local grassroots organization named for a Tucsonan who passed away from ALS.

Student research assistant Linh Pham works carefully with the fruit flies, using a paint brush.

“Whenever we see data, we see not what we're looking for, but a trend or something we're really interested in,” Pham said.

They're hoping to find a trend of what could cause this devastating disease, so people like Joel Sanchez can spend more time with his daughter.

Sanchez said he's overwhelmed by the support he's received from so many people who did the Ice Bucket Challenge on his behalf.

“Seeing someone do their challenge is one of the few lights on a dark day and always makes me smile,” he said. “It reminds me that I'm one of the few people with ALS but I'm never alone.”