Homecoming weekend, Portage County Jail study and foster parents in this week's editorial roundup.

Vice Chancellor Al Thompson, Stevens Point Mayor Andrew Halverson, Head Pointer Football Coach Tom Journell and others gather as University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point student Jenna Furger, the homecoming promotions coordinator, cuts the dedication ribbon to rename Fourth Avenue as “Pink Street.” UWSP is celebrating homecoming and pink week and raising money for cancer charities and the Joanne Suomi Memorial Fund. The week’s activities end Saturday with the football team’s Pink Game at 2 p.m. at Goerke Field. (Photo: Photo courtesy of the University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point)

Happy homecoming! This weekend Stevens Point is bustling with alumni and homecoming fun, with the parade at 10 a.m. Saturday followed by the campus and community picnic at 11 a.m. at DeBot fields and the Pointer football Pink Game at 2 p.m. at Goerke Field.

There are lots of fun local traditions, and plenty of people getting together to celebrate their university, the friendships they made here and to connect with people they might not see all that often.

We expect a good time to be had by all, in short. And if, by chance, some folks have a little bit too good a time, well, rest assured that there are additional police patrols all weekend, should things get out of hand. Cops made about 50 arrests last year.

Be safe, be respectful and have fun. Welcome back.

Story: UWSP students have fun on 'Pink Street'

Story: Police: All hands on deck for UWSP Homecoming

County seeks jail plans

Portage County has studied the jail question for quite a while, but leaders will take a new look at their options. That's right, another study.

That's not to say it's a bad idea. The county faces a complicated, expensive decision. About the only thing we can say for certain is that the status quo is not acceptable. The county routinely ships inmates to other counties, paying rent there and creating logistical challenges. The jail falls short on safety standards in ways that may even put staff members at risk. That's not tolerable.

We're strong proponents of alternatives to incarceration, and the county should be looking at everything from electronic monitoring to a drug court to manage offenders who most need treatment for their addictions. But it's not clear that these alternatives can possibly be enough to remove the need for a new facility — or at the very least, a costly renovation.

The study is a step forward. Concrete action will certainly have to follow.

Foster parents change kids' lives

Buy Photo There are 8,000 children placed in foster homes each year in Wisconsin alone. (Photo: Gannett Wisconsin Media file photo )

Some parents and children in central Wisconsin are benefiting from the foster care system.

Brenda Bembenek of Stevens Point was able to reconnect with her sons after they were placed in foster care. Losing her sons temporarily helped her realize she needed to change her life.

"(Foster care) really helped my kids a lot," Bembenek said. "Before my kids went to foster care, they were out of control; I couldn't even handle them. Now they're getting awesome grades in school and are willing to talk to me about anything, no matter what it is."

In 2013, there were 137 children in foster care in Wood County, which has 57 licensed providers. Portage County has 58 children served in 41 licensed homes. In Wisconsin, nearly 8,000 children are cared for each year in 5,100 foster homes.

More foster homes are needed.

"If the service needs exceed what we can provide locally, we unfortunately have to look outside of the county, which makes family contact and reunification efforts more difficult, often elongating a child's placement in foster care," said Danita Docka, the foster care coordinator for Portage County.

Jalynn Allison suggests interested people get more information.

"I would definitely tell (people) it's the most rewarding thing that you could ever do in your life," she said. "You receive more than you can possibly imagine."

Find out more:

• Go to www.wifostercareandadoption.org, call 1-800-947-8074 or email info@wifostercareandadoption.org for more information.

• In Wood County, go to www.co.wood.wi.us, click on Social Services, then specialized services.

• In Portage County, go to www.co.portage.wi.us, click on Division of Children and Families, then foster care.

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1sztzJP