Topics: Bonnaroo, Burning Man, coachella, Dream City, Festivals, SXSW, Innovation News

If you were driving on an American highway last weekend, you probably passed one. They came from Nashville, New York and New Orleans, from Boston and Seattle and Chicago and Los Angeles, and from four dozen other countries entirely: 2,000 musical acts, in vans brimming with equipment and ambition and hope, rolling toward Austin, Texas, for South by Southwest like filings drawn to a magnet.

It’s a big week for these aspiring musicians. Like pre-season football hopefuls, many will do two-a-days, playing to land a label or a spot at a big summer festival. But it’s also a big week for Austin. Like a polished party host, the city doesn’t flaunt its own hospitality. But after nearly three decades, the festival’s brand of forward-thinking, creative cool seems perfectly aligned with Austin’s own.

This symbiotic relationship has turned heads in municipalities across the country. Cities have historically competed for visitors by building cavernous convention centers and taxpayer-funded stadiums, and though economic wisdom frowns on these expenditures, they still build them. But festivals represent an alternative growing in popularity. Industry conferences and major sporting events, like your average American family, do not visit the same city year after year. Festivals, by contrast, are a municipal golden goose. And they don’t just stick around: They can float a cultural aura that helps affirm a city’s identity year-round. For Austin, that’s live music. For Miami Beach, it’s art. Nearly everyone agrees it’s a concept worth imitating — so why do so few American cities have world-class festivals?

South by Southwest is now a quintessential urban American festival. For nearly two weeks each March, the three-part extravaganza is divided between music, film and “interactive,” but includes other add-ons like the Gaming Expo. For wannabes, it’s both an opportunity and a stamp of legitimacy, and the doorway can open wide indeed. It was only five years ago that Lena Dunham got her start with a short film submission to SXSW; now she has a film released by the Criterion Collection, a multimillion-dollar book deal, and a show on HBO.

Then there’s the money: An analysis of SXSW 2013 estimates that the festival was responsible for contributing $218 million to the local economy. That includes direct impact, like the revenue of a local bed-and-breakfast; indirect impact, like the increased business of a cleaning service that works at that BnB; and induced impact, or the unrelated spending made possible by those additional revenues. The direct impact was calculated at $146 million, a comparable figure to the $152 million direct impact of Super Bowl XLVI on Indianapolis. It’s like Austin is hosting the Super Bowl every year.

The willingness of Americans to travel in order to be a part of something like this is nothing new. The 1893 World’s Columbian Exhibition in Chicago, a mammoth six-month event that occupied 700 acres of the city, drew 27 million people. (At the time, the U.S. population was 62 million.) It was the dawn of American public leisure, the age of the amusement park and the Fourth of July parade. Many festivals of the era were culturally specific — Chinese New Year in San Francisco, St. Patrick’s Day in Boston, Columbus Day in New York, African-American festivals across the Southeast. But American festivals really took off in the 1930s, with improvements in transportation and increased recreation time.