PEORIA — Both Republicans and Democrats across the 18th Congressional District will get to decide who they want their party’s standard-bearer to be in a special election.

Five candidates — three from the GOP, two Democrats — filed candidacy paperwork by the deadline Monday in the race to replace resigned U.S. Rep. Aaron Schock.

In each case, voters will pick a party nominee in a primary election July 7. The winners will face off in a Sept. 10 special general election across the territory that sprawls from the Mississippi River to Cropsey, northeast of Bloomington.

Breitbart news editor Mike Flynn, now of Quincy, and former corrections employee Donald Rients of rural Benson delivered petitions to the State Board of Elections in Springfield as Republican candidates.

State Sen. Darin LaHood, R-Peoria, submitted paperwork on the first day candidates were eligible to do so last week.

Flynn said as a sixth-generation native of the district, he would focus his campaign on core, conservative issues, arguing that “this area deserves conservative representation and it has not had that for decades.”

Among the policies he wants to push, Flynn cited continued pushes to repeal Obamacare — focusing not just on what he called “token votes,” but on systematically working on a wholesale defunding of the policy across government — and addressing President Barack Obama’s executive orders earlier in the year related to immigration policy.

Rients did not return a phone message seeking comment on his candidacy.

Though the district’s voting pattern has leaned heavily toward Republicans, two Democrats also filed.

Rob Mellon, a social studies teacher in Quincy, and Adam Lopez, a member of the Springfield District 186 School Board, joined the race. Lopez is an insurance executive; Mellon sought his party’s nomination in the 2014 primary election, losing to eventual nominee Darrel Miller of Danvers.

A host of other potential candidates had floated their names, but clearing the hurdle of getting more than 1,000 valid signatures for Republicans and more than 600 for Democrats — numbers based on previous voter turnout — can prove a challenge for many.

Typically, to avoid challenges to their petitions, candidates will try to get at least twice the number of required signatures. LaHood turned in about 4,000 signatures; Flynn said he turned in just more than 2,000.

■ Another Aaron Schock staffer is served a grand jury subpoena

■ GOP's Darin LaHood favored in race to replace Aaron Schock

Chris Kaergard can be reached at 686-3135 and ckaergard@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @ChrisKaergard.