Buy Photo The Des Moines school board could decide as soon as Tuesday whether to outsource the district’s substitute teachers and teacher associates to a temp agency (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

The Des Moines school board could decide as soon as Tuesday whether to outsource the district's substitute teachers and teacher associates to a temp agency, a plan that some fear would deteriorate the quality of subs in schools.

District administrators say the same substitute standards would be upheld, and the move could actually benefit students. Right now, substitute shortages leave an average of 30 classes a day unfilled, prompting teachers to forgo planning time and other responsibilities to step in.

In addition, elementary music, art and physical education teachers are sometimes asked to fill in, as are instructors who work in small groups, which hurts students, according to Anne Sullivan, the district's chief of human resources.

"It affects teaching and learning," she said.

About 190 of Des Moines' 2,800 classroom teachers are absent on any given day. Substitutes are found most of the time.

But Andrew Rasmussen, president of the Des Moines Education Association, said the switch could decrease the number of licensed substitutes who have completed a teacher preparation program, which also is required of full-time teachers, and instead increase the number of substitutes with less training. The union does not represent substitutes.

"We have, as a union, always been against outsourcing the work of public employees to private corporations," Rasmussen said.

In addition, he questioned a move that he believes means less district control on hiring and training decisions.

The proposal goes before the Des Moines school board at its Tuesday meeting. It was initially placed on the consent agenda, which is typical for management functions, but was pulled to another section to allow more discussion.

"This could be a viable option, and a viable solution," school board chairwoman Cindy Elsbernd said, explaining that companies that work with the district must follow its policies and procedures. "These are still going to be professional people."

If approved, the plan would start in the fall and cost $854,000 a year.

Outsourcing substitutes

Des Moines competes with suburban districts for substitutes, and Sullivan believes that Kelly Educational Staffing, which district leaders are recommending, would increase Des Moines' competitiveness.

"I was really impressed by their professionalism and the benefits they offer to subs," she said, citing paid orientations, options for heath and retirement benefits, as well as bonus and substitute recognition programs.

Kelly Educational Staffing is a specialty service of publicly traded Kelly Services. It has contracted with school districts in states such as Texas and Missouri, among others. A company spokesperson could not be reached for comment Friday afternoon.

According to the company's website, districts typically contract with them after having difficulty hiring enough substitutes.

Others make the switch because of the Affordable Care Act, also known as ObamaCare, the site says. The health care law requires that employees who work 30 hours a week or 130 hours a month have access to employer-sponsored health care benefits. Some substitutes meet that threshold.

But parents such as Thatcher Williams, president of the parent-teacher organization at Phillips Elementary School, question whether companies concerned about being "in the black" would make the same decisions as the district when it comes to hiring substitutes.

"We all know that one person who we were shocked when they continued to get jobs in a temp agency, because of their lack of effort," he said.

Standards unchanged

Sullivan said standards for substitutes would remain the same if the contract is approved. Under Iowa law, the district is required to hire substitutes who are licensed and have completed a teacher preparation program, or who have earned an authorization, which allows individuals who have completed a bachelor's degree and a substitute course to be hired.

Background checks would also continue, as would current pay: licensed substitutes earn $130 a day and teacher associates $79, she said.

Outsourcing substitutes appears to be a solution that was prompted by discussions during union contract negotiations this winter. Union leaders asked for additional pay when teachers are asked to take on additional classes because a substitute cannot be found.

In addition, Sullivan said there have been more complaints by teachers and principals about the sub shortage.

"I think they're trying to find a solution," said Samy El-Baroudi, a teacher at East High School and the union's treasurer. "I just don't think it's the right solution."

Substitute license and authorization

•Substitute license: Holders have completed a teacher preparation program and have, or are eligible, for an Iowa teaching license. They may hold long-term subbing positions up to 90 days.

•Substitute authorization: Individuals have completed a substitute authorization course and hold a bachelor's degree, but have not had a teacher preparation program. They may substitute up to five consecutive days, but no more than 10 days per month in one classroom.

If you go

WHAT: The Des Moines school board will discuss outsourcing substitute teachers and teacher associates, and could vote on the plan Tuesday evening.

WHEN: A public forum will be held at 5:45 p.m., and the meeting starts at 6 p.m. on the second floor of Central Campus, 1800 Grand Ave.

SPEAK: To be put on the speaker list, individuals are asked to fill out a card before the meeting or call 242-7713 before 3:30 p.m. Tuesday.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1GSuTeF