Texas’ decision not to accept federal funds to expand health coverage not only leaves our most vulnerable populations without access to coverage, it also threatens important safety net providers in our community.

In 2010, Congress created a temporary health center trust fund to help centers expand sites and services to cover those newly insured under health care reform. This trust fund will expire in 2015 because Congress assumed that patients would have access to care under Medicaid expansion and the market place. Since Texas did not expand coverage under health reform, most health center patients remain uninsured because their income is too low to qualify for assistance in the Marketplace.

Without a solution, health centers will receive about a 70-percent cut in their federal funds in 2015 when the trust fund expires. This would take centers back to where funding levels were in 1999.

Uninsured, low-income workers making between 100 percent and 400 percent of poverty can now receive subsidies to help purchase affordable health coverage.

However, because of Texas’ decision to turn down federal funds under the Affordable Care Act, uninsured El Pasoans earning less than poverty wages are left without affordable coverage.

Most of the city’s poorest have been left out of this coverage, relying on community health centers to provide access to primary care services.

When safety net services are not available, or if services beyond primary care are needed, lack of coverage and access leads to use of emergency rooms for routine care, increasing costs for everyone in the long term.

El Pasoans as taxpayers are already picking up the tab for low-income residents, but are paying for it three times: through federal taxes paid regardless of expansion, through sales taxes that fund indigent health care programs and through property taxes that help pay for University Medical Center’s uncompensated and indigent care programs. This coverage is wasteful, inefficient and expensive.

We need a Texas solution. A Texas solution for expanding health coverage should be designed to place the interests of both patients and taxpayers first.

The federal government has shown that compromise is attainable through negotiations with other states.

A Texas solution must be carefully crafted to assure access to cost-saving primary and preventive care, must have a statewide rollout, must cover the entire coverage gap population, and must encourage the use of primary and preventive care through a targeted approach to cost sharing.

Just recently, a board of medical professionals appointed by Gov. Rick Perry recommended that the state provide health coverage to low-income Texans under the Affordable Care Act. The 15-member board recommended that the state’s health commissioner be authorized to negotiate a Texas-specific agreement to expand health coverage to the poor.

We urge our elected officials to find a solution to cover our low-income residents that saves money, eases local tax burden and ensures that Texas taxpayer dollars are funneled back into the Texas economy. The lives of thousands of our neighbors depend on a solution.

Jose Luna, M.D., is the chief executive officer of Centro San Vicente Familiar de Salud, which operates two health clinics in El Paso and one in San Elizario.