Sen. Michael Bennet, D-Colo., faces re-election next year, but so far no strong Republican candidate has emerged. (Photo: AP)

WASHINGTON — With less than a year until Election Day, one of the most important Senate races in one of the most important presidential states remains a drama without a complete script.

If the situation remains as it now stands, Colorado Democratic Sen. Michael Bennet could cruise to a second term because Republicans so far have failed to unite around one well-known, well-financed candidate. The GOP primary, under this scenario, becomes a grueling battle among a long list of second-tier candidates who not only have trouble matching Bennet’s fundraising but also fail to attract the massive spending by outside groups that has marked recent Senate elections.

In the other scenario, the GOP is either able to persuade a well-known politician to run or rallies around a fresh-faced candidate who has the right résumé and financial backing to take advantage of the fact the state is evenly divided politically.

At stake: who represents Colorado in the Senate for six years, helping to determine whether Republicans retain control of the Senate, and potentially affecting the presidential race.

Here is a guide to the race — the players, the setting, the money and the issues.

The Players

Right now the race is Bennet versus a cast of relative unknowns.

Bennet was chief of staff to Denver’s mayor and then superintendent of the Denver public schools before being named in 2009 to fill out the term of Ken Salazar, who became secretary of the Interior Department.

Bennet won election to his first full term in 2010, defeating Republican Ken Buck 48.1% to 46.4% — a little more than 28,000 votes out of about 1.8 million cast.

Republican leaders in the state and in Washington have been scrambling since Rep. Mike Coffman of Aurora, who many assumed would be the party's nominee, announced this summer he would not run. Then a few months later attention focused on District Attorney George Brauchler, who prosecuted the Aurora theater shooting case. But he said in September he won't run.

The spotlight has shifted to State Rep. Jon Keyser of Morrison, a graduate of the Air Force Academy, who reportedly met recently with officials in Washington about a possible bid. Keyser did not return a call seeking comment.

Republicans who have announced they are candidates include:

• Tim Neville, a state senator who lives in Jefferson County. He worked in food-service distribution and restaurant management and runs a family insurance agency.

• Ryan Frazier is a former Aurora City Council member, Navy veteran and co-founder of a charter school.

• Donald Rosier is a Jefferson County commissioner. He received a bachelor’s degree from Colorado State University in civil engineering and has worked in engineering, land development, construction and energy development.

• Daryl Glenn is an El Paso County commissioner who served on the Colorado Springs City Council. He is a lawyer and graduated from the Air Force Academy. After 21 years of active duty, he retired as a lieutenant colonel.

Also running: Greg Lopez, former Colorado director of the Small Business Administration, and Charles Ehler, a retired military computer programmer.

The setting

While the fractured Republican field may put Bennet in the driver’s seat for now, two factors — the state’s evenly divided electorate and Bennet’s low poll numbers — mean the race is far from over, most agree.

There are slightly more registered Republicans than Democrats in the state, according to the latest numbers from the secretary of state’s office, but “unaffiliated” outnumber either party.

A November Quinnipiac University poll found 37% approved of the job Bennet was doing, while 35% disapproved and 28% had no answer. Forty-one percent said Bennet did not deserve another term, 30% said he did, and the rest did not answer.

Democrats have attacked the accuracy of past Quinnipiac polls in Colorado and the sample used to conduct this one and suggest that asking whether an incumbent politician deserved another term was inevitably going to spark a negative response.

In Bennet’s favor, according to Kyle Saunders, associate professor of political science at Colorado State University, is the fact that the state tends to lean toward Democratic statewide candidates in a presidential election year.

Also providing a boost for Bennet is that the state has added more than 260,000 jobs since he began his first full term, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the state’s unemployment rate has dropped from 9.1% to 3.3%. The economy in Colorado grew by 4.7% in 2014 compared to the previous year, the fifth-fastest rate among the states, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Money

Bennet has a huge advantage in fundraising, having raised $8.3 million this election cycle, with about $5.4 million in his campaign account at the end of September.

On the Republican side, only Glenn has reported raising any campaign funds, about $40,000. He had $15,610 in his campaign account at the end of September, according to the Federal Election Commission.

When Bennet won his first full term in 2010, he spent about $10.9 million and the candidates spent a total of $15.7 million. By 2014, when Republican Cory Gardner knocked off incumbent Democrat Mark Udall, spending by the candidates had more than doubled to more than $33 million.

Spending by outside groups — including party committees and interest groups — totaled more than $70 million in the Gardner-Udall race, driving the total cost of the race above $104 million. It was the second most expensive Senate race in 2014, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

With no single, strong Republican candidate yet, two GOP outside groups who spent heavily in Bennet’s first race — American Crossroads ($6 million) and Club for Growth Action ($1 million) — are sitting on the sidelines for now.

The issues

Saunders, the Colorado State professor, said the political landscape changes so quickly in modern politics that it is not certain what will be most critical near Election Day.

With the recent terrorist attacks in California and around the world, national security appears to be a top concern.

Ryan Lynch, executive director of the Colorado Republican Party, said Bennet’s vote in favor of the Iran nuclear agreement makes him vulnerable. “He is certainly going to have to answer that.”

Republicans also are going to likely bring up his vote for the Affordable Care Act and to otherwise attempt to link him to President Obama to take advantage of the president's unpopularity.

Democrats argue there are plenty of examples of Bennet opposing Obama, including his successful effort to change the president’s mind about scuttling the Orion spacecraft, his vote against the fiscal cliff budget deal in January 2013, and his opposition to administration regulations on spent grain used by breweries and children working on farms.

Bennet is likely to highlight his bipartisan work on education legislation to replace the No Child Left Behind law, a five-year farm bill, and legislation that expedites government approval of breakthrough drugs and treatments.

Important dates

April 4: Last day for GOP candidates to file petitions to get on the ballot.

April 9: Republican state assembly (or convention) at which candidates can earn enough support to get on the ballot

June 28: Primary election

Nov. 8: General election

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1YlFzJi