Employment: How many times have we seen this? Every time the economy seems ready to pull out of its 2% growth rut and shift into a higher gear, the engine stalls. It’s happening again in 2015.

Employers added a flimsy 126,000 jobs in March — and with downward revisions from previous months, the job gains were half that high. The latest estimate for first-quarter GDP is below 1%, with one Federal Reserve Bank predicting closer to zero.

Businesses aren’t buying into the robust expansion story that President Obama has been peddling in his “mission accomplished” victory tour across the country — and neither are Americans on Main Street.

The March job gains were way down from 18 months prior, when the economy had been averaging more than 200,000 a month. Wages crept up a bit (0.3%), but hours worked fell back slightly.

The now-meaningless headline unemployment rate of 5.5% remains low only because of the still historically low 62.7% labor force participation rate. Working-age Americans aren’t working, and an additional 100,000 dropped out in March.

The all-inclusive unemployment rate, which includes those who have stopped looking for a job plus those who can’t find full-time work, is closer to 11%.

Once again, supporters of the administration’s policies have blamed the lousy numbers on the weather. But that doesn’t explain the big downward revisions in previous months.

It seems that every winter, we get poor jobs numbers that Obama apologists blame on the weather — as if we’ve never experienced snowstorms in January, February and March. And this is the president who says that we have to fear global warming.

Drawing conclusions from one discouraging jobs report or one bad quarter of growth is a fool’s errand. But the five-year trend on jobs tells us a lot.

This is a pitiful economic recovery, and the underperformance didn’t happen by accident. The chart above shows the difference in job growth under President Reagan (whose policies underscored his philosophy that government was “the problem, not the solution”) vs. Obama. We are some 6.5 million jobs short of where we should be. That can’t be blamed on the weather.

The policy takeaway? Obamanomics is a grand failure. We’ve spent and borrowed $7 trillion in six years. The Fed has printed and expanded its balance sheet by over $3 trillion and pursued near-zero interest-rate policies.

Fiscal stimulus, tax hikes on the rich, ObamaCare, cash for clunkers, minimum-wage increases, housing bailouts — none of it has returned the economy to anything near the prosperity we saw in the 1980s and ’90s.

The president should stop trying to spin Americans on how well things are going when they aren’t seeing it at the kitchen table. Instead, he can sign the Keystone pipeline, reverse recent EPA regulations that are strangling oil and gas producers and utilities, and suspend the 50-worker and 30-hour-a-week rules that trigger ObamaCare mandates and regulations.

Then he can strike a deal with congressional Republicans to cut the corporate tax rate to bring money back to the United States. If creating jobs is Job One for this president, he should do each of these things tomorrow.

But we’re not holding our breath.