OLDWICK, N.J.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--A.M. Best has released the latest installment of its Insurance Law Podcast, a series that examines timely insurance issues from an attorney’s or expert service provider’s point of view.

This episode features Dan Thompson, owner of DeeGee Rehabilitation Technologies, Ltd., which provides life care plans, vocational assessments, and rehabilitation and motivational speaking services to insurers, attorneys and medical practitioners. DeeGee Rehabilitation Technologies, Ltd. has offices in Yucca, AZ and Huntsville, Ontario, CN. Mr. Thompson is a registered rehabilitation professional, registered vocational professional and certified life care planner. The discussion addresses health care system reform in the United States and Canada and its impact on the U.S. insurance industry and the legal community.

Mr. Thompson explains what life care planners and vocational experts do and the impact they can have on the insurance industry. He comments on the controversy surrounding the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act—colloquially referred to as Obamacare—as well as the Act’s impact on damages those plaintiffs or claimants receive. He articulates the coverage differences between the United States and Canada, and then concludes by detailing cases of interest and by speculating on the future of life care planners and vocational experts.

DeeGee Rehabilitation Technologies, Ltd. [link to http://www3.ambest.com/DPSDirectorySearch/CompanyDisplay.aspx?dpid=39753&nid6] is listed in Best’s Directories of Recommended Insurance Attorneys and Adjusters (including Expert Service Providers), the most authoritative and detailed reference for locating qualified legal counsel, independent insurance adjusting services and expert service providers since 1928. Learn more at http://www.ambest.com/directories.

Listen or subscribe to the Insurance Law Podcast at http://feeds2.feedburner.com/InsuranceLaw.

A.M. Best Company is the world's oldest and most authoritative insurance rating and information source. For more information, visit www.ambest.com.

Copyright © 2015 by A.M. Best Company, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.