Scott Roman, a man charged in the hit-and-run crash that killed Joseph Deverson, appears in court where his bond is set at $1 million. (Published Tuesday, Sept. 1, 2015)

A Broward County judge set bond at $1 million Tuesday for a driver authorities say was responsible for an Oakland Park hit-and-run crash that killed a man in May.

Scott Roman appeared in a courtroom Tuesday morning after being booked into jail Monday, more than three months after 22-year-old Joseph Deverson was killed in the crash. The victim's stepmother also appeared in court.

Video 2 Injured in Separate Shootings in NW Miami-Dade

"We didn't want to hear it from anybody else, we wanted to hear what the judge had to say," Dawn Deverson said.

Authorities say Deverson was riding a Go-ped on Powerline Road near Oakland Park Boulevard when he was struck by a BMW, allegedly driven by Roman, and dragged down the street. The driver fled the scene, police said.

Driver Arrested in Fatal Oakland Park Hit-and-Run: Cops

Authorities have arrested the driver they say is responsible for an Oakland Park hit-and-run crash that killed a man in May. (Published Monday, Aug. 31, 2015)

Deverson was on life support but died days after the crash. The BMW was found days later with damage to the front at the Palms Condo.

"Eye for an eye. I'd be happy. Eye for an eye," the victim's father, Don Deverson, said outside of the jail on Monday. "He deserves to get everything coming to him now because you don't do that, you don't run off."

Roman, 47, was charged with failure to stop and remain at a fatal accident, tampering with or fabricating physical evidence, and was ordered to surrender his passport.

It is not known if Roman has hired an attorney.

According to the arrest report, video showing Roman driving the damaged car to the parking garage at the Palms Condo after the crash. Cell phone records also showed that Roman's phone was in the area of the crash at the time of the crash, the report said.

An employee of the Palms Condo later told detectives that Roman had asked him to make arrangements to have the damage to the vehicle repaired, the report said.

"Because of of the severity and location of the damage to his vehicle, Roman knew or should have known that injury or death could have occurred," the report said.

Investigators said Roman had been drinking at a Wilton Manors bar before the crash.

At Tuesday's hearing, Roman's attorney said he had given his keys to a stranger who then drove him home while he slept.

But a detective testified he was alone when he returned to the condo. He also allegedly told the valet about the damage.

"In that conversation, Mr Roman made statements along the lines, 'I panicked, I hit something,'" the detective testified.

Broward Judge John Hurley said Roman is a flight risk, and called attention to a Facebook post made by Roman two hours after the crash in which he allegedly said he was looking for a travel buddy to Italy.

Roman's attorney denied he is a flight risk and said he was out of the country but returned to face the charges.