Uninsured California State University students have avoided signing up for health care coverage because they believe it’s expensive, not because they think they don’t need it, results from a poll released on Monday show.

At least 80 percent of the 836 students who responded said that they did not have health insurance because they could not afford it, while 7percent replied that they did not think they needed it. Researchers handed out surveys to students at the Cal State University campuses of Los Angeles, Fresno and San Jose in September and October last year. The poll was conducted by Cal State University of Los Angeles’s Department of Public Health as part of the Health Insurance Education Project.

Results of the survey also found that 73 percent of the students said they should have insurance because “I will have access to care if I need it.” Also, 19 percent said having insurance was the “responsible thing to do.”

The results show that the so-called young invincibles want to comply with the Affordable Care Act but have shied away from signing up for health care for different reasons, said Walter Zelman, chairman of the Cal State L.A. Department of Public Health and director of the project.

“Most students may be in good health, and when compared to older individuals, insurance may not be high on their priority list,” Zelman said in the study. “But they know they need it. They just have not been able to afford it. This is not about invincibility; it is about affordability,”

A lack of knowledge about where to sign up for health plans may also be why uninsured youth have avoided enrollment, which means more outreach and time are needed to educate young people about the plans. At least 77 percent of those who responded to the survey said they hadn’t heard of Covered California, the state’s health exchange that offers plans at various price ranges. And most didn’t know that if they are low income, they qualify for subsidized coverage, including Medi-Cal, Zelman said.

About 30 percent of the of 437,000 students in the California State University system are uninsured, and at least 34 percent of those uninsured are older students age 22 to 25 years old.

Zelman said the poll was conducted before Covered California stepped up its marketing efforts toward the young and uninsured.

Covered California officials said last month that about 25 percent of the nearly half million who purchased health plans since enrollment kicked off on Oct. 1 were between the ages of 18 and 34.

Advertisement

“We believe this may be the first published poll taken of university students on their health insurance status, and the circumstances and views underlying that status,” Zelman said, but acknowledged that the poll does not meet “peer review” standards, or standards applied by professional polling organizations.