Inside Politics: Funding questions snag Albany County youth programs

This week's political intrigue is brought to you by a news conference that didn't happen about a donation that wasn't.

On Wednesday, Democratic Albany County lawmakers were poised to join Sheriff Craig Apple to announce what a press advisory from the legislature billed as a "major donation" to the county to fund youth programs.

Those plans, however, were at least temporarily grounded once questions were raised about where the money to fund the programs was coming from.

County Executive Dan McCoy's administration got wind of the event (to which McCoy — who was out of town — was not invited) late Tuesday and, knowing nothing about any donation, sought to figure out the source of the cash.

More Information Contact Jordan Carleo-Evangelist at 518-454- 5445 or email jcarleo-evangelist@timesunion.com. On Twitter: @JC Evangelist_TU

After learning the money was somehow related to a telecommunications contract, the Department of Management and Budget concluded it was not a donation but actually a $1.5 million payment from a company that last year won the right to provide inmate phone services at the jail, a county spokeswoman said.

In July, the legislature approved a three-year agreement with Alabama-based Global Tel Link that required the firm to pay the county $1.5 million upfront.

The upfront payment was negotiated as the Federal Communications Commission was moving nationally to cap and reduce charges on inmate calls long criticized as exorbitant, changes the county knew would cut into its roughly $450,000 average annual share of from calls at the jail.

The problem with diverting the upfront Global Tel Link payment for youth programs is that McCoy's administration had already budgeted all $1.5 million this year with the intent that it would be used to offset expenses at the jail — a spending plan the legislature approved in December.

In other words, McCoy's administration said, those dollars were already spoken for and using them for youth programs would leave a $1.5 million hole in the sheriff's budget.

"Per the contract that provided for a one-time payment, that money was included in the 2016 budget as that was when the revenues were to be received," acting budget Commissioner Dave Reilly said.

Apple said that was news to him, offering Insider a look at a spreadsheet that showed a $514,000 request in his 2016 budget on the line for jail phone call revenue. But that conflicts with the budget posted on the county's website, which says the sheriff's office requested $1.51 million.

Whatever the source of that discrepancy, Wednesday's news conference was scuttled less than an hour before it was scheduled to start, and a budget amendment for the programming was tabled at Wednesday night's meeting of the legislature's Audit & Finance Committee. The meeting agenda, which included no back-up documentation for the amendment, also described the money as "a donation" — a description that a spokesman for the Democratic majority later said was an error.

"Our goal all along has been to dedicate this to youth programming," Apple told the finance committee on Wednesday night. Global Tel Link, he said, was under no obligation to agree to pay the county anything. "It's kind of found money," he said.

Ultimately, the sheriff said, he's looking to break the payment into four $375,000 installments over four years for programs that would help keep teenagers out of trouble.

District Attorney David Soares was also said to be onboard.

Aside from the funding confusion, McCoy is said to have been furious about being left out of the loop on the announcement — a pothole in what for months had been a much smoother relationship between the executive and legislature since the start of McCoy's second term in January.

Since taking office, McCoy has also sought to expand the county's youth programming, including reopening Lawson Lake and hiring the city's former recreation commissioner, John D'Antonio, to oversee the effort.

Wednesday's weirdness isn't likely to stall the sheriff's programming for long. Apple said he's now looking to tap savings accrued from the Affordable Care Act's impact on inmate medical care.

Lawmakers are planning a special finance committee meeting to precede the full legislative meeting May 9 so they can still move forward with the youth programming that night.

"The sheriff's got a some great ideas," finance committee Chairman Gary Domalewicz said. "I'm not concerned about finding the money."

Apple said he was blindsided by how quickly everything unraveled Wednesday.

"The budgetary issues are secondary to what we are trying to accomplish here," Democratic Majority Leader Frank Commisso said though a spokesman. "The Albany County Legislature looks forward to collaborating with Sheriff Apple to put these innovative youth diversion services in place."