CLEVELAND, Ohio – A series of well-timed grants is allowing Care Alliance Health Center and other agencies to raise the scope and level of available mental health services, continuing the work launched three years ago with a sizable federal award.

This fall, a van staffed by clinicians will begin visiting eight permanent supportive housing sites on a regular basis to provide mental health services.

In addition, clinicians will be able to increase the amount of time they spend at men's and women's shelters, tending to the mental health needs of those residents.

Making this extra outreach possible are three grants from the Ohio Housing Agency, United Way and the Affordable Care Act totaling nearly $1 million, and the close collaboration of several agencies focused on providing care to the poor, homeless and uninsured.

Care Alliance is the recipient of two of the grants - $250,000 in federal funding and $227,000 from the United Way of Greater Cleveland.

The third grant - $467,000 from the Ohio Housing Agency – is designed for Care Alliance to collaborate with the Housing First Initiative and FrontLine Service.

The infusion of money will go toward the hiring of additional staff, including a nurse practitioner, part-time psychiatrist, social workers, medical assistant and care coordinators; buying the van for the mobile clinic, and even paying for costly medications that patients otherwise wouldn't be able to afford.

Care Alliance doesn't have a psychiatrist on staff; FrontLine Service and the Centers for Families and Children provide those services.

"One-third of the patients we serve have mental issues," said Care Alliance CEO Francis Afram-Gyening. The more serious cases are referred to Beech Brook, the Centers for Families and Children, and FrontLine.

But for the rest, it has been a struggle to provide enough resources to take care of their needs, he said.

The new money will enhance the ability for primary care physicians at Care Alliance to consult on site with mental health clinicians about patients' psychosocial issues.

"With a complement of behavioral health folks, this will really be the first bold move for this project," Afram-Gyening said. "From the patient standpoint, they will now have more access to these professionals that, until now, they couldn't have."

In 2011, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (samhsa.gov) awarded a $1.5 million grant over three years for Bridges to Housing. The program takes chronically homeless people and moves them into permanent housing and helps them become more self-sufficient.

Clients were referred for this program based on three factors: their homeless status (at least five years, but many have been living on the streets or in shelters for decades), a severe and persistent mental illness or disabling addiction, and chronic physical illness.

Along the way to housing, they are given an onslaught of social services and treatment for behavioral health issues such as mental illness, anxiety and depression, and primary health care services.

"We know where they are," Afram-Gyening said. "Once we find them, we need to give them intensive case management."

The goals were, in part, to decrease the number of people relying on shelters, improve access to services and improve their health without a constant reliance on emergency rooms.

Over the past three years, Bridges to Housing (which Care Alliance runs in partnership with FrontLine) has helped 199 adults. All but 27 adults are settled in permanent housing; the remaining individuals are waiting for openings.

"It really demonstrates the whole continuum of care," Afram-Gyening said. "We cannot be in isolation and just tend to their physical health."

Last December, longtime Care Alliance and FrontLine client Larry Remar moved into an efficiency in a new apartment complex in Cleveland's Buckeye-Woodland neighborhood.

It was a pivotal moment for Remar, 53, who for the past decade had been living in and out spare rooms and, until recently, the Lutheran Metropolitan Ministries Men's Shelter at 2100 Lakeside Ave.

"I didn't think it was really going to happen," Remar, who first got connected with Care Alliance and FrontLine several years ago for medical care and treatment for his depression, said of the new apartment. "But things started falling in place. It's changed my life."

The new stability has allowed Remar, who occasionally attends Alcoholics Anonymous meetings in the building, to start thinking about his future again.

"I'm able to live now more like I used to," said Remar, who recently was chosen to take part in a six-month training program in the restaurant and hospitality industry. "I want to do more normal things again."

While the SAMSHA funding for Bridges to Housing runs out Sept. 29, FrontLine received an $80,000 grant this year from United Way for the program, and continues to look for other funding.

When a behavioral health issue is added on top of other physical ailments, everything becomes worse, said Matthew Mlckovsky, a licensed practical nurse at Care Alliance, who sees a lot of people with hypertension and uncontrolled diabetes.

"They don't understand how to take care of themselves," Mlckovsky said. "For a lot of them who have schizophrenia and other conditions, it's more difficult for them to understand."

Mlckovsky has worked with Bridges to Housing since joining Care Alliance two years ago.

"A lot of them have had problems navigating the system," Mlckovsky said. "They see that people care about helping them, and it establishes a trust that means a lot."

Providing that care isn't easy, Mlckovsky said.

"You always need more time and more people," he said. "You always want to raise the level of everything.

"Transportation for clients is difficult; barely any of them drive, so we give out bus passes, or we drive them back and forth to their appointments," he said.

The addition of a mobile mental health clinic will have a big impact, Mlckovsky said. "It makes it more likely that they'll get the care they need."