Move over comics; pop culture is the new king.

Comic Book Classroom — the nonprofit branch of Denver Comic Con — is changing its name to Pop Culture Classroom, all in the name of childhood literacy. The change was announced Friday night to officially open the three-day comic book and pop culture extravaganza at the Colorado Convention Center.

Christine Tubbs, executive director of the nonprofit, said the mission was originally to encourage education by promoting literacy and self-expression through comic books, but the group is expanding the methods of its outreach.

“It has worked so well in comic books, in what we are calling ‘storytelling through comics,’ we are now expanding it to other areas of popular culture,” Tubbs said. “So, music, film, gaming are a few of the areas we’ll use to expand it.”

At this weekend’s convention, the Classroom Kids Corral area featured a variety of activities for kids to explore, from video games to creating their own comics. Moving forward, Tubbs said the group is working to package the programs and offering it to educators to use in their own classrooms.

“We’ll be working to make sure we can get them into schools that can’t afford to have them in there; we’ll make them free. And other schools, we’ll work with them to make it affordable for them as well,” she said.

The move seems to make sense at a time where a “comic book” convention has guests ranging from sci-fi celebrities to TV stars, voiceover artists and everything between.

Meridith Cahill, 17, frequently attends anime conventions. She went to Denver Comic Con to watch people and take in the experience.

“I haven’t gone to much of the programming,” she admitted. “But there’s a lot of focus on literacy, and I think that’s really cool.”

For 6-year-old-Clive Higgins, it’s all about Spider-Man.

“He’s a superhero and he has lots of very good things and powers,” he said.

The newly graduated kindergardner, who has liked Spider-Man since he was “very, very little” was dressed from head to toe in his favorite hero’s garb, sporting a Spidey hat, shoes and costume, and carrying a newly purchased Spider-Man print from artist David Wong for his bedroom … which, of course, is decorated in a Spider-Man theme.

Clive and his mom, Brandy Higgins, are among the expected 75,000 fans converging on downtown this weekend for the convention. Friday’s attendance topped 25,000, according to organizers, and was marked by a much smoother entry process than last year’s.

About 6,000 people had to be turned away on Saturday in 2013, a black eye for the event that fans remembered all winter.

So, was it faster than a speeding bullet? Maybe not quite that quick, but Denver Comic Con officials say they spent all year working on a plan to speed the process of getting fans inside the convention center, and the improved flow was just as smooth Saturday.

How long was the wait?

“Probably five minutes. It was more like walking to the right spot,” said Ty Hart of Boulder, who is at Denver Comic Con for the first time. “Once we found the right line, we jumped right in, and there was hardly any wait at all.”

Scores of fans visited Artists Valley to meet, chat with, and purchase art and books from their favorite comic book artists. Christopher Jones, an artist who has worked on DC’s “Young Justice,” The Batman Strikes!” and more spent much of his day conversing with fans, both new and those familiar with his work.

“It’s been a mixture of both. I’ve had fans that are really excited to see me here and they thank me for coming, and then there are people who have just stopped by because they saw me on a panel or saw the art and they want to hear more about what I do and what I’m working on.”

It’s all in the name of fun, superheroes, and literacy. Tubbs said the outpouring of support and sense of community is only growing stronger.

“I asked in the opening ceremonies for anyone who wanted to come and help (with Pop Culture Classroom) and in every hallway and every room I’ve been today someone has come up to me and handed me their business card and said ‘I want to be part of this. … I know we’re on the right track. I cannot tell you how excited I am about it.”

Denver Comic Con continues from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Sunday.

Joe Nguyen, Daniel J. Schneider and Rex Santus contributed to this story.