TRENTON — Gov. Chris Christie has long been critical of New Jersey's Supreme Court, calling it too liberal and vowing to reshape it.

And some of the Republican governors sharpest attacks came in 2013 when the state's highest court ordered his administration to come up with new, stricter rules governing New Jersey's affordable housing program. Christie called the decision "outrageous" and said the justices were "out of control."

Today, after the administration failed for months to follow that order, the Supreme Court ruled that it is now up to trial courts and not the state government to determine how much affordable housing towns across the state must provide.

All three of the justices that Christie has appointed — Anne Patterson, Faustino Fernandez-Vina, and Lee Solomon — voted in favor of the 6-0 decision.

Frank Askin, a law professor at Rutgers-Newark, said the ruling is the judiciary's latest blow to Christie, a potential candidate for the 2016 Republican nomination for president.

"I don't know what Christie is going to do," Askin said. "He's going to have to start attacking his own judges as being activists."

"Christie tries to bully everybody," he added. "He thinks he can bully the court, as well. He can't do it."

The governor's office, however, had no stinging criticisms of today's decision. Instead, spokesman Kevin Roberts portrayed it as "a call to action to finally finish the job of reforming our affordable housing system so that it is no longer a costly burden to the people of New Jersey and actually encourages sound development."

Christie proposed abolishing COAH in 2010, saying New Jersey should get "the hell out of the business of telling people how many units they're supposed to have" and allow individual towns to set their own quotas. The measure passed the state Senate but was amended in the Assembly. Christie conditionally vetoed the legislation, sending it back to the Legislature in its original form, but it eventually stalled.

Then, in September 2013, the Supreme Court gave COAH five months to write new guidelines to increase the minimum number of homes that towns must make available to their poorer residents.

COAH missed the court's deadline twice.

But Roberts said today that "now is the time to finish what we started and move these bills to take the judicial system out of the process of creating a rational process for encouraging the development of affordable housing that is grounded in economic feasibility and land-use planning."

State Assemblyman Jerry Green (D-Union) said today's decision could have been avoided entirely "entirely if the governor had worked with the Legislature to resolve this matter."

Still, Lori Grifa, a former commissioner of the state Department of Community Affairs under Christie, argued that today's decision is more a blow to COAH than to Christie.

"I thought the decision was very measured and apolitical.," said Grifa, who is now a partner at Hackensack law firm Archer & Greiner. "When an administration body is not functioning, people need to have an outlet, and that outlet will be the court."

Brent Johnson may be reached at bjohnson@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @johnsb01. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.