Joey Jacobs, CEO of Acadia Healthcare. (Photo: Submitted)

Acadia Healthcare's stock outperformed over the last year other Nashville-area companies in a local exchange-traded fund called NASH.

The ETF — a fund that is open to people who want to invest on the New York Stock Exchange — is dominated by health care companies.

Acadia provides patient behavioral health and addiction dependency care for children, teens and adults of all ages. The Franklin-based company topped the list for performance in the ETF's second year. Nashville based hospital operator HCA is the top performer over the fund's life.

The 10-year-old company has transformed since 2010.

Over a four year stretch Acadia nearly quintupled its revenue, going from $333 million in 2011 to $1.67 billion in 2014. Its portfolio grew from 29 to 208 facilities in the same period.

Several factors, including increased awareness about mental health care and addiction recovery, legislative support and better access to care, are combining to make the next few years a time of opportunity in the industry, said Brent Turner, president.

"These all support patients' access to patients," Turner said. "If there’s a need out in the communities we want to be there to fill it.”

The in-patient behavioral health hospital market is projected to grow to $18.4 billion by 2020 from about $15.9 billion in 2014, according to Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, a department of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

About 2.4 million people were opioid dependent in 2013, according to the federal report. The majority, 79 percent, were painkiller dependent; just over a fifth were heroin dependent. Tennessee has one of the highest rates of painkiller prescriptions in the country.

Over the last decade federal reforms – particularly the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 and the Affordable Care Act —have improved access to mental health care.

The 2008 law prohibits employers and health insurance companies from putting stricter limits on mental health care than other conditions. The ACA has helped millions of people across the country get insurance.

Joey Jacobs, chairman and CEO, has been at the helm since February 2011, the year Acadia started its fast-track growth.

Turner, who also joined in the same month as Jacobs, said the company’s success is a result of the people in the executive suite in Franklin as well as the people in the facilities.

“It takes everybody working to do what we do. We’ve got a good formula,” he said.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1NfZ0in