If nothing else, the media’s triumphalism over the SCOTUS gay “marriage” decision proves they’re sore winners. True, they deserve a victory lap – they and their pals in the entertainment industry made this constitutional and civilizational abomination possible. But you’d think that with victory secured, they’d ease up on traditional marriage supporters, maybe go back to pretending they’re journalists.

But no. On FNC’s MediaBuzz, host Howard Kurtz asked his panel about it, noting that “I can't remember another time in my career where I felt that coverage has been so one sided for a position that until three years ago Barack Obama held and until two years ago Hillary Clinton held, which is they were for traditional marriage.”

National Review’s Jim Geraghty cut right to the chase saying:

But on this issue press has decided that one side is effectively illegitimate, that one perspective is effectively evil. They’re be neutral on all kinds of issues – sharia law, ISIS, the Castro regime in Cuba. We’re not going to take a side on that one, we’re not going to say one side is evil on this one, but if you oppose two men getting married or two women getting married we will call that out as evil.

Yep. And then dismiss you. Discussing the exclusion of dissenting opinions in reports on the issue, liberal NPR political correspondent Mara Liasson said, settled saw and settled beliefs – do we have a white supremacist on every single time we talk about a civil rights issue? No.”

Geraghty wasn’t having it. Noting that “something in the neighborhood of 30 to 40 percent” of Americans oppose gay marriage, he said to Liasson, “You just compared that 30 to 40 percent to white supremacists.” Liasson tried to weasel out and ended up agreeing that it isn’t hard to find opponents of gay marriage.

But increasingly, that’s what we’re going to hear when we call for balance on gay issues: “Well, we don’t have to include the perspectives of Nazis, serial killers, the Mongol hordes or any other reviled, anachronistic group,” so why bother with traditionalists?

During the conversation, Kurtz wondered if “do some people feel marginalized by the media culture and the way these [issues] are approached?” To which the only proper response is, “Ya think?”