More Than Just Online Master’s Degrees In Business Administration

When it comes to some serious street cred in the business sector, an MBA has long been thought the way to go. An MBA offers the strong foundation needed to succeed and lead. Yet it instills so much more in graduates, who come away with myriad skills and knowledge gained through online master’s degrees in business administration.

The Value of Online Master’s Degrees in Business Administration

Considering an MBA? It's a smart decision. You’ll earn a graduate degree that provides you with valuable expertise and the freedom to move across industries, locations and departments within an organization.

According to Dr. Alex Manus, associate dean of Graduate Business Programs at Southern New Hampshire University, “The MBA program is designed for professionals seeking the tools, knowledge and analytical skills needed for effective business analysis, decision-making and management in a wide variety of organizations, including non-financial corporations, banks, insurance companies, investment firms and government units. The MBA focuses on the skills and abilities necessary to effectively make well-informed and strategic decisions to help graduates better position their companies within the market.

As one of the most sought-after graduate-level degrees, a Master of Business Administration can be the ticket to any number of career experiences. The highly translatable skill set and knowledge allows holders of online master’s degrees in business administration to easily transition to new management and leadership roles in diverse settings.

And what about the personal value of this achievement? MBA graduates share a common response – earning their online master’s degrees in business administration was highly rewarding, personally, professionally and financially. Your investment in an MBA is one that reaps very tangible rewards.

When it comes to earnings, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics notes that those with a master’s degree can expect to earn 20 percent more on average than those with a bachelor’s degree – and almost 80 percent more than those without a degree.

Distinguish Myself Among My Colleagues

Miguel Gutierrez's interests are mainly in the IT field, but he says he has an entrepreneurial spirit. He’s been involved with different small business ventures with varying success. It was those mixed results in business, as well as his career aspirations – and the desire to stand out among his colleagues – that led Gutierrez to consider online master’s degrees in business administration and “to take on the challenge of obtaining an MBA at SNHU.

He was able to combine several goals in his MBA journey, adding a concentration in IT management to his master’s degree and a Project Management Graduate Certificate online. The IT management concentration is just one of more than 20 online MBA career-oriented concentrations at SNHU, and gives students like Gutierrez a strong foundation in business management combined with expertise in information technology – positioning graduates for success in today’s highly technical business world.

SNHU is a Registered Education Provider (R.E.P.) of the Project Management Institute (PMI®), a globally recognized certification standard, and graduates of the certificate program meet the education requirement needed to take the PMP® exam. Coupled with his online MBA with a concentration in IT management, Gutierrez harnessed his potential and turned it into so many new possibilities through the skills and knowledge he’s gained. A spring 2015 graduate, he says his success is “a tribute to the fine staff at SNHU – this includes my advisors, financial aid administrators and excellent instructors.”

Khaldoon Saboubeh began his MBA with SNHU over a decade ago at its off-site campus in Dubai. He soon found himself struggling with attending night classes after a long day at the office, running the derivatives and commodities business for one of the leading banks at its treasury and investments group. His hard work paid off with a promotion, which led to more hours at the office, traveling and relocation to another city. Four courses deep into his MBA, Saboubeh had to take a break.

Ten years went by before he would resume his studies. He had even more professional experience and wanted to get back on track in pursuit of his advanced degree. Saboubeh contacted SNHU to see how he could enroll once again in the MBA program, this time online. “Over the course of my first couple of semesters, my grades took such a dramatic change that I was even more encouraged and motivated to proceed,” he said. “I felt truly privileged, proud and great about my outstanding performance in my last semester.”

For Saboubeh, the major turning point in his academic career was “the pressure from growing peer competition, new talents in the market, and most importantly, the positive response I got back from SNHU, accepting me to be re-enrolled into their MBA program.” He realized he had an opportunity to distinguish himself as a professional, in a very competitive and demanding environment – and the support of his family and SNHU advisors helped him take full advantage of that opportunity to succeed in finally reaching his MBA goal.

Finding New Possibilities

With a bachelor’s degree in mathematics, Krystal Bibeau decided to pursue her MBA to strengthen her skill set and resume. She opted for an online MBA with a concentration in Quantitative Analysis, with the end of goal of becoming a statistician. While still in the program, Bibeau began a new job, where she’s able to put her education to use each day and is being groomed for a management position.

“I call that a success for sure!” she said. “I want to thank all of my professors, and my advisor, for all the effort they put into helping me learn and succeed, during each and every class I take. I love every class, can apply it to real life, and that makes me realize how signing up for graduate school was the best decision I have made.”

Lizzette Tarver came to SNHU as a professional with a desire to complete her education with a graduate degree to better position herself in the corporate arena and for personal growth. “Over the past few years, I have had the opportunity to find my niche in my love of the marketing world,” she said. When looking into online master’s programs in business administration, SNHU’s MBA in Marketing was the right fit. She’s found some of the more challenging courses to be the most informative – “SNHU has opened my eyes once again to the limitless possibilities that stand in the winds.”

With three years of professional experience under his belt, Matthew Behr wanted to extend his knowledge with an MBA. “I chose SNHU mainly because of the flexibility with my work schedule, and knowing they were one of the only universities that had an MBA in Six Sigma Quality program,” he said. Behr completed his MBA and is pursuing a management role within the supply chain management-Six Sigma sector.

When Rachel Waugh first began looking at graduate degrees, she felt a bit overwhelmed. When she found SNHU, she “liked their values-based message and decided to take the leap.” She was accepted as a probationary student in an MS in Organizational Leadership program and said she was deathly afraid of failing. “But the organizational leadership curriculum lit a fire in me, and for the first time in my academic career, I was becoming focused,” she said.

Four years later, Waugh had earned her master’s, along with a graduate certificate, and completed her MBA in Human Resources. I owe a lot of gratitude to SNHU, its faculty and its staff for giving me the knowledge and direction that I needed to find my professional calling.”

Preparing for Post-military Life

Four years into his military service with the U.S. Navy, Jeremy Beckett realized that with tuition assistance and his education benefits, he could complete his education while serving his country. During his search for the right school, he was given a list from the Navy College. “The majority of the colleges on the list were for-profit and had more focus on their shareholders than students,” said Beckett. “SNHU stood out as one of the only nonprofit universities that truly had a focus on the welfare and focus of their students, rather than how much money their students were paying.”

After completing his bachelor’s degree in business studies with SNHU, Beckett opted to pursue an online MBA in Operations and Supply Chain Management. “SNHU not only provided me with the means to complete my goal of getting a degree, but also pushed me to complete an advanced degree,” Beckett said. “This MBA will provide me with even more opportunities after I complete my service in the United States Navy.”

Mutual Success

For Konstantinos Korinis, “Knowledge is the key with which to open the door to your future success, as long as you have the persistence, patience and willingness needed to succeed.”

Obtaining knowledge through his online MBA with SNHU was a dream for Korinis. In doing so, he felt it broadened and enriched the philosophical aspects of what it means to be a professional businessman – “someone who substantially, powerfully and seriously takes into consideration the company’s status, infrastructure, innovation, social appeal, marketplace competitors and annual profit.”

He feels grateful, honored and lucky to have earned his online MBA at SNHU – and particularly having had the chance to collaborate and interact with “such amazing educators,” who helped, advised and guided him through his courses.

Korinis knows that his newly honed skills and knowledge will be able to make a significant difference for an organization. “I strongly believe that, in this globalized and technologically advanced society, dynamic companies seek active and responsible team members, who would not only upgrade their personal profile, but also improve the company’s social and worldwide prestige,” he said. “And the success would therefore be mutual.”

Personal Satisfaction

For Jessica Cooper, ’14, earning an online MBA from Southern New Hampshire University was something she never anticipated. A Navy veteran who entered into the military directly from high school, she spent 20 years on active duty. Cooper also married another active-duty sailor, who was deployed 80 percent of the time.

“Needless to say, I have attended many colleges to earn my undergraduate degree, pooling classes together to finally confer my Bachelor of Science in Business Administration with Southern New Hampshire University (SNHU) in January 2004,” Cooper said. SNHU has a long, rich history as a top military-friendly school, and it provides maximum transferability at the undergraduate level and dedicated military advisors supporting students every step of the way.

As the first in her family to receive a degree of any kind, Cooper’s daughter then followed her example by beginning her bachelor’s in psychology and joining the Navy. As her daughter began speaking of going on to a master’s degree in her chosen field of study, Cooper began to consider a graduate-level degree, too. She thought, “Why not me?”

She began researching online master’s degrees in business administration. Cooper chose SNHU’s online MBA and dove right in. Much to her surprise, her least favorite subject matter in school soon became the one Cooper enjoyed most. “My favorite class was MBA-501 Mathematics and Statistics for Business with Professor Vlad Dolgopolov as my instructor,” she said. “He made this class so understandable and used many up-to-date teaching and meeting aids. I appreciate him for that!”

Cooper went back to school primarily to prove she could do it, and she ended up impressing herself with how well she did. “I never in a million years dreamed I would go back to school to obtain my MBA, and I’m so glad I did.”

Fine-tuning Interests, Developing Expertise

If you’re researching online master’s degrees in business administration, you’re sure to see the broad range of concentrations available through SNHU’s online international MBA and MBA programs – more than 20 for each program – to help you advance in your career while focusing on what interests you most.

From operations and supply chain management to corporate social responsibility and music business, SNHU’s online MBAs offer the opportunity to fine-tune your business acumen to especially fit a specific industry.

For instance, SNHU’s unique collaborative partnership with the renowned Berklee College of Music resulted in the only online MBA in Music Business of its kind in the U.S. Drawing on SNHU’s rich history of business education excellence and the internationally respected music business expertise at Berklee, this innovative, high-quality advanced business degree provides the tools and knowledge critical to a thriving music career. From ethical music business leadership to promotion and marketing and financial analysis applied to talent, music enterprise and distribution, this best-of-both-worlds approach is built for an industry that’s constantly redefining itself.

Keeping Current in Healthcare

Brian Downes has owned and operated an outpatient orthopedic rehabilitation company for the past 20 years, with several clinic locations in the Boston area. His clinics were significantly impacted by the economic downturn, which resulted in high unemployment and many without healthcare insurance or access to affordable care.

“Combined with the enactment of the Affordable Health Care for America Act, its comprehensive compliance requirements for eligible providers, it was necessary for me to gain a new perspective on the direction of the healthcare industry, and to obtain credible information in a structured setting so I could enhance my knowledge of this new legislation and learn industry best practices that would allow me to succeed as an effective leader,” said Downes.

SNHU’s online MBA in Healthcare Management provides him with “the opportunity to acquire this knowledge in a convenient, online format that I can pursue on my schedule.” It’s also allowed him to communicate and share information and ideas with other students in his courses through various online collaboration tools.

“The program content has challenged me on a wide range of relevant, industry-specific topics,” said Downes. “It requires me to provide detailed and precise responses to successfully complete my course assignments. I am very pleased with the program. I would highly recommend it to those looking to expand their knowledge in this fast-changing industry.”

Choosing an Online MBA Program

When researching online master’s programs in business administration, there are significant variables to consider. Most important is choosing an online program that will best equip you for success going forward in a highly competitive marketplace. There’s increased expectations from employers for those holding an MBA, including strong analytical skills, the ability to collaborate and foster collaboration in others, effective communication skills, strategic thinking and flexible leadership.

SNHU’s successful 40-year MBA program continues to adapt and evolve to meet current and future industry needs. Through extensive research, including direct feedback from Fortune 500 employers and student surveys, SNHU has modified its MBA to be more reflective of today’s business demands while continuing to honor its commitment to quality, accessibility and affordability. The result is a state-of-the art online master’s in business administration with coursework readily applicable to real-world challenges, by design, enabling students to develop projects that serve their immediate business needs while simultaneously becoming stronger, more capable leaders.

An online Master of Business Administration degree from SNHU allows you to help reshape corporations, create sustainability in small businesses and take the helm as an up-and-coming entrepreneur or business leader. And if you’re in a hurry to reach these goals, you can earn a master’s faster with SNHU. Your online MBA can be completely in as few as 15 months. Check out our online master’s programs in business administration today.