Anyone who was watching their first gubernatorial debate of the campaign season on Thursday (Oct. 15) should lock it into their memory because it's likely the last time they'll see all four candidates on the debate stage before the Oct. 24 primary.

That is notable because this was only the second televised debate U.S. Sen. David Vitter has attended, and he went into far more policy specifics than he did two weeks ago in his first appearance at the WDSU-TV debate in New Orleans. The other three candidates, Republicans Scott Angelle, Jay Dardenne and Democrat John Bel Edwards covered mostly familiar ground, having appeared without Vitter in previous venues, and they did their best to call attention to their differences.

So viewers on Thursday were able to hear Vitter expand his views on Medicaid expansion; hear him threaten a veto on education standards that resemble Common Core; and speak about his role in finding a solution to the charity hospital crisis in northern Louisiana. Vitter -- and the other three candidates, for that matter -- were also far less aggressive in this debate than the one two weeks ago, though each had an attack at the ready.

Held at Louisiana Tech in Ruston and televised by KTBS-TV statewide, the debate was riddled with technical problems, at one point blanking to a black screen and audio went out twice. There was no audience present and no outside media allowed inside the room where the debate was held.

Even so, this debate was a much more policy-minded discussion than the one in New Orleans, giving each candidate more time to discuss what they'd actually do as governor. All four candidates spoke about the state's looming shortfall in its Medicaid program, which is fueled by ballooning health costs among the uninsured -- which mostly affects the working poor -- and how they'd handle expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

This question is one that's been closely watched by both advocates for the poor and the health care industry because expanding Medicaid would be a huge change from Gov. Bobby Jindal's refusal to accept a key part of the Affordable Care Act. All three Republicans said they'd seek to change the program by seeking a waiver, which some critics have said would take the federal government time to approve.

Vitter said he would also seek a waiver, and said he's concerned that a plan legislators have approved that would allow hospitals to levy a fee to help pay for a 10 percent stage match in 2020 won't be enough to cover the costs. Currently, all states that have accepted Medicaid expansion are not required to provide matching funds.

"I would not rule out ... procuring more federal funds if we can do it on Louisiana's terms, not Washington terms," Vitter said. "If we don't have a realistic plan (for state matching funds), and Baton Rouge has not come up with one yet ... then we're going to be digging the hole deeper, cutting higher ed again."

Both Vitter and Dardenne said they would seek a waiver that would reward health care providers for better patient outcomes and preventative care. Responding to criticism about the waiver taking too long, causing more shortfalls in the budget, Dardenne said he'd seek to leverage negotiating power with Washington.

"I believe we'll be in a tremendous negotiating position with a Republican Southern governor in the last term of this president's administration," Dardenne said. "The two provisos I'd have is an escape clause ... and give Louisiana the flexibility to adapt to the systems we have" such as the public-private charity hospitals and Bayou Health.

Edwards said he'd support Medicaid expansion without a waiver, saying, "we ought to take care of our working poor."

Angelle said when it comes to Medicaid expansion, he'd "identify how we get out of anything before we get into it," Angelle said, expressing concern that the federal government could change the rules on the state.

The four candidates also addressed what they'd do about the 20 percent of Louisiana residents living in poverty. All three Republicans said they don't support raising the minimum wage; Edwards said that the minimum wage is not "meaningful compensation in 2015."

"I know that it isn't just kids working their way through high school or college who are working for minimum wage -- we have a lot of parents" with children working for minimum wage, Edwards said. "Also, we ought to pay women the same we do as men."

He added he'd support expanding the earned income tax credit.

Dardenne said getting people out of poverty comes down to education: "Making sure we afford opportunities for the next generation of Louisianians because unfortunately, many in the current generation have already been lost."

Vitter said he'd be a governor who emphasizes faith, family, education and hard work, saying, government often promotes programs that break down those principles.

Angelle said he would raise "minimum expectations," and would promote jobs associated with skills training. He added he'd "put community and technical colleges on steroids to give folks the skills and opportunities they need."

The debate was not without attacks. Although Vitter has been in public office since 1992, he sought to portray himself as an anti-establishment candidate, frequently attacking politicians in Baton Rouge for their decisions and how they've led the state.

"Baton Rouge is broken and dysfunctional, and there are no adult leaders there," Vitter said. Like the other candidates, he said he would look to cut spending by freeing the budget from statutory mandates, and positioned himself as a governor who wouldn't raise taxes.

Angelle sought to remind voters that although Vitter positions himself as an anti-tax, outside candidate, he has a voting record in both Louisiana and Washington.

"When I hear about a Washington D.C. guy coming to Baton Rouge and fixing our problems, I don't think it works," Angelle said.



. . . . . .

Kevin Litten is a state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. Reach him at klitten@nola.com or 225-436-2207. Follow him on Twitter (@kevinlitten).