In 2003 the Medicare Modernization Act was enacted, allowing private health insurance companies to receive federal subsidies to cover medications for Medicare beneficiaries. The law was meant to help curb rising health-care costs because, unlike the government, private health insurance providers could negotiate discounts with pharmaceutical companies. By doing this, it was promised that Medicare recipients would be able to afford their prescription drugs, but, for many, this law has only hindered care while costs have continued to climb.

WellCare is one of the companies contracted to serve Medicare recipients. While a member of WellCare's prescription drug plan, my premium increased each year while my coverage went down. For each medication no longer covered, my doctors and I filed paperwork, persistently appealing denials with the same information I had previously submitted until the medication was approved. Recently, however, even persistence wasn't enough. After my doctor's office staff spent half a day on my preauthorization paperwork for a drug I desperately needed, it was denied because they wanted a scientific study proving that the medication my doctor wanted was better.

Advertisement

I understand the desire to have all medical decisions supported by a scientific studies, but, as many experts have documented, rarer diseases go unstudied, and studies are often biased and contradictory of each other. Studies should not be used as sole basis for medical decisions, as many medical issues have individualized factors that statistics don't account for. Instead, medical decisions should be made as an agreement between the doctor and patient as the best course of action in light of one's personal medical needs, the doctor's experience, and current medical research.

It seemed clear that my doctor and I were being led on a wild-goose chase of endless paperwork that meant waiting on a medication I could not wait on. Ultimately, WellCare's administration made the call in my treatment. Their choice of medication is bad if you have low blood pressure, heart problems, or headaches due to inter-cranial pressure changes. I had all these issues. After bad reactions, I ended up just paying for the medication my doctor wanted and cut back on food. In the end, WellCare was not just bad for me, but for my patient-doctor relationship.

As medical reimbursements have gone down, doctors have to see more patients every day (approximately 20-40) just to afford their practice. If getting a medication for a patient takes a doctor or their staff just two hours (a conservative number), it becomes too expensive to see just four patients with a bad Medicare drug plan. This will result in a shrinking pool of doctors willing to work with patients with certain insurances. The doctors that will still take these patients will, likely, have to practice "cookbook" medicine by prescribing only medications on the insurance formulary rather than what is best for the patient's needs. Since this is a bad situation for both patients and doctors, why does WellCare, and other insurance companies, make it hard for patients and doctors to have autonomy in their care decisions?

One possible answer is that it is more profitable to deny care. In 2013, WellCare was sued by ex-employees who claimed they were fired for "resisting pressure from senior executives to boost denial rates." The claim, if true, asserts that WellCare issued denials to reduce costs. Allowing health insurance companies to play doctor was not the intention of the Medicare Modernization Act. We, as a society are enraged at the thought of pharmaceutical reps having any power over a doctor's medical decisions, yet health insurance companies have created systems for appeals that have far more reach into controlling the medical decisions of practitioners. Leaders need to enact policy to ensure health insurance companies can't play doctor or dictate care choices for their members.

Lynsie Mae Buteyn lives in Denver.