One of the biggest names in broadcasting has just joined the estimated 5.5 million people who lost medical insurance coverage due to new Obamacare regulations.

This week, Anthony Cumia, one half of the satellite radio duo Opie and Anthony received the following notice about his insurance.

During Friday’s broadcast, Cumia announced the news that his policy had been cancelled and he was going to need to find coverage elsewhere after February.

“Did you get your insurance cancellation notice for your health insurance?” Cumia asked his co-host Hughes. The two apparently purchase insurance through the same company. Hughes had not checked his mail since the new year started, so he was not certain if his family’s coverage had been cancelled.

“Apparently, and I did not know this, apparently, I must not have been happy with my current insurance,” said a sarcastic Cumia. “Because I heard from the president, if I was happy, I would able to keep it…but I guess I wasn’t happy and they knew,” continued the outspoken critic of the Obama administration.

TheBlaze reached out to the radio star regarding the cancellation. He responded via direct messaging on Twitter.

When asked if he had logged onto the Obamacare website and surveyed possible options available there, Cumia said, ”I’ve done nothing yet. It expires in Feb. No clue what I need to do to get the same quality care. Such bulls**t. “You can keep it”, oh yeah?”

“I was with them for 8yrs, NEVER considered Obamacare,dropped due to new law,” the radio host added.

TheBlaze pressed Cumia on the type of coverage he had, asking if it was less than optimal or perhaps he had been filing excessive claims that might have made him a less desirable client for the insurance company.

“It was great for me,” he replied. “Never had an issue.”

We also wondered if Greg “Opie” Hughes, the other half of the radio duo, was also facing a similar dilemma. Cumia wasn’t sure. At the time of publication, Hughes had not responded to our inquiries.

–

Follow Mike Opelka on Twitter -@Stuntbrain