SHERIDAN — U.S. Senate candidate Liz Cheney urged Sheridan residents at a meet and greet Tuesday night to live by the Code of the West when considering the present state of politics in America. Particularly; she called on the 10th rule of the Code of the West — know where to draw the line — reiterating what has become the rallying cry of her candidacy to fight against perceived encroachments by the federal government and President Barack Obama.

Dozens of Sheridan residents stopped by Warehouse 201 for the event, which included hors d’oeuvres and a complimentary beverage, paid for by Cheney for Wyoming. Cheney spoke for approximately 15 minutes, conducted a question and answer session and spoke with attendees 1 on 1.Several attendees said they participated because they were curious about where Cheney stood on certain issues or because they were already supporters of Cheney. Founder of Ptolemy Data Systems Ryan Mulholland announced at the event that he was acting as Cheney’s campaign chair in Sheridan.

Cheney, a Republican, will run against incumbent Republican Senator Mike Enzi in the 2014 election.

Mulholland said people often ask him why they should vote for Cheney over Enzi, and he asked Cheney to answer that question herself.

First, Cheney said, she disagrees with Enzi’s idea that people can agree on 80 percent of the issues in Washington and can find compromises for solutions on those issues, which is the approach Enzi has taken most of his 16 years in office.

“With a president as radical as this one, and with his allies in congress being as radical as they are, it’s just not accurate to describe the people of Wyoming as agreeing with 80 percent of that agenda,” Cheney said. “Too often we end up as Republicans, as Wyomingites, losing out when Mike is making efforts to try to come to compromise with really radical policies.”

Second, Cheney said, she felt it was time for a new generation to enter congress.

“Senator Enzi’s been there for 18 years. It’s not personal, but three terms is enough,” Cheney said.

Key issues that surfaced during the question and answer session included Obamacare, Syria, the IRS scandal, immigration, national security vs. personal privacy rights and how to get younger generations involved in the Republican Party as successfully as the Democratic Party has in recent elections.

Cheney said she would vote against an attack on Syria because she feels it is unwarranted and part of a failed foreign policy that left a vacuum in the Middle East that was filled with bad guys.

About the IRS scandal she said it ought to give Republicans hope and inspiration.

“The president wouldn’t have bothered to target political enemies with the IRS if he wasn’t worried about us, if he didn’t realize the power that we as conservatives and as Republicans have,” Cheney said.

Dr. Michele Bennett, a family medicine physician in Sheridan, inquired about Obamacare.

“I asked her if she had ideas on what to do about it, and she did agree with the defunding process. She didn’t have a lot of other ideas in that area, but it’s a difficult problem,” Bennett said. “I did agree completely with the fact that she said what they’ve done so far to roll back or delay some aspects of it is probably our best hope to get rid of it because if some of it is not good for us, then all of it is not good for us. I hope if she gets elected she could really push that some more.”

Ptolemy Systems Engineer Tyler Neeriemer wanted to know Cheney’s thoughts about national security vs. personal privacy rights.

“Working in technology, especially internet-based technology, the collection of information that traverses the internet is of concern to me,” Neeriemer said. “When that collection is unchecked, and we’ve got a government that has a history of using information that was collected for one purpose to perform another purpose, for example going after political enemies, that bothers me. Her answer of needing more oversight and significant oversight was exactly what I wanted to hear.”

Regarding immigration, Cheney said she would encourage legal immigration but that the U.S. needs to get serious about securing its borders. She was not in favor of allowing amnesty for illegal immigrants to boost the Republican voter bloc.