Can members of Congress and governors have friends?

That’s not the opening of some snide joke or comment about our elected officials’ likability. It’s a serious issue raised by the murky cases of former Virginia Gov. Bob McDonnell and New Jersey Sen. Bob Menendez.

Both have people in their lives they called their friends and who gave them lavish gifts. Both have come under fire for extending privileges to those friends – privileges that are rooted in the power the two Bobs have or had as elected officials. But at what point does the line between friendship and selling the office get crossed?

[READ: Menendez Slammed With 14-Count Indictment]

McDonnell, a Republican, was convicted and sentenced in January to two years in prison for trading the benefits of his office for luxury items, including vacations and a Rolex watch. The case was especially thorny because Virginia does not have strict rules limiting the type and worth of gifts a governor can receive. Menendez was hit Wednesday with a 14-count federal indictment alleging that he used his role as senator to provide personal and professional favors to an ophthalmologist who provided approximately $1 million in gifts and campaign contributions to the Democratic lawmaker. Menendez calls the doctor, Salomon Melgen (who was also named in the indictment), a “friend.”

The problem with both the charges and the two Bobs’ behavior is that their defenses seem plausible. McDonnell (and his wife, Maureen McDonnell, also prosecuted and sentenced in the case) described businessman Jonnie R. Williams Sr. as a friend who was kind enough to help them out with loans and offer some nice gifts. That’s what friends do, right? So maybe the McDonnells used their roles to help Williams promote his dietary supplement. Anything wrong with helping to spur a Virginia business?

And what about Menendez – so what if Melgen ferried him around on his private plane? If you had a private plane, wouldn’t you offer rides to your friends? The campaign contributions come under the same umbrella; surely Menendez doesn’t get fundraising help from his enemies. As for the alleged return-on-investment, Menendez supposedly helped several of Melgen’s girlfriends get visas and intervened with federal agencies in ways that helped Melgen’s business. Are the visas a courtesy many lawmakers would extend, and would they have been OK if Melgen had been a virtual stranger? And maybe the effort to help Melgen in his fight with the Department of Health and Human Services on a Medicare billing issue was something the senator saw as righting a wrongful charge of overbilling by the doctor.

[READ: Maureen McDonnell Sentence Shows Some Justice in an Otherwise Sordid Tale]

Maybe. But even if the help Menendez provided was totally innocent (and the indictment by the Justice Department is pretty damning), it just looks bad. Really bad. McDonnell’s behavior looked bad as well, but at least McDonnell was helping a local businessperson. Melgen’s a Florida doctor, which takes away the argument that Menendez was going to bat for a constituent.