What skills or qualities do you have that your opponents do not?

America’s middle-income families, workers and small businesses are struggling to make a better life and our nation faces serious threats from terrorism. The values I learned growing up on the family farm are needed in Washington and I am working hard to bring those North State values to Congress.

I am the only candidate with a proven record and a history of action to promote and protect Northern California. There is never a question of where I stand on the important issues because my record of fighting for us is clear. I have opposed the over-spending budgets that would put our families further into debt. Our nation cannot secure itself if we are bankrupt.

The Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association has endorsed me because I am the only candidate to push for lower taxes and overturning ridiculous regulations. I have a strong history of helping to create jobs and improve economic opportunities in the North State.

I have worked hard to be in every corner of our district to know the people and issues. I have lived here all of my life; building our family business and working to improve our communities. I would be honored to have your support. Please call me anytime at 530-712-3675 or email me at Doug@DougLaMalfa.com.

If elected, what will be your top priorities and why?

As your representative, I am pushing to remove the out of control regulations that stifle our economy and chase good paying jobs of our state and country. Part of reducing regulations is reducing the size, scope and spending of the federal government as a way to eliminate our national debt. Big government is the problem, not the solution.

I will continue to lead the effort to protect our water and build additional water storage, such as Sites Reservoir. More water is a win for all of Northern California. It means more water for farms, our communities and our environment. Additionally, these large infrastructure projects bring more jobs to our area.

We must return to common sense forestry. Every summer our air is brown from burning forests, while our rural mountain communities are hit the hardest with fire danger and a struggling economy. We can have better forest health and a better economy if we implement simple reforms to clean and thin our public lands.

Our national security requires that we have firm control of our borders. That means building the fence and having a gate that we control.

Finally, I believe we must repeal and replace Obamacare. I have pushed every effort and helped put Obamacare roll back legislation on the President’s desk. It is driving up the cost of healthcare, reducing choices, while costing all of us more in taxes and deductibles.

I’d be honored to have your vote for US Representative and you can learn more at DougLaMalfa.com.