HARARE, Zimbabwe

Conflicting reports have emerged on the fate of Jericho, Cecil the lion’s brother.

Saturday afternoon, several news outlets, including CNN, NBC News and USA Today, reported Jericho the lion also was illegally killed in Zimbabwe.

According to CNN, the Zimbabwe Conservation Task Force reported on its Facebook page at 4 p.m. local time that Jericho had been killed. An officer from the task force also had confirmed the killing. However, an Oxford University researcher tracking Jericho told the outlet the lion was alive and moving as of 8 p.m. local time Saturday.

According to CNN, the GPS device used to track Jericho didn’t suggest anything out of the ordinary.

Cecil the lion’s killing sparked an international uproar after the beloved feline was lured out of a national park, killed, skinned and beheaded last week by an American hunter and two local guides. USA Today also reported Jericho recently had been seen protecting Cecil’s orphaned cubs.

The two Zimbabweans, a professional hunter and a farm owner, have been arrested. Zimbabwe authorities are working with the United States government to extradite Walter Palmer back to the African country to face potential charges for the alleged trophy kill.

Following the public outcry, Zimbabwe has suspended the hunting of lions, leopards and elephants in the area where Cecil was killed. Wildlife authorities said it was necessary to tighten hunting regulations following Cecil’s death, and they hope the incident raises awareness to the country’s regulations.

“The outrage over Cecil could have helped because people are now more aware and ready to come with information,” Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife conservation director Geoffrey Matipano told The Associated Press.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.