Democrats slide as Obamacare tanks: Christie takes one-point lead over Hillary Clinton for 2016

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie runs neck-and-neck with Hillary Clinton for 2016 presidential votes after trailing her by 13 points in October

Clinton still bests other GOP presidential hopefuls including Rand Paul, Ted Cruz and Paul Ryan

Christie earned massive new name recognition with his landslide re-election victory last week

Clinton is struggling to distance herself from Obamacare as the health insurance reform bill begins to disintegrate

Generic-ballot Republican House candidates are now tied with their Democratic opponents in 2014 matchups



New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has closed the polling gap with former secretary of state and first lady Hillary Clinton, after trailing her by 13 points a month ago.

He now holds a 1-point lead over Mrs. Clinton in a Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll released Wednesday.

That slim lead is within the margin of error, making the race a neck-and-neck affair for the first

time. When Quinnipiac polled Americans last month, Clinton held a 49 per cent to 36 per cent lead over Christie, a seemingly insurmountable edge in what was admittedly a far-too-early public survey. But now all bets are off.



Gaining ground: Republican New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie won re-election last week, and his newfound national name-recognition is giving him a new edge in 2016 presidential matchups

The results come as the Affordable Care Act is falling apart of the seams, and even former President Bill Clinton is saying his fellow Democrat, President Barack Obama, should honor his promise to let insured Americans keep their health care plans.



Such a move would likely hobble the Obamacare system as upwards of 10 million fewer Americans would be forced to buy insurance in the public health care marketplaces.

The university institute surveyed 2,545 registered voters nationwide between Nov. 6 and Nov. 11.



An NBC poll released Tuesday had Christie trailing Clinton by 10 points, 44 per cent to 34 per cent, in a hypothetical 2016 matchup.



But that poll sampled just 1,003 adults, and they weren't necessarily registered voters.



More troublesome, NBC polled also sampled 8 per cent more Democrats than Republicans.

Too big to fail? Hillary Clinton has a massive lead among other potential Democratic presidential candidates, but Chris Christie could be superwoman's kryptonite

The latest Quinnipiac poll also found that Repubilcan congressional candidates have closed another crucial gap, matching Democrats in what-if races for seats in the House of Representatives.

Thirty-nine percent of voters said they would vote for the Republican House candidate in their districts, the same number who would stand with Democrats.

Democrats held a 43-34 advantage on that score a month ago.



There is little risk Republican will lose control of the House, but Democrats have 20 seats to defend in the Senate next year, while Republicans only have 13 incumbents up for re-election.

Combinations of state-level polls indicate that if the election were held today, Republicans would pick up five seats, giving them 50 of the 100 Senate slots. Democrats would still control the chamber, however, with 48 seats plus the two independents who caucus with them.

Democratic Vice President Joe Biden, as president of the Senate, casts tie-breaking votes.