In the program note for her dance suite “Tejas Luminous,” Malini Srinivasan, a dancer and choreographer of the classical Indian style Bharata Natyam, writes of spiritual questions. Explaining how growing up in America she often visited her family’s home in India, she recalls her early connection to the sensuality of ritual but also her fear and doubt and the resulting sense of alienation.

This back story should not surprise anyone who has watched Ms. Srinivasan dance. She is among the most openly sensual — and least inhibited — dancers I have ever seen. In “Night,” the central solo of “Tejas,” which she presented at the Robert Moss Theater on Saturday as part of the New York International Fringe Festival, her character searches in a storm for her lover, the god Krishna. Eventually she finds him with another woman. But before that rude surprise, visions of the divine make her hands quake with an erotic rapture that’s nearly frightening.

The solo is gripping in its toggling between dread and desire. Ms. Srinivasan’s sweet face is incredibly expressive. She inhabits her character with such absolute focus as to compel empathy; her experience becomes the viewer’s. But the drama arises as much from her choreography as from her acting. Her movements conjure the storms both outside and within. The anger of a woman scorned is expressed as much in her tightening circles of rhythmic steps as in her fierce gestures and scowling.

“Night” is the hot core of a show organized by time of day, with seven sections passing from afternoon through to the following midmorning. Besides “Night,” the strongest sections are “Dusk” and “Evening,” in which intriguing part-Western music by the Finnish composer Ilari Kaila leads Ms. Srinivasan into experimentation, incorporating Western dance forms. In “Evening” the force of shuttling eyes or shoulder blades like cocking shotguns, isolated as percussive abstractions, works well with the spatial tension in the arrangement of three dancers.

The yoga in “Dawn” is less compelling, and the first and final group sections, though handsome and diverting in their shifting formations, are lighter and more conventional: an opening number and (redundantly) two closing ones. The five dancers other than Ms. Srinivasan share her endearing enthusiasm, though that’s the positive side of varying degrees of amateurishness that sap her designs of some of their potential power.

As the diurnal cycle completed, I found myself longing for a different story. At the end of “Dusk,” Ms. Srinivasan is the last to leave. It’s clear, on her face and in how her exiting body twists back, that something has happened to her alone. That individual experience continues in “Night,” where the resistance and ravishment can be read as a spiritual struggle. The remainder of “Tejas” drops this thread, though, and its color, the boldest Ms. Srinivasan has, fades into day.