Ted Cruz reportedly canceled his health insurance because of steeply rising premiums. | Getty Cruz reveals he doesn't have health insurance

Ted Cruz revealed on Thursday that he is not currently covered by any health insurance, chalking up the lack of coverage to Obamacare.

"I’ll tell you, you know who one of those millions of Americans is who’s lost their health care because of Obamacare? That would be me," Cruz told a Manchester, New Hampshire, audience. "I don’t have health care right now."

Story Continued Below

Cruz explained that he had purchased an individual policy and that Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas had canceled all of its individual policies in Texas, effective Dec. 31. Cruz and his wife, Heidi, who is on temporary leave from her job with Goldman Sachs, purchased an individual plan last year after previously receiving coverage through the Wall Street firm. A spokeswoman for Cruz's campaign did not immediately respond to a request for comment to clarify his remarks.

"So our health care got canceled, we got a notice in the mail, Blue Cross Blue Shield was leaving the market. And so we’re in the process of finding another policy," Cruz said. "I hope by the end of the month we’ll have a policy for our family. But our premiums — we just got a quote, our premiums are going up 50 percent. That’s happening all over the country. That’s happening in New Hampshire."

It would appear that news of the cancellation did not go over well in the Cruz household.

"By the way, when you let your health insurance policy lapse, your wife gets really ticked at you," he remarked. "It’s not a good — I’ve had, shall we say, some intense conversations with Heidi on that."

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas did stop selling some of its individual policies for 2016 but not all of them. The company earlier said its individual PPO products — which give people a broader choice of providers — were no longer financially sustainable, so they were discontinued at the end of last year. Blue Cross HMO plans, which are more restrictive, are still available in Texas on HealthCare.gov, and other insurance companies in the state offer a variety of network types.

Also, while premiums did rise across the country this year, they did not spike 50 percent.

Rachana Pradhan contributed to this report.