A year’s events have a way of blurring together, like headlights on a highway. Still, there must be a way we can collect, collate and analyze all that happened in 2014 to derive some form of larger meaning that will help us in 2015, right?

Why are you looking at me like I have a staph infection?

Seriously, folks, I understand that 2014 was a paradoxical year, and it’s hard to draw a precise bead on; in fact, if there were ever a year that threw off more contradictions, I have clean forgotten.

We had ISIS in the Middle East, Ebola landing hard in Africa — and both panicking America. President Obama spent most of the year looking fallible and the Republicans rose to prominence by sounding every last chime against him. Amazon’s AMZN, +0.59% Fire and Google’s GOOG, +0.72% Glass flopped, Apple’s AAPL, +1.76% Steve Jobs was still dead and by the end of the year, North Korea sabotaged an American movie opening.

It seemed a bit like the entire universe was choking on a chicken bone.

But a funny thing happened on the way to paving hell. Everything that should go up — like the stock market and gross domestic product — went up. Everything that should go down — like oil prices and unemployment — went down.

You got all that?

A full year’s worth of bristly events culminated in records and riches. The brunt of what happened this year was horrible … and the results were fantastic.

What gives? Do we live in some sort of counterintuitive world where bad begets good? Did we simply punch out all our problems as the year went on? Or are we seeing that spark of false hope in America that sinks us every time?

Here’s what we know for certain: almost nothing.

As always, nearly everything we were told at the beginning of the year did not pan out by the end. Tablets were, conventional thought held in January, killing PCs, and we were entering what was widely termed a “post-PC world.” By Christmas, though, The New York Times ran a headline with the words “PC Renaissance.” Apparently, we only live in a post-PC-panic world.

In January, Russian President Vladimir Putin, strutting the world stage shirtless, was the biggest danger at hand. By the end of year, “Cold War Chic,” as it was called back then, had faded, replaced by plummeting oil prices, which led to a junk-status credit rating for Russia and a ruble about as valuable as Putin’s lost reputation.

At the start of the year, expectations for mergers-and-acquisition activity was nothing special, but $3 trillion worth of deals later, we know better. Who would ever have thought that the prospect of wrinkle-free foreheads would entice Actavis PLC US:ACT to bid $66 billion for Allergan Inc. AGN, -0.45% the maker of Botox, in the year’s biggest deal? If that didn’t furrow your brow, consider that the largest private-equity deal was PetSmart Inc. US:PETM for $8.3 billion. That’s a lot of hamster bedding.

Draw a shade over all that for a moment, though.

Let’s just ask ourselves what it means that over the course of a year, nearly everyone was wrong about everything, all the time. Even when not actively wrong — there was neither a twist nor a turn of fate that was adequately foreseen by any meaningful number of journalists or traders.

It is almost as if the process of looking out over a year is a fool’s game.

O.K., you can pull up the shade now.

A year, as a measure of time, appears as good as any. If nothing else, it stands as a convenient marker of time for journalists and as good a point as any for traders to stop and judge past performance, while tilting their eyes at what is to come.

Which is where the trouble always starts.

Tidy conclusions — much less those set around on particular measures of time — set you up for forced judgments and misguided notions, all soon lost in the chaotic mercantile bustle that is business in our sprawling global market.

How do you avoid these forced conclusions that will look so silly in 12 months?

Just realize that a year’s time is a random construct. For practical and religious purposes, the brackets that calendar years offer matter. But if you are talking about deadlines for thoughts, perceptions and predictions, taking a calendar year seriously will do nothing but seal defeat.

A year is a potent symbol, but no predictions have to be made at its start, or conclusions at its end.

There is, to be certain, no deadline to make final determination about the fate of the American, or Russian, economies. The stories are dynamic and unfolding — for the time more positively (America) and negatively (Russia) than not. But a reversal in oil prices could bring about an inversion as fast as you can roll an old clip of a shirtless Putin.

You want the last laugh on any big predictions about 2015? Don’t make any. Just roll with events as they occur, in all their unpredictable, counterintuitive and maddening glory.

More from MarketWatch