'It was the only way I knew to get through'

Next time Linda Schminke sits in the chaise lounge in the guest room at her son's Jamestown home, the view will be unfamiliar.

The row of large bedroom windows still frames the same colorful sunrises and mountain peaks that it always has. But the surrounding landscape is forever changed.

Greenery has been replaced by dirt, wiped out by the floodwaters of last year's September storm. Nearby homes are in disarray as residents scramble to rebuild before winter arrives.

But Schminke is preserving the past and the view that she remembers the only way she knows how.

Using a few strips of colorful fabric and thread, Schminke stitched together "Sunrise at Nuggitt Hill," a bright yellow sun bursting with rays of light cresting two purple mountain peaks.

"As a quilter, you work through things through quilts," Schminke said. "It was the only way I knew to get through the tragedy that my son and his community were facing."

Schminke's patch is one of 30 squares that make up the Boulder County strong and beautiful commemorative flood quilt.

Quilters from seven states, including California, Colorado, Iowa, Minnesota, Missouri, North Carolina, and Tennessee, answered the county's call for the fabric blocks.

Early this year, Katie Arrington, the county's flood recovery specialist, noticed a faded quilt hanging in the main entrance of the county courthouse. None of her colleagues seemed to know how old the quilt was or why it hung there on display, she said.

"It's dingy and dull," Arrington said. "It's been there so long that I haven't been able to find anyone who knows where it came from."

Arrington received approval from the county commissioners to replace the old quilt with a new one and put out a call to quilters nationwide.

Arrington wanted a community project that recognized the flood and the survivors that are still putting their lives back together, she said.

Brightly colored patches and a hopeful theme of resilience drove the project.

Rebeccah Joyce, of Mountainjoy Quilts, work on a commemorative quilt put together by Boulder County consisting of patches that were submitted by people across the country. (Lewis Geyer / TIMES-CALL)

The county received 40 submissions, including several from county staff members, flood Boulder County residents and flood survivors. The remaining 10 patches will be incorporated into other county projects that will benefit flood survivors, Arrington said.

Each patch is different with varying interpretations of the strong and beautiful theme.

Some are abstract designs and shapes that exude hope through the pops of color that fill the patches. Others are more direct featuring mountains, aspen trees and rivers. All were inspired by love and support.

"I wanted to send a piece of love and hope to Colorado," Schminke said. "And to say 'I hope life will get put back together, and, like a quilt, be more beautiful than it was before.'"

The new quilt will be dedicated at 9:30 a.m. Tuesday at the Boulder County Courthouse. A book featuring a photograph of each patch and a description of the patch submitted by the quilter will be part of the display, Arrington said.

The old quilt will be salvaged, but Arrington said, plans for the faded original are still being discussed.

Arrington said she hopes the new quilt will exude the same warmth and comfort as one that is wrapped tightly around its owner.

"I think the flood can be forgotten very quickly, even by some people in Boulder County," Arrington said. "This is something semi-permanent to recognize that it happened and was significant, first of all, but also shows nationwide support for Boulder County."

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com