Marco Rubio painted himself as the true Reagan-era conservative candidate for president during his hour-long visit to Birmingham's Samford University.

A nearly sold-out crowd at Wright Center listened and cheered as Rubio spoke about uniting the Republican Party, and his love for free enterprise and limited government.

Rubio, a junior senator from Florida, said Republican frontrunner and businessman Donald Trump is running a "con job" on the American people.

Trump isn't a conservative, he said, adding he has the same talking points on Planned Parenthood and healthcare as Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton.

"We get this election wrong we will lose the conservative movement," Rubio said. "We will lose the future of this country."

Rubio said he's tried not to attack other Republicans during his campaign, but it's now time to address some of the differences.

"What's at stake is the party of Reagan and Lincoln," he said. "What's at stake is the Republican movement. I am not going to stand by and watch the conservative movement be taken over by someone who is not a conservative."

On Trump, Rubio said: "I think there are Americans today who are being fooled by this guy."

Rubio said Trump conned people into attending Trump University. He said Trump hired illegal immigrants to build his hotels.

"(Trump) says he is going to bring jobs back from China and Mexico. (Trump's) making hats and ties in China and Mexico," Rubio said.

"We cannot lose this election to someone the Democrats will tear apart," he added.

Rubio said Trump refuses to take a side on Palestine and Israel.

"I am going to take a side," Rubio said. "I am going to be on Israel's side 100 percent every single time."

Rubio called Democrat candidate Bernie Sanders a socialist. He said Hillary Clinton isn't qualified to be commander-in-chief.

Rubio said if he wins he will repeal all of President Obama's executive orders on his first day of office. He would repeal Obamacare and ensure Americans have to the right to carry arms.

He said he would make two changes to the Constitution: Create a balanced budget amendment and create term limits for Congress and for judges.

Rubio said he would make the U.S. safer by expanding the military to the level of the Reagan presidency.

"Radical Islamic jihadists are spreading all over the world," he said. "ISIS now has affiliates in over a dozen countries, and this president (Obama) guts our military in the face of all of this. We are soon going to have the smallest Army since the end of World War II, the smallest Navy in 100 years and the smallest Air Force in our history."

Rubio said immigration is a "national security issue more than ever before."

The U.S. needs to secure its borders, he said, adding 40 percent of the illegal immigrants are those who came into the country legally with a Visa but then overstayed their visit.

Rubio's parents immigrated to the United States from Cuba in 1956. But, due to the state of the economy, he said immigration can no longer be family-based. It has to be merit-based.

He said the U.S. should allow those with the skills to create jobs to immigrate into the country.

Aslyn is here with her dad to support @marcorubio pic.twitter.com/66FqjDKmOA — Erin Edgemon (@eedgemon) February 27, 2016

Here's what some Rubio supporters had to say:

Braden and Jenna Pace drove from Montgomery to Birmingham to hear Rubio speak today. They even dressed their adorable 13-month-old daughter, Aslyn, in a purple Rubio T-shirt.

"I've always been a big fan of Marco since he was running for Senate in 2010," Braden Pace said.

He said he's been supporting Rubio the whole way, even though he doesn't live in Florida.

"I like that he is a conservative, someone who can unite the Republican Party," Pace said. "And I think he can win in November."

Amanda Miller drove over an hour from her home in Albertville to get her questions answered.

"I wanted to hear (Rubio's) views up close and personal," she said. "I want to make my vote count."

Miller said she's appreciative so many presidential candidates have traveled to Alabama this election season.

Jeff Norrell, of Vestavia, said he tries to see every presidential candidate. This year, though, he's only seen Ben Carson and Scott Walker (early in the election season).

"Eight years ago, we saw all of the candidates including Obama and John McCain," he said, while waiting in the lobby of Wright Center.

But, Norrell has already decided he's voting for Rubio.