You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Message: * A friend wanted you to see this item from WRAL.com: http://wral.com/13663891

— A Panther Creek High School senior faces felony charges after authorities say he attached a smartphone to his shoe to record videos underneath women's skirts.

Bradley Gray Hoffman, 17, of 105 Flora Springs Drive, Cary, surrendered to Cary police Wednesday afternoon on four counts of secret peeping and four counts of possessing photographs of secret peeping.

Investigators say those charges stem from cases from March 10 to May 8 at Panther Creek.

Apex police have also charged Hoffman with five secret-peeping charges involving four victims between May 6 and May 8 at a SuperTarget store at 1201 Beaver Creek Commons Drive.

A 44-year-old victim in the Target cases – who did not want to be identified – said Wednesday that she felt violated after seeing video of her on Hoffman's cellphone.

"I was shocked at not only how close he was to me physically," she said. "I was stunned at how clear the image was and surprised at how unsettling to know that someone had that image of me."

When she found out teenage girls were also victimized, she said, she was outraged.

"It is an absolute violation of privacy. It is completely inappropriate and it needs to be addressed," the victim said.

Cary Police Capt. Don Hamilton said investigators are still working to determine if any of the videos were posted online.

"You go to school and you think school's some place that you're going to be safe and not have to worry about stuff like this," he said. "For it to be another student, I'm sure it's got to be very upsetting for the victims and the parents."

Neither Hoffman, his parents nor his attorney could be reached for comment. He was out of jail Wednesday evening on a $15,000 bond and was expected to make his first court appearance Thursday morning.

Renee McCoy, director of public relations for the Wake County Public School System, could not comment on the matter Wednesday but said that, generally, students who violate the school system's code of conduct can face disciplinary action.

Parents were shocked over the news.

"It's not something that you expect, especially at a school like Panther Creek that has a great reputation," said Marie Wagner, whose daughter graduated from the school last year.

Friends described the incident as out of character for Hoffman.

"He was a cool kid. He is pretty funny," said Baaqir Yusef, one of Hoffman's classmates. "I talk to him every now and then because he's in my class. Doesn't seem like the kind of kid that would do that."

Ryan McNulty, another classmate, was just as surprised.

"He was a quiet kid. He was nice and smart," he said. "He didn't really say much. It's kind of like unexpected, kind of shocked that happened. It just boggles my mind."