Obama is so honest that even when he lies... it's only to be honest. Sure Obama lied to Americans... but it was for their own good. He was only lying to Americans in order to keep his promise to them.

Dan Pfeiffer's crazy spin on Obama's now infamous "If you like your plan, you can keep your plan" lie may be more addled than Orwellian. It goes through more contortions than a gymnast falling out of a plane.

Plugging in the now familiar claim that the cancelled plans were somehow "substandard", Dan Pfeiffer tries to argue that Obama had to choose between two betrayals of the American people. Either he had to lie to them about their coverage or let them keep their "substandard" plans.

On ABC’s This Week, Obama advisor Dan Pfeiffer argued, if Obama were to allow people “to have those plans be downgraded, or insurance companies to keep selling barebones plans… he'd be violating even more important promise to the American people, that everyone would have a guarantee to access of quality affordable health insurance.”

So if Obama had allowed people to keep their health plans, after promising them that they could, he would be violating another promise that he made to them.

This is like a car salesman who overcharges you and then tells you that he did it to keep his promise to you about including floor mats. It's somewhere between disgusting and laughable.

It's not even an argument that deserves to be taken seriously.

The ObamaCare plans with their high premiums and deductibles and small networks don't guarantee access to quality affordable health insurance. But even if they did, Pfeiffer's argument that one lie justifies another, that Americans can be tricked by lying about being able to keep their plans in order to force them into the plans that are good for them are at the heart of everything wrong with the mindset of liberalism.

This is why Romney has correctly said the ObamaCare lie is rotting Obama's second term. It's his "Read my lips, no new taxes" and "I did not have sex with that woman."

Last year’s losing Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney said Sunday that President Barack Obama’s "fundamental dishonesty" on the Affordable Care Act has “put in peril the whole foundation of his second term.” Appearing on NBC’s Meet the Press, Romney said Obama’s handling of Obamacare’s promises “has undermined the foundation of his second term – I think it is rotting it away.” He added that what “has really undermined the president's credibility in the hearts of the American people is that he went out, as a centerpiece of his campaign and as a centerpiece of Obamacare over the last several years, saying time and time again that fundamental to his plan was the right people would have to keep their insurance plan, and he knew that was not the case....” He said “had the president been truthful and told the American people that millions would lose their insurance and millions more would see their premiums skyrocket… there would have been such a hue and cry against it, (that) it would not have passed.”

It destroys his credibility no matter how often he and his surrogates squeal about "bad apple plans" and "scam insurance".