By Dennis Seid

Daily Journal

TUPELO – Mary Cates Williams plans to visit each of the 30 counties in the Mississippi Hills National Heritage Area as early and often as possible.

Williams, a Ripley native who lives in Oxford, on Friday was introduced as executive director of the Mississippi Hills Heritage Area Alliance, which is the coordinating organization.

“We’re really excited to have her on board, said Alliance President Neal McCoy. “She brings a wealth of knowledge not only working for a nonprofit in the economic development world, and being able to navigate the waters in Washington from her background. She brings excited, visionary leadership for the organization.”

McCoy also praised “her unique combination of leadership, organizational and people skills. We are all looking forward to working with her.”

Williams will be the voice and face of the Alliance who will seek new dues-paying members in the organization to benefit everyone.

“We want to leverage the local money to get state money and state money to get federal money so we can assist them by putting grants into the communities,” McCoy said.

Williams worked in Washington, D.C., as an assistant to the chief of staff and then as a legislative aid and office manager for Sen. Thad Cochran (R-Miss.) from 2003-2007. From 2008-2014, she was executive vice president for government affairs and business development for the Golden Triangle Development LINK in Columbus. Most recently, she has been working as a consultant with economic development and private-sector businesses regarding grants, including a Joint Land Use Study grant through the Department of Defense’s Office of Economic Adjustment.

“I want to make sure everybody has the opportunity to know what we have to offer,” she said. “I hear stories about the Hills all the time – I’m here to make sure we don’t lose those stories. North Mississippi is a wonderful place … I think it’s the best-kept secret in the world. And I think we’re more effective working as a group rather than working individually.”

The path to establishing the Mississippi Hills National Heritage Area began in 2004, and was funded initially by CREATE.

A management plan was approved in fall 2014 to help guide the cultural and heritage development of the area comprising the alliance.

dennis.seid@journalinc.com

Twitter: @dennisseid