CAMBRIDGE – U.S. House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi on Friday called the problems with the Affordable Care Act website “incidental” to the law as a whole.

“We’ll overcome the challenges that we’re facing right now,” Pelosi said, speaking to reporters at Cambridge College after an event with congressional candidate Katherine Clark. “But they are almost incidental. The glitches, technologically, are incidental to the value of what the Affordable Care Act is.”

With many provisions of Democratic President Barack Obama’s health care overhaul scheduled to go into effect Jan. 1, the rollout has been plagued with problems. The federal website that oversees new health care exchanges for several states has been unable to handle the large volume of traffic. Obama administration officials have apologized, taken responsibility for the website problems and pledged to fix them. There has also been anger over reports that a number of people who buy health insurance individually will have their plans cancelled, even though Obama previously pledged that people who like their plans can keep them.

Obama visited Boston Wednesday to deliver a speech in which he pointed to Massachusetts’ success with health care reform as an indication that the Affordable Care Act will work.

Pelosi, a California Democrat and the former U.S. House speaker, flew to Massachusetts with Obama. She attended an event at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard on Thursday and campaigned with Clark, a state senator and the Democratic nominee in the 5th District special congressional election, on Friday.

While most of the event focused on women and family-related issues, Pelosi and Clark, after the event, both defended the president’s health care law.

Pelosi said she did not think the problems with the Affordable Care Act rollout will hurt Clark or future Democratic candidates. “These are glitches. We’ll get through them,” Pelosi said. Though Pelosi called the glitches “unacceptable,” she said, “The Affordable Care Act is a great thing for our country, and I think it’s going to work just fine.”

She pointed to the implementation of Medicare Part D, the prescription drug benefit for seniors, under Republican President George W. Bush. There were serious technological problems with that program at the beginning. The Washington Post reported at the time that the administration got tens of thousands of complaints from seniors and pharmacists who could not get the correct medication at the correct price.

“There were glitches for months, and Republicans at the time said this happens when you roll out a big program,” Pelosi said. “They’re a little less patient this time.”

Pelosi also addressed the cancellation of plans, saying, as Obama has, that the plans will be dropped so they can be replaced with better ones, which conform to the standards of the Affordable Care Act – for example, with no lifetime or annual limits. “There has to be some clarity about what the dropping is,” Pelosi said. “It is to improve.”

Pelosi added that the implementation of the health care law “has been incredible for one year,” with people already enjoying benefits. (Several benefits already went into effect such as allowing children to stay on their parents’ health plan until age 26, requiring health plans to cover certain preventive care without co-pays and starting to close the gap in prescription drug benefits for seniors on Medicare.)

Clark, in an interview with The Republican/MassLive.com, said similarly that the technological problems should not distract from the benefits of the law. “There have been some technological problems with the website. I know they are trying to address them,” Clark said. “That doesn’t take away from the overarching principal that this is a chance to expand health care, which is so critical to families.”

Clark said she thinks any temporary discouragement will be overshadowed in the long term as Americans receive better access to health care. “These changes and improvements are going to make such a substantial difference that I think the technological glitches as this rolls out will be… in the rearview mirror,” Clark said.

The problems have provided further ammunition to Republicans, who have been strongly opposed to the Affordable Care Act all along. Rob Cunningham, executive director of the Massachusetts Republican Party, called the Affordable Care Act “an absolute broken mess right now.” “People are being kicked off their insurance. They can’t sign up,” Cunningham said. “For Nancy Pelosi and Katherine Clark to stand together and refer to people losing their insurance as glitches, they should be ashamed of themselves.”