Schools turning to staffing agencies for substitute teachers

A few Western Pennsylvania school districts are among a growing number nationwide that are opting to “outsource” their substitute teachers.

Kelly Services, the staffing solutions company known for its “Kelly Girls” who started filling temporary office jobs in 1946, contracts with five school districts in Allegheny County — Plum, Woodland Hills, Pine-Richland, Montour and Fox Chapel Area — and a combined 16 districts in Beaver, Butler and Lawrence counties. Kelly doesn't contract with any districts in Westmoreland County.

Allowing an outside company to hire substitutes makes it easier for some districts to manage the cost and the constant chore of getting them into classrooms where and when they are needed, supporters of the process said. But critics say it raises questions about how the subs are vetted.

Kelly Educational Staffing, established in 1997, says on its website that it is among the largest firms that specialize in handling substitute hires. It works with more than 6,100 schools in 36 states, said David Stieving, the company's northeast regional sales manager. Kelly works with 65 districts in Pennsylvania.

“There's things that we bring to the table that (the districts) can't do,” said Stieving, who is based in Pittsburgh.

Namely, he said, the company can get more substitutes into classrooms that need them by streamlining the hiring process. Kelly recruits temporary clerical staff, custodial workers, school nurses and food service workers.

The company covers the subs' benefits and workers' compensation, and doesn't limit the number of hours they can work, potentially saving money for cash-strapped districts. Substitutes for Kelly can work in multiple districts, expanding the pool of teachers and improving the odds of scheduling a sub, Stieving said.

School officials critical of outsourcing the hiring process are concerned about the cost and the inability to control who teaches students.

‘A sweet little deal'

Loretta White was one of the four members on the nine-member Plum school board to vote against signing a contract with Kelly in 2011.

“When you don't interview them yourself, you don't know who's coming to your school,” she said.

Michael Cinefra, who worked in the Plum district from 2010 to 2014, was arrested last month on charges that he had sex with a female student. He was an employee of Kelly Services.

Though she doesn't blame Kelly for hiring Cinefra — he started substituting with the district a year before Kelly began managing subs, and eventually was hired to coach baseball — White doesn't think the company has done what it promised the board it would.

In September, the Plum district recorded 286 teacher absences, White said. Kelly found substitutes to cover for 261. That's a “fill rate” of about 91 percent. When she included the fill numbers for non-instructional employee positions, the average was about 71 percent.

That's discouraging this early in the school year, especially because Kelly advertised a fill rate of 100 percent, White said.

But Kelly is capable of getting a certified, new substitute background-checked and ready to work within about 72 hours if necessary, Stieving said, and recruitment is “very robust.”

“Our ultimate goal is to fill 100 percent of the classrooms,” he said.

White has a problem with the amount the district pays for Kelly's services. Plum pays Kelly $122.40 per day for a substitute teacher, she said. The substitute gets $90 of that total.

If Plum hires a teacher who worked as a substitute for Kelly, the staffing company receives a “finder's fee” equivalent to 10 percent of that teacher's salary for the first year, White said. State records show teachers in Plum make at least $47,500 a year.

“They've got themselves a sweet little deal here,” White said. “I just think we did so much better when we hired our subs.”

Not just ‘a body'

Nina Esposito-Visgitis, president of the Pittsburgh Federation of Teachers, said Pittsburgh Public Schools has not considered outsourcing substitutes during her time with the union.

It's a good thing, too, she said. Her organization's sister chapter, the Philadelphia Federation of Teachers, is taking legal action against the Philadelphia School Reform Commission for approving a three-year contract with Source4Teachers, a substitute staffing company.

Besides the fact that subs in that district are part of the federation's bargaining unit, Espositio-Visgitis doesn't like the idea of outsourcing substitutes because districts can't predict the quality of teacher they will get. Ideally, subs are familiar with the school, teacher, principal and students, she said.

“You don't just need a body,” she said. “You need a quality person in there.”

Yet others praise Kelly's work in schools — for saving money and helping to get substitutes into classrooms.

Steve Robinson, spokesman for the Pennsylvania School Boards Association, said the nonprofit has noticed more districts outsourcing substitutes and attributes the change to requirements of the Affordable Care Act.

Under the insurance guidelines, an employee who works more than 30 hours a week ina 120-day period must be considered full time, and districts might not be able to provide them with full-time benefits, Robinson said. Companies such as Kelly offer benefits packages that comply with the law.

Fewer costs, hassles

Fox Chapel Area School District has contracted Kelly's services for about two years, said spokeswoman Bonnie Berzonski. The company helps the district find substitute teachers and playground and cafeteria monitors. Other agencies help the district fill temporary custodial, food service, secretarial and nursing jobs.

The district partnered with Kelly primarily to offset costs, Berzonski said. The district doesn't have to pay subs benefits or contribute to pensions.

The need to get more substitutes into classrooms was a second reason to outsource, Berzonski said.

“Fill rates have always been an issue,” Berzonski wrote in an email. “Even when we were finding our own subs, fill rates were an issue. However, Kelly has managed the process well and our fill rates this school year have been averaging between 92 and 95 percent.”

The numbers aren't always what the district wants, she said, but trouble finding substitutes isn't a problem unique to Fox Chapel or Kelly Services.

Kelly tries to streamline the process for districts but keep them informed about what is happening, Stieving said. Teachers can contact Kelly directly if they will be absent and the agency will send a substitute to cover the class.

Stieving said Kelly has a “stringent” screening process for applicants who want to work in schools. They undergo criminal background checks that include checking the national sex offender registry. An applicant must provide references and meet state and district certification requirements.

“We guarantee our employees,” Stieving said.

Elizabeth Behrman is a Trib Total Media staff writer. Reach her at 412-320-7886 or lbehrman@tribweb.com.