In a brief letter released March 17, then-U.S. Rep. Aaron Schock of Peoria announced he would resign amid questions about whether he misspent taxpayer and campaign money and violated congressional ethics rules. A federal grand jury in Springfield has been interviewing his former aides as part of a criminal probe.

Voters in central Illinois probably are still shaking their heads over Schock's fall from grace. But they have some work to do. The 18th Congressional District seat is open.

Five candidates — three Republicans and two Democrats — want the job. They're running in a July 7 primary election; the winners will meet in a Sept. 10 general election.

These five have distinct backgrounds: a state senator and attorney, a tech manager, a writer and policy analyst, a teacher, a financial adviser.

They have at least one thing in common: They pledge to avoid the highflying, high-spending style of the last congressman. Schock's hometown newspaper, the Peoria Journal Star, once chastened him in an editorial with this question: "Aaron Schock: Caviar congressman in meat-and-potatoes district?"

The 18th District includes parts of Peoria, Bloomington, Springfield, Jacksonville, Quincy and Macomb. It's one of the most Republican-leaning districts in the state. Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney won 61 percent of the vote there in 2012.

So who should replace Schock? The Tribune offers endorsements today.

Our recommendation in the Republican primary is state Sen. Darin LaHood of Dunlap, the son of former congressman and U.S. Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood.

A former federal prosecutor, Darin LaHood was appointed to the Senate seat in 2011.

In his relatively short time in the Senate, LaHood has established a record as a principled, independent conservative. He has pushed legislation to force elected officials to reveal more detail about their outside income and potential conflicts of interest. He has supported pension reform despite pressure from public-sector unions.

He would not be shy about challenging authority in Washington. Twice he has opposed Senate Minority Leader Christine Radogno's bids to stay in charge of the Republican caucus because, he argued, the party needed to make a more forceful challenge to Democrats.

LaHood says he is grounded in the district. He doesn't spend nights in Springfield when the legislature's in session. He drives to his home just north of Peoria to be with his family.

Two other Republicans are running. Michael Flynn of Quincy, who studies conservative policy, advises candidates and writes and edits for Breitbart News Network, the conservative news outlet. Flynn says he supports immigration reform, so long as it starts with closing the border.

"You physically shut it down. Fencing, yes. Then you can have a discussion about immigration policy. It's insane to have this discussion while you have a completely open border that you don't even know who's coming across," Flynn says.

Donald Rients of Benson is a tech manager for an insurance company who says the national debt is his top concern.

Democrats will choose between history teacher Robert Mellon of Quincy and Adam Lopez, a Springfield school board member and financial adviser.

Our endorsement goes to Mellon, a captain in the Army Reserve. Among his top priorities: expand veterans programs such as the GI Bill and improve the veterans health care system.

Mellon says improving infrastructure is also critical, and he would be open to replenishing the Highway Trust Fund with a gradual increase in taxes. Lopez says the trust fund can be restored by closing offshore tax loopholes, not by raising general tax revenues. He strongly supports the Affordable Care Act.

Special elections can be difficult to predict. Turnout tends to be low, which is likely to be the case for an election held the Tuesday after a holiday weekend.

Voters, make the effort. And hope that, this time, your choice remembers the 18th is a meat-and-potatoes district.