See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

Covered streetlights at the intersection of Fifth Street and Euclid Avenue. (Source: Tucson News Now)

New details have been released regarding a hit-and-run near the University of Arizona campus that sent four women to the hospital on Saturday night.

The 5th Street and Euclid Avenue intersection where the accident happened was constructed several months ago by the City of Tucson to make the area safer for pedestrians and bicyclist.

The crosswalk has been functional, but the streetlights have not. They were installed in a few days ago and will be turned on in a few days.

Alyssa Belder is one of the students still in the hospital.

She’s involved with the Sigma Kappa sorority. On social media, Belder's sister said she is doing better.

According to the Tucson Police Department, 45-year-old Gerald D. Taylor hit the group of women with his car before taking off.

Officials said he had three kids in the car with him and later turned himself in.

Taylor’s mom, Cheryl Taylor, said one of the kids in the car was his, the other two were his girlfriend's.

She said her son is still in jail right now and is sorry for what happened to those girls.

“I just don’t know what to say to my son, I’m just torn apart about it. I feel sorry for the family. I wish God could help me, but the church just says pray to God everyday,” she said.

Taylor said her son also spent time in jail for driving the wrong way down the street several years ago.

He’s facing nine counts including DUI and child endangerment.

Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.