Chelsea Clinton, the daughter of former President Bill Clinton and current Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, said in an interview at a Hillary Clinton fundraiser that she left the Baptist church because she was not happy that she was told about abortion when she was a 6-year-old.

From LifeNews:

“I find it quite insulting sometimes when people say to my mom, my dad or me . . . that they question our faith,’ said Chelsea. “I was raised in a Methodist church and I left the Baptist church before my dad did, because I didn’t know why they were talking to me about abortion when I was 6 in Sunday school — that’s a true story.” “My mother is very deeply a person of faith,” Chelsea said. “It is deeply authentic and real for my mother, and it guides so much of her moral compass, but also her life’s work.” “I recognized that there were many expressions of faith that I don’t agree with and feel [are] quite antithetical to how I read the Bible,” Chelsea said. “But I find it really challenging when people who are self-professed liberals kind of look askance at my family’s history.”

On Twitter, many people raised eyebrows at Chelsea's story:

@EsotericCD This is why the left doesn't trust her. Her pandering is so outrageously and obviously false it makes no sense. — Seth Mandel (@SethAMandel) February 11, 2016

There is no possible reason for an American child of six years old to have to know what abortion is....None. — Colonel (@laurakfillault) February 11, 2016

@StevenErtelt @SOcean5 6 y/o's are more concerned with Sunday school snacks- I call bullshit — bee kay (@beekaytulsa) February 11, 2016

How does Chelsea get away w/saying crazy stuff like this? She also discussed Bush tax cuts as towers fell on 9/11. https://t.co/zTsWwZvg4f — Karol Markowicz (@karol) February 11, 2016

Two possibilities: 1) she's a bold-faced liar, or 2) she was a really creepy & depraved 6 year old. https://t.co/zE7GwjvQc5 — Sarah Rumpf (@rumpfshaker) February 11, 2016

Now, while I'm not a Baptist and I've never been to church in Arkansas, but as someone who helped teach C.C.D. classes to kindergarteners at my parish for two years while I was in high school, I am positive that nothing involving abortion was ever mentioned to my students in my classroom. It's not appropriate to discuss abortion to someone who is that young, and that topic should be saved for someone who is more mature and able to understand what is happening. Further, most 6-year-olds I taught were far more concerned with coloring than social issues.