Sioux Falls, SD

We're just two days away from the vote, and the debate of the school start date in Sioux Falls is heating up. If the majority of voters, say "yes" the first day will be mid-August. If voters cast "no" ballots school will start after Labor Day for the next three years.

It's an important issue for many, and the first day of school is causing a lot of debate. Physics teacher at Roosevelt High School Barb Newitt say pushing the start date past Labor Day hurts students in advance placement classes because it takes away three weeks of classroom instruction.

"Ideally we feel like if we can continue on with the calendar we've had or possibly something maybe a little bit in between, that's going to give our kids the best academic education they can have," Newitt said.

Carrie Pederson, a parent and a member of of "Vote No to Save Our Summers," says starting school in August hurts students that use seasonal work to make income not just for themselves, but their families.

"They're really not working a lot of those seasonal jobs in May. So then they're really not starting until somewhere in June. So then they have June and July to earn income," Pederson said.

If more people vote "yes," there still could be some changes to the school calendar the district put together. Newitt says there could be things like maneuvering around in-service days and a potential four day Labor Day weekend added to the calendar.

"If the vote goes no there's no possibility for a compromise, but if it is yes we think there is something we can do," Newitt said.

Pederson says a compromise was brought up to the school board in 2009. She says hearing about a proposal this time around seems disingenuous.

"We would have loved to have seen something worked out before it got to this. The school district knew this was coming. They drew up the petition for us. There could have been compromise then," Pederson said.

It's a debate that continues to rage on, but the voters will decide on Tuesday.

Education

High School

Middle School {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.