Buy Photo (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

It’s no secret that Iowa is an insurance-friendly state. In fact, a promotional brochure from the Iowa Economic Development Authority lists some of the benefits enjoyed by insurance companies based in Iowa:

•In recent years, Iowa lowered its insurance premium tax by half, to just 1 percent — which makes it one of the lowest rates in the nation.

•Iowa does not charge premium taxes on the sale of annuities or qualified life insurance plans.

•Iowa does not assess any additional surtaxes or income taxes on insurance carriers.

•Iowa offers “a favorable business climate with direct financial assistance, tax advantages and supportive regulatory services” for insurers.

But there are other specific benefits that the state’s promotional brochures don’t highlight.

As the New York Times reported recently, Iowa is one of several states that have passed laws allowing life insurance companies to pull cash out of the reserves they’re required to keep on hand to pay claims. They can then use that money for bonuses, shareholder dividends, acquisitions and other projects. And because of a loophole in the federal tax law, that money is not being taxed by the federal government.

Transamerica Life Insurance Co. of Cedar Rapids used the Iowa law last year to pull $1.8 billion from its reserves. In the process, the company avoided paying an estimated $640 million in federal taxes.

That’s $640 million in lost tax revenue from just one company.

To put that in perspective, $640 million would have been more than enough to pay for the entire Land and Water Conservation Program aimed at expanding and protecting national parks – a program that was gutted earlier this year due to a lack of funding.

In other words, this sort of tax avoidance has real-world consequences for those of us who still view our taxes not as “confiscated wealth,” which is the label preferred by some conservatives, but as the dues we pay for the privilege of living in the United States. When corporations don’t pay their fair share of taxes, that results in fewer services and higher taxes for the rest of us.

The so-called “shadow insurance” ploy works like this: State insurance regulators require companies to maintain reserves that will enable them to quickly pay all claims. Under federal law, any reductions in these reserves are treated as taxable income. But some states, like Iowa, allow insurers to dramatically lower their reserves through a complex series of transfers that free up money for other purposes. And yet, for federal tax purposes, these types of reductions in reserves are invisible. That saves the companies tens — in some cases, hundreds — of millions of dollars in taxes they’d otherwise be paying.

To make matters worse, these same companies can claim a tax deduction on “reserves” that don’t even exist, except on paper.

Is it any wonder that Symetra Life Insurance Co. trumpeted Iowa’s “state-of-the-art statutes and regulations” as one of the reasons it decided in January to change its legal domicile from Washington to Iowa? The switch is expected to result in the opening of one small office in Des Moines with 20 to 40 employees, but the company’s headquarters will remain in Bellevue, Wash.

Benjamin M. Lawsky, the financial services superintendent of New York, has tried to impose a moratorium on these types of transactions. He is also calling for action by the Internal Revenue Service and the Treasury Department.

But the sad reality is that nothing is likely to change, even though it’s estimated that this “shadow insurance” scheme has enabled life insurers to avoided paying an astounding $100 billion in federal taxes in recent years.

That’s because insurance regulation is left to the states, which means insurance companies can pit states against each other to determine which of them will provide the most incentives for relocation while offering the most “industry-friendly” approach to regulation. That’s a game Iowa loves to play, even when it means giving away the store.

Transamerica points out that it’s not doing anything illegal. Taking advantage of massive, and perhaps unintended, tax breaks aren’t exactly the hallmark of good corporate citizenship, but corporations do have a fiduciary responsibility. In that respect, they should avail themselves of whatever incentives our elected leaders have seen fit to provide.

The problem is that politicians will always be eager to offer up incentives like these because “job creation” plays well on the campaign trail. Few voters will ever ask about the public assets – tax revenue, grants, land, buildings, public improvements, etc. – that were quite literally given away to secure those jobs.

So, yes, the Orascom fertilizer plant in southeast Iowa will create 240 jobs in Iowa. But the state, local and federal governments ponied up more than $1 million for each of those jobs, and the deal was negotiated in secret. Good public policy? Maybe not, but it’s definitely good politics.

Iowa’s governor and state legislators talk a lot about economic development and job creation in Iowa — as they should. But it’s high time they started being open and honest with the public about the real cost of those jobs.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1BbJb8g