The Sunday morning guest list:

House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, discusses the GOP agenda, Obamacare and the Department of Homeland Security on "Fox News Sunday" at 10 a.m. on WOFL-Channel 35. Other guests are Alabama Supreme Court Chief Justice Roy Moore and Rory Kennedy, director of the Oscar-nominated documentary "Last Days in Vietnam." The panel will be Juan Williams, George Will, Julie Pace of The Associated Press and Dana Perino of Fox News' "The Five."

White House Chief of Staff Denis McDonough and Sen. Bob Corker, R-Tenn., talk to CBS' "Face the Nation" at 10:30 a.m. on WKMG-Channel 6. Rep. John Lewis, D-Ga., discusses the 50th anniversary of the Selma marches. The panel will be Peter Baker of The New York Times, Jan Crawford of CBS, Jeffrey Goldberg of The Atlantic and Kimberley Strassel of The Wall Street Journal.

Leon Panetta, former secretary of defense and former director of the CIA, talks to CNN's "State of the Union" at 9 a.m. and noon. Jim Acosta is the guest anchor.

Secretary of Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert McDonald visits NBC's "Meet the Press" at 9 a.m. on WESH-Channel 2. Dana Carvey reflects on the 40th anniversary of "Saturday Night Live" and his political sketches. Other guests are Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., and Sen. Jack Reed, D-R.I. The panel will be Kathleen Parker of The Washington Post, April Ryan of American Urban Radio Networks, Joe Scarborough of MSNBC's "Morning Joe" and David Axelrod, author of "Believer."

ABC's "This Week" welcomes Rep. Adam Kinzinger, R-Ill., and Rep. Adam Schiff, D-Calif., at 11 a.m. on WFTV-Channel 9. The panel will be Democratic strategist Donna Brazile, Republican strategist Ana Navarro, Robert Costa of The Washington Post and Jim VandeHei of Politico.

Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., and former Ambassador Robert Jordan are guests on "Sunday Morning Futures" at 10 a.m. on Fox News Channel. Another guest is Charles Plosser, president and CEO of Philadelphia Federal Reserve. The panel will be Republican strategist Ed Rollins, journalist Judith Miller and Richard Peterson of Global Markets Intelligence Group at S&P Capital IQ.

Bill and Melinda Gates discuss vaccines and global health on "Fareed Zakaria GPS" at 10 a.m. and 1 p.m. on CNN. Other guests are Bill Browder, CEO and founder of Hermitage Capital Management; Zanny Minton Beddoes of The Economist; Gillian Tett of Financial Times; and Rana Foroohar of Time magazine.

Piers Morgan and David Westin, former president of ABC News, are guests on "MediaBuzz" at 11 a.m. on Fox News Channel. The lineup also features Rich Lowry of National Review Editor, Marisa Guthrie of The Hollywood Reporter, Joe Klein of Time magazine, Amy Holmes of The Blaze TV and Mark Hannah, Obama 2008 campaign aide.

Andrew Heyward, former president of CBS News, discusses the Brian Williams story on "Reliable Sources" at 11 a.m. on CNN. Other guests are Michael Ware, former CNN international correspondent, and Frank Sesno, of George Washington University.