The eastbound lanes of Interstate 70 were closed for several hours early Friday after a semi-tractor trailer collided with a car and rolled near Georgetown, covering the highway with debris from the truck, officials said.

“It’s more or less shut down I-70. Unfortunately we don’t have an estimated time of re-opening the highway during the commute,” Trooper Josh Lewis said. “We need special equipment to clear the semi.”

Lewis said the accident happened around 8 a.m. after the semi and a car collided. No one was injured in the accident, he said.

Richard Gorman, who lives about 50 feet from that stretch highway, heard the crash and was the first on scene, he said.

“I heard dragging and scraping, then saw a cloud of dust moving down the highway,” Gorman said.

Lumber from the semi crushed the car driven by a man and a woman, Gorman said.

“I didn’t want to look in the window, but then I saw they were both standing outside the car,” he said. “I was surprised they were alive.”

Other than some minor scapes, both of the car’s occupants were uninjured, Gorman said.

“They said they were from out of town and were immediately on the phone with family and with insurance company,” he said.

The semi spilled the load of lumber across both sides of the highway for about a quarter of a mile, Gorman said.

The semi truck driver did not sustain any serious injures, it appeared, Gorman said.

Gorman has lived at the location for three years and said accidents in the area are common, but Friday’s was one of the worst he had witnessed.

Lewis recommended that commuters find an alternative route to Denver.

Travelers can take Colorado Highway 9 North to U.S. Highway 40 or Colorado Highway 9 South to U.S. Highway 285.

About 3 p.m. the Colorado Department of Transportation reported that the clean-up was continuing, although the left lane of eastbound I-70 opened about 10:30 a.m. Exit 228 remained closed, as well as the right lane.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, kmitchell@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kmitchelldp