Lesli Ellis, City of Boulder - Planning, Housing + Sustainability in Boulder, Colorado. (Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer)

The Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan is a jointly adopted plan between the City of Boulder and Boulder County that has been in place since the 1970s. The plan guides how the city and county share responsibility for preservation, growth, development and services for the Boulder Valley. The city and county update the plan every five years.

The 2015 update currently underway has a few focus areas: livability and growth management, development, design, housing, and neighborhoods; as well as other emerging issues such as resilience, climate action, local foods, arts and culture, and age-friendly policies. Community engagement and input, of which this survey is a part, play a key role in the update process.

Some 6,000 individuals have been invited to take part this year through a detailed survey. We took a look at the survey and then we visited with Lesli Ellis, Boulder's comprehensive planning manager, on what the city and county hope to learn from the responses they receive.

1. The city and county update the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan every five years. What are the key areas that need updating this time around?

Advertisement

Every five years, the topics for the plan update are determined by the four approval bodies of the plan (the Boulder City Council, Boulder County Board of County Commissioners, City Planning Board, and County Planning Commission). The leaders respond to the community's input and to changed circumstances. During the past year, the community has talked about growth management, preservation, livability, climate action and energy, affordable housing, arts and culture, resilience, local foods, and other topics seen through trends analysis, such as an aging community. The plan update will address these key areas, as well as make the plan more useful, clear, action-oriented, and measurable.

2. You have sent a survey to 6,000 residents regarding the plan, and much of that survey relates to business growth and development. What do you hope to learn?

As the Boulder and Front Range region have emerged from the Great Recession and the pace of building has increased, so have the divergent voices and opinions about the desired future vision for the community, what should be preserved, how Boulder should grow, and whether growth management mechanisms or changes to the land use plan or policies are needed. The survey should give leaders and planners a more definitive idea of the community's range of opinions about growth and development issues and how Boulder should respond through the plan.

3. One question in the survey asks about the rate of commercial growth. What if responses were overwhelmingly in favor of just letting growth happen without restriction? Would that actually then make it in the plan? What if the response is primarily "slow the rate of commercial growth"?

The plan recognizes Boulder's role as a center of employment, and since the 1990s when it became so, the topic of jobs-to-housing balance has been an ongoing discussion. More recently, community leaders and residents have talked about the desired future for the community, including what rate and amount of future employment growth may be appropriate given Boulder's affordable housing challenge, economic vitality goals, and high numbers of regional in-commuters. The results of the survey and other input received will assist city and county staff with preparing land use and policy options that the public and decision makers may further consider in later phases of the plan process.

4. Height restrictions in Boulder, commercial building heights, is something addressed within the survey. Is that a big issue this year?

Boulder's City Charter limits height of all buildings to 55 feet, although in most areas the land use code and zoning districts limit building heights to 35 to 40 feet unless a taller height is approved as part of a site review process. Taller buildings are limited to those areas with a clearly defined approved vision for that kind of future development, such as in the downtown. In February 2015, city council approved an ordinance temporarily limiting height modifications in Boulder to specific areas, meaning that in most parts of the city building heights for new developments are limited to three stories. The limit is in place through April 2017. This year, height, design, and growth in general have all been issues of community discussion and concern, and the survey results may help city council determine which parts of the city may be appropriate for taller buildings and where the community would prefer lower intensities.

5. Honestly how much impact does a citizen survey have with the plan? Also, after the surveys are tabulated what is the next step with the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan?

Public input has always had a strong influence in shaping the Boulder Valley plan, and this random sample statistical survey will be one of several ways of engaging the community and gathering input for the plan update. Survey results will carry weight because the anticipated 1,200-1,800 responses will be more statistically valid than voluntary engagement approaches. That quantity of response also is higher than what the city and county might normally see for a plan. For people in the community who did not receive a postcard invitation or mailed version of the survey, an open on line version will be available in mid-October.

After the survey results are tabulated and analyzed (separately), the next step will be to use the results to generate policy and land use options for analysis and discussion by the public and the community's elected leaders and appointed boards who approve the plan. Additionally, if this survey is found to be helpful, the city and county may do a second more targeted set of questions in the spring to focus on those options. The city and county are aiming to complete the plan update in summer of 2016.

For more information visit www.BoulderValleyCompPlan.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel