HOUSTON — Brandon Marshall was not among the Broncos’ contingent who experienced a Houston homecoming Saturday night.

But he played as if he were right at home.

In his first game action since undergoing surgery on his right foot in March, Marshall played the first quarter of the preseason game against the Texans and compiled three tackles (all solo) and two passes defensed.

He was undoubtedly the brightest spot in an otherwise sloppy first quarter for Denver, wreaking havoc quickly and efficiently.

If there was any doubt, Marshall is back. And his foot appears fine.

Last season, the middle linebacker led the Broncos in tackles with 113 despite hobbling to the finish line. He sat out the last two games but returned for the Broncos’ divisional playoff loss to the Indianapolis Colts.

He now has two screws in his foot — and some minor pain that comes with them — and will have to leave the screws in for the remainder of this season. But he was ahead of schedule with his rehab during training camp and is back on the field, playing a crucial role in Wade Phillips’ 3-4 defense.

Although Jack Del Rio’s 4-3 alignment last season implemented some principles of the 3-4, Marshall’s duties as the strongside linebacker changed.

“I’m still trying to learn all the ins and outs, but I think I have a pretty decent grasp on it,” Marshall said. “Once I do (get more reps), I’ll be able to make plays.”

This is only the preseason, but for Marshall, Saturday’s showing offered a measuring stick of his physical progress. It was a show of his comfort in Phillips’ system. And it was a message of his comfort in the system.

“I felt good,” he said after the game. “Obviously you want to improve on everything or some things each week. I thought I could have played against the run a little better, but I thought I did well against the pass. I just want to keep getting better, and as my foot keeps feeling better, I think I’ll play better.”

It also was a sign that the fourth-year pro is back where he feels most at home. On the field. Racking up tackles.

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickijhabvala