In his May 6 op-ed, “The ideological earthquake,” Charles Krauthammer mischaracterized the ideology that was rejected by GOP voters. Mr. Krauthammer cited voters’ feeling of betrayal by conservative leaders who didn’t deliver on their promises to adhere to conservative orthodoxy (repeal Obamacare, defund Planned Parenthood, stop “President Obama’s tax-and-spend hyperliberalism”).

GOP voters rejected the ideology of the Republican Party for the past seven years, which has been to deny anything that would look like a victory for President Obama. This ideology of “no” has led to increased mistrust of government, continued crumbling of infrastructure and anemic economic growth. And where there have been conservative leaders who have been able to imprint the conservative ideology on government (for example, Kansas, Louisiana and Michigan), the state has failed its people.

Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has offered to break this cycle of “no and less” in a different way, by promising “yes and more” to getting things done that help people. The GOP voters chose Mr. Trump because he refused to adhere to the recent conservative ideology of “no.” They want their government to work for them, not against them.

Maurice Werner, Washington

Charles Krauthammer expressed the dismay of many Republicans over the triumph of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump. Mr. Krauthammer noted that, in exit polls, up to 60 percent of GOP voters said they feel “betrayed” by their leaders because of the failure of the GOP-dominated Congress to roll back Obamacare, defund Planned Parenthood and attack other GOP targets.

The premise is wrong. The electorate is not so much charmed by anti-government ideology as it is concerned about the government’s failure to respond to people’s very real concerns: jobs, health care, affordable housing and other practical issues. Sixty-two percent of the public supports the Supreme Court ruling on Obamacare upholding health-insurance subsidies. Gallup reports that 59 percent of Americans view Planned Parenthood favorably. In 2013, The Post reported that 53 percent of Americans blamed the GOP for the government shutdown. Mr. Trump’s unexpected success with GOP voters should be a wake-up call that Americans are primarily seeking not ideological purity but a government that listens and seeks to address their real-life needs.

Elizabeth R. Conklin, Honolulu