WASHINGTON - President Obama touted an expanding economy but acknowledged that many white voters feel left out during a wide-ranging interview Monday on NPR.

"There are a lot of white working-class voters who haven't seen enough progress economically in their lives," Obama said.

"They hear about an immigration debate or they hear about, you know, debate surrounding Ferguson, and they think, 'I'm being left out. Nobody seems to be thinking about how tough it is for me right now,'" Obama said in the interview taped before he left last week for a vacation in Hawaii.

Obama's critique partly echoed a speech last month by Sen. Chuck Schumer, who lamented Democrats' failure to address priorities of middle-class voters.

But, without referencing the New York senator, Obama rejected Schumer's claim that Democrats' decision to take up the Affordable Care Act in 2009 was a mistake that alienated those voters.

Obama argued that the problem instead was the Democratic Party's failure "to communicate directly to those voters and say to them, 'You know what? We're fighting for you.'"

The President attacked the perception that Obamacare "is largely something that is benefiting black and Hispanic and downscale voters.” He pointed to "huge numbers" of white working-class voters who have gained coverage in states like Kentucky through the law.

Continuing a theme he has hammered in recent weeks, Obama said: "We are as well-positioned today as we have been in quite some time economically."

The public is starting to agree. A Gallup poll out Monday showed Americans' economic confidence in positive territory for the first time since 2008.

Obama also offered an upbeat take on race. He called it understandable but wrong to claim race relations are worse than six years ago amid protests and violence tied to the deaths of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., and Eric Garner in Staten Island.

"I assure you, from the perspective of African-Americans or Latinos in poor communities who have been dealing with this all their lives, they wouldn't suggest somehow that it's worse now than it was 10,15, or 20 years ago," Obama said.

Obama waved off a decline in his approval rating on foreign policy.

He faulted Washington pundits who "think you can just move chess pieces around the table" for promoting the idea that overseas crises have easy fixes.

"One of the things I've learned over six years, and it doesn't always suit the news cycle, is having some strategic patience," Obama said.

"You'll recall that three or four months ago, everybody in Washington was convinced that President Putin was a genius," he added.

Asked if he could envision reopening diplomatic relations with Iran within two years, Obama said "never say never," but said that nuclear talks must be resolved before relations improve.

Obama, who has vetoed just two bills passed by Congress in six years, said he expects "to pull that pen out" more often now that Republicans will control the Senate.