UNIVERSITY PARK — Former President George W. Bush said his decision to speak at Southern Methodist University’s centennial commencement Saturday was a “practical one.”

“I got a call from my landlord…[SMU President] Gerald Turner,” Bush said. “Rather than raising the rent or threatening to withhold our security deposit, I was relieved to hear President Turner ask me if I believed in free speech.”

Bush said he did. Turner replied, “perfect, here’s your chance to give one.”

Thousands of students and their families packed Moody Coliseum for the ceremony, which marked the 100th anniversary of school’s spring commencement. Bush was both light-hearted and serious during his speech. He was self-deprecating at times about his speaking and painting skills, and he invoked his faith while prodding graduates to participate in the civic life.

Saturday’s commencement speech was the first Bush has given since leaving office, but his second at SMU. He first spoke at the university in 1999 while governor of Texas. His presidential center is on the campus.

Though Bush is a Yale graduate, his wife Laura, who also attended the event, is an SMU graduate and board of trustees member.

Turner said when discussing with students who should be the centennial commencement speaker, they said they needed someone “very special.”

“I asked for examples and they had one, George W. Bush, the 43rd president,” said Turner, who introduced Bush to a standing ovation. “I was relieved when he said yes, my backup plan was to get a certain member of the board of trustees to twist his arm.”

Since leaving office, he has been a fixture on the SMU campus, occasionally dropping into classes where he said he was “impressed by the energy and intelligence of the SMU faculty.”

During his speech, Bush congratulated parents of the graduating students, and the students themselves.

“For those of you graduating with high honors and distinctions, I say well done,” he said. “And as I like to tell the “C” students, you too can be president.”

Bush encouraged students to serve others and while doing so, inspire others. He said he was inspired by “the example of many selfless servants,” including former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill. He said Churchill inspired him during his presidency and his post-presidency.

“Like Churchill, I now paint,” he said. “Unlike Churchill, the painting isn’t worth much without the signature.”

Referencing a speech Churchill gave in 1941, Bush said that even today some doubt the country’s future.

“Some say America’s best days are behind us,” he said. “I say, given our strengths — one of which is a bright new generation like you — these are not dark days, these are great days.”