Falls Church resident Jim Webb on Thursday formally entered the race for the Democratic presidential nomination for president in 2016.

A U.S. Naval Academy graduate, the 69-year-old former U.S. Marine served one term representing Virginia in the U.S. Senate, from 2007 to 2012. He also is a former Secretary of the Navy and the author of 10 books.

Webb enters a field that includes frontrunner Hillary Clinton, Lincoln Chafee, Martin O’Malley and Bernie Sanders.

In his announcement, Webb outlined a platform that highlights “economic fairness,” including inequities of high CEO pay and revamping the tax code; foreign policy; national infrastructure; criminal justice reform and improving the administration of government.

"[O]ur country needs a fresh approach to solving the problems that confront us and too often unnecessarily divide us," Webb said in a statement announcing his plans. "We need to shake the hold of these shadow elites on our political process."

In his announcement and his online platform, Webb highlighted the importance of raising money to compete in the nomination process. Clinton already has a huge fund-raising lead on her competitors.

"I understand the odds, particularly in today's political climate where fair debate is so often drowned out by huge sums of money," Webb wrote. "I know that more than one candidate in this process intends to raise at least a billion dollars — some estimates run as high as $2 billion — in direct and indirect financial support.”

Democratic National Committee Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz welcomed Webb’s announcement in a statement.

“Senator Webb has a long and distinguished record of service to his country, both in the Marines and in public office. His leadership on the Post-9/11 GI Bill is a sterling example of the Democratic commitment to ensuring the opportunities available for our veterans when they return home,” she wrote.

“As the field of 2016 candidates rounds into shape, a stark contrast is developing between the Democratic and Republican parties. Democrats are fighting for middle class families, and those still struggling to get there. Republicans are concerned only with those already at the very top."