What If: Minimum wage is a contentious issue, but which body of government should handle it?

Protesters march through ASU during a rally to raise the minimum wage to $15 in Tempe April 15, 2015. (Photo: Michael Chow, Michael Chow/The Republic)

Protesters across the country are demanding the minimum wage be increased to $15 per hour. The state Legislature normally handles this issue, but what if that weren't the case? What if Phoenix, Flagstaff and other cities were allowed to decide what worked best for them? We asked two experts what they thought.

LAST TIME: What if the VA health system didn't exist?

------------------------------------------

RESEARCH SHOWS MINIMUM WAGE HELPS

Shawn Aiken, lawyer who filed suit against a state law prohibiting municipalities from setting their own minimum wages:

In 2006, the people of Arizona voted to allow cities to set their own minimum wage. If we followed that law, many Arizona cities would stick with the state minimum wage, because that reflects their local cost of living.

But, elsewhere — Flagstaff, Prescott, and Lake Havasu City, for example — average wages adjusted for the cost of living rank among the lowest in the nation. Voters of those cities might decide that the local minimum wage should be higher than the statewide minimum ($8.05 per hour).

Shawn Aiken (Photo: handout)

What would happen? We know the answer. Over the past decade, cities across the country have adopted minimum wages higher than federal and state minimums. Economists with the University of California-Berkeley Labor Center found that businesses in those cities (and the 21 states with higher base pay than the federal minimum) absorbed the costs through lower job turnover, small price increases and higher productivity.

A January 2014 letter signed by 75 noted economists (including seven Nobel laureates) confirmed that higher minimum wages had little to no effect on job growth (and could stimulate the economy).

And, in Arizona, many full-time low-wage workers live in poverty. They must rely on public assistance programs. According to a new study by the UC-Berkeley Labor Center, taxpayers foot the bill for low wages because the federal and state governments subsidize the working poor through these public assistance programs to the tune of $153 billion a year ($4.5 billion in Arizona).

So, if we followed the law and allowed Arizona's cities to set their own minimum wage, everyone would win: voters, workers, businesses, and taxpayers.

------------------------------------------

HIGH MINIMUM WAGE IS BAD BUSINESS

Farrell Quinlan, Arizona state director, National Federation of Independent Business:

What if we give business owners in Phoenix a good reason never to open a second shop in Tucson? What if we foolishly devastate the economy of Flagstaff by pushing businesses to cluster just outside its city limits?

What if we force employers to spend more in time and money on complying with a crazy quilt of minimum-wage laws that it becomes impossible for them to ever hire another person?

Farrell Quinlan (Photo: handout)

What if we took a hard and honest look at the suffering of the now-jobless employees of a growing number of out-of-business restaurants and mom-and-pop shops in the workers' paradises of today's San Francisco and Seattle, which fool-heartedly set their minimum-wage rates as the highest in the nation?

Instead, what if we abandon the mesmerizing myths and accept the reality that ever higher minimum wages do nothing to alleviate poverty or move people into the middle class?

What if we acknowledge what the overwhelming body of economic research and old-fashioned commonsense tell us: That minimum wages are entry level wages and raising them only harms teens, young adults and the low-skilled?

The best way to improve the earning-power of Arizona's hard-working people is not through higher minimum wages. It comes by lowering the cost for small business to employ them by eliminating burdensome mandates and rolling back cumbersome regulations that inhibit job creation.

More specifically, those agitating for higher minimum wages could actually help struggling workers get more take-home pay if they would redirect their advocacy toward repealing the income-killing 30-hour workweek enshrined in Obamacare.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1G6SOq6