Pediatric neurologist and neuroscientist Huda Y. Zoghbi won Rockefeller University's 10th annual Pearl Meister Greengard Prize, which on Thursday night she attributed in part to following "a gut feeling." For 16 years, she tracked down a gene mutation that causes Rett Syndrome, a form of autism that only affects girls. None of her male colleagues supported her hunch that Rett Syndrome could be a genetic disorder.

"There were several years of silence because I didn't tell anyone that I kept working on it," Dr. Zoghbi said. "I was really somewhat intimidated and felt everyone thought I was crazy to work on it."

A selection committee of 10 members, including Rockefeller University President Marc Tessier-Lavigne and five Nobel laureates, awarded Dr. Zoghbi the prize, which carries a $100,000 honorarium.

ENLARGE Huda Zoghbi and Rockefeller University's Marc Tessier-Lavigne Rod Morata

"Dr. Zoghbi stands out because she has made pioneering discoveries in not just one but multiple areas of neuroscience, and because she is an unusual translational scientist who focuses equally on understanding the causes of disease, and on using that knowledge both to illuminate fundamental biological mechanisms and to seek therapies and cures for the diseases," Dr. Tessier-Lavigne said.

Dr. Zoghbi also has identified the cause of a neurodegenerative disease called Spinal Cerebellar Ataxia 1. Her research is said to advance scientists' understanding of more common disorders, such as autism, Parkinson's and Alzheimer's.

In 2000, Paul Greengard donated his winnings from his Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine to establish the Pearl Meister Greengard Prize. He said by honoring extraordinary women scientists, he hoped to decrease gender discrimination in the sciences. "When the prize was announced, I got hundreds of emails from women and many of them were incredibly moving, saying how much it meant to them, how much they've suffered and felt discrimination, more than I had imagined was the case," Dr. Greengard said.

For women in pursuit of a family and a career, Dr. Zoghbi suggested a protocol to follow. All the while she made the scientific discoveries that earned her the Pearl Meister Greengard Prize, she and her husband raised a daughter and a son.

"First, it takes a partner. My husband made my career and this award possible. It takes two working together generously and nobody saying, 'I did this but you didn't do that.' Just support when you have to support, not count. That is the essence," Dr. Zoghbi said.

Secondly, Dr. Zoghbi said she focused exclusively on her children and her work. "I got my first manicure at 40," she said. "I never had that time for myself."

Lastly, she said it helps to focus only on vital tasks. "You cannot be the one cleaning the house," Dr. Zoghbi said. "You have to have someone to help with chores that are less essential."