Charities yesterday bowed to pressure to stop trading the personal data of donors in a victory for the Daily Mail.

The clampdown follows a series of Mail investigations highlighting outrageous cold-call fundraising techniques.

Charity chiefs now promise to introduce an ‘opt in’ system in which details cannot be passed on without an individual’s explicit consent.

The moves come after a public outcry over the conduct of charity fundraisers following the death of pensioner Olive Cooke, who committed suicide last May

The 92-year-old retired postal worker had spent over 75 years tirelessly fundraising. After her death, her family said that she had been constantly hounded by charities asking for donations

And warnings about data sharing will no longer be ‘hidden’ in the smallprint of fundraising literature.

The Mail revealed last week that some charities were routinely trading in donors’ data and even selling the information to firms operating scams.

Samuel Rae, an 87-year-old with dementia, had his details passed on up to 200 times and lost £35,000 to conmen. Major charities were also exposed for contacting households on official ‘no call’ lists.

The new rules will ban call centres from using withheld numbers so that victims of aggressive fundraising can complain.

All the measures are likely to be in force by the end of the month. But it is likely the code will apply only to new donors and will not work retrospectively. This means existing donors could still see their details shared and, in some cases, sold on.

Apologising last night, the charity bosses' revealed that measures were being taken, including the revision of the code of conduct small print

The Institute of Fundraising (IoF) admitted that the 'there have been times where fundraising practices has failed to live up to these high standards'

PENSIONER HOUNDED BY FOUR BEGGING CALLS EVERY DAY By Vanessa Allen for The Daily Mail A pensioner has been sent 50 unsolicited ‘gifts’ by charities within two years after being targeted as a potential donor. Nigel Macmillan, a widower who lives alone, receives four letters and four phone calls a day on average asking for money. The 85-year-old has asked the charities to stop contacting him but is being bombarded with unwanted items through the post. Nigel Macmillan (pictured) receives four letters and four phone calls a day on average asking for money Among other things, he has received a child’s doll, canvas shopping bags, greetings cards, pens and a set of crucifixes despite having never donated to most of the organisations involved. The retired engineer said he feels ‘emotionally blackmailed’ by the gifts. ‘You feel they have sent you something so you should really donate,’ said Mr Macmillan, from Glasgow. ‘It feels as if I can’t do anything to stop it.’ The grandfather said that people who call ‘can be very pushy’ and sometimes ask to speak to his wife, who died six years ago. He has now cut back the amount he gives to just two charities, but is considering stopping these donations. Battersea Dogs Home, which sent Mr Macmillan a pen and keyring, said it ‘is never our intention for donors to feel under undue pressure’. Other charities which have targeted him could not be reached for comment.

In a letter to The Sunday Times yesterday, bosses of 17 big charities admitted their fundraising procedures had ‘failed to live up to’ their high standards.

They wrote: ‘No one should ever feel pressured into giving. The vulnerable should always receive the strongest protection. And we need to act quickly and decisively when any fundraising practice is found wanting.’

But Sir Stephen Bubb, the head of the Association of Chief Executives of Voluntary Organisations, complained the new rules would mean ‘less giving and less support for what the British public see as great causes’.

He said it would mean there is less money to spend on ‘cancer research, on helping vulnerable people and supporting refugees’. He told Sky News: ‘It’s right that we react to public concern and make changes to try to restore people’s trust in our fundraising techniques.

‘But I would also make the point that it’s a very simple equation that less asking means less giving.

‘And I suspect that changes will mean there is less money coming to great causes, and charities will have less to spend on cancer research, on helping vulnerable people and supporting refugees as we have seen recently.’

He added: ‘I know from charity chief executives that they feel there has never been a time where they have faced greater demands on their services and yet resources have been so constrained.’ His remarks will raise concerns that charities are only reluctantly abandoning fundraising practices that have prompted public outrage.

Samuel Rae's details were passed on after he failed to tick a box on a lifestyle survey in 1994 saying his information should not be shared

The Daily Mail Investigations Unit revealed that former army colonel Samuel Rae's details were passed on hundreds of times and resulted in the 87-year-old losing 35,000 pounds to fraudsters who purchased the data

Marilyn Baldwin OBE, founder of the anti-scams charity Think Jessica, said: ‘To complain that measures to protect vulnerable donors would cause them to lose money just shows these charity bosses still don’t get it. It is exactly the same kind of moral blackmail we get from their cold calls – and the public have had enough of it.

‘If these charities were serious about protecting vulnerable people, they would simply stop trading in their supporters’ data.

‘By buying and selling donors’ details, they are fuelling the rising tide of scams against the elderly and vulnerable. Being on these lists is destroying people’s lives.

‘It’s also not clear how these measures are going to protect people from aggressive cold-calling techniques. They need to go much further.’

Ministers have already pledged to bring in laws requiring charities to be explicit about their fundraising techniques. And a Government-commissioned review led by Sir Stuart Etherington is expected to report next week.

A watchdog could be set up within the Charity Commission with the power to impose fines on rule-breakers. It is hoped this will bring an end to the aggressive fundraising practices seen in boiler room-style call centres.

Tomorrow bosses of major charities will be grilled on fundraising practices by MPs on the Commons public administration committee.

Executives from Oxfam, the NSPCC, Save the Children and the RSPCA are expected to give evidence as well as officials from charity regulators.