Republican candidate for president Rand Paul, a senator from Kentucky, referenced Obamacare Tuesday in his argument to defund Planned Parenthood.Paul, according to Politico, said on WSC-FM the Affordable Care Act essentially negates the need for the government having to feed money to the controversial organization that provides abortions."I think there's a strong argument, even for those on the other side of the coin, that guess what, you know, we have free health care everywhere now, we don't need Planned Parenthood," Paul said. "We have community health centers that have doubled in their funding. We've put $5 billion into community health centers. They do everything that Planned Parenthood does, except for abortion."There's absolutely no reason for any money to go into Planned Parenthood." Planned Parenthood has drawn negative headlines in recent weeks after two videos surfaced that depicted officials at the organization talking about selling body parts of aborted fetuses for research.There is renewed talk on Capitol Hill about the government ceasing its funding to the organization, which operates across the country. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said Tuesday his chamber will soon vote on a Republican-sponsored bill that would defund Planned Parenthood.Paul said the bill might have some support from Democrats, and also called what Planned Parenthood is doing "despicable.""I've persisted and I've fought and I've fought," Paul said. "I think that what they're doing, manipulating the baby to harvest baby parts and organs, is despicable."I think there are a few Democrats, who have said they're pro-life, who are going to be put on the spot." Rep. Diane Black, a Tennessee Republican, accused Planned Parenthood of violating the law during a recent interview."I don't think there is any doubt from what you see on that video, they are breaking the law, and they need to be brought to accountability for breaking the law," Black said."They're selling body parts, which is against the law," said Black, a registered nurse. "And partial-birth abortion is also against the law. It's very clear on that video that they are doing both of those things."