Photo

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• Greek bailout survives German vote.

The German Parliament gave a crucial endorsement today to the third bailout package for Greece, worth $95 billion and negotiated by its international creditors.

The vote was seen as a test of political support for Chancellor Angela Merkel, who lobbied for the package. The deal still needs approval from other European governments.

• Reprieve for Palestinian hunger striker?

The Israeli authorities today offered to release a Palestinian prisoner from administrative detention by November, his lawyer said. His case was to go to the Supreme Court today.

The prisoner has been on a hunger strike for more than 60 days, confounding Israel’s legal, medical, political and security systems. Israel passed a law last month allowing the force-feeding of hunger strikers.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• No “Deflategate” settlement.

Lawyers for the N.F.L. and one of its biggest stars, the Patriots’ Tom Brady, may present oral arguments today in federal court as both sides resist pressure from a judge to make a deal on his four-game suspension.

The league spent millions of dollars on the investigation into whether footballs were deliberately deflated by the team in a conference championship game seven months ago.

• Islamic State beheads a scholar.

Militants killed one of Syria’s most prominent antiquities scholars and hung his body from the ancient town’s Roman columns, state news media and activists said.

• A plea deal for the former Subway pitchman.

Jared Fogle, the once popular pitchman for Subway, is expected to plead guilty to sex acts with minors and distributing child pornography.

As part of a plea agreement, Mr. Fogle will pay $100,000 to each of 14 victims, and is expected to receive a sentence of at least five years.

• Another military barrier set to fall.

A U.S. Navy admiral says that SEAL teams will be opened to women who pass the grueling six-month training regimen, but he didn’t give a timetable.

On Friday, two soldiers will become the first women to graduate from the Army’s Ranger School.

• Rape case at elite prep school.

Current and former students are expected to testify in the trial of a former student at the prestigious St. Paul’s School in Concord, N.H.

Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox. Monday – Friday.

Prosecutors opened their case by saying that the school was a place of secret rites and sexual conquest, where young girls were at risk.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

MARKETS

• Addyi, the first prescription drug to enhance women’s sexual drive, will be available starting Oct. 17, its manufacturer says.

Despite concerns about side effects, the F.D.A. approved the medication after pressure from women’s groups.

• The Federal Reserve releases minutes this afternoon from its July 28-29 meeting.

The notes may shed light on the policy debate over the timing of the first increase in the nation’s benchmark interest rate since 2006.

• Hackers say they put online 9.7 gigabytes worth of personal information stolen from Ashley Madison, the dating website for people hoping to cheat on their spouses.

The F.B.I. has joined the Royal Canadian Mounted Police’s investigation of the computer breach.

• Wall Street stocks are down. European markets closed down sharply, and Asian indexes ended mixed.

NOTEWORTHY

• Pushy panhandlers or artists?

New York’s mayor made clear what he thinks of the topless women covered in body paint who are seeking payment to pose for pictures in Times Square.

But he acknowledged that regulating them would be difficult because of First Amendment protections of artistic expression.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• Targeting cheese.

Russian police officers have broken up a “cheese ring” suspected of smuggling nearly 500 tons of dairy products, worth about $30 million, in violation of bans on European food imports.

This month, the authorities destroyed huge piles of pork, tomatoes and peaches, as well as flowers from the Netherlands.

• The Red Sox start over.

The Boston Red Sox, on track for their third last-place finish in four seasons, hired a new president of baseball operations and said farewell to their general manager.

It’s their third major recent shake-up, as they dismantled much of their roster after the 2012 and 2014 seasons. They won the World Series in 2013.

• What male musicians want.

They’re flocking to the website of a Dallas violinist and businessman who engineered a stretchable, breathable tuxedo shirt.

It’s a mix of formal attire and athletic performance wear that the creator calls “performal.”

BACK STORY

The World Science Fiction Society’s annual convention, opening tonight in Spokane, Wash., ends on Saturday with the Hugo Awards, one of the most prestigious prizes for science fiction and fantasy writing.

Past winners include luminaries like Isaac Asimov, Robert A. Heinlein, William Gibson, Neil Gaiman and the “Game of Thrones” author George R.R. Martin.

Photo

But in a sort of ballot-stuffing, several authors this year successfully campaigned to get certain writers nominated.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It’s not against the rules — nominations and voting (which ended July 31) are open to the public — but their political agenda irked fans.

As a result, for the first time in the Hugo’s 62-year history, several finalists removed their works from consideration.

Many of this year’s nominees were suggested by a group of right-leaning writers, including T Brad R. Torgersen, Larry Correia, Theodore Beale (a.k.a. Vox Day) and John C. Wright. They say the Hugos had become hijacked by progressive politics.

“We’ve seen the Hugo voting skew ideological,” Mr. Torgersen wrote, saying the convention uses the Hugos “as an affirmative action award.”

Their opponents, many of whom said they would vote for “No Award,” say that science fiction has diversified beyond white men.

Victoria Shannon contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.