Emma Stark rehearses with other members of the Longmont Youth Symphony at Altona Middle School on Saturday. ( Lewis Geyer )

KaLia Bernstein plays the french horn during a Longmont Youth Symphony rehearsal at Altona Middle School on Saturday. The Longmont Youth Symphony and the Longmont Symphony are joining forces for a side-by-side concert on Jan. 25. ( Lewis Geyer )

If you go What: Longmont Youth Symphony "Side-by-Side" with Longmont Symphony family concert, featuring music from space-themed movies such as "Apollo 13" and "Star Wars" and parts of Gustav Holst's "The Planets." When: 7:30 p.m. Saturday, Jan. 25 Where: Vance Brand Auditorium, 600 E. Mountain View Ave., Longmont Tickets: Cost is $19 for adults, $17 for seniors, $14 for students or youth; children younger than 14 who are dressed in space costumes will be admitted free. Tickets are available at the Longmont Symphony office, 519 Main St.; via phone at 303-772-5796; or at the door. For more information: Visit http://longmontsymphony.org; call 303-772-5796; or email symphony@qwest.net.

On Saturday, cellist Tavon Boaman will perform, with the Longmont Youth Symphony and Longmont Symphony orchestras, one of his favorite pieces: the "Jupiter" movement from "The Planets" by Gustav Holst.

"It's very cool to be able to play something from your childhood," the 18-year-old Boaman said, explaining that he grew up listening to recordings of piece.

But he's not the only performer excited to play the piece.

Josh Hertz, a senior from Longmont High School who plays clarinet, said he is obsessed with "Jupiter."

Advertisement

"It's a really, really fun clarinet piece," Hertz said. "It goes from crazy and jolly to a beautiful melody in the middle."

Boaman and flutist Emma Stark, also Longmont High School seniors, have played with the Longmont Youth Symphony since their sophomore and freshman years, respectively. They both appreciate the demands the orchestra places on them.

Boaman joined the orchestra because, he said, "I was looking for a place to play at, other than school, because I wasn't being challenged."

The orchestra members are there because they want to be, not because they need the credit in school, Stark said.

"Everybody there cares about the music," she said.

Although just being in the orchestra offers that opportunity, preparing for this weekend's "Side-by-Side" concert also allows the students to learn from adult performers who sit next to them during rehearsals and the concert.

"It's just cool to play next to somebody who's played for 30 years," Boaman said. The adults show him different positions to use and how to get a better sound from his cello, he said.

"They make you feel good about it, even if you're not sounding good," he said.

KaLia Bernstein, 14, just started playing the French horn in October; she's played the clarinet for four years.

As a beginner, she is most appreciative of the chance to learn from experienced players.

"It's really a cool experience to be working with the adults because they're much better musicians than us," KaLia said. "The adults are always teaching us and giving up little tips."

Another advantage of performing with the adults is the enriching of the orchestra's sound, Hertz said.

"It makes our music even better, Hertz said. "It's great for the audience and it's great for the musicians, too."

Boaman agreed.

"I just can't wait to hear ourselves playing ("Jupiter") with other players who play it professionally," he said.

Victoria Camron can be reached at 303-684-5226 or vcamron@times-call.com.