A woman looks at the Healthcare.gov insurance exchange website in this file photo. (Photo: AFP/Getty Images)

UnitedHealthcare plans to join New Jersey’s Obamacare health insurance exchange and sell policies that would go into effect in 2015, the company said Monday.

The move would give consumers more choices in a state whose insurance premiums are among the nation’s highest.

“Just having another (insurer) could make it cheaper for people,” said Beatriz Patino, health exchange coordinator for Ocean Health Initiatives Inc., a Toms River-based health center that helped consumers sign up for insurance through the exchange. “That’s what I hope for our next open enrollment.”

Minneapolis-based UnitedHealthcare previously sold insurance in New Jersey, but not on the exchange, the marketplace set up by the Affordable Care Act for consumers who aren’t insured through employer plans.

New Jersey is one of 36 states nationwide that opted to use a federal exchange instead of their own. A report released last week found New Jerseyans buying insurance on the exchange paid an average of $465 a month if they did not qualify for tax credits and $148 a month if they did. By comparison, the average premium for all states using the federal exchange was $346, or $82 after tax credits.

Observers said it reflected New Jersey’s high cost of living, but they also wondered if the lack of competition played a part. Just three insurers – AmeriHealth NJ, Health Republic of New Jersey and Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey – sold plans on New Jersey’s exchange last year. Meanwhile, 16 insurers in New York sold plans on its exchange.

There was little difference in average prices between the two states. But New Yorkers had far more choices, and the prices of the insurance companies’ policies varied widely.

UnitedHealthcare has been under fire from consumers in New Jersey and nationwide for reducing its provider network. For example, its Medicare Advantage plan recently dropped Meridian Health, the Shore’s biggest hospital network, after the two sides couldn’t agree on a new contract. But the insurer has said it is making the moves to slow down the rising cost of health care.

UnitedHealthcare still needs approval from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, which operates the federal exchange, to sell policies on the New Jersey marketplace.

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@app.com

HOW MUCH MORE?

34 PERCENT: Percentage more on average New Jerseyans pay each month compared with other states if they buy an Obamacare policy without tax subsidies.

80 PERCENT: Percentage more on average New Jerseyans pay each month compared with other states if they buy an Obamacare policy with tax subsidies.

Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1izXlJO