Reverend Franklin Graham is now urging Christians to vote for the “least heathen” candidate in the 2016 presidential election this fall and avoid the Left’s push for believers to avoid the ballot box when their favorites are eliminated.

Apparently not happy with the way the presidential primaries have gone so far, the son of the iconic world evangelist Reverend Billy Graham is still adamant that believers cast their ballots, come November — even though their favorite candidates might not be in the running. He is still adhering to his promise to evangelicals earlier in the campaign season not to endorse any candidate seeking to occupy the Oval office in January 2017.

"I don't care who wins and who's out there — you have to vote," Graham told CBN News in an interview in Denver, Colorado, earlier this week.

In the midst of his Decision America Tour across the country, Graham took some time to make sure that Christian voters from coast to coast do not neglect their biblical responsibility to take part in the democratic process so they can do all they can to protect the current and future generations from the effects of ungodly leadership in the nation’s capital.

The president of the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association insisted that Christians in America have a crucial duty to be involved in the electoral process in order to do their best to ensure that a leader who most closely follows and upholds biblical principles is leading the nation.

However, Graham made it clear that he is not telling anyone how to vote — just to use godly discernment and hold candidates up to God’s standards, and not simply their own.

"And I'm not going to tell people who to vote for — I'm not going to do that,” the 63-year-old evangelist expressed. “Let God tell you who to vote for.”

He does not want Christians to get caught up on personalities or stray away from focusing on the issues that should weigh the strongest on their — and God’s — hearts.

The lesser of two evils?

Implying that godly values might not be well-represented on the ballots come November, Graham argues that Christians must still vote so that laws, policies and programs going against biblical teachings will not run rampant over the next four years in the United States.

Important social issues often stressed by Graham when discussing politics include abortion, same-sex “marriage,” religious freedom, national security against Islamic terrorism and standing behind Israel as America’s key ally.

Graham, who also serves as president of Samaritan’s Purse, revealed that Leftists have infiltrated the Church in order to covertly forward the progressive agenda of the Democratic Party. He says that these promoters of the liberal agenda are aiming to take out the Christian vote so that the Leftist’s candidate will not be challenged in the election this fall.

"There is a Left movement within the evangelical community that are telling people, 'If so-and-so wins or this person wins, don't vote,’” the North Carolina native pointed out.

But Graham remained adamant that no matter how disillusioned Christians are when it comes to who’s in the running for the White House in November, they must not throw in the towel and concede the election —just because the candidate with the strongest biblical platform was knocked out of the competition.

“I'm just saying — I don't care who wins and who's out there … you have to vote," the vocal Christian leader concluded.