Program closes insurance gap for breast cancer patients

By Donna Burch CONTRIBUTING WRITER

Stana Prostran was in a bad predicament. She’d just lost her job after having a lumpectomy to remove an aggressive form of breast cancer. She was scheduled to start chemotherapy in a few days but no longer had health insurance. As a housekeeper earning a low wage, there was no way she could afford the expensive chemo and radiation treatments that her doctor had ordered.

Prostran also wasn’t a native English speaker, so it fell to her daughter, Sladjana Cadjo, to find help. Stressed over her mother’s situation, Cadjo finally got a phone call that gave her some hope. She was told to come to a local hospital and fill out a simple, one-page form.

A few days later, Cadjo learned that her mother had been approved for Medicaid. All of her cancer treatments would be covered.

“It’s basically like they came to us and said, ‘Here’s a $1 million check,’” Cadjo says. “That’s how I’m looking at it.”

Prostran’s good fortune wouldn’t have happened without Every Woman’s Life, a federally funded program that provides breast and cervical screenings for low-income, uninsured or underinsured women ages 40- 64. An additional state grant offers similar services to younger women (ages 18-39) who are experiencing symptoms of possible breast or cervical cancer.

Women who are diagnosed with breast or cervical cancer through Every Woman’s Life qualify to apply for Medicaid services and receive an accelerated decision. Most find out if they qualify within 10 business days, which is much faster than the usual waiting period.

Based on U.S. census data, there are more than 200,000 women ages 18-64 in Virginia who are eligible for the services. Unfortunately, there’s only enough funding to serve around 7,600, or about 3 percent, of the eligible population each year.

“It’s a very high demand,” says Carrie Schaeffer, social worker at Henrico Doctors’ Hospital’s Cancer Center. “In Virginia, we do not have any Medicaid expansion, so there are still thousands of people who are unable to afford health insurance even through the Affordable Care Act. They’re living paycheckto paycheck, if they even have a paycheck.

“Just a mammogram itself is $150, and that’s just a screening mammogram,” she continues. “If they need any more than that, it becomes unaffordable.”

Every Woman’s Life partners with 29 enrollment sites, including health systems, health departments and clinics, around the state. In Richmond, the program is available through HCA and Bon Secours hospitals. All partners are reimbursed for the services they provide via federal and state funding.

Many of the women who qualify fall within a service gap. They make too much money to directly qualify for Medicaid services, but not enough to afford health insurance coverage through the Affordable Care Act.

“These are women who otherwise wouldn’t have access to a regular mammogram or pap smear,” explains Christina Benton, cancer control supervisor at the Virginia Department of Health. “The goal is to detect cancer as early as possible so we can have better outcomes to treatment.”

And for those women who are diagnosed and find themselves in dire financial situations like Prostran, Every Woman’s Life provides an accelerated path to treatment that’s paid for jointly by the federal and state governments.

“If a woman has a diagnosis of cervical or breast cancer, we can help her apply for expedited Medicaid to help pay for her treatment,” Schaeffer says. “Without [Every Woman’s Life], we wouldn’t be able to get those women into the Medicaid program.”

Bon Secours Richmond is the largest provider of the program’s services in the Richmond area. There are seven clinics a month offered at six different facilities around the region, including Chesterfield’s St. Francis Medical Center and St. Francis Watkins Centre.

“We offer them different times of the day, and we also offer a Saturday clinic for women who work or have transportation issues,” says Berkeleigh Combs, Bon Secours’ EWL project supervisor. “We also give them a $10 gas card to help with transportation. It encourages them to get those preventative screenings.

“I’ve been amazed by how many women do not get their annual screening mammogram,” Combs continues. “Just since … April, we’ve had a couple of women who don’t have health insurance who have been diagnosed with breast cancer, so it’s very important. We try to inform and educate that we are available.”

For Cadjo, the Every Woman’s Life program means that her mother will get the treatment she needs. Prostran will start radiation therapy this month.

Obviously, it’s a taxing time for the family, but one thing they won’t have to worry about is how to pay for cancer treatment.

“Can you imagine the stress level, knowing you’re going for all that [treatment], but nothing is covered?” Cadjo asks. “What they did for us is a lifesaver.”

Do you qualify?

To be eligible for Every Woman’s Life services, women must be 18-64 years of age (women ages 18-39 must be symptomatic for breast or cervical cancer), reside in Virginia, have an income at or less than 200 percent of the Federal Poverty Level and have limited or no health insurance. For more information, call (866) 395-4968 or visit vahealth.org/breastcancer. Free mammography services may also be available through the Susan G. Komen Foundation (359-WELL) and Reach Out for Life (977-3920).