The debate over what to do about the crisis on the border has been dubbed "Obama's Katrina" by critics. Here are four incidents that have also been given the moniker of being the president's "Katrina moment." (Pamela Kirkland/The Washington Post)

We first tallied the number of times President Obama's critics labeled events "Obama's Katrina" in early July. We found 19 times this had happened. In the six months since, this insult has not gone out of vogue, so we decided to update the list with even more events that might be Obama's Katrina. We'll let you know when everyone agrees on one.

Not attending the march in Paris

Will Obama's failure to attend the #ParisMarch against terrorism become his "Katrina moment"? My take: http://t.co/wXftUW2dP3 — Max Boot (@MaxBoot) January 12, 2015

Will the Administration failure to join world leaders at yesterday's Paris solidarity protest prove to be Obama's diplomatic Katrina moment? — Robert Danin (@robertdanin) January 12, 2015

Ebola

CNS News: "The growing concern over the possible spread of Ebola in the United States is Barack Obama's equivalent of George W. Bush's Katrina problems."

Investor's Business Daily: "Now comes Ebola, which has the real potential to be Obama's Katrina."

#Ebola starting to feel like President Obama's Katrina. — tom ricks (@tomricks1) October 16, 2014

Hurricane Katrina

The Huffington Post: "A large number of Louisiana Republicans think President Barack Obama is to blame for the federal government's poor response to Hurricane Katrina, according to a new Public Policy Polling survey released Wednesday -- despite the fact that the storm occurred three years before he took office."

Ferguson

Tef Poe: "Ferguson is Barack Obama’s Katrina."

The BP Oil Spill

Charles Krauthammer: "In the end, speeches will make no difference. If BP can cap the well in time to prevent an absolute calamity in the gulf, the president will escape politically. If it doesn't -- if the gusher isn't stopped before the relief wells are completed in August -- it will become Obama's Katrina."

Karl Rove: "Could this be Mr. Obama's Katrina? It could be even worse."

Associated Press reporter Calvin Woodward: "Will this be Obama's Katrina? Should the federal and state governments have done more, and earlier? Did they learn the lessons of the devastating hurricane?"

Professor John Barry: "Until recently, it didn't look like this was going to be Obama's Katrina. That seemed to be a Fox News hope, rather than a reality. But from where we sit, there seems to be a lot of inaction."

Sean Hannity: "The president has not taken the lead. This is Obama's Katrina on steroids."

The NSA leaks

Jennifer Rubin: "In a way, the NSA intelligence gathering is President Obama’s Katrina."

Swine Flu

The Kansas City Star: "If the number of deaths mount, and if critics start second-guessing the speed in which the vaccine was distributed, could H1N1 become Obama's Katrina?"

The Fort Hood shooting

Human Events: "Fort Hood could become Barack Obama's Katrina."

The AIG bonuses

Ken Blackwell: "AIG is Obama's 'Katrina' -- in terms of an example of government's failure -- and the failure of presidential leadership."

The Economy

James Pinkerton: "The economy is shaping up to be Barack Obama's Katrina."

Obamacare

George E. Condon Jr.: "Press secretary Jay Carney alluded to what he called 'a messaging challenge.' But it is much more than that. It is one of those moments—like Katrina in 2005—that threatens to define the rest of his presidency."

New York Times reporter Michael D. Shear: "The disastrous rollout of his health care law not only threatens the rest of his agenda but also raises questions about his competence in the same way that the Bush administration’s botched response to Hurricane Katrina undermined any semblance of Republican efficiency."

Wolf Blitzer: "Some are suggesting, Gloria, this is President Obama's Katrina moment, referring to the blunders that President Bush made immediately after Katrina."

Democratic strategist Garry South: "This is Obama's Katrina."

Ron Fournier: "Why Obamacare May Be Obama's Katrina"

Syria

Conn Carroll: Furthermore, the dates between Obama’s Syria mess and Bush’s Katrina match up almost exactly. Hurricane Katrina landed in New Orleans on Aug. 29. Obama announced his decision to go to Congress on Syria on Aug. 28. ... Unless Obama caves to his base and nominates [Janet] Yellen, there still is a possibility Syria could become Obama’s Katrina."

Unemployment

Arianna Huffington: "The members of the Obama administration may not be attending a birthday party at John McCain's ranch in Sedona or shopping for expensive Ferragamo shoes in New York as a great American city is destroyed, but their decidedly lackadaisical response to what job losses are doing to multiple great American cities raises the question: will unemployment be Barack Obama's Katrina?"

Steven Hill: "If the White House can’t figure this out, it may end up as Obama’s “Katrina moment,” hurting the country as well as his political fortunes."

Haiti

Dr. Soumitra Eachempati: "Haiti: Obama's Katrina"

Undocumented immigrants

Texas Rep. Henry Cuellar (D): “I hope that this doesn’t become President Obama’s Katrina moment."

Rick Perry: “I think about the criticism that George W. Bush received when he didn’t go to New Orleans [during] Katrina, this is no different."

Rush Limbaugh wishes everyone would stop calling the immigrant situation Obama's Katrina due to the fact he thinks this is far worse than Katrina, because George W. Bush did not start the hurricane.

Low approval ratings

S.E. Cupp: "Could President Obama be having his Katrina moment? Actually, it might be even worse if you look at a brand-new poll I'll show you next."

Housing policy

Mickey Kaus: "Obama's Katrina: The most damaging article about Barack Obama I've read. ..."

The bank bailout

Frank Rich: A charming visit with Jay Leno won’t fix it. A 90 percent tax on bankers’ bonuses won’t fix it. Firing Timothy Geithner won’t fix it. Unless and until Barack Obama addresses the full depth of Americans’ anger with his full arsenal of policy smarts and political gifts, his presidency and, worse, our economy will be paralyzed. It would be foolish to dismiss as hyperbole the stark warning delivered by Paulette Altmaier of Cupertino, Calif., in a letter to the editor published by The Times last week: “President Obama may not realize it yet, but his Katrina moment has arrived.”

Hurricane Sandy

Sean Hannity: "I want to show you this report by our own David Lee Miller of a public housing unit in New Jersey, and -- I'm sorry, in Brooklyn -- devastated. This is Obama's Katrina"

Propane shortages in the Midwest

Steve Ahrens of the Missouri Propane Gas Association: "They need to understand -- people are calling this Obama's Katrina. It may seem a stretch, but it really is a widespread natural disaster caused by this weather."

All of the scandals

Todd Eberly: This is President Obama's Katrina moment. If he cannot regain control of the narrative, he will face the same loss of public confidence suffered by President Bush.

Everything

Ted Nugent: "Just think if the Obama-trained Fedzilla would have been in charge of the Katrina hurricane aftermath. And don't just contemplate the outcome and resultant outrage: know that Obama's most vocal supporters are the same people who so knee-jerkingly condemned the Bush FEMA debacle, yet somehow mysteriously want that same bureaucratic runaway bulldozer to take control of America's healthcare, banking and insurance businesses, and God knows what else. Would they part their hair with Kurt Cobaine's quail gun? Wild. Considering Obama and his gang of denial cultists have determined that the cure for living outside one's means is to go on a spending orgy, it only seems reasonable that their response to the Katrina flood would have been to order more water for downtown New Orleans."

Dad Jeans

Huffpost Hill: "Are Dad Jeans Obama's Katrina?"

All of these events cannot be Obama's Katrina. The president's critics will have to pick one, and get back to us. Unfortunately, they've also recycled many of the other available disastrous parallels littered throughout American history.

We've also seen...

If you're looking for a more novel scandal to use, may we recommend, Obama's XYZ affair, Obama's Conway Cabal, Obama's court packing scandal or Obama's corrupt bargain?