Letters will be sent in the coming week to the owners of 2,107 properties about the status of their challenges of the values the Boulder County Assessor's Office assigned to those properties.

At least some of those property owners were successful in making their case to the county Board of Equalization that their homes, businesses or other properties were worth less than what Assessor Jerry Roberts and his staff had initially concluded those properties were worth as of mid-2014.

Information was not available Friday about exactly how many property owners or their agents got property values at least partly reduced during the Board of Equalization process.

But the property-value reductions that did result totaled about $96.4 million, according to Barbara Garner, the Board of Equalization's appeals coordinator.

Higher property values, such as those Roberts and his staff initially assigned to many of the 117,594 residential, commercial and industrial properties in Boulder County, are likely to result in higher property tax bills, starting with taxes coming due next year.

Boulder County commissioners are technically also the Board of Equalization, although hearings on challenges to the county assessor's property-value decisions are conducted by independent officers appointed by the board.

Advertisement

On Thursday, county commissioners approved the 2015 Board of Equalization staff's final appeals reports. Garner said letters are expected to sent sometime between Monday and Thursday, formally notifying the petitioning property owners of the board's property-value determinations.

Those letters also will tell property owners that if they disagree with the Board of Equalization's decisions, they'll still have options for further appeals — either to the State Board of Assessment Appeals, or to Boulder County District Court, or a binding arbitration procedure. But they'll have to file those further appeals within 30 days after being mailed the Board of Equalization decision.

Garner told county commissioners that of the 2,107 appeal petitions filed with the Board of Equalization, 26 were withdrawn.

In 323 cases, property owners or their agents waived being heard by the county board officers. They decided instead to bypass the Board of Equalization and to advance directly to the state assessment appeals panel, district court or arbitration.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc