<p>Mark Harmon</p>

Earlier this summer Tennessee U.S. Sen. Bob Corker left what amounts to a hidden message in his newsletter. At first glance the story looks like standard Republican fare, ignoring recent good economic news in order to stress debt.

Corker was referencing Senate Budget Committee hearings and the back-and-forth with Congressional Budget Office Director Keith Hall. In the newsletter Corker praises himself for raising “concerns about the country being unprepared for another financial crisis due to Congress’ inaction on real fiscal reforms.”

The reference to another financial crisis is key here. Corker in July 2010 voted against the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act that cracked down on credit default swaps and subprime mortgages — key factors in the corporate abuses that nearly tanked the global economy. In fact, two months before Corker voted against reforms he voted in favor of a failed attempt to weaken the law. Corker’s career campaign donation haul from banking, finance, real estate and securities/investments interests exceeds $5.4 million.

Three times between late 2008 and mid-2009 Corker voted against the stimulus bills that helped revive our economy following the crash. In 2013 he even voted against disaster relief appropriations.

So what are the “real” changes Corker favors? One recent analysis of the budget plan Corker favors summarized it fairly well. It would make, over the course of a decade, approximately a 40 percent cut in college aid, food assistance and tax credits for the working poor. It would push 16 million people into poverty or deeper into poverty starting in 2017. Meanwhile, it would leave untouched nearly a trillion dollars in annual tax breaks overwhelmingly benefitting those at the top of the tax brackets.

By the way, Corker also favors lower taxes on capital gains, the largest source of income for the non-working rich. The top tax rate you or I may pay on our earned income is 36.9 percent, but the unearned capital gains tax rate has gone from 33 percent in the late 1980s to but 20 percent today.

Corker also supports another budget buster, eliminating the inheritance tax. Current law is you can leave an unlimited amount untaxed to your spouse, and after that the first $10,680,000 of your estate is untaxed, but that’s not enough for Corker and his wealthy benefactors.

Boston College’s Center on Wealth and Philanthropy documents we are at the start of the largest intergenerational wealth transfer in history — an astounding $59 trillion passing down to heirs between 2007 and 2061. Corker would have it all proceed untaxed just like in the good old days of feudal lords.

So after locking in tax breaks for the wealthy and trying to return to the scary world of Wall Street deregulation, what does Corker push for? He and Tennessee’s other U.S. senator, Lamar Alexander, are pushing a bill to slash the benefits you’ve paid to get from Social Security and Medicare.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act has extended the solvency of Medicare’s hospital insurance trust fund by at least seven years. The Congressional Budget Office says ACA also has reduced the federal budget deficit, and repealing ACA would explode the budget deficit. Yet Corker favors repealing ACA.

So when Corker writes about financial crisis and fiscal reform, recognize that for what it really is — a desperate cry for help. He’s really saying “Somebody stop me before I legislate again.”

Mark Harmon is a professor of journalism and electronic media at the University of Tennessee and a member of the Tennessee Democratic Party Executive Committee. He may be reached at markdharmon@yahoo.com.