(Spencer Heyfron)

A surgeon, a triathlete, and a proud family man, as well as one of TV’s most respected medical correspondents, Sanjay Gupta says he juggles so many jobs because “there are really important stories to tell.”

Go behind the scenes of Dr. Gupta’s photo shoot in the video below, and get even more of the good doctor’s stay-healthy tips here.

[onescreen item=”5146690″ playerFill=”width”]

Anchorman Anderson Cooper recalls with embarrassment the first time he met his CNN colleague Dr. Sanjay Gupta, in 2001. “So what are you, a brain surgeon?” joked Cooper. Actually, yes, said Gupta, a practicing neurosurgeon.

Gupta, who turns 44 on Oct. 23, is instantly recognizable as CNN’s globe-trotting chief medical correspondent. He regularly reports from far-flung hot spots, including the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. “Sanjay’s all in!” says Cooper, who’s been with Gupta covering the aftermaths of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, the earthquake in Haiti, tsunamis in southeast Asia and Japan, and more. “He’s incredibly committed to seeing things for himself and informing people.”

What most viewers don’t know is that when he’s home in Atlanta, Gupta operates on patients’ brains and spines at least one day a week at Grady Memorial Hospital, where he is associate chief of neurosurgery. “You can have immediate healing through operations, and it’s gratifying,” he says. On a recent Monday, having returned only days before from the Middle East, he did four surgeries between 6:30 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. “There were breaks,” says Gupta, whose OR playlists include hip-hop and the Red Hot Chili Peppers for opening and closing spinal surgeries, when something “a little raucous” is called for, and music that’s “more chill,” like Coldplay, during operations.

Sanjay Gupta says that in trips to trouble spots like ­Afghanistan he’s learned to “duct-tape my passport and cash to my body at night and never sit with my back to the street.” (Danielle Dellorto/CNN/Time Warner)

The whip-smart and friendly Dr. Gupta you see on TV is the same man you meet in person. He credits his wife, family law attorney Rebecca Olson Gupta, with helping him adapt to being on camera. “Early on, she told me, ‘You should just pretend you’re talking to your patients,’ ” he says. “I was comfortable in that role, and it set the right level of language and empathy.”

Gupta only speaks his mind on an issue once he has thoroughly researched and weighed it. In August, he made headlines by endorsing medical marijuana after previously taking a stand against it. “Not only can it work, but it can work when nothing else does,” he says. A White House fellow during the Clinton administration and a candidate in 2009 to become surgeon general (Gupta withdrew his name largely because he learned that the job would, ironically, mean giving up surgery), he applauds the Affordable Care Act, calling it “an important step.” But he cautions that offering most Americans access to insurance is not a cure-all. “If you don’t make America healthier, you’re not going to control costs,” he says. “And ultimately that’s what we have to do.”

He has always been an overachiever, enrolling at age 16 in an accelerated joint college and medical school program at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, where he was president of the Indian American Student Association and sang baritone in the glee club. Today, in addition to his work at Grady and CNN (the latter includes a weekly show, Sanjay Gupta, MD), he’s an assistant professor of neurosurgery at Emory University; contributes pieces to CBS’s 60 Minutes; does videos and blog posts for EverydayHealth.com; and has published three books, including a novel, Monday Mornings, that briefly became a TV series last winter. “He has a deep-seated need to be busy,” says his mother, Damyanti Gupta.

But wait, there’s more: Gupta competes in triathlons (he mastered swimming via YouTube videos), writes poetry (he proposed to Rebecca with a poem), is scribbling away at a new novel (he has written 400 pages but says “the majority will never get used”), and is an involved parent to three daughters, ages 8, 6, and 4 (“He sings a song to the girls every night and will actually practice the song so he does a good job,” says his wife). How does he do it all? “I get by on five or six hours of sleep,” says Gupta. “And I get up early, by five.”

A first-generation Indian-American, Gupta grew up with a younger brother in Novi, Mich., where his immigrant parents were engineers at Ford Motor Company. (A loyalist, Gupta drives a Ford Lincoln Navigator and a Jaguar bought when the British carmaker was owned by Ford.) He encountered prejudice and bullying in his small community. “It was tough being a kid who looked different and had a different-sounding name,” he says. Wanting to fit in, young Sanjay proposed changing his name to Steve (inspired by Steve Austin of TV’s The Six Million Dollar Man). His mother talked him out of it. “I told him to be proud of his name, that one day everyone would know it because of the wonderful things he was going to do,” she recalls.

Mom was right. Nowadays, people hail Gupta by name in airports and on the street, eager to discuss a story he’s done or tell him their medical woes. He listens with real interest, often despite nudges from colleagues in a hurry. “I enjoy those conversations,” says Gupta. “It’s why I do this.”

Related

How to Build a Good Relationship with Your Doctor: Sanjay Gupta’s Top Tips

The Sneezin’ Season: How to Avoid Getting Sick This Winter

12 Ways to Keep You and Your Family Healthy

6 Things You Didn’t Know About Dr. Sanjay Gupta