According to the American Legislative Exchange Council, a nonpartisan organization of state legislators, Tennessee’s Department of Correction 2013 annual budget was around $899.2 million, or around $24,500 per prisoner. (Photo: Getty Images / iStockphoto) Story Highlights Faith-based program Men of Valor helps with male inmates' rehabilitation.

Given the hyper-partisanship that has come to characterize Washington, D.C., these days, it’s easy to become cynical of the entire process. But in recent months, there has been a bipartisan push to reform our country’s criminal justice system, including taking a look at our minimum mandatory sentences.

Additionally, there has been interest in looking at ways to reduce our country’s recidivism rate — the rate in which former inmates are reincarcerated. As the executive director of Men of Valor, a local nonprofit that ministers to the incarcerated in the Metro Davidson County Detention Center, this national conversation is particularly personal.

Moreover, this national discussion also is sparking a conversation at the state level, including here in Tennessee, which was only one of 28 states that saw an increase in the state’s prisoner population in recent years, according to a report by the Prison Policy Initiative.

This unfortunate growth translates into an additional financial burden for our state’s treasury. According to the American Legislative Exchange Council, a nonpartisan organization of state legislators, Tennessee’s Department of Correction 2013 annual budget was around $899.2 million, or around $24,500 per prisoner.

And in a few years, it will most likely reach $1 billion. This does not include jail costs, court costs, police, judges, lawyers and "hidden costs” such as health care, welfare, lost taxes, victim costs, additional law enforcement and increased homelessness.

These numbers are sobering, but as the executive director of an organization that is working directly with the incarcerated and the formerly incarcerated, I know that the real tragedy of our overcrowded prisons is the human cost. Men in our prison system means that there are missing husbands and fathers in our community. This pain is especially tough during the holiday season.

Raul Lopez (Photo: Submitted)

For years, Men of Valor has been operating thanks to the generosity and support of our local community, which understands that we must do more to ensure that the incarcerated are treated with the dignity and respect that they deserve. More importantly, Men of Valor knows that there are stories of redemption waiting to be told.

As a faith-based organization, we believe that character transformation happens through the gospel of Jesus Christ. We know that our faith-based approach will not appeal to everyone, but we are committed to staying true to our principles and core beliefs.

What’s more, we are seeing real results with our approach. Whereas the national recidivism rate is around 70 percent, according to the Bureau of Justice Statistics, men who complete our in-prison and out-of-prison Men of Valor programs see a drop in the recidivism rate to around 10 percent. This happens thanks to the hard work of our full-time staff, but also as a result of our hundreds of volunteers who are taking time from their busy lives to spend time ministering with the incarcerated.

Change doesn’t happen overnight. There are many stories of former prisoners who went through our program that would relapse upon being released and find themselves back in prison. We never judge or give up on them.

One of these men is Anthony Charles, who goes by “AC” and today leads our Men of Valor reintegration program. He is able to relate to the men we minister to as a former inmate and someone who knows what it feels like to walk out of prison with nowhere to go and no one to see.

As our state and federal policymakers consider reforms to our criminal justice system, including ways to reduce our recidivism rate, it’s important that they consider the contributions of local nonprofits, like Men of Valor, that are ready to stand shoulder to shoulder in order to prepare the incarcerated for life outside prison walls.

Raul Lopez is the executive director of Men of Valor, a local nonprofit, faith-based organization dedicated to rehabilitating the incarcerated. For more information, please visit www.men-of-valor.org.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1R4IJlE