The two women battling for Senator Jay Rockefeller's seat in the U.S. Senate went toe-to-toe Tuesday night in an hour long debate, covering minimum wage, to the coal industry and everything in between.



Representative Shelley Moore Capito (R) had the chance to start things off with her opening statement. In it, she said that she wanted to get Washington for us, the people of West Virginia, and get rid of President Obama's agenda. Secretary of State Natalie Tennant (D) bounced back in her opening statement saying this isn't about President Obama, and it's her name on the ballot and not the president's. She claimed this race is about West Virginia, saying she's for the people and has even saved them tax dollars.

Throughout the debate, both women took jabs at each other. Tennant attacked Capito's voting records, claiming Capito talks about one thing but her voting records show the opposite. Capito said Tennant is supporting President Obama's agenda, which is hurting West Virginians. She also pleaded with Tennant to stop personal attacks on her and her family. Tennant said Capito started the personal attacks in July.

Both candidates said Tuesday night that Obama's proposal to limit carbon emissions from coal-fired power plants hurts coal jobs.

When asked about increasing minimum wage in the Mountain State, Representative Capito said that we need to look at the ramifications of raising it and that it should be debated. She said she thought she would look favorably at raising the minimum wage. Tennant, who wants to see minimum wage increased to $10.10/hour, responded that Capito's votes in Washington say different and that $15,000 a year is simply not enough for hardworking families.

When it comes to the Affordable Care Act, Capito and Tennant may have seen eye to eye on one aspect of it. Neither want people with pre-existing conditions to be penalized. Capito said she would like to keep what's good but replace the bad with what will work. Tennant said she wouldn't appeal it, citing personal experiences with her daughter, Delaney.

When faced with the tough question on how we should be dealing with ISIS and whether or not American boots should be on the ground, Secretary Tennant said she doesn't think we've exhausted all other options and that she would need more information from Congress before saying a definitive time of if or when that action should be taken. Representative Capito said she thinks we're having this problem because the President's policies were weak in Iraq. She said she voted to arm trained Syrian rebels, so there was a coalition of people to go in and stop ISIS.

While their stances were different throughout the debate, both candidates had similar thoughts regarding the future of gay marriage. Both ended up saying they would support whatever West Virginia decides.

The general election is November 4.