Republican Elephant (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

It’s disturbing to observe how disrespectful Republicans are to President Obama. The economy is up and unemployment is down. The Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) has proved successful beyond most predictions because health care delivery is improved and health care costs are reduced. Additionally, 20 million more Americans now have affordable health coverage, three million young adults stayed on their parents’ health insurance, and nearly 129 million Americans with pre-existing conditions are now protected from discriminatory practices.

As reported in magazines and recent books by Michael Grunwald and Roger Draper, the Republican plot to obstruct President Obama began with secret meetings even before he was inaugurated. The strategy Republicans settled on was to obstruct everything that President Obama supported, then to blame Democrats for the resulting damage. It’s probable that these Republican schemers were encouraged by rich donors who are faithfully served via advantageous legislation. Additionally, Republicans at that time were comfortable with the make-up of the Supreme Court. South Dakota’s Sen. John Thune may not have attended these secret meetings. Never-the-less, he and the future two elected officials from S.D. have willingly joined other Republican sheep in Washington who support this nefarious plot.

The results of this obstruction can now be told. As one small segment of the story, Republicans proceeded to block every veterans’ support bill. These bills included: a bill to help millions of unemployed veterans find work; a bill to provide job security to wounded veterans; a bill to reauthorize help for homeless veterans; a bill to help finance home structural alterations for disabled veterans; a bill supporting a Veterans Business Center; and a bill to support veteran entrepreneurs. Every single one of these bills would have helped veterans and every single one was killed exclusively by Republican opposition. The sad thing is that when reports say “both sides do it,” people get mixed up about who should get their vote, or people decide not to even bother to vote. The American Legion phrased its report as “Senate vote on veterans’ bills was inexcusable.” It’s amazing how Republicans can say with a straight face that they are friends of veterans, but they do.

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1N2N6wT