Another tech-related company has taken over a formerly foreclosed building in Orlando, this time on Sand Lake Road in Crownepointe Commerce Park.

Web Benefits Design, which specializes in online benefits administration software and analytics, bought all the units in the mostly vacant, foreclosed office condo building at 4725 W. Sand Lake Road.

The company has occupied the entire third floor with about 45 employees. The building was built by developer Art Neaf of Isleworth, in an ornate style with stone, tile and a large dome at the front.

“I want to hire people right now. I would hire 50 people if I could, if they were qualified,” said Bethany Schenk, president and COO of Web Benefits Design. Over three years, the company hopes to fill the building and up to 300 people, she said.

The company is one of several new stars in benefits administration technology, including PlanSource, which is based in the formerly vacant Exchange Building in Church Street in downtown Orlando.

Web Benefits Design bought this building on Sand Lake Road Web Benefits Design Web Benefits Design

Mayor Buddy Dyer is set to speak at the company headquarters during an opening ceremony at 3 p.m. Tuesday. So far, the company hasn’t applied for any public incentive money, Schenk said.

She said starting salary for people with no prior experience would be in the high 30,000s or low 40,000s. The company is also hiring programmers at higher salaries, she said. The jobs are listed on CareerBuilder.com. One job listing for a COBRA benefits administrator was posted Monday for $39,000.

Schenk and her husband Ron Schenk, CEO, bought the former condo office building in April. They removed the large, classic style fountain with nude figures.

The company employs programmers, customer service, and salespeople who work on commission.

“Our business is really booming with Obamacare,” Schenk said. “We help employees decide how to put health and other benefits online, and how to generate the government-mandated reports. It’s not just medical, it’s also dental, vision, 401k, and other benefits.”