There is a great need here, and it's worth spending a career trying to be part of the community.

John Waits always knew he wanted to use his medical degree to do some good.

A Tuscaloosa native, he originally thought about going into the international mission field. Later he decided to look for an underserved area closer to home.

After he completed his obstetrics fellowship in 2004 at the University of Alabama, he left Tuscaloosa for rural Bibb County – and never looked back.

"After two or three months of being here, I realized this was there I was needed – this was the mission field," said Waits. He's now the CEO and residency director at Cahaba Medical Care, where he has been a family doctor and obstetrician for the past 11 years.

Cahaba is a Federally Qualified Health Center – meaning it's a primary source of medical care for those who are uninsured or who have Medicaid – and serves people primarily from rural Bibb and Perry Counties.

"There is a great need here, and it's worth spending a career trying to be part of the community, to make this a nice place to live and help your neighbors."

One goal he's had on his mind since 2004: reopening the long-shuttered labor & delivery unit at Bibb Medical Center.

The hospital is a five-minute walk from Waits' practice in Centreville. But the women in Bibb County and surrounding areas who see Waits or his fellow physicians for prenatal care must make the 45-minute drive to DCH Regional Medical Center in Tuscaloosa to safely deliver their babies.

The closing of rural labor & delivery units is a statewide trend that has worsened in recent years, leaving Alabama's rural mothers – many of whom live in impoverished or underserved communities – with fewer and fewer birth choices.

But thanks to a remarkable collaboration between Waits' practice and Bibb Medical Center's leadership, a federal grant, a capital investment and more than a few crossed fingers, a brand-new labor & delivery unit is scheduled to open at Bibb Medical Center this September.

"It's been a labor of love," said Waits, "no pun intended."

It's also a process that Waits believes could be replicated at the dozens of other rural hospitals around Alabama that have lost their labor & delivery units over the past several decades, due in large part to a lack of funding and a dearth of rural family physicians.

A troubling trend

Today, just 17 out of 54 designated-rural Alabama counties have hospitals with labor & delivery wards. That's down sharply from 46 rural counties in 1980.

The L&D department at Bibb Medical Center closed around 1999. For many pregnant women who come to Cahaba Medical Care for prenatal care – nearly 100 percent of whom qualify for Medicaid – getting to a faraway hospital isn't easy.

In 2012, Waits said, 7-10 percent of households in Bibb County didn't have a car. That number was even bigger in nearby Perry County. "A much larger percentage (in Bibb County) only had one car per household," said Waits, "which is just as much trouble when you have a spouse that works.

"On average, especially for younger women pregnant with their first baby, it's not uncommon to need two or three visits to the hospital to rule out labor or other complications. Transportation by ambulance is not the best solution."

Britni Brown is a medical assistant at Cahaba and a mother of five. She's delivered all of her children at DCH, including a set of twins who came six weeks early. She said she often worried whether her doctor – Dr. Waits, in her case – would be able to meet her there in time.

"You don't want to walk into a building and not know who is going to deliver you," she said. "They don't know my medical history. Being able to deliver so close would be so beneficial."

She has heard stories from women whose water broke at home and labor progressed quickly as they tried to get to Tuscaloosa.

"They were stressed they were going to have a baby in an ambulance," she said. "In our community, the patients will feel more comfortable knowing they are just steps away from the hospital."

A lack of prenatal care

While Waits and Dr. Lacy Smith, Cahaba's chief medical officer, were residents at the University of Alabama, they spent time researching the effect of labor & delivery closures on rural healthcare.

They found that when labor & delivery units closed at rural hospitals, prenatal care gradually dried up as local physicians stopped offering obstetrical services. Driving longer distances – in many cases more than an hour each way – for a monthly or weekly prenatal appointment is just not feasible for women who lack access to transportation, money for gas, or who work jobs where they can't afford to take leave.

According to the Alabama Rural Health Association, in 2013 more than a quarter of expectant mothers in rural areas in Alabama had less than adequate prenatal care, which can lead to health complications for both mother and baby, and higher rates of infant and maternal mortality.

How Bibb County became the exception

Bibb Medical Center, bucking the statewide trend, has found a way to reinstate its labor & delivery department. The hospital broke ground in early May, and a four-unit L&D is scheduled to open in September.

So how did they do it?

First of all, said Waits, the community's medical providers had to lay the groundwork by first making all parts of the local healthcare system a priority.

"An average OBGYN couldn't do what we're doing (bringing back an L&D department) because there's not enough volume in this county," said Waits. He estimates his practice sees about 70-100 deliveries a year, out of about 200-240 deliveries total in the county. Many of the other deliveries are to upper middle-class women who have private insurance and choose to drive to Birmingham or Tuscaloosa to deliver and to receive prenatal care.

Because of the low obstetrical volume – a problem for many of Alabama's rural hospitals that shuttered their L&D departments – it was all the more important for the hospital to be on sound financial footing in other departments.

"We had to keep all the other aspects of family medicine alive," Waits said. "We (the physicians in the area) work in the ER. We work in the nursing home. We work in the clinic. We see inpatients in the hospital. We've made every other piece of this healthcare system work, which has kept the hospital itself viable without labor & delivery."

Smith applied for and received an expanded medical services grant available from the federal government through the Affordable Care Act. That gave Cahaba Medical Center the ability to hire a fourth physician to perform obstetrics, and to hire the personnel necessary to staff a labor & delivery department at Bibb Medical Center.

"The hospital healthcare authority, seeing our gesture of trust, was willing to make a $1 million-plus capital investment in a four-unit labor & delivery, trusting that we're going to help staff this thing and not change our minds," Waits explained.

Offering prenatal care during the years without an L&D department was also crucial, said Smith. It was easier to make the case for a profitable L&D, she said, because "we could already come to (the hospital) and say we have a ready 60-100 deliveries per year the moment you open. If we weren't doing prenatal care here, then that startup time would have been much longer."

A new model

Could this model of collaboration be replicated at other Alabama hospitals? Waits thinks so.

"It's not as insurmountable as it sounds," he said. "There are family doctors coming out (of medical school and residency programs) that want to do obstetrics," he said. "There are hospitals that would love to offer Labor & Delivery again.

"The amount of anticipated (financial) loss, two or three years into a program, is really minimal. It's just the startup inertia of a group of doctors wanting to do it and a hospital being willing to reinvest."

It takes around $150,000 per year to train a resident physician during her three-year residency, said Waits. But that investment could provide a larger return within that physician's first year of practice.

"In the resident's first year of practice, their impact on a rural community is $1.3 million," said Waits, quoting a study done by the Alabama Rural Health Association. "That's in terms of pharmacy, hospital, employees, tax revenue, durable medical equipment, peripheral jobs."

Hospitals across the state have closed their doors in the past several decades – 46 since 1969, many in rural areas .

With a committed group of physicians, a willing hospital and additional funding – which admittedly, aren't always easy to come by – the case can be made for reversing course in the hospitals that are left in Alabama's rural areas. Labor & Delivery departments can be financially feasible; but it may take more of a concerted grassroots-style effort by doctors who see Alabama's most underserved populations as a mission worth undertaking.