KALAMAZOO, MI – One of Kalamazoo's two major hospitals is laying off part of its workforce and is issuing layoff notices Thursday, a spokesman for Borgess Medical Center confirmed.

"Communication with all 4,100 Borgess associates is taking place at this time. Reductions will not eliminate services or change the nearly 125-year-old Borgess commitment to providing patient-center care to southwest Michigan residents," said Lew Tysman, senior public relations specialist for Borgess Health.

"In consideration of those associates adversely impacted, Borgess will not provide specific numbers by category or department."

Layoffs will take effect over the next several weeks, said Tysman in a phone interview. He declined to provide the total number of layoffs or percentage of employees affected.

The layoffs at Borgess are taking place amid belt-tightening and staff reductions at hospitals nationwide. Factors cited include everything from more baby boomers reaching 65, which means their health care is covered by Medicare as opposed to private health insurance; changes to the industry as a result of the Affordable Care Act; and lower Medicare reimbursements to hospitals mandated as a result of the government sequester, which took effect in April.

In October, USA Today reported that health care providers announced 8,128 layoffs in September – more than any other industry. As of October, 41,085 health care workers had been laid off nationwide in 2013.



Under the sequester, which took effect in April, Medicare reimbursements to hospitals were cut by 2 percent, according to the American Hospital Association. Also as a result of the sequester, the National Institutes of Health reduced hospital funding by 5 percent. Under the Affordable Care Act, hospitals that have high readmission rates or provided lower levels of care would see their Medicare payments reduced.

Borgess cited the impact of Medicare payment reductions as the reason for its layoffs.

"The impact of Medicare payment reductions related to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) necessitates Borgess to reduce our total associate workforce," Tysman said. "The existing regulator Medicare reductions that span a 10-year period (2012–2022) are significant and exceed $140M over the 10-year implementation of the ACA. Since 2012, the reductions are about $10 million a year and increase over time."

Kalamazoo's other major health-care provider, Bronson Healthcare, announced cost-cutting measures, including a wage freeze, last month, but as of now those do not include layoffs.

"At this time, we don't have any plans to do any layoffs," said Erin Smith, media spokeswoman for Bronson Healthcare, on Thursday.



In a November letter to employees, Bronson Healthcare announced it would not be giving raises in 2014, citing "considerable changes" to the health-care industry. The wage freeze would save Bronson $6.4 million a year, the letter said.

Other cost-cutting measures announced by Bronson include: re-designing the gainshare program, which operates similar to performance-based incentives, as well as eliminating incentive pay for on-call staff and casual staff at Bronson Methodist Hospital and Bronson Battle Creek, who would be renamed "contingency staff."

The letter said that the government sequester, which took effect in April, reduced payments to Bronson by "approximately 900,000 per month."

"We know this news is disappointing and difficult for everyone, but these actions are critical in order to keep Bronson strong for our patients, their families and for our communities. We appreciate your understanding as we manage through a dynamic healthcare environment," read the letter by Frank Sardone, president and CEO of Bronson Healthcare.