Morning MoneyBeat is the Journal’s pre-market primer packed with market updates, insights and must-read news links. To receive this morning newsletter via email, click here: http://on.wsj.com/MoneyBeatUSSignup

MARKET SNAP: At 06:20 a.m. ET, S&P 500 futures down 0.03%. Treasurys yield lower at 2.091%. Nymex up 2.23% at $50.53; gold 0.96% higher at $1155.30. In Europe, FTSE 100 up 0.94%, DAX up 1.21% and CAC 40 up 0.99%. In Asia, Nikkei 225 up 1.64% and Hang Seng up 0.46%.

WATCH FOR: 8:30 a.m. EDT. Sept. Import Prices. [Expected -0.5% vs. -1.8% in Aug.]; 10 a.m. EDT. Aug. Wholesale Trade. [Expected 0.1% vs. -0.1% in July.]

THE BREAKFAST BRIEFING

Alcoa Inc.’s results could be a bad omen for what’s to come for stocks.

Thursday the aluminum giant kicked off third-quarter earnings season with results that missed analyst expectations. Shares of the company are down 4.2% premarket Friday, and if losses hold through the close, they could bode poorly for stocks over the next several months.

Alcoa lost its bellwether status years ago and was dropped from the Dow Jones Industrial Average in September 2013.

Based on data compiled by Schaeffer’s Investment Research, Alcoa’s results suggest investors shouldn’t count on a fourth-quarter rally.

When Alcoa’s stock price fell the session after it reported quarterly results, the S&P 500 was only positive 56% of the time one and three months later over the past decade. In the 25 times that’s happened since 2005, the index rose an average 0.1% a month later. But it fell an average 0.1% three months out.

Conversely, when Alcoa shares rose the day after earnings, the large-cap S&P index typically gained a month and three months later, advancing an average 1.7% and 3.1%, respectively, according to Schaeffer’s.

“I’m not sure how much I would base my trading on this one particular data point, but it has been a pretty good forecast for the market,” said Rocky White, a quantitative analyst at Schaeffer’s.

The fourth quarter is a seasonally strong time and Wall Street strategists predict the S&P 500 will finish the year 6.4% higher than where it closed Thursday, according to 21 strategists followed by Birinyi Associates. But there are a batch of headwinds that could keep a lid on equities the next few months, including lackluster earnings, slow global growth, a potential showdown in Washington over the debt ceiling and geopolitical developments.

Profits for the S&P 500 are expected to decline 5.5% in the third quarter, according to FactSet. That would lead to an earnings recession (two straight quarters of negative growth) and represent the biggest decline in quarterly profits since the third quarter of 2009 when they fell nearly 16%.

While past performance is never a perfect indicator of future returns, Alcoa’s results, which showed a year-over-year drop in earnings and revenues, resemble the weakness expected from third-quarter profits. And they could be a harbinger for market performance over the next several months.

Morning MoneyBeat Daily Factoid: This day in 1967, Che Guevara, an Argentine socialist revolutionary and guerilla leader, was killed by the Bolivian army at the age of 39.

-By Kristen Scholer

STOCKS TO WATCH

Alcoa shares dipped in thin premarket trade after the aluminum producer said it now expects 2015 automotive production growth in China to be in the range of 1% to 2%, down from a previous outlook of 5% to 8% growth. Alcoa’s results are considered the unofficial kickoff of earnings season.

Shares of Gap could see some pressure after the fashion retailer reported late Thursday that total sales fell 1% in September, hit by a stronger dollar and weakness for its Banana Republic unit.

Shares of Apple could be active after two reports out Thursday showed continued declines in personal-computer shipments, but Apple‘s market share increasing.

MUST READS (LINKS)

Global Stocks Rally as Fed Remains Uneasy on Inflation: Global stocks rallied Friday following the release of minutes from the U.S. Federal Reserve’s September meeting Thursday that further reduced investor expectations for a U.S. interest rate rise this year.

Fed’s Rate Delay Spurred by Worry Over Low Inflation, Minutes Show: Federal Reserve officials held off on raising short-term interest rates at their September policy meeting because of worries that inflation could remain stuck at exceptionally low levels, according to minutes released Thursday.

Bill Gross Seeks Millions in Pimco Suit: Bond investor Bill Gross gave his first public account of the circumstances that drove him out of the firm he co-founded, saying in a lawsuit his former colleagues aligned against him to advance their own careers and capture some of his hefty bonus.

Why Kevin McCarthy Came to Quit Speaker Race: In an interview with The Wall Street Journal, the House majority leader said he had concluded that what had become a painful and potentially ugly process of securing the required 218 votes would ultimately hobble him in doing the job.

Nobel Peace Prize Awarded to Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet: The Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet, a civil-society group comprising labor-union and business leaders, human-rights activists and lawyers, was awarded the 2015 Nobel Peace Prize on Friday.

Debt Markets Hold Key to Dell’s Bold EMC Bid: Michael Dell is pressing ahead with partner Silver Lake on a $50 billion-plus acquisition of data-storage giant EMC, people familiar with the matter said, a bold but risky deal that would require massive debt financing at a time when credit markets have become less hospitable to mergers.

UAW Rallying Support for Fiat Chrysler Contract with Promise of Higher Wages: Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, agreed to boost a top wage rate as it gradually overhauls a controversial factory-worker pay system, handing a victory to the United Auto Workers union that had threatened to strike.

Gentlemen May Prefer Bonds, But More Traders Take Stocks: Wall Street’s trading business is going through a profound change—and bonds are on the wrong side of it.

WSJ Survey: Economists Still See Fed Rate Increase in 2015: Economists are taking Federal Reserve officials at their word. About 64% of respondents to The Wall Street Journal’s monthly survey of economists now say the Fed’s Dec. 15-16 meeting will culminate with the first rate rise in nearly a decade.