Thinking up new ways to improve medical care, even incrementally, is hard enough.

The more daunting challenge is transferring those ideas from the drawing board to everyday practice.

A two-year-old upstart launched within Roper St. Francis Healthcare is looking to bridge that gap.

The big hospital system’s Clinical Biotechnology Research Institute in downtown Charleston is unveiling its second act, what it calls “the innovation arm.”

It has lined up nearly $400,000 from donors to fund the effort, which it expects to become self-sufficient. The Medical Society of South Carolina, which is made up of Roper physicians, has contributed $250,000.

Part of the plan is get Roper medical professionals to meet regularly with an expert “idea extractor” to discuss and identify needs they glean from working with patients.

“We’re trying to give doctors the tools to transform themselves from users of new technology to creators of it,” said Dr. Jacobo Mintzer, director of the biotech institute.

The proposals might range from the “trivial to the sublime,” he said. Some suggestions have included minor changes in clinical procedures and new ways of keeping track of operating room instruments.

At the same time, the center is hiring a technology transfer expert to evaluate more ambitious ideas or promising research that could be turned into viable businesses, and then work to raise money to cover prototypes and other start-up expenses.

Proposals are being solicited both inside and outside Roper.

“We are very open. We are an equal-opportunity idea receiver,” Mintzer said.

2 goals

Roper established the biotech research institute in March 2013 in a fifth-floor wing of its Calhoun Street hospital. Its purpose was twofold.

The first objective was to incorporate more clinical research into everyday care, usually in the form of a government-approved experimental drug, Mintzer said. Today, researchers are at work on studies from six specialties, including primary care, oncology and dermatology.

“The goal would be that every patient across the system who has a disease that is not completely treatable ... would, if they so desire, be able to receive cutting-edge treatment,” he said.

The innovation part of the equation came next.

“We had to create a structure that includes clinical research operations, marketing, regulatory, contracts, finance and accounting,” Mintzer said. “Now, when we had this structure together we looked at the other commitment that we had. That ... was to bring new technology to South Carolina.”

The state hasn’t exactly been a slouch in this area, he noted. The Boeing 787 operation in North Charleston and the BMW plant in Greer are prime examples from the manufacturing field.

“However, it has been less energetic in doing it in the ‘bio’ part of biotechnology,” Mintzer added.

As the energetic Argentina native sees it, a big hospital system is an ideal place to nurture that industry from the ground up.

“Most of the innovation comes through small biotech companies. And most of the ideas come from clinicians who are seeing everyday patients,” he said.

The rub is many doctors lack the time or the expertise to turn their million-dollar ideas into businesses.

“There is a big gap to be filled,” said Mintzer, who stressed the Roper initiative won’t duplicate other local biotech booster efforts. “It requires capital and the know-how to use this capital to develop the product to the point that it can be acquired by a larger company or be commercialized by itself.”

1st investment

Neuroquest is a case in point. Created inside the Weizmann Institute of Science, the small Israeli company’s chief scientist, Dr. Michal Schwartz, has developed a marker that, in theory, can identify brain lesions associated with Alzheimer’s disease 10 to 15 years before the onset of any symptoms. It could lead to more effective treatments or even a cure.

The problem is “the technology has been stuck” within the lab at Weizmann for the same reasons so many other promising ideas never make it to market, said Mintzer, himself an expert in Alzheimer’s and a former Medical University of South Carolina phyisician.

“So we did the due diligence, and we thought the technology has a future,” he said.

Roper and other backers, including The InterTech Group of North Charleston and the S.C. Research Authority, invested about $1 million in Neuroquest after a state trade mission to Israel in late 2012. The early tests from a medical outsourcing firm in Australia are encouraging, Mintzer said. By some estimates, Neuroquest is now valued at as much as $8 million, from virtually nothing three years ago.

“Now, after the completion of all preliminary studies, we’re at the stage where we’re about to establish the U.S. headquarters for the company here, start a large North American study with participation of major universities and complete a second round of investment,” Mintzer said.

The hope is that the business will mature to the point that it will need more workers and more space, perhaps the SCRA Innovation Center on upper Meeting Street or at the emerging Horizon project near MUSC.

As for Mintzer and his staff, the task at hand is to uncover more opportunities like Neuroquest. He vowed that at least two more companies will be “up and running” and incubating along with Neuroquest on the fifth floor at Roper Hospital by the end of the year.

“This is real,” he said.

Contact John McDermott at 937-5572