Buy Photo Kirk Davis of Nashville expresses his support for Insure Tennessee in the halls of Legislative Plaza outside the Senate Commerce and Labor Committee meeting March 31. (Photo: George Walker IV / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Advocates for the governor's controversial health care plan curse Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey, House Speaker Beth Harwell, their fellow lawmakers and special interest groups alike for the death of Insure Tennessee.

But navigating the path necessary to successfully pass controversial legislation is seldom easy or swift, note several political observers.

"I think Beth has done a real good job in handling the House and handling the affairs. She's done well," said Jimmy Naifeh, former Democratic speaker of the House from 1991 to 2009.

Naifeh is an outspoken supporter of Insure Tennessee. He's upset that politics clearly got in the way of what he considers a vital plan to help Tennesseans in need. But when he was speaker, he said, he never supported any effort to try and pluck a stalled bill from committee and bring it to the full House for a vote.

Insure Tennessee supporters have blasted Ramsey and Harwell for not bringing the measure to the floor of the House and Senate for a vote. Logistically, that's nearly impossible. Naifeh agreed with recent comments from both leaders that they can't just summon a bill out of committee. Insure Tennessee, in fact, has had more scrutiny by legislators than most bills.

It takes a two-thirds vote to bring a bill out of committee to the floor of either chamber. In the Senate alone, 14 of the 33 members have cast votes against Insure Tennessee. Opponents would need only 11 votes to keep the measure from the floor.

Apart from procedural wrangling, the leaders simply never came out in support of the policy. Ramsey seemed to indicate he might support the plan during the special session, but has since stepped back significantly from even tacit support of Insure Tennessee.

Harwell has never taken a position on the issue.

The death of Insure Tennessee is in part "a symptom of Tennessee currently being a one-party state," said Kent Syler, a political science professor at Middle Tennessee State University and former Democratic political operative.

"One thing politicians are very good at, especially when they have the majority, is vote counting," Syler said. "If they don't have the votes and they've got no way to get them, then why go through it? Why pay that political price?"

Pushing the initiative through the General Assembly always is going to be an uphill battle because of the policy's ties to President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act, political kryptonite to Tennessee's deeply red voters.

Echoing recent comments about the death of Insure Tennessee, recently retired GOP Party Chairman Chris Devaney said the fact the federal money for the program was tied to "Obamacare" was the key stumbling point for many Republican lawmakers.

"If there was a way to come up with something just a little bit more creative, I think that (Gov. Bill) Haslam made a great step in coming up with some creative policy items, and Insure Tennessee is one of them. But come up with something, recraft it and maybe it'll be more palatable to the legislators," Devaney said.

Even if Harwell or Ramsey believed in the policy and wielded their clout to try and bring Insure Tennessee to a vote, the cost probably would have been high for their GOP colleagues in future races.

"You would have Obamacare wrapped around your neck," said John Geer, Vanderbilt political science professor and co-director of the Vanderbilt Poll. "It's pretty clear that it was something that they didn't want to pursue, so they stayed on the sidelines."

Syler and Geer agreed that Insure Tennessee probably has the support of most Tennesseans. Those who oppose the measure are most likely to be Republican primary voters, though.

In a state where the GOP primary matters more than the general election, politicians tend to defend their right flank from a possible challenge. At times, that can mean catering to those primary voters, the political scientists argued.

"If you're a Republican and you're aspiring to higher office in the current political climate in Tennessee, you're worried about being primaried by somebody from the right," Syler said. "The 30-second TV ad linking you in any way to supporting something that could be construed as an offshoot of Obamacare is going to be damaging."

Republican lawmakers' fears of a challenge from a tea party-aligned candidate are real. But Devaney said those lawmakers should still "pay attention and listen to the voters more than they listen to the third-party organizations."

Devaney heralded the leadership of Harwell and Ramsey but acknowledged the need for some change to address the massive problem of uninsured Tennesseans. But he thinks lawmakers have a little too much fear of the power of a group like Americans For Prosperity, a conservative advocacy group, and what it could do after a lawmaker takes a controversial vote.

"I think that the legislators, in my opinion, need to focus on what is best for their districts and not be so consumed with these third-party groups that make veiled threats, or even threats. I don't think they're as strong as the members think they are in Tennessee," Devaney said.

"There are certain groups that go around and say they're door knocking, or they say they're making phone calls. But we have people out in the field on campaigns, and we never saw those groups. Never saw them in the field. I think that the threats … they need to take some of the threats with a grain of salt."

Policy decisions based too much on primary politics might work in the short term, but they could force people in the political middle to start abandoning those lawmakers, Syler argued. The political scientists acknowledged that it would take more legitimate Democratic candidates to threaten GOP lawmakers into concentrating as much about the general election as they do the primary.

The Rev. Joseph Breen, a retired Catholic priest who has advocated for the passage of Insure Tennessee, said withholding support from the plan was "a first-class cop-out" from legislators. Breen called on Haslam to "exercise his leadership" by rallying enough support to bring Insure Tennessee to the floor for debate in the House and Senate.

"He is very popular, and this is something that I think will make him even more popular," Breen said of Haslam.

Ahead of any future election, Naifeh sees a way for Harwell and Ramsey to take action on Insure Tennessee.

"I would think that if the two speakers would get together and appoint a special committee to look at Insure Tennessee over the interim, and I mean really look at it, and put the right people on there ... this is just an alternative that they could do to show the Tennessee citizens that they really do want to get something done," Naifeh said.

This year's legislative session could end as soon as this week. Between the end of session this year and the start of session next year, Naifeh said, Haslam, Harwell, Ramsey and advocates need to work together to find a way to fix the problems Insure Tennessee aimed to address.

INSURE TENNESSEE

Contact information for Tennessee's legislative leadership and those who did not vote to pass Insure Tennessee when the proposal was revived last month:

Leadership

Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey

615-741-4524

Lt.gov.ron.ramsey@ capitol.tn.gov

House Speaker Beth Harwell

615-741-0709

Speaker.beth.harwell@ capitol.tn.gov

Senate Commerce and Labor Committee members

(No votes or abstentions on Insure Tennessee)

Sen. Todd Gardenhire

615-741-6682

Sen.todd. gardenhire @capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Mark Green

615-741-2374

Sen.mark. green@capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Dolores Gresham

615-741-2368

Sen.dolores.gresham @capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Jack Johnson

615-741-2495

Sen.jack.johnson @capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Steve Southerland

615-741-3851

Sen.steve.southerland @capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Jim Tracy

615-741-1066

Sen.jim.tracy @capitol.tn.gov

Sen. Bo Watson

615-741-3227

Sen.bo.watson @capitol.tn.gov

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1ynGOkg