For most of his life, Forest High School senior Shawn McCarthy has been considered homeless, since he lives in motels in Ocala with his parents.

Though his stepfather works hard as a landscaper at On Top of the World, it has been difficult for the family to save enough money to afford the security deposits for an apartment and utilities, not to mention the first and last month’s rent.

By the time McCarthy entered high school, the rigor of his courses accelerated. Without a computer and adequate Wi-Fi, completing homework was difficult in the motel room. That’s when the school district, which tracks and helps the homeless children population, found a business donor to purchase him a laptop.

“I walk to friends’ houses to use their Wi-Fi,” said McCarthy, now 18, who hopes to graduate in June and then apply for grants and assistance that might allow him to start courses at the College of Central Florida in the fall.

McCarthy is one of 2,181 Marion County students considered homeless as defined by the federal McKinney-Vento Act. It says children are homeless if they lack a regular nighttime residence.

So that covers children who live with friends or relatives, or in motels. It covers kids whose “home” is a campground, a shelter, foster care — or the streets.

Currently in Marion County, there are 1,762 children living with relatives or friends, 206 in motels and another 175 in emergency shelters. Officials estimate another 28 live in cars or on the street and 10 are in foster care, for a total of 2,181 considered homeless.

Marion was ranked fourth among medium and large counties statewide in the percentage of school-age homeless children in December 2013, the latest data available for all districts.

In December 2013, Marion reported it had 2,373 homeless children — 5.6 percent of the district’s 42,109 students that year. That is more than double the state average of 2.6 percent.

Only Osceola (8.5 percent), Lake (7.7) and Santa Rosa (6.9) had a higher percentage of homeless children, according to Florida Department of Education statistics.

Suzanne McGuire, the school district’s homeless children liaison, said the number of homeless children has risen sharply since the national recession hit in late 2007.

In December 2007, there were 1,060 homeless students — 2.5 percent of the 42,692 public school students. The number has doubled in eight years.

The number peaked in December 2012, when there were 2,575 homeless students in the school district, she noted.

•••

McGuire said though many residents may not consider someone homeless if he lives with friends or family, or even in a motel, the law defines the situation as homeless.

McGuire said the leading contributors to homelessness are loss of jobs, domestic violence, fire, and medical emergencies. Also, many people have had work hours cut since the Affordable Health Care Act was passed, she said. Businesses are required to offer health insurance to employees who work more than 28 hours per week.

“Many businesses cut employee hours from 40 to 28,” said McGuire, adding most of these jobs paid minimum wage. “After taxes, their wages could no longer support the household.”

A person getting paid $8 per hour in a 40-hour week receives about $1,034 per month after taxes, McGuire estimated. Now, that same person receives about $708 per month after taxes for 28 hours.

“That causes more families to become in need of help,” McGuire said. “We do all we can here.”

McGuire’s office collects donations of clothing and other items for the students. She said families living with relatives or friends are considered homeless because they are relying on other people to survive. And, in most cases, the additional people in the household causes a financial strain on the host family.

The district does provide out-of-zone bus transportation for homeless children so they can go to the school they attended before becoming homeless. The idea is that the children have gone through enough and should not be forced to switch schools.

One of the biggest issues for children, especially those in high school, is the lack of educational resources to do basic assignments.

McGuire said most shelters do have tutors, computers and Wi-Fi for students. Others living with friends and family must get a ride to a library if that home does not have Wi-Fi. Teachers aware of the situation usually allow students to visit the school library more often to work on assignments.

•••

McGuire said she is now seeing a rise in what officials call “homeless unaccompanied” children — often abandoned teenagers who do not have a legal guardian.

According to a U.S. Department of Education report released last fall, there were 1.2 million public school homeless students around the country in 2012-13. That was an 8 percent increase over the previous school year.

Since the recession hit, there has been an 85 percent increase of homeless children nationwide.

The report shows there also is a rise in the number of unaccompanied youths, like McGuire is seeing locally. The report states that there were more than 75,000 unaccompanied homeless youths in 2013.

Before a Florida law passed last year, it was hard for the district to get these students medical treatment. That’s because doctors and hospitals require consent from the child’s parent or guardian. The law allows the school district to become that legal guardian.

“That has made a huge difference,” McGuire said.

•••

Now that McCarthy turned 18 years old, he has become what is known as a “couch surfer,” spending about five nights a week at a friend’s house. McCarthy says a good night sleep on a couch is better than on motel room floor.

“I spend a couple of nights a week with my family at the motel,” he said.

School district social workers and guidance counselors assist the students and their families through donations and seeking help from area agencies, such as Interfaith Emergency Services, the Salvation Army and Brothers Keeper.

Simone Winkler, a social worker assistant who works with McCarthy, said she visits the family several times a month, bringing them food and other needed items.

She said families who live with friends, family or in motels cannot get housing assistance because they live in places that have electricity and other utilities. Area agencies are forced to help those living in temporary shelters or on the streets to get into apartments or other rentals.

“There is a big need out there,” Winkler said. “People living in motels are not viewed as needing as much help.”

Karla Grimsley, executive director of Interfaith, said the issue is “a very frustrating thing for our staff as well.”

Grimsley said federal laws are specific in terms of helping families pay rent and utilities, or to help them transition into an apartment or rental.

Several local agencies utilize federal Housing and Urban Development grants to help homeless families pay for deposits and rent.

“The problem is that the money comes with guidelines about who can qualify and they define homeless as someone living in a homeless shelter or in a place not suitable for human habitation,” said Grimsley, referring to cars, the woods or under a bridge. “This rules out lots of people who have a little income, but are giving a chunk of that to a hotel every month, which leaves them with very little to save toward their deposits.”

McCarthy’s family, for example, pays $225 a week at the motel; if they paid for a month at a time, the fee would be $600, but they have difficulty saving up that much.

“If they are living in their car we can help them, but if they are in a hotel or on a friend’s couch, we cannot,” Grimsley said. “It’s out of our control, as we are bound to HUD’s rules for the grant.”

The homeless children population usually drops slightly in the spring, when income tax refunds allow families to try to make it on their own. Winkler said McCarthy’s family used income tax refund money in 2014 to rent a house. A month after moving in, a tree fell and damaged the home. The family was not refunded their money, and back to the motel they went.

“This year, they purchased a (used) car,” Winkler said. “Now they can go to the store to get groceries.”

Winkler said before purchasing the car, the family walked to convenience stores to buy food with food stamps. Even though they can buy quality groceries, the family has little in the way of being able to cook quality meals in a motel room.

Grimsley said if there were more shelter beds in Marion County, families could go there and then possibly get HUD assistance.

Grimsley said her agency does treat those living in hotels just like any other person seeking their services, which is to help with food, medicine, hygiene and clothing.

Joe Callahan can be reached at 867-4113 or at joe.callahan@starbanner.com. Follow him on Twitter @JoeOcalaNews.