CHARLESTON, S.C., Dec. 19, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Benefitfocus, Inc. (NASDAQ: BNFT), a leading provider of cloud-based benefits software solutions, today announced the first class of graduates from its newly established Benefitfocus Implementation Program. Graduates include consultants from each of the following firms: Deloitte Consulting LLP, ROC Americas, HRchitect, Providence Technology Solutions (affiliate of The HCiGroup) and Motion HR.

This class brings years of experience from a broad spectrum of implementation and consultation projects in human capital management (HCM) and enterprise resource planning (ERP). The Benefitfocus Implementation Program expands the company's ability to rapidly scale its service offerings while maintaining a high-quality customer experience. At the same time, it applies the system integrators' broad experience across industries to support customers as they implement the BENEFITFOCUS® Platform.

The program to train system integrators was announced in May 2014 at the Benefitfocus One Place conference. As the benefits industry continues to see a need to scale significantly to meet the demand of newly eligible individuals under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), Benefitfocus has been at the vanguard of benefits software providers facilitating compliance with cost-effective results.

"This is a milestone for Benefitfocus and the Benefitfocus Implementation Program," said Benefitfocus President and CEO Shawn Jenkins. "This first class of graduates demonstrates how we are keeping pace with the demands of the industry as we continue to scale. We've been very happy with our partnerships with these consultants and we are excited to see them demonstrate a similar level of dedication to providing anticipatory service as Benefitfocus. I always tell Benefitfocus associates that we are just getting started and this is another sign that there are great things to come."

The intensive educational process is offered by Benefitfocus University, which trains Benefitfocus associates and third-party partners in Benefitfocus products. Roles within the certification process for system integrators include: Project Manager, Implementation Consultant, Implementation Configuration Analyst, EDI Analyst and Payroll Analyst. The training program includes web-based and instructor-led courses, exposing partners to Benefitfocus products and processes, as well as Benefitfocus' culture and dedication to customer service.

"We are excited to see our first class graduate from the Benefitfocus Implementation Program," remarked Bucky Wall, Dean of Benefitfocus University. "The quality of service that Benefitfocus provides to our clients is excellent, and we have worked very hard to instill this top-tier dedication to quality service in our consultant partners. We look forward to seeing these certified consultants lead many successful Benefitfocus implementations."

System integrators will take the lead on projects while Benefitfocus will have quality assurance measures in place. System Integrators are also required to perform quarterly web-based training on recent product enhancements and achieve annual re-certification—in order to maintain the most up-to-date industry knowledge and continue to deliver peak levels of service coupled with a best practices approach.

The next class in the Benefitfocus Implementation Program will start training on January 7.

About Benefitfocus

Benefitfocus, Inc. (NASDAQ: BNFT) is a leading provider of cloud-based benefits software solutions for consumers, employers, insurance carriers and brokers. Benefitfocus has served more than 23 million consumers on its platform that consists of an integrated portfolio of products and services enabling clients to more efficiently shop, enroll, manage and exchange benefits information. With a user-friendly interface and consumer-centric design, the Benefitfocus Platform provides one place for consumers to access all their benefits. Benefitfocus solutions support the administration of all types of benefits including core medical, dental and other voluntary benefits plans as well as wellness programs. For more information, visit www.benefitfocus.com.

Except for historical information, all of the statements, expectations, and assumptions contained in this press release are forward-looking statements. Actual results might differ materially from those explicit or implicit in the forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially include: the need to innovate and provide useful products and services; the immature and volatile nature of the market for our products and services and other factors that could impact our anticipated growth; reliance on strategic relationships, including with system integrators, management of growth; our ability to compete effectively; reliance on key personnel; our ability to maintain our culture and recruit and retain qualified personnel; changes in government regulations; privacy, security and other risks associated with our business; fluctuations in our financial results; general economic risks; and the other risk factors set forth from time to time in our SEC filings, copies of which are available free of charge within the Investor Relations section of the Benefitfocus website at http://investor.benefitfocus.com/sec.cfm or upon request from our investor relations department. Benefitfocus assumes no obligation and does not intend to update these forward-looking statements, except as required by law.

Benefitfocus, Inc.

843.284.1052 ext. 6846

pr@benefitfocus.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20110602/CL12553LOGO

SOURCE Benefitfocus, Inc.