Tar sands pump facility in Alberta, Canada ProCon.org expanded its pro and con research about the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline. The pipeline, if completed, would transport oil extracted from tar sands in Alberta, Canada, through several US states, and ultimately to the Texas Gulf region.



The updated ProCon.org resource presents statements from authoritative sources in the debate over "Should the United States authorize the Keystone XL Pipeline to import tar sand oil from Canada?"



Pro sources include: the US Chamber of Commerce; US Senator Joe Manchin (D-WV); US Senator John Hoeven (R-ND); James Hoffa, President of the Teamsters; the American Petroleum Institute; economist Dr. Mark Perry; Patrick Moore, former Director of Greenpeace International; TransCanada; the American Fuel & Petrochemical Manufacturers (AFPM); Gary Doer, US Ambassador to Canada; Robert Bryce, Senior Fellow at the Manhattan Institute; Mary O’Grady, Wall Street Journal editorial board member; and the Calgary Herald editorial board.



Con sources include: US Senator Bernie Sanders (I-VT); US Senator Barbara Boxer (D-CA); Dr. James Hansen, Director of the Goddard Institute for Space Studies at NASA; Noman Seip, former US Air Force Lieutenant General; the Natural Resources Defense Council; the League of Conservation Voters; nine former Nobel Peace Laureates (the Dalai Lama, Desmond Tutu, and others); former US Vice President Al Gore; the Indigenous Environmental Network; geoscientist Dr. Michael Mann; political science professor Dr. Michael Kraft; and the New York Times editorial board.



All statements are fully sourced and include a biography of the person or organization being quoted.



In addition to the expert statements, the updated ProCon.org resource contains:



* Keystone XL Pipeline Environmental Review by US State Department - featuring the final environmental impact statement released on January 31, 2014.



* President Obama's Statements on Keystone XL Pipeline - featuring President Obama's veto threat of the Keystone XL Pipeline Act on January 6, 2015.



* Keystone XL Pipeline Act (S.1) - including the text of the bill and the latest actions in Congress.



ProCon.org President & Managing Editor Kamy Akhavan stated:



"With so much controversy and partisan spin over the Keystone XL Pipeline, we knew that people just wanted a nonpartisan information source for this issue. Our resource gives people both sides of the Keystone XL Pipeline debate so they can become better informed and make up their own minds.”



For pros, cons, and related research on whether or not the United States should authorize the Keystone XL Pipeline to import oil from Canada, visit http://alternativeenergy.procon.org/view.answers.php?questionID=001628.