Lorelei Beyer will discuss "The Impact of the Affordable Care Act and Midwifery Today" March 16 in Aurora.

Beyer is a woman's health nurse practitioner and midwife who has a bachelor's degree in nursing, a master's degree in nursing and midwifery and certification in nurse midwifery. Her talk will go from 6:30 to 8:30 p.m. at the new Santori Public Library, 101 S. River St., Aurora. The discussion is free and open to the public. A short PowerPoint depicting key areas of the new library also will be shown.

The Aurora branch of the American Association of University Women and AAUW Aurora-branch member and state Rep. Linda Chapa LaVia (D-Aurora) are co-sponsoring the discussion.

With 37 years experience in nursing, Beyer has worked in both the suburbs and the city of Chicago. She spent 34 of those years at South Suburban Hospital, then went to the University of Illinois, Little Company of Mary Hospital, taught nursing students at St. Xavier University and most recently has been working as a midwife and woman's health practitioner out of Mercy Hospital in Chicago.

"I can speak on the Affordable Care Act's impact on my patients because I see it every day," said Beyer, who as a certified nurse practitioner can prescribe medications for her patients. "My patient population is lower socioeconomic women who rely strongly on Medicaid and Medicare. Many of these women were without well-woman care until the Affordable Care Act was passed. So I have seen what a difference it's made."

As for midwifery, Beyer said this type of care is making a comeback and midwife nurses are currently being licensed by the state of Illinois. Midwives, she said, are not physicians, but neither are they assistants. They are considered mid-level providers.

"Our role is growing," she said. "The emphasis is now on keeping people well, keeping them healthy, and keeping them out of hospitals."

The American Association of University Women is open to all people who have received an associate's or higher degree. For more information on the discussion or the AAUW, go to www.aurora-il.aauw.net