Those of us between 26 and 33 have undergone some interesting economic times and cultural trends. We are waiting longer to get married (partly related to the next fact). We have been burned by the largest economic recession since the great depression. We are carrying loads of student debt. Many millennials live with our parents well beyond college and certainly depend heavily on them into early adulthood; the sad fact is many of us are not, in a strictly financial sense, better off than our parents. That doesn't seem very American, but it's true.

Health care seems like something else we will have to put off. The Affordable Care Act, despite what you think about it as a political pundit, was created so that folks would not have to put off health insurance—that is the law's intention. And it is now the law to have health insurance or pay a penalty. The nation depends on a healthy population, and affordable health insurance depends, in part, on mass enrollment.

The Affordable Care Act is not government-provided health care like many European nations have. "Health insurance is not free for anyone," said Sonja Smith, Project Manager for Enroll Alabama. Private insurance companies still provide plans at their discretion, but government regulations have increased. Rates are adjusted depending on income, region, age, and other factors via subsidies—the government picks up part of the tab. Since the program offers subsidies to those who have health insurance costs beyond their means, it does ask more of healthy, well-off taxpayers in terms of the cost/benefit ratio. Technically, that is the basic mechanism that makes insurance work in the first place: a large, healthy group pays in because no one knows who will get sick and most of them statistically won't.

If you are running from health coverage though, don't flatter yourself; you are probably not even in this category yet. Single adults (those who file as single) who make from $12,000 to around $45,000 will qualify for some sort of subsidy. Smith emphasized that the numbers are calculated based on affordability, so that no one will have to pay more than around eight percent of their income for health coverage. Even though the penalty is cheaper than coverage for many of you, guess what? You have to pay it and you still won't have coverage.

If you are under 30 and your employer does not offer health insurance, you can qualify for a "catastrophic plan," which is exactly what it sounds like—the plan only kicks in after a very high deductible to save you from absolute financial ruin (and possibly death). But, even if you enroll for a more expensive plan, you are not stuck with inevitable, ruinous insurance costs—if you have a major change in employment status, income, or you relocate, your subsidy can be adjusted.

The best place to begin your investigation is here, where you can get an idea of the subsidy you'll qualify for and the plans available. For example, a 31-year-old single male in zip code 35222 and who is making between $25,000 and $30,000 a year (and who may not feel capable of purchasing health coverage) might receive the most basic coverage (bronze level) for around $100 per month. The Affordable Care Act assures that all policies will offer basic items: doctor visits, prescription drugs, hospitalization, maternity care, and preventive care. And insurance companies are no longer allowed to not discriminate based on pre-existing conditions.

To enroll to qualify for a subsidy you must visit www.healthcare.gov. You can buy insurance from the "Health Insurance Marketplace," where plans are conveniently compiled and compared, or you can buy from any broker directly. The policy needs to meet certain standards to avoid the penalty and to qualify for a subsidy. The only way to get subsidy is to purchase through the Health Insurance Marketplace.

Because there has been so much confusion about what the Affordable Care Act means, groups such as Enroll Alabama exist to offer free consultation to anyone who has questions. Some of us are likely delaying our search due to a feeling of ignorance or intimidation. Sonja Smith said there is no need to be intimidated. Her team will guide you through each step of the process. She noted that now is an opportune time to begin your search, as "open enrollment" begins November 1. If you don't have acceptable coverage by January 1, 2016 you may face a penalty of around a $600 minimum.

In summary, if you don't have health insurance, you should enroll on healthcare.gov; even if you would like to see the law changed for ideological reasons, keep yourself alive to fight it in the meantime. Isn't that the ironic, millennial thing to do anyway?