Topics: 1 percent, Capitalism, david madland, Editor's Picks, Inequality, Labor Rights, Middle Class, trickle-down economics, wage theft, Media News, Business News, News, Politics News

You may recall how in 2013 — and then again in 2015 — President Obama tried to give his economic vision a snazzy name, something to compete with “trickle-down economics” in terms of memorability and pith. What he came up with, and has stuck with since, is “middle-out economics,” or sometimes “middle-class economics,” which is supposed to communicate his and the Democratic Party’s commitment to seeing the middle class — and not the 1 percent — as the true fount of economic growth.

But although Obama and other Democrats are evidently happy enough with the branding, the actual policy approach that defines a middle-out economics has remained somewhat fuzzy. And that’s where “Hollowed Out: Why the Economy Doesn’t Work without a Strong Middle Class,” the new book from the Center for American Progress’s David Madland, steps in. While politicians’ focus on the middle class can sometimes feel like empty pandering, Madland’s book makes a strong and clear argument that an economy geared around the middle class is not only more in keeping with democratic and liberal norms, but it’s simply better economics, too.

Recently, Salon spoke over the phone with Madland about his book, inequality, and what he sees as the right economic agenda for liberalism in the 21st century. Our conversation is below and has been edited for clarity and length.

When did you start thinking about a strong middle class as not only a good thing unto itself but as a necessary component of keeping the U.S. economy healthy?

It actually started way back when I was in high school.

I coached baseball camps throughout the summers, and I had this sense that in the more middle-class neighborhoods where we would do the camps — because we would move all around — things worked better. The kids would immediately trust each other and knew how to work together well. So I had this germ of an idea, way back then, that there was something about a strong middle class that led to better outcomes.

What kind of outcomes do you have in mind?

One of the key things is that a strong middle class leads to greater trust, and trust might seem a bit abstract, but, really, it’s essential to any functioning economy and society. You need to be able to work with people that you don’t already know, that aren’t part of your family, etc.

You can see over the past several decades that trust has declined sharply in the U.S., and a key factor in that has been rising inequality, because people have far different experiences — or they don’t think others are like them.

Some of the costs of that [lack of trust] for our society — think of the number of lawyers we have.

The share of lawyers in our economy has doubled over the past several decades. It was steady from the early 1900s to the ‘60s, and since inequality started rising, the share of lawyers in the economy has risen sharply. While lawyers might do important things, they really are just a cost, a burden that makes business transactions harder.

I want to continue on this trust theme in a moment, but first I wanted to ask you to explain why the trickle-down theory of economic management is wrong.

The underlying idea behind trickle-down, really, is that high levels of economic inequality are good and that if you help the rich get richer through things like tax cuts and less regulation, that will buy some greater economic growth.

The premise that inequality is good is fundamentally wrong. It might be true in a very narrow sense that, yes, [it provides] some incentive to work harder; but that ignores the larger context. When inequality gets to extreme levels, you have all these harms that happen as a result. I talked about trust; you have governance getting corrupted, you have fewer people able to develop their human capital. And you also have weakening of demand, which we saw that in the Great Recession’s aftermath.

Okay, so how does that kind of extreme inequality result in lower levels of trust?

The basic idea behind trust is this idea of reciprocity. You do unto others as they would do unto you. They treat you well, you treat them well. If they don’t treat you well, you know, an eye for an eye. Behind that is this idea that you think you share things in common. Inequality erodes that idea. [It makes] you think people are far less like you.

We can see the evidence for this in lots of different ways. In one of the studies that I think is most interesting, [researchers] left a wallet in cities throughout the world. In regions that had greater inequality, fewer wallets were returned. What’s happening is people think [other] people are not like them when they live in an unequal society; and they’re less likely to trust them, which leads to all sorts of harmful consequences.