The Rodriguez family's lawyer released the video of the incident during a press conference on Tuesday.

A lawyer for the family of a man, who died outside the Moore Warren Movie Theater while in police custody, has released a video of the incident.

Luis Rodriguez died earlier this month after a confrontation with police outside the theater in Moore.

2/15/2014 Related Story: Family Says Moore Police Beat Father To Death

Police say the 44-year-old Rodriguez became uncooperative when officers questioned him about a possible domestic disturbance. Police handcuffed the man.

2/18/2014 Related Story: Moore Police Hold News Conference Concerning In-Custody Death

Rodriguez's wife and daughter say police then started beating him. Autopsy results are pending.

The Rodriguez family's lawyer released a cellphone video of the incident and a statement at a Tuesday news conference in Oklahoma City.

The video shows 44-year-old Luis Rodriguez on his stomach on the ground outside the theater with five police officers restraining him. One officer holds Rodriguez's head down and the others are on top of him as they handcuff his hands behind his back.

Rodriguez's wife, who shot the video, is later heard screaming and asking if Rodriguez is dead as he is placed on a stretcher.

We have attached the video to this story. Warning: the video may be considered graphic to some viewers.

"He was not involved in the disturbance. However, when police came, they focused their attention on Luis. Taking him face down onto the pavement, pepper-spraying his mouth, nose and eyes and putting the weight of five grown men on top of him, and then handcuffing him as he was unconscious or already dead," said Michael Brooks-Jimenez, attorney for the Rodriguez family.

Moore Police Chief Jerry Stillings said he stands behind his officers' actions and said he did not see anything inappropriate on the cell phone video as far as his officers' actions.

There is security camera footage from the Warren Theater. However, that has not yet been made available for us to see.

OSBI has taken over the investigation into the death.

Police say three officers involved in the incident are on administrative leave.