This Week in Crain's: November 11, 2013 Listen to the Podcast or Download

A late push by Gov. Andrew Cuomo, business groups and labor unions persuaded New York voters to legalize casinos last week. Now a far less visible but equally high-stakes sales pitch has begun as high rollers in the casino industry seek the lucrative first licenses to set up shop.



Operators from Malaysia to Las Vegas are eyeing bids for four casinos upstate. After seven years, three more venues could be built downstate, including in the five boroughs.



The dozen or so operators are anteing up, sinking millions into land, lobbying, construction and campaign donations, knowing a winning hand could pay off handsomely.



But casinos are far from a sure thing. As they have proliferated in Pennsylvania, Connecticut and Massachusetts, cannibalizing each others' profits, half of Atlantic City's 12 casinos have filed for bankruptcy. While casino gaming revenue nationwide last year rose 4.8%, to $37.3 billion, analysts say saturation may be at hand.

Panel to award licenses

New York's new casino law calls for one site in the Catskills, one in the Albany region and one in the Southern Tier, bordering Pennsylvania. The fourth could go to any of those three areas, although it's widely expected to be in the Catskills, where a slew of operators are preparing bids for the market closest to New York City.



The state's gaming commission will soon set up a five-person casino siting board of financial experts, economists and real estate professionals. In selecting winners, it will consider bidders' proposed investment, financial health, local support and other factors. Some industry insiders see particular operators as odds-on favorites, while others caution that it's too early to handicap.



"I don't have any idea," said James Featherstonhaugh, a top New York gambling industry lobbyist, who is part of a Saratoga racino owners' group targeting the Albany-area license. "Anyone who says they do is just delusional."



The state has not yet issued a request for proposals specifying what it wants from bidders, Mr. Featherstonhaugh noted. And any number of new operators and developers could enter the fray.



One new entrant is Caesars, the Las Vegas and Atlantic City giant, whose bid to open a casino in Massachusetts was rejected last month as regulators frowned on its $23.5 billion in debt. Days later, Caesars pumped $100,000 into Mr. Cuomo's efforts to pass the casino referendum, and is said to be targeting the Catskills for a proposal.



Groups with deeper New York roots have a leg up. One is Mr. Featherstonhaugh's, which would spend $40 million to convert its Saratoga racino—one of nine New York racetracks with electronic games—into a full-scale casino.

6 Atlantic City casinos, out of 12, have filed for bankruptcy since 2006 amid increased competition.



In the Southern Tier, the Tioga Downs racino owned by Jeffrey Gural, the chairman of New York City-based real estate services firm Newmark Grubb Knight Frank, is seen as the early front-runner to score a license, though it faces competition from at least one other bidder.



The action is most intense in the Catskills, where city vacationers flocked decades ago but whose tourism sector has struggled in recent years. Several developers are looking to revive once-iconic destination resorts that have shuttered.



One seen as likely to win a license there is Empire Resorts, which owns the Monticello racino. Empire is controlled by the same family that owns Malaysian gambling behemoth Genting and the highly successful Resorts World slots parlor in southeast Queens.

Defunct hotels eyed

Genting has deep pockets, a strong if short record in New York, and local approval to move the Monticello racetrack and slots parlor to a 1,700-acre site that houses the defunct Concord, a once-famous hotel. The project would cost $600 million.



"They have no problem just throwing millions of dollars at something," said Alan Woinski, chief executive of Gaming USA Corp., an industry consultant.



Other groups are seeking a Catskills casino license, including Nevele Investors, which specializes in emerging gambling markets from New York to Taiwan. It has lined up a number of New York partners, including Tishman Construction, to rebuild the Nevele, the Borscht Belt resort that closed in 2009. The group touts strong support among local residents and Ulster County officials, and says it would bring thousands of jobs to an area with 18% unemployment. "The plan would be to rebuild the Nevele as the crown jewel it once was," said CEO Michael Treanor.



At least four other groups are seeking a Catskills casino, including the Mohegan tribe of Connecticut—owner of the Mohegan Sun—and New York City's Muss Development, which is partnering with the Mashantucket Pequots, the tribe that owns Foxwoods Resort Casino in Connecticut.



Meanwhile, Las Vegas operators including MGM, Wynn and Las Vegas Sands have said they are interested only in New York City, where far greater profits could be reaped. Some gambling insiders and lawmakers speculate that the Legislature could allow a downstate casino sooner than seven years hence.



"You're going to have a lot of people pushing from the Las Vegas crowd that would put up a lot of money for one in the New York City area," said Mr. Woinski.



Such a move seems unlikely in the short term because it would undermine the state's efforts to secure bids upstate. The chairman of the Assembly Racing & Wagering committee, Westchester Democrat Gary Pretlow, said fast-tracking a city casino won't happen.



"Not as long as I'm the chairperson," Mr. Pretlow pledged. "We made a promise to the bidders."

Correction: The name of a racino in the Southern Tier region is spelled Tioga Downs. That fact was misstated in an earlier version of this article, originally published online November 10, 2013.

Get Crain's Morning Insider Sign up for the Morning Insider email and receive political news and musings every morning at 6 a.m. More Newsletters ›

Comments