Topics: From the Wires, News

MATAMOROS, Mexico (AP) — The sidewalks are empty on Alvaro Obregon Avenue. Restaurants and souvenir shops lining the once popular thoroughfare are gutted and shuttered. The sign in front of an abandoned karaoke bar is now ripped and dilapidated, riddled underneath with three spray-painted tombstones.

The thousands of spring breakers who flooded over each March from the nearby Texas resorts are gone. The drug war drove them off, leaving a void of tourism in a city that years ago gave up trying to cater to such crowds.

But in the midst of a three-year increase in American tourism in Mexico, communities along the Rio Grande see potential to win back some of the tourists and revitalize an industry that has gone dormant since the cartel violence erupted south of the border.

In Matamoros, a new tourism director is pouring $2 million into luring Mexican visitors for Holy Week in April, with an eye toward implementing a similar plan next year that would focus on spring breakers who flock to South Padre Island, Texas.

“We used to see waves of people along the main boulevard,” said Julio Mejia, who took over as tourism director in December. “But the area wasn’t promoted properly.”

Matamoros, nestled just south of the Texas border and along the Gulf of Mexico, plans to open a children’s water park and build a pier at Costa Azul beach to attract tourists from nearby Coahuila and Nuevo Leon states. A more detailed plan will be worked out later for how to attract American tourists next year, but a pivotal part of the endeavor will involve working with business owners to reopen their restaurants and bars.

The city previously attracted thousands of spring breakers from South Padre Island for the “Two Nation Vacation,” but the number of such visitors began dwindling in 2005 as drug violence started making international headlines and U.S. authorities later began warning against traveling into northern Mexico. By 2010, it became rare to see a young American vacationer visiting this city’s tourist district.

And although violence in some border cities has quelled, spring breakers remain hesitant to take any chances this year.

David Lynch, an Eastern Kentucky University senior visiting South Padre Island this week, says he still sees too much news about Mexican violence and “won’t be crossing into Mexico.”

Jackie Raichandani, a University of Louisville senior also planning to visit South Padre, suggested to his friends that they go to Matamoros. “Some want to try it,” he says, “but others told me no way they are going.”

These sentiments echo what’s plain from the statistics: While more Americans are returning to popular destinations such as Mexico City, Cancun and Los Cabos, the border communities have yet to see significant rebounds. Mexico’s tourism agency reports a 9 percent increase in Americans visiting Mexico in 2013, but a steady decline in border tourists from 10 million in 2011 to 9.5 million last year.