Buy Photo Orrin Johnson (Photo: Andy Barron/RGJ)Buy Photo

Oh, how I want to bask in schadenfreude about the Democratic state convention disaster. A profoundly liberal senator from California booed off of the stage for not being liberal enough; the party that stokes self-entitlement learning that the self-entitled don’t accept things like “rules” or “vote totals”; the once-vaunted party machine swiftly disintegrating from the inside now that more and more party activists realize that Harry Reid, the Clintons, and the rest never cared about them or “the little guys” in the first place – what’s not to snicker at?

I want to laugh at all the people who demand an ever-larger and more powerful government, and then freak out when this desire is immediately and directly fulfilled in the form of police officers coming to restore order and disperse troublemakers. (What did you think “more government” was, Berners? It’s blunt force. How else did you think you were going to take more of Other People’s Money to pay for “free college”?)

And I want to be satisfied that a party filled with people who respond to electoral defeat by vandalizing their own party headquarters, publish personal contact information of party volunteers, and harass and threaten the families of said volunteers will never, ever be capable of achieving any sort of power in Nevada or in the United States of America.

But I can’t. Because we’ve already seen this show, and know how it ends.

We had our convention chaos in 2008, when Ron Paul supporters who couldn’t win by persuasion determined to attack from the inside. They eventually succeeded, but like mutineers who can’t drive a ship, ran the whole enterprise aground. They “purified” the GOP by driving “heretics” to register as independents without influence in primaries.

The 2016 convention was relatively sedate. But it was not the smooth running of a well-oiled machine that kept it quiet, but rather the peace of the grave. Very few elected officials bothered to show up, and why would they? The party activists don’t represent the majority of regular voters. (To-wit: Governor Sandoval’s approval rating is 66 percent statewide, while the conventioneers condemned him.) Why court a party which has minimal money or organizational ability to get out the vote; one infected with tinfoil-hat-wearing activists who cause such disruption that party officers keep quitting in disgust? Those who remain left their intellectual credibility behind when they rallied behind Donald Trump – how do you censure the governor and his GOP allies in Carson City for “breaking promises,” raising taxes, or not being sufficiently against Obamacare, while simultaneously demanding fealty to a serially dishonest Orange Combover who has promised to raise taxes and implement a full-fledged single payer government health care system?

The result is a party leader who will either lose to the worst Democrat candidate in living memory, or will win and be indistinguishable from her in any way that matters to those of us who believe in America’s founding principles.

We can only hope that a saner option rises from the corpse of the current GOP, so we can shield ourselves from the inevitable death throes of the Democratic Party’s Berned-out husk.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rgj.com/1ViQRQX