HARTFORD — More and more consumers have felt the sting of hospital "facility fees" in recent years, but hospital executives said Wednesday that they need to recoup losses from the free care they provide to the uninsured and from the under-funded care they give to people in government plans such as Medicaid and Medicare.

"Last year, we provided over $500 million worth of free care, charity care and under-reimbursed care for governmental payers," said Patrick McCabe, senior vice president of corporate finance at Yale-New Haven Health System

McCabe and others spoke Wednesday at a hearing called by state Comptroller Kevin Lembo as part of an investigation into the consolidation of hospitals and other health care providers and the impact on the state's health plan.

Lembo's hearing also hoped to clarify what is behind the fees, which often show up as a separate bill. Patients who are billed for these fees end up paying more out of pocket, particularly those who have high-deductible health plans.

About 25 percent of Yale-New Haven's patient base has Medicaid coverage, and the hospital is reimbursed 59 cents per $1 of cost for Medicaid costs, McCabe said. The result was a $220 million loss, he said. Medicare patients are 40 percent of the hospital's patient base.

"And with the changes in the wake of the [Affordable] Care Act, we're not getting paid about 90 cents on the dollar for treating those patients," he said. That generated a loss of about $125 million last year, McCabe said. Additionally, free and charity care to people without insurance cost about $135 million, McCabe said.

"Given those complexities, the place where that funding is made up is really on those privately insured patients," McCabe said.

Hospitals are charging people with private insurance more as a result of dramatically declining government reimbursements, punctuated by historic state cuts to the Medicaid program to the tune of almost $550 million over the last couple of years, McCabe said.

Facility fees are applied to complex services, such as a transplant or cancer treatment, Dr. Rocco Orlando, chief medical officer at Hartford Healthcare — parent company of Hartford Hospital, told Lembo and the legislators. The amount a patient pays depends on the coverage of a patient's plan and the contract terms the hospital has with that patient's insurance company, Orlando said.

In other words, the contracts between insurers and hospitals allows hospitals to charge the fees.

"Our patients are really whipsawed in the middle because these contractual allowances, and with these increasing, you know, copays and high-deductible plans, those are the folks that are being disadvantaged," Orlando said.

Is some cases, the fees are justified, said Bernadette Kelleher, vice president of Provider Solutions at Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Connecticut. "There are clearly cases where we think there should be an additional payment, an incremental payment, because it's the higher-end services," Kelleher said.

In other instances, however — a simple office visit, for example — Anthem would not support a facility fee, she said.

Still other cases are in a gray area, she said, "and that's why we continue to look at our data and assess whether we may need additional policies related to some of those areas."

State Healthcare Advocate Victoria Veltri said her office started getting complaints about "facility fees" in about 2012. Consumers weren't clear on how the fees were derived. They could range from $25 to $5,000, Veltri said.

"Unless you're a sophisticated health care insurance customer … it is impossible to really navigate the system when it comes to facility fees and charges that are imposed," Veltri said.

She added that the union is concerned that hospital mergers and consolidations are limiting options for consumers to go to free-standing clinics where they might not be charged a facility fee.

During a public comment period, three union representatives spoke, but no single patients stood up to offer their experience paying a hospital facility fee.

Deborah Chernoff, public policy director of the New England Health Care Employees Union, District 1199 of SEIU, represents 27,000 union members who have the dual perspective of being providers and consumers of health care.

"In both of those roles, we are deeply concerned about the increasing application of and number of facility fees that accompany the rapid consolidation of health care providers into ever-larger farther-reaching organizations," she said.

Clinicians and consumers have been urged to curb health care costs by changing their behavior and their choice of medical providers to less expensive options, Chernoff said. Union members have been told to prescribe generic drugs instead of brand-name options; consumers have been told to go to urgent care instead of the emergency department; clinicians have been told to treat chronic illnesses with lifestyle changes before a disease can progress into more a threatening and expensive crisis.

Chernoff called for greater transparency and full disclosure about the nature and rationale for facility fees.

"This isn't the cost savings we are all urged to participated in. This is cost shifting," she said.