ROME — Two Italian priests and a Canadian nun were abducted early Saturday from their mission in northern Cameroon, the Italian government and Vatican officials said.

The Italian Foreign Ministry identified the priests as Giampaolo Marta and Gianantonio Allegri. A Vatican spokesman, the Rev. Ciro Benedettini, said the priests were from the Vicenza diocese in northern Italy.

Bishop Phillippe Stevens of the parish of Maroua, Cameroon, identified the nun as Gilberte Bissiere, Reuters said. He said the three were taken by “unknown people” who broke open the doors of their residences.

The Rev. Henri Djongang, the vicar general of Maroua, said the kidnapping took place near Maroua in the village of Tchéré, 37 miles from the border with Nigeria.

The kidnappers arrived in two cars and on five motorcycles, and “there were many of them,” Father Djongang said. People nearby heard the sounds of a struggle, and the nun “cried out a lot,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

No one immediately claimed responsibility for the kidnappings, although Boko Haram, an Islamist militant group based in Nigeria, has operated in the area.

“It has not been excluded that the culprits of the kidnapping could belong to the Islamic militia Boko Haram,” said Vatican Radio, the Vatican’s news outlet.

An Italian Foreign Ministry press officer said the ministry’s website cautions against traveling in the area, “in consideration of the risk of kidnappings due to presence of jihadist elements coming from Nigeria.”

Father Benedettini said that Pope Francis was informed early Saturday about the abductions, and that the pope was praying for the three who had been taken.

The priests “had been there for many years,” Father Djongang said. “They were very kind. They liked the population, and they were well liked by the people, too. They helped a lot with the children, in the schools. They helped train teachers.”

He said he suspected Boko Haram because it was “the same method” they used in the kidnapping of a French priest, the Rev. Georges Vandenbeusch, in the same region in November. He was freed in late December.

Boko Haram’s insurgency has killed hundreds of Nigerian citizens in a campaign to undermine Nigeria’s central government.