The administration announced a new initiative under ObamaCare on Monday aimed at changing payment incentives so that doctors have more freedom to choose how to care for their patients.

ADVERTISEMENT

The new payment system is intended to move away from traditional “fee for service” payments under Medicare, in which a doctor gets paid separately for each visit or procedure. Under the new program, part of doctors’ payments will be a monthly fee to pay for a certain group of patients, freeing up doctors to talk on the phone, email their patients or set up longer visits outside of the usual structure.

Under the old system, doctors tend not to have an incentive to speak by phone or email with a patient, for example, because they don’t get paid for that.

The initiative is part of a larger administration effort to move the healthcare system away from paying simply for the number of procedures or visits and toward rewarding quality health outcomes for patients, using authority that ObamaCare gave to an innovation center able to test out new payment models.

“There’s often no way to get paid for work that we know keeps people healthier,” said Dr. Patrick Conway, the head of the innovation center at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). The new system, he said, will allow doctors to “move away from a visit-based fee for service structure.”

Doctors will also be financially rewarded for hitting quality targets.

The new initiative is voluntary, so doctors can choose to join if they wish. The program also seeks to partner with private health insurers so that the payment changes come not just from Medicare but from private health insurance as well.

The CMS says the program will be implemented in up to 20 regions of the country, covering 20,000 doctors and 25 million people.

The program is one of a range of administration efforts aimed at making healthcare payments smarter. The administration announced in March that it had met its goal of tying 30 percent of Medicare payments to quality outcomes instead of simply the number of procedures performed, and it is now pushing to increase that percentage more.

The programs will depend on the next president carrying them out. The program announced Monday, for example, known as the Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Model, will begin in January 2017, right as President Obama leaves office.