Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson’s efforts to renew his state’s Private Option Medicaid expansion likely depend on the results of three state Senate primaries next month.

Hutchinson has proposed an alternative he is calling Arkansas Works that would take effect when the Private Option expires at the end of the year. But many state legislators see Arkansas Works as little more than a new name for the Private Option.

“It’s simply the Obamacare-expanded Medicaid Private Option 2.0, is all it is,” State Rep. Donnie Copeland, a Republican primary candidate in the Arkansas Senate’s 34th District, told Watchdog.org.

Hutchinson’s plan to ask the federal government for the Medicaid waivers necessary for Arkansas Works has already run into resistance from Sylvia Burwell, secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Copeland is doubtful the Obama administration will grant any meaningful waiver requests for work requirements, cost-sharing or the other aspects of Hutchinson’s Arkansas Works plan that would differentiate it from the Private Option.

“It is an attempt to obfuscate, and the whole farce of going to Washington and getting exemptions is totally ludicrous,” Copeland said. “If you’re the president of the United States and your goal is to expand the welfare state and you’ve got a state that took the money, why would you give them any exceptions?”

Copeland said that even Hutchinson’s proposed waivers would do little to improve the Private Option, which uses funding from the 2010 health law to buy insurance plans for Arkansans with incomes up to 138 percent of the poverty line.

“Even with the exceptions, we’ve got a hugely expanded welfare program and the bill is going to come due shortly. I’m totally opposed to it,” Copeland said, noting that Hutchinson promised to end the Private Option — not just rename it.

The Private Option was designed to make Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion palatable to Republican lawmakers, but costs have rocketed past supporters’ projections. Arkansas Works is backed by a legislative task force created when lawmakers voted to end the Private Option.

BACKGROUND: Will Arkansas Republicans renew Obamacare expansion?

Copeland — who is challenging incumbent Private Option supporter Sen. Jane English in the March 1 primary — is one of several Arkansas Senate candidates hoping to stop Arkansas Works in its tracks and avoid a Private Option repeat.

The Arkansas Senate District 7 and Arkansas Senate District 29 Republican primaries are also pivotal for the long-term viability of Arkansas Works, even if Hutchinson manages to push throgh approval of the program this spring.

In the 7th District, Private Option opponent Sharon Lloyd is running against State Rep. Lance Eads, who was hand-picked by allies of Private Option supporter State Sen. Jon Woods when Woods opted not to seek re-election.

Hutchinson appeared at a fundraiser for Eads on Feb. 12.

In the 29th District, Private Option opponent R.D. Hopper is challenging incumbent Private Option supporter Sen. Eddie Joe Williams.

English, Eads, and Williams did not respond to requests for comment on Arkansas Works and the Private Option.

Copeland told Watchdog.org he believes a few more anti-Obamacare votes in the Arkansas Senate would be enough to guarantee Arkansas Works doesn’t get a foothold after the Private Option expires in December.

“We’re so close in the Senate now,” Copeland said. “With one to two — definitely with three — votes in the Senate, we kill it dead.”