Ben Ludwig, Nate Press, Kirk Thomsen and Jeffrey Kriesel perform in “Bent.” Credit: Ryan Blomquist

By ,

"Anyone who even thinks of homosexual love is our enemy."

That chilling Orwellian remark comes from the Nazis' official position paper on being gay, promulgated five years before they took power in 1933. By 1935, even indulging "homosexual fantasies" was a crime.

That's the background informing Martin Sherman's "Bent," which premiered in 1979 and was first performed here in 1995, as the inaugural production by the group that morphed into Bialystok & Bloom. Now "Bent" is back, in a wrenching World's Stage Theatre Company production being directed by Don Russell.

"Bent" begins as a version of "Cabaret," with the odd couple of Sally and Cliff replaced by lovers Rudy (Doug Soder) and Max (Kirk Thomsen). Rudy is a gentle and emotive dancer who alternately nurses droopy plants and the done-in Max — suffering from a hangover reflecting a decade's worth of cocaine, booze and rough sex.

Recovering from his blind drunk, Max can't even remember picking up the SA stormtrooper (Benjamin Ludwig) who stumbles in from his bedroom. But neither Max nor Rudy will ever forget him: SS thugs burst into their flat and murder this unknown boy toy while Max and Rudy flee for their lives, on this morning after 1934's bloody Night of the Long Knives.

Within two years, Rudy is dead and Max is in Dachau, passing as Jewish because even displaying the now-compulsory yellow star beats wearing the pink triangle designating a prisoner as "queer." Which doesn't keep Max from falling for Horst (Nate Press), pink triangle and all.

What ensues — right down to these two prisoners' pointless task of moving rocks from pile to pile under the watchful eyes of their captors — bears a strong resemblance to Athol Fugard's "The Island," a riveting play currently on stage at American Players Theatre, in which two prisoners consigned to apartheid South Africa's notorious Robben Island struggle to maintain their sanity.

To suggest that either of these 1970s plays is now dated — with apartheid dead and gay marriage legal — is to assume that nominal equality magically eliminates ongoing hatred and the ways it gets internalized by its victims. Not so, which is why Max continually insists he's a bad man who can neither give nor receive love.

Thomsen conveys this self-loathing without either overacting or throwing Max a pity party, which renders his Max all the more credible. Press, as good here as I've seen him, strikes the perfect balance between tough, sarcastic humor and loving tenderness, allowing his Horst to spur Max's spring awakening.

That awakening is all the more powerful and moving because these perpetually watched men can neither touch nor look at each other — tough on them and on these two actors, who must convey a great deal while ostensibly doing little at all.

Helped along by Sherman's beautifully written script, they succeed, which renders unnecessary the often distracting video projections with which Russell accents their story. It's a rare misstep in a production that's both hard to watch and well worth seeing.

IF YOU GO

"Bent" continues through July 19 at Tenth Street Theatre, 628 N. 10th St. Note: The play includes a few scenes involving brief nudity. For tickets, visit bent.bpt.me.