Please enable Javascript to watch this video

RICHMOND, Va. -- This Tuesday will certainly not be a typical Election Day in Central Virginia.

That's because Republican Dave Brat and Democrat Jack Trammell are vying for former Majority Leader Eric Cantor's seat in the 7th District of Virginia.

Accordingly, both candidates will be appearing on the ballot twice. The first will be for the term beginning in January. The second position on the ballot will allow the winner to finish Cantor's term effective immediately. That means whoever wins could be sworn in as soon as this week.

"We are doing good. We are feeling really good about things," Trammell said.

Brat responded along similarly, saying "I think we are going to have a good outcome again."

CBS 6 News political reporter Joe St. George joined both candidates as they campaigned throughout the district Sunday. Trammell spent time at church services Sunday and then went door knocking in Henrico.

Brat hit several locations in the northern end of the district, including Potbelly's in Fredericksburg.

While Brat is leading in the race, Trammell said many analysts are not taking into effect several outside factors --- like who is going to show up and the fact there are several moderate Republicans in the 7th district. Trammell said his secret weapon may be the support Democratic Senator Mark Warner has in his election statewide.

"There are a lot of of factors people may not be considering, including the Warner effect," Trammell said.

However, Brat dismisses Warner's poll numbers. He believes the race is tightening resulting in a Ed Gillespie victory. Brat said the fact he beat Cantor in June shows voters' frustrations with Washington.

"I do think he [Gillespie] has a chance similar to me in the primary," Brat said.

On the issues, both men, who serve as professors at Randolph Macon, could not be further from each other.

Brat wants to defund Obamacare, while Trammell merely wants to make some adjustments. Trammell wants to raise the minimum wage, Brat does not.

As for each candidate's biggest issue, Trammell touts education reform while Brat wants changes to entitlement programs like Social Security.

James Carr is the libertarian in the race.