In an era known for over-the-top political antics, somehow Maine’s Governor Paul LePage is proving to be one of the nation’s most hotheaded politicians. Though Maine is known for its largely moderate stances, Gov. LePage’s far-right views and approach to leading isn’t just upsetting Democrats – it’s also concerning plenty of Republicans.

As a result of his inappropriate comments and disgraceful behavior, state legislators are currently discussing whether to pursue impeachment. Convincing enough Republicans to abandon faith in LePage in order to secure an impeachment might be a long shot, but there are plenty of reasons why Maine deserves a better governor:

1. He’s racist

Most recently, LePage made headlines for going on a bigoted rant, blaming Maine’s growing drug problem on out-of-state black men. “These are guys with the name D-Money, Smoothie, Shifty – these types of guys – they come from Connecticut and New York, they come up here, they sell their heroin, they go back home. Incidentally, half the time they impregnate a young white girl before they leave, which is the real sad thing,” he said.

Despite his comments dripping with coded racism, LePage insists he intended no racial connotations with his comments. That might be slightly more believable if he hadn’t previously declined an invitation to a NAACP event with an invitation of his own for the organization to “kiss [his] butt.” On another occasion, LePage was reported to declare that President Barack Obama “hates white people.”

2. He’s sexist, too

When activists pushed for publicly funded elections in the state, LePage shuddered at the thought, saying that it would cost taxpayers too much money. “That’s like… giving your wife your checkbook. Go spend!” he said.

LePage’s sexist stereotype is an embarrassing way to put down clean elections, particularly when it is spending in non-publicly funded elections that tends to get out of control. While it’s not clear whether LePage is aware of the statistics that show that women are more likely to run for office and win when public financing is available, his stance against the proposal could be at least as harmful as his reasoning.

3. He’s ridiculously anti-labor

LePage caused a big stink when he decided to remove a popular mural that portrayed a history of Maine’s labor struggles in the Department of Labor. The mural featured specific strikes, women shipbuilders, fights to reduce work hours and increase safety, and the end of child labor. Vocally anti-union, LePage explained that the mural was too “one-sided” and wasn’t fair to businesses.

Sadly, getting rid of the mural wasn’t just a symbolic gesture – he’s also tried to pass legislation that counters the labor advancements depicted in the mural… including weakening child labor laws. LePage advocates dropping the legal labor age to 12, adding that these minors should also receive sub-minimum wage payment for this work.

4. He stands accused of blackmail

Allegedly, LePage took revenge on his political rival Mark Eves, the Democratic House Speaker of Maine, this past year by getting him removed from Good Will-Hinckley, the charter school organization he headed. According to a lawsuit, LePage told Good Will-Hinckley that he would withdraw all state funding allotted to the non-profit if it didn’t sack Eves, leaving the schools with no choice but to dump the politician. Though the lawsuit is still pending, LePage says he’ll claim immunity in court.

5. He limited citizens’ health care options

While campaigning in the 2014 governor race, LePage committed himself to “find[ing] a way” to cover his state’s uninsured population. However, anyone paying attention would have known how disingenuous this claim was, given how he blatantly vetoed Medicaid expansion legislation that would have taken care of these people – all at no cost to the state.

Why would he do that? Simply put, the funds came from Obamacare, something LePage stubbornly refused to accept. Claiming you want to help people while denying the money that would secure insurance coverage for these people out of spite is no way to be a leader.

6. He unsuccessfully rage-vetoed a lot of legislation while trying to eliminate income tax

After referring to the IRS as the “new Gestapo,” LePage went on a tear last year insisting that Maine legislators adopt his plan to eliminate the state income tax altogether. Not paying taxes sounds nice, but since half of the state’s revenue comes from income tax, Maine would be in a lot of trouble without this money. When Democrats refused to sign off on this amendment, the governor threatened to retaliate by vetoing every single Democratic bill until they agreed to his plan.

Lest you think that’s all a bit of bluster, LePage actually vetoed 65 bills passed by Maine’s Congress in an act of retaliation… or at least he tried to. Apparently, the governor misunderstood the timetable for vetoing the legislation and missed the deadline. He insisted that his tardy vetoes should stand, but the Supreme Court ultimately disagreed, so all of the bills wound up becoming law anyway. I don’t know whether it’s worse that he broadly vetoed so many bills out of spite, or that he was too incompetent to even follow through on that threat correctly, but neither scenario seems to make him a good governor.

If you support the effort to see Governor Paul LePage impeached, you can sign the petition here.

Photo Credit: Matt Gagnon