Portland motorists who've encountered warning signs like those pictured above may have scratched their heads in confusion. Yes, it's easy to recognize what's depicted: a pedestrian and a cyclist. It's also clear where, in this case, the signs point: to a marked crosswalk at an intersection. But even seemingly simple signs can create confusion in real-world traffic as road users make snap decisions based upon their understanding of the law and – yes, this happens – their desire to be courteous.

The city installs these signs at certain intersections for an entirely laudable reason: to notify motorists of heavy bicycle and pedestrian traffic. Drivers, thus warned, exercise heightened caution – looking, for instance, for bikes and pedestrians in and near the crosswalk.

Editorial Agenda 2015

Make Portland a city that works Get pot right Smart choices for education Help rural Oregon Keep people and goods moving Foster small business growth Track health reforms

_______________________________ Read more about the editorial board's priorities for Oregon.

Before we get to the unintended confusion these signs can create, let's dispense with a question some drivers who see this sign are bound to ask themselves (you know who you are): Does the law require motorists to treat people riding bikes in crosswalks as they treat pedestrians, for whom they must yield? As a practical matter, no responsible motorist would consider endangering a cyclist regardless of who's in the right. But it's human nature to wonder about such things, if only because we like to know whether we should be irked.

Julie Yip, a bicycle and pedestrian safety specialist with the state department of transportation, referred us to Portland cycling attorney Ray Thomas. The answer, says Thomas: Yes, motorist, you have to yield. Cyclists operating on sidewalks and in crosswalks have their own set of responsibilities, including an obligation not to ride at Tour de France speeds. But cyclists, riding at an appropriately sedate pace, are entitled to the same protection in crosswalks as people on foot. Motorists should not be aggrieved here – as far as you're concerned, the cyclist in the crosswalk is a pedestrian.

More interesting, and potentially dangerous, is a problem that originates, paradoxically, in a desire by motorists to be nice to cyclists, says Thomas. This is one instance in which Portland Polite, encouraged by well-intentioned signage, is counterproductive.

The problem begins, says Thomas, when drivers – either through confusion or misplaced courtesy – apply the deferential treatment encouraged by the sign not only to cyclists in the crosswalk, but also to those in traffic lanes. Imagine, for instance, that you pull your car up to the intersection, spot the sign, and see a cyclist preparing to heed the "stop" sign on the crossing street. Do you wave him through or make him wait his turn despite the warning sign's encouragement to be nice?

If you said "wave him through," you get an "F." Cyclists in the traffic lane are obligated to do things like stop at "stop" signs and wait their turn. If the cyclist accepts your invitation to go out of turn, he will violate the law – and perhaps even be hit by a vehicle whose driver expected him to do what he's supposed to. On the other hand, when cyclists do the right thing and refuse the hospitality of well-intentioned motorists, they may seem ungrateful and rude. Feelings get hurt.

Conflicts and accidents involving motorists and cyclists happen for a variety of reasons, including consciously bad behavior by people in both camps. Unfortunately, jerks will be jerks. For everyone else, civility and safety are best served by attentiveness, knowledge of the rules of the road and simple signage that does not inadvertently encourage undesirable behavior. In this last regard, the well-intentioned signs above function imperfectly. They create what Thomas calls "ambiguous intersections" that could use, he says, a public-education campaign.

Portland has installed 262 of the signs since October 1998. They're not going anywhere, and we're not suggesting that they should. Drivers, however, ought to remember two things when approaching designated intersections: Yield without complaint to cyclists in crosswalks, and give no special treatment to cyclists in the lane of traffic. They don't want or need it.