TALLAHASSEE | The Florida Senate says it is willing to alter its Medicaid expansion plan to gain the support of House Republicans who have opposed the measure.

Starting Monday, the first day of a special session to craft the state budget, senators will consider an amendment to the same Medicaid expansion proposal they approved during the regular session. The amendment contains provisions to the Senate’s “Florida Health Insurance Exchange” program, or FHIX, aimed to neutralize critics like Gov. Rick Scott and House budget chief Richard Corcoran.

For example, the amendment removes a six-month transition period that puts new enrollees into the state’s existing Medicaid system, opting instead to go straight to the private options starting January 1. And it makes sure that the same plans found on the federal insurance exchange are options for the expansion population. Corcoran has criticized the Senate plan for forcing people who currently use subsidies to purchase insurance on the exchange to give up their plans and join Medicaid.

Sen. Aaron Beach, R-Fernandina Beach, filed the amendment Tuesday as the sponsor of Senate Bill 7044. Bean called it “FHIX 2.0” or the “FHIX Remix,” and said “believe it or not, it is even more conservative than the original bill.”

But even this amended measure would face an uncertain future in the House. “I don’t see it being worked out,” Corcoran said Tuesday after learning about the Senate’s revised plan.

Under the revised bill, the state would provide vouchers to the estimated 800,000 who fall into the gap between Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act. Using the voucher, the recipient would purchase an insurance policy through a state-based insurance exchange.

The amendment also tightens the requirement that those receiving vouchers either work, volunteer or demonstrate they are seeking employment by registering with CareerSource Florida, the state’s workforce development agency. There are exceptions for the disabled and for caregivers.

The vouchers would be paid for with the funds from the federal government that had been promised for Medicaid expansion, an estimated $50 billion over the next decade.

“This way we maintain sovereignty,” Bean said.

The federal government has never before approved a work requirement as part of a state’s Medicaid expansion plan. If Washington doesn’t agree with aspects of the bill, “the feds would likely come to us with a plan,” Bean said. “We would have the final say. We could approve it or change it again.”

House Speaker Steve Crisafulli expressed doubt about the revised plan because it includes a work requirement that the federal government has frowned upon in the past. And Scott issued a statement indicating the Senate revisions would not affect his opposition to Medicaid expansion.

“The Senate’s plan to expand Medicaid under Obamacare will cost Florida taxpayers $5 billion over 10 years,” Scott said Tuesday. “A budget that keeps Florida’s economy growing will cut taxes and give Floridians back more of the money they earn, not inevitably raise taxes in order to implement Obamacare and grow government.”

Bean said his highest priority is “keeping the doors of UF Health open.” He is employed at the Jacksonville hospital that treats a large number of uninsured patients.

With the federal government reducing Low Income Pool funding to $1 billion next year, a decrease of $1.2 billion, it’s going to take $700 million in general revenue funds from the state to ensure safety net hospitals like UF Health don’t lose money in the coming fiscal year.

“That’s very expensive,” Bean said.

The Senate’s Health Policy Committee, which he chairs, will consider the FHIX amendment and likely vote on the Medicaid expansion plan Monday. The full Senate could vote as early as June 3, sending the matter to the House for consideration.

Meanwhile the governor’s Healthcare and Hospital Commission plans to meet June 4 and start drafting recommendations to improve how state funding is divided among Florida’s hospitals, especially those that provide the most charity care.

The commission held its second meeting Tuesday in Orlando, where members learned more about hospital profit margins and the impact of LIP dollars used to help defray the costs of treating the uninsured.

For example, UF Health Jacksonville had a slight loss last year, but it would have been worse without the $95 million in LIP funding the hospital receives. Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami posted a profit, but it would have been in the red without hundreds of million of LIP dollars.

These two hospitals are among 26 the commission praised for mostly complying with Scott’s wide-ranging request for financial and patient data. The commission also publicly chastised 194 hospitals that have refused to respond, including members of the for-profit HCA chain that Scott once led.

Tia Mitchell: (850) 933-1321

Charlie Patton: (904) 359-4413