NuView Academy teacher Nicole Elmini was named a "Hybrid Learning Rock Star" in the "Best New Artist" category, from the Hybrid Learning Institute

NuView Teacher Nicole Elmini, shown with student Brian Rodriquez, was recently named a “Hybrid Learning Rock Star” in the “Best New Artist” category, from the Hybrid Learning Institute. (Photo: Photo courtesy of Middlesex Regional Educational Services Commission) Story Highlights NuView Academy teacher Nicole Elmini was named a Hybrid Learning Rock Star.

HLI and Dellicker Strategies worked with schools to adopt the instructional Hybrid learning method.

NuView Academy teacher Nicole Elmini has been named a "Hybrid Learning Rock Star" in the "Best New Artist" category, from the Hybrid Learning Institute (HLI).

The Best New Artist award goes to educators who "made the most positive impact on students during their first year of hybrid instruction," said Kevin Dellicker, president and CEO of Dellicker Strategies, whose firm has worked with the HLI since 2012 in an effort to improve student academic performance.

"We hear so much about what needs to be changed in public education," Dellicker said. "These awards are about what is being done right, and recognizing teachers and administrators for exceptional contributions to their students and their profession."

NuView Academy is one of the schools of the Middlesex Regional Educational Services Commission.

The institute and Dellicker Strategies have worked with more than 50 schools to adopt the instructional Hybrid learning method, with 94 percent of participating schools reporting improved student academic performance, according to Dellicker.

Hybrid learning combines digital and face-to-face instruction, resulting in more personalized learning opportunities in an effort to improve student academic performance. The program was introduced at three MRESC schools in September 2014 and included providing each student with a Google Chromebook to use during school hours.

"Given how technology has exploded, particularly over the past decade, it is critical to offer a classroom experience for students reflective of our changing world," said Gary Molenaar, assistant superintendent for Learning/Educational Services.

The MRESC was also designated as the official Hybrid Learning model in New Jersey by the HLI.

Hybrid Learning is being implemented at the following MRESC schools:

• The NuView Academy, which collaborates with Princeton House to serve students ages 5-21 who have a diagnosis of depression, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and conduct, thought or anxiety disorders.

• The Raritan Valley Academy, for students ages 10-21 with behavioral, learning and/or language disabilities.

• The Middlesex County Academy, for students ages 12-21 who are at-risk or classified.

The MRESC operates seven schools, providing a range of services for students ages 3-21 with autism, multiple disabilities and at-risk behavior, and facilitates a clinical support program for students 5-21 years old. Founded in 1977, the MRESC also manages a Co-op Pricing System, the largest state approved cooperative, and coordinates transportation services for more than 14,000 students throughout New Jersey.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1amXCx9