Buy Photo Wade McCurdy, center, of Nashville, holds a sign as demonstrators in favor of Insure Tennessee gather before the annual State of the State address at the state Capitol on Monday. (Photo: Andrew Nelles / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

As Gov. Bill Haslam delivered his sixth State of the State speech Monday, upwards of 100 proponents of Insure Tennessee flocked to the Capitol to once again press the issue.

About 100 pro-Insure Tennessee supporters chanting outside House chamber. State of the State at 6 pm pic.twitter.com/3jKr9B3Tx6 — Dave Boucher (@Dave_Boucher1) February 1, 2016

When Haslam walked into the chamber, supporters of the governor's controversial health insurance proposal cheered him on.

Insure Tennessee supporters give @BillHaslam a big round of applause as he enters House chamber pic.twitter.com/4hGQTyArS3 — Dave Boucher (@Dave_Boucher1) February 1, 2016

The demonstrators could be heard before and after Haslam’s remarks as they directed cheers and chants at Haslam, House Speaker Beth Harwell and Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey.

As lawmakers walk out of chamber here's the scene pic.twitter.com/sNzv95tlh5 — Joel Ebert (@joelebert29) February 2, 2016

Ramsey, who praised Haslam's agenda, calling it "ambitious," said the demonstrators were within well their rights to express their opinions. “That’s what democracy’s all about,” he said. “But we have to remember what’s best for all Tennesseans.”

More singing, chanting from Insure Tennessee supporters. @BillHaslam hasn't entered chamber yet pic.twitter.com/eLGciyaEsZ — Dave Boucher (@Dave_Boucher1) February 2, 2016

Ramsey once again reiterated the need for lawmakers to wait until after the November presidential election to address the issue.

After Haslam concluded his speech, state Sen. Jeff Yarbro, D-Nashville, pointed to the crowd to reiterate that the issue was not going away.

“The elephant in the room was what he didn’t talk about. There was no mention of Insure Tennessee despite this huge crowd,” Yarbro said.

State Democratic Party Chairwoman Mary Mancini went further, saying that despite the fact that Republicans have a supermajority in both chambers, the governor’s health insurance plan couldn’t get out of committee during the 2015 session.

Haslam's plan sought to use federal money made available through the Affordable Care Act to expand access to health insurance for low-income Tennesseans. But the effort gained little momentum in the legislature and was ultimately not adopted, despite being touted by the governor.

“Even worse, when the going gets tough, he gave up,” Mancini said. “He could have brought back Insure Tennessee. He could have used his leadership to pass a health care plan that would have saved lives and created opportunity. Instead, he caved to the extremists in his party.”

Monday's gathering of Insure Tennessee supporters comes after they also assembled on the first day of the legislative session.

Dave Boucher contributed to this report.

Reach Joel Ebert at 615-259-8379 and on Twitter @joelebert29.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1WZSRMc