The new facility is slated to open in the fall. Amazon offers competitive wages and comprehensive benefits, company officials said.

In this June 30, 2011 file photo, a United Parcel Service driver delivers packages from Amazon.com in Palo Alto, California. (Photo: AP) Story Highlights Besides competitive wages, Amazon immediately offers new employees comprehensive benefits.

Mayor Daniel Reiman said Amazon is a welcome addition to the community.

Applications are being accepted at www.workatamazonfulfillment.com.

CARTERET – The search is on for 500 employees to staff the Amazon.com fulfillment center, which is expected to open this fall in the borough.

The company has launched an intensive recruitment process, urging potential team members to apply now, according to a statement from the company.

The 1-million-square-foot fulfillment center will be at 8003 Industrial Ave.

Besides competitive wages, Amazon immediately offers new employees comprehensive benefits that include health insurance, 401(k) with 50 percent match, bonuses, company stock awards and a network of support to ensure employees succeed, the statement said.

Amazon also offers full-time employees other programs like Career Choice, where the company will pre-pay up to 95 percent of tuition for courses related to in-demand fields, regardless of whether the skills are relevant to a career at Amazon, the statement said.

There will soon be solid, well-paying jobs for people who are willing to work hard and embrace the Amazon philosophy for success, according to an Amazon spokesman.

Applicants from throughout the area are invited to apply.

Mayor Daniel Reiman said Amazon is a welcome addition to the community, adding that the borough is working to partner local residents with these new positions.

The borough has been conducting training sessions with Ready To Work New Jersey (RTWNJ), during which local residents can receive assistance building resumes and cover letters, the mayor said. After that, Ready To Work New Jersey will work to match residents with companies in the area looking to hire, he said.

The mayor said Amazon’s announcement to move to the borough came after a year of discussions with Amazon and the property owner.

“The building is located on a redevelopment site, which was built only a few years ago on an old, 100-plus-acre landfill,” Reiman said. “It’s a state-of-the art structure. It’s really ideal to the operation.”

The facility, which is in an urban enterprise zone, was used temporarily by Wakefern while rebuilding its Elizabeth facility, the mayor said.

Amazon also has fulfillment centers in Robbinsville and Woodbridge.

Applications are being accepted at www.workatamazonfulfillment.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1NatO3X