Private insurance exchanges expected to attract more small biz

Small-business interest in private health insurance exchanges is expected to produce more sales this fall as employers seek lower costs and convenient solutions to the design of their benefit plans, several insurance experts say.



Executives with Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan's GlidePath — the state's first private exchange, formed in 2011 — and Royal Oak-based iSelect Custom Benefits Store say sales have progressed as expected, although the slow rollout of Obamacare last fall has caused some companies to delay overhauling their health benefit plans.

ISelect CEO Denise Christy said more than 100 companies have expressed interest this fall in iSelect's multi-insurance line on private exchanges.



"We expect to double the number of groups by January 1" from about the 35 customers iSelect has today, Christy said. "We are seeing a lot of interest in people that never offered insurance before," she said.



The model works by employers setting a budget for health care costs, then allocating each employee an amount to spend on benefits in the exchange. The employee's contribution would be deducted from his or her pay.



So far, nearly 100 small-business customers in Michigan have signed up through private exchanges with iSelect and GlidePath, executives said.





Steve Selinsky, director of new business and consumer solutions at HAP, said there has been some hesitation from some companies to move into private exchanges because they have extended their current policies.



"This fall, many are going to make choices. We could see increased interest in private exchange products," Selinsky said. "The defined-contribution approach is a cost containment strategy if they know they only have 'X' amount to spend for benefits."



Bruce Marwil, president of Farmington Hills-based Marwil Associates, said many small businesses with 10 or fewer covered lives and up to 200 lives are exploring private exchanges and defined-contribution approaches to funding health benefits.



"The concept is sound. The problem is the rates are not competitive yet with other options," he said. "I have looked at several private exchanges, and if the prices are more expensive than renewal rates, why do it?"



But Marwil expects some companies facing high rates if they renew their current coverage to look into private exchanges and the defined-contribution approach.



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene

Related Links