Call 573-815-1776 or email tribtalk@columbiatribune.com to contribute.

Jim Robertson, managing editor

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

“Almeta Crayton was a leader in many areas. She presented much reality to the city council, but perhaps even more important to remember is the quality of giving and caring she gave to all. There will be a time soon when the new grade school will be built, and who better to honor than Almeta?”

“People feel strongly about the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare. It seems there is a lot of misinformation out there, particularly in social media and on cable news. I would like to encourage people to investigate for themselves before making a decision. I’m not old enough for Medicare, and I wanted to know what’s available instead of relying on rumors. I don’t have a computer or Internet access at my house. I called the Department of Aging in the same building as the senior center on Business Loop. There are trained navigators that will take you through the healthcare.gov website. You do need an appointment. It’s totally free!”

“Hank Waters writes in his Oct. 19 column, ‘Skyscraper,’ that ‘deciding the ratio of internal parking for high-rise buildings is akin to decisions regarding elevators, swimming pools and other amenities.’ What flawed logic from a usually rational guy. Residents, guests, employees and patrons will not compete with other businesses and the public for elevators, pools and other internal amenities, but they sure will for nearby parking spaces. Inadequate parking would create traffic congestion and conflict between neighbors.”

“The story in the Oct. 17 Tribune about building a 24-story apartment building at Sixth and Elm makes we wonder if the city fathers have totally lost their minds. Four hundred units with parking for only half the tenants — total insanity! Elm is a narrow street and the main entrance to the north campus and many other places. The construction alone would block the street for months. Afterward the increased congestion would be a nightmare. Who in the world would want to fight this situation? It would create a major reason to avoid going downtown for anything that you could find elsewhere.”

“I have a modestly paying job. We live frugally and recycle as much as possible. We put out a garbage bag less often than once a month. We live near the recycling station behind Gerbes and walk there periodically with our paper, cans, etc. Our neighbors who gripe about the cost of garbage need to think about what they, themselves, can do about that cost.”

“Sometimes I find the comments in Trib Talk incredulous; Oct. 15 was no different. Where to start? One commenter says Obama bypassed the Constitution to get ‘Obamacare’ illegally passed. Both houses actually passed this into law, so how was it illegal? And he says, ‘U.S. citizens should have had the right to vote on Obamacare.’ You did! You voted for your senator or representative, and they either voted for it or against the law. It’s not a democracy; it’s a republic (i.e., we vote for our representatives, and they are supposed to represent us on all laws, not just Obamacare). Another caller relays her conversations with other conservatives that Hartzler prefers the Affordable Care Act over Obamacare. Hello? I don’t think Congress passed a bill titled ‘Obamacare’ — rather the Affordable Care Act, which everyone is negatively referring to as ‘Obamacare.’ Do Hartzler and other conservatives know the difference?”