BOULDER — If the question in the women’s elite race at Monday’s Bolder Boulder was how much Ethiopia’s Mamitu Daska would win by, then in the men’s race, it was: Could Eritrea’s Afewerki Berhane even hold on?

Yes, but barely — by 1.64 seconds — enough to keep Kenya’s Allan Kiprono from becoming the first runner to win three straight Bolder Boulders. Berhane finished in 29 minutes, 11.37 seconds.

“I was not expecting to be No. 1,” Berhane said through a translator. He smiled while recalling the thunderous noise of thousands as he entered Folsom Field, something he said he had never felt in a race.

The margin of victory was among the smallest in Bolder Boulder history. In 2010, three runners finished within a second of one another. In 2008 and 1992, only one second separated first and second.

In the team standings, USA Red finished third — equaling the team performance of the U.S. women — with 32 points, behind winner Eritrea, which had 16 and was fielding a team for the first time. Ethiopia finished second with 24, and Kenya was fourth with 40 points.

PHOTOS: Thousands run in Colorado’s 2014 Bolder Boulder 10K

But the biggest surprise of the race came from Lafayette’s Sean Quigley, a Saucony-sponsored runner relatively unknown outside elite racing circles, who finished as the top American in seventh overall, besting Olympic marathoner Ryan Hall and others who were expected to beat him.

Hall finished ninth in 30:12.97 — his second running of the Bolder Boulder. He was seventh in 2011 in 30:29.33.

“Every single guy who runs into this stadium feels like a rock star,” Hall said. “I was just taking it pretty conservative, because I knew from running at altitude that you can’t get out too aggressively. So I played it pretty cautious, and it was nice running with Sean for a good part of the race. We worked together to catch a lot of guys.”

Quigley, quiet, unassuming and modest, deflected the praise, saying the talent of the Americans in the race was comparable from runner to runner. He has shunned Twitter, Facebook and other traditional promotional outlets, expecting his performances to speak for themselves. He called Monday’s finish the biggest race he has had in four years.

“The game plan was to be conservative the first two miles and then hopefully guys would start falling back and I could reel them in,” Quigley said. “I think the aggressiveness of the lead pack early on probably helped my advantage.”

Quigley graduated from La Salle in Philadelphia in 2008 and continued to train with his college coach, Charles Torpey.

In the summer of 2011, Torpey accompanied Quigley on a bike for an 8-mile tempo run at a local park. Afterward, Quigley left Torpey for a cool-down, and when he returned, he saw ambulances in the distance, but didn’t see Torpey. He ran to the ambulances, believing Torpey went over to help, and once over there, realized what had happened: Torpey died from a heart attack that day.

“It was like losing a family member,” Quigley said, recalling the incident a few months ago while trying to hold back tears.

He left Philadelphia behind for Colorado for a chance to train at altitude and to forge a fresh start. He has been coached by Boulder’s Lee Troop ever since but has battled through injuries. Last year, he dropped out of the Bolder Boulder elite race with an Achilles tendon injury.

“The only reason he wanted to run was because of the disappointment of last year,” Troop said. “He wanted to redeem himself in the eyes of the organizers, his track club. It just speaks volumes about a kid who just came out and raced the way he did. I’m proud of him.”

For Quigley, success in races means much more now than it ever has.

“I’m just thankful,” he said. “I feel my body’s getting closer to that point. If I stay injury-free, I know good things can come.”

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com or twitter.com/danielpetty