Respected: Edward Clancy in 1994. Photo: Dean Sewell

As a young boy, Edward Bede Clancy believed the most important thing in life was to save as many souls as possible. When his father, John, asked him why he wanted to be a priest, Edward replied: "One, because it seems to me that by far the most important thing for anybody is, in the end, to go to heaven, and I think my surest way is to become a priest. Two, because, if I get to heaven, I would like to take others with me, or at least help them along the way."

His clear-headed, youthful conviction did not waver; Clancy entered the seminary when he was 16 and was ordained in St Mary’s Cathedral on July 23, 1949. In February 1983 he became the seventh Catholic Archbishop of Sydney, a role he held until 2001 when he retired.

Archbishop George Pell receiving the staff from Cardinal Edward Clancy, his predecessor, in 2001.

Cardinal Clancy, the Emeritus Archbishop of Sydney, died early on Sunday at the Mount Saint Joseph's Hostel and Nursing Home in Randwick where he was being cared for by the Little Sisters of the Poor. He was 90.

Advertisement

Edward Bede Clancy was born in Lithgow on December 13, 1923. His mother died when he was young and he was brought up by his schoolteacher father. According to one friend, he imbued young Ted with the disciplined spirit of the times.

He was educated at Holy Camp Public School in Grenfell in the central west of NSW; St Monica's Primary School and Good Samaritan School in Richmond, north-west of Sydney; and at Marist Brothers in Parramatta. He studied at the seminaries St Columba’s College, Springwood, and St Patrick’s College, Manly.

Retired Cardinal Edward Clancy at his home in Bellevue in 2005. Photo: Lee Besford

After his ordination, Father Clancy spent four years in Rome studying sacred scripture. When he returned to Australia he taught at St Patrick's College in Manly, served as assistant priest of Elizabeth Bay, and later Liverpool, before being appointed Professor of Sacred Scripture at St Columba's in 1959.

There he also served as Dean of Discipline. He was known as a hard taskmaster; a favourite phrase was that students needed to "exercise due decorum" and he acquired the nickname "Judy Corum".

As the Auxilliary Bishop of Sydney in the mid-'70s, Cardinal Clancy was given responsibility for western Sydney, and his deep concern for the welfare of ordinary people led to him being affectionately known as the ‘‘Bishop of Blacktown’’. A long-time friend said, ‘‘He’s best at relating to ordinary people where they’re at.’’

In 1978, Pope John Paul II appointed Bishop Clancy to the Archdiocese of Canberra-Goulburn as archbishop, where he remained until 1983 when he became Archbishop of Sydney. In 1988 he was elevated to the Sacred College of Cardinals.

Cardinal Clancy's friend and the parish priest of Woollahra, Father Don Richardson, said on Sunday that, as archbishop of Sydney, he lived a simple and very disciplined life.

“He was a fairly retiring sort of guy; he was not gregarious. But at home when he was relaxed and among the people he was living with he was very thoughtful and he was quite witty and very human," said Father Richardson, who as a former assistant priest at St Mary's Cathedral, shared quarters with the cardinal.

Cardinal Clancy, who was known as a workaholic, was the Archbishop of Sydney through a tumultuous time in the Catholic Church's history. “He was a steadying force; a moderating force; he was by inclination conservative without being reactionary,” said Father Richardson.

In one interview, Cardinal Clancy described himself as "open-minded".

"He was a very precise man; essentially he was a fairly gentle man but willing to take tough decisions," Monsignor Tony Doherty, parish priest of Rose Bay Catholic Church, said on Sunday.

Monsignor Doherty pointed to Cardinal Clancy's decision to split Sydney into three dioceses. "It was a very difficult and legally complex action to take. This was a devolution of power which very few leaders are quick to undertake."

It was the Cardinal's support, especially in Rome, that resulted in the eventual canonisation of Australia’s first saint, Mary MacKillop. He hosted two visits by Pope John Paul II to Sydney.

In 1992 he was made a Companion in the Order of Australia for service to religion, learning and the disadvantaged in the community. "I consider my nomination a great honour and recognition of what the Catholic Church has contributed to Australia," he said at the time.

Cardinal Clancy is survived by his sister, Iris, and his brother, Brother Ken Clancy, a member of the Missionaries of the Sacred Heart.

There will be a funeral Mass at St Mary’s Cathedral to celebrate his life. He will be buried in the crypt of the cathedral.

– with AAP