Kurt DelBene is returning to Microsoft less than two years after the longtime executive left the company. He will become executive vice president of corporate strategy and planning, a new role on the senior leadership team.

Kurt DelBene is returning to Microsoft less than two years after the longtime executive left the Redmond company.

Microsoft announced on Monday that DelBene has been named executive vice president of corporate strategy and planning, a new role on the company’s 16-person senior leadership team. He will report to Chief Executive Satya Nadella.

In his new role, DelBene will advise Nadella on internal strategy, the company says, with a focus on coordinating planning and implementation of the company’s goals across Microsoft’s wide range of business units.

Mark Penn, the Microsoft executive who 13 months ago was named “chief strategy officer” as part of Nadella’s first executive shakeup, loses that title with DelBene’s arrival. Penn is now listed as Microsoft’s “chief insight officer” on the company’s online roster of top executives.

DelBene retired from Microsoft in 2013 as part of the sweeping reorganization instituted under then-CEO Steve Ballmer. He had spent more than two decades at Microsoft, ultimately leading the company’s Office division when the retooling of Microsoft’s structure moved that team under the leadership of Qi Lu.

He was later tapped by President Obama to lead the effort to fix the Affordable Care Act’s HealthCare.gov website after its troubled launch. DelBene returned to the Northwest last year, taking a role advising and investing in technology startups at Seattle venture capital firm Madrona Venture Group. Companies he advised include Bellevue project-management software builder Smartsheet and ExtraHop Networks, a Seattle firm that tracks network data performance for businesses.

DelBene’s new role is designed to work in concert with two other executives on the company’s senior leadership team who are charged with overseeing strategy, rather than engineering groups or specific functions like marketing. Amy Hood, chief financial officer, will continue to oversee budgets and mergers and acquisitions. Peggy Johnson, the former Qualcomm executive hired in August as business development chief, leads external sales deals and partnerships.

“My hunch is that, with [DelBene] having operated large portions of the Microsoft business over the years, he will be instrumental in setting strategy” and piloting a few initiatives that cut across Microsoft business units, said Matt McIlwain, a managing director with Madrona. Nadella “wanted to have someone on his leadership team who could help him think strategically and has a deep familiarity within Microsoft of how to get things done.”

Jeff Teper, a former Office executive appointed last year to lead a corporate strategy team under Hood, will now report to DelBene.

“I’m excited to rejoin Microsoft,” DelBene said in a statement. “My time in Washington and in working with startups has brought a fresh appreciation for the challenges our industry faces, and the ways Microsoft has the talent and ambition to tackle these challenges in creative ways.”

DelBene will join Microsoft next week.

He is married to U.S. Rep. Suzan DelBene, D-Medina, whose district includes Microsoft’s Redmond campus and the homes of much of the company’s local workforce.

Penn, a former chief executive of public relations giant Burson-Marsteller, has been credited as a force behind both Microsoft’s aborted “scroogled” campaign targeting Google’s privacy practices and, later, its more uplifting “Empowering” ad campaign. Microsoft officials have said the former adviser to Bill and Hillary Clinton has focused recently on analytics and competitive research rather than corporate strategy.