An approach that can be sustained long-term

Lucy Deakin, left, and Hayden Niederhauser, weed one of the plots in the school garden at Red Hawk Elementary earlier this year. The school has been awarded a grant to develop an online class for teachers on incorporating more movement into the school day. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Erie's Red Hawk Elementary recently was awarded a grant to develop an online class for teachers on incorporating more movement into the school day.

The $50,000, two-year Thriving Schools grant from Kaiser Permanente Colorado allows the school to continue work from a previous $100,000, two-year Thriving Schools grant, said Red Hawk Principal Cyrus Weinberger.

"We want to take a very successful model and scale it up," he said.

In the most recent round of Thriving Schools grants, sixteen Colorado school districts will receive a combined $968,080.

Along with the grant to St. Vrain's Red Hawk, the neighboring Adams 12 school district will receive $150,000 over two years to introduce and support physical activity programs at multiple schools, including Legacy High School.

At Erie's Red Hawk, the school has scheduled student movement sessions each morning since the school opened in August 2011.

Weinberger said the benefits of integrating movement in the school day — higher academic performance, better retention of information and focus, and fewer behavior issues — is backed by about 20 years of research.

Using the first Thriving Schools grant, he said, Red Hawk provided training for 75 teachers at five elementary schools plus Erie Middle and Erie High. The teachers also met monthly Red Hawk mentors.

The new grant will go to develop a semester-long online class that will culminate with a capstone project at the teacher's school.

Advertisement

"Teachers will learn about the research and resources, then, within their school, they'll identify a project to bring in more physical activity," Weinberger said. "The goal is for those teachers to form a core team to sustain what they're doing over time."

Todd Bissell, principal at Erie Middle School, said teachers were "really intrigued" by the idea of integrating movement into class time.

He said about 10 teachers received training from Red Hawk, then shared what they learned with the rest of the school's staff members. Teachers started adding "brain breaks" and other physical activity in late spring.

The options are flexible enough to meet the needs of different grades, he said. Sixth-graders, for example, like jumping jacks and following choreographed dance moves. Eighth-graders like to take outside walks.

"It helps them become more attentive in class," Bissell said. "It helps wake the brain up."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa