Click To View Gallery

With the Affordable Care Act in place and an economy on the rise, retail and healthcare are an inseparable pair. Healthcare organizations are ramping up to improve patient experience and population health—not only by embracing preventive care and cost-conscious measures, but also by creating retail-like healthcare environments. Today’s providers are migrating deeper than ever into communities, luring consumers with convenient care in a smaller, less-expensive outpatient footprint.

“I think the biggest hospitals in the country are eventually going to figure out that acute care hospitals are going to get smaller and receive fewer investments from here on out, and what’s going to get increasingly invested in are these retail places,” says geomedical consultant Bill Davenhall, formerly of Esri (Redlands, Calif.), a geographic information systems software provider.

In turn, retailers in the drug store, grocery store, and general merchandise markets are capitalizing on an opportunity to provide healthcare services in the same space their customers buy health-related products. Whether they’re aggressively pursuing these opportunities on their own or—more and more—partnering with healthcare systems, the result is a growing mix of healthcare and retail strategies in site selection, design elements, and more.

Add to this a trend toward more merchants setting up branded shops within healthcare campuses and healthcare spaces moving into former stores, and the lines between retail and healthcare become even blurrier.

Selecting sites, street by street

As both physicians and retailers race to deliver more community-oriented healthcare, they’re increasingly relying on big data. According to Este Geraghty, chief medical officer at Esri, that means examining insurance coverage, age, race, predominant languages, and disease prevalence, as well as less expected factors such as income level, educational attainment, and home ownership rates, in order to select sites and specialties offered.

Craig Beam, managing director of healthcare services for commercial real estate firm CBRE (Newport Beach, Calif.), says this process has helped healthcare providers leverage retailers’ site-selection savvy: “A more thoughtful approach is starting to emerge that looks at demographics, payer mix, traffic patterns, and medical use rates. While these can define areas, there’s still the need to consider visibility, access, parking, and the more traditional retail qualifications for a site,” he says, noting that healthcare providers are now taking over mid-sized spaces vacated in recent years by retailers like Blockbuster, Circuit City, and RadioShack.

Beam uses proprietary analytics software to help health systems select new locations; he can pinpoint a given diagnostic code “down to the street corner.” Then, for example, he might advise a primary care provider in a saturated market to buy up existing practices rather than launch new sites. And healthcare providers that give the community what it needs (ideally, in an attractive setting) are also those most likely to score highly on satisfaction surveys. Thus, designers who can provide the tools to research patients’ behavior, desires, and unmet needs will be more competitive in tomorrow’s healthcare design market.

Yet healthcare systems aren’t currently moving into community-based models purely for profit. “It’s mostly market share,” Beam says. “Most are looking at it as less about the financial viability of a space and more about retaining market presence, which is a nice way of saying most of them lose money.” The real money to be made is in long-term brand recognition and referrals from branded clinics to other providers in the system for pricier diagnostic and testing services or ongoing care.