S.C. Department of Insurance Director Ray Farmer says he doesn’t know if health insurance premiums will cost more next year.

Health insurance customers in South Carolina may pay higher premiums next year because Consumers’ Choice Health Plan closed its doors in 2015.

S.C. Department of Insurance Director Ray Farmer explained that the state’s guaranty fund covered $48 million worth of outstanding insurance claims after Consumers’ Choice shut down.

“It was more than we were expecting,” Farmer said.

The guaranty fund is paid for by insurance companies operating in South Carolina, he said, and the companies are allowed to pass off those expenses as higher premiums.

“That $48 million has been paid by the insurance industry,” Farmer said. “Ultimately, our taxpayers will foot the bill.”

Consumers’ Choice Health Plan was a health insurance cooperative set up with a $87.8 million federal loan after the Affordable Care Act was passed in 2010. Other similar insurance cooperatives, also established by the federal health care law, have recently failed, too.

Consumers’ Choice decided in October that it would close.

“We were told by the company and others that this would be an orderly run-off,” Farmer said. “The more we got into it, the worse it appeared.”

Patti Embry-Tautenhan, a spokeswoman for BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina, would not say if premiums will be more expensive next year.

“The exit of Consumers’ Choice Health Plan has created unexpected and unfortunate financial obligations for existing insurers,” Embry-Tautenhan said in a prepared statement, “and represents another example of upheaval in the exchange marketplace, which continues to affect consumers.”

While 2017 health insurance premiums may reflect the Consumers’ Choice closure, Farmer said it’s still too soon to know what prices will look like next year.

Health insurance companies that plan to sell Affordable Care Act policies in South Carolina next year must submit their proposed rates and plans to the Department of Insurance by May 25. Companies selling “off the exchange,” directly to consumers, must submit their plans and rates by July 11.

The state agency will review those rates and make them public in October, Farmer said.

“We’ll just have to wait to see what the filings show,” he said. “We have no way of knowing what rates for 2017 will be at this point.”

Some analysts expect plans sold through HealthCare.gov will likely be more expensive in 2017.

Open enrollment for 2017 health plans through the federal insurance marketplace begins Nov. 1. More than 200,000 South Carolinians are enrolled in Obamacare policies this year.