Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Boulder News Boulder looks to 'Housing First' approach to help reduce homelessness Building housing with supportive services has helped cities reduce street homelessness

Boulder Housing Partners' facility to house the chronically homeless at 1175 Lee Hill Road in Boulder is seen under construction earlier this month. The facility is modeled under the Housing First approach, which calls for the chronically homeless to be put directly into housing rather than increasing levels of sheltering. (David R. Jennings / Daily Camera) Homelessness in Boulder As Boulder grapples with how best to address homelessness, the Daily Camera looks at what city and community leaders have done so far, and examines some of the proposed solutions. Introduction: Boulder seeks balance in homeless solutions Enforcement: Smoking ban key in clearing homeless from Boulder's municipal campus Housing: Boulder looks to 'Housing First' approach to help reduce homelessness Shelters: Homeless advocates see need for daytime, summer shelter in Boulder People: More than half of Boulder's homeless lived here before they lost housing Advocacy: Boulder Rights Watch: Non-police response teams can help ease homeless tensions If you go What: Boulder City Council study session on homelessness When: 5 p.m. Tuesday Where: Boulder Municipal Building, 1777 Broadway Info: To read the complete City Council memo on homelessness, go to bit.ly/1pOxdw9. That homeless people are less visible in Boulder's downtown area and on the municipal campus doesn't mean they have gone away. There are somewhere between 650 and 1,200 homeless people in Boulder, based on averages from recent Point-in-Time surveys and visits to Bridge House and the Boulder Shelter for the Homeless. They are the people hanging out at the horseshoe and in the sculpture garden west of Ninth Street, just beyond the reach of the smoking ban, under bridges and up in Boulder Canyon. Advertisement They're also in the Boulder Shelter's 60-bed transitional program, in Bridge House's Ready-to-Work job training program, in a discreet women's shelter that rotates among a group of churches and synagogues, and in the summer sleep program at Har HaShem synagogue. The Point-in-Time survey puts the percentage of chronically homeless around 15 percent of the total homeless population. That's roughly 100 people in Boulder. Boulder County's 10-Year Plan to Address Homelessness called for the construction of 100 "Housing First" permanent supportive housing units for the chronically homeless. These are people who have been homeless more than a year or who have been homeless four times in the last three years. They often have mental health and substance abuse issues. For at least the last decade, the prevailing theory for ending homelessness among this population is just to give them a place to live rather than move them through different levels of temporary sheltering. Hence, Housing First. Many transitional programs require sobriety as a condition of participation. The Housing First approach does not. But having reliable shelter often helps people make progress on their addiction or their mental health issues. "It's hard to say that we can end homelessness, but we can have a big impact," Boulder Human Services Director Karen Rahn said. "If you have a stable living situation, it's a lot easier to pay attention to other issues that you need to stabilize." Housing also changes how people spend their time. "When people get housed, they might come into Bridge House to say hi, but they aren't hanging out all day," Bridge House Executive Director Isabel McDevitt said. When Salt Lake City embarked on its 10-year-plan in 2005, it had about 3,000 people who lived on the streets. Today it's about 400, in large part due to an aggressive Housing First program bolstered with contributions from the Mormon church. Other cities also have seen dramatic changes. Quincy, Massachusetts, reduced its chronically homeless population by 50 percent and closed a 35-bed shelter because there wasn't enough need. 'We've made progress' Boulder has pledged $4 million toward housing for the homeless since 2008, including $1.2 million for a planned 48-unit transitional housing program for Bridge House's Ready-to-Work clients at 4747 Table Mesa Drive and $2 million for 31 Housing First units at 1175 Lee Hill Drive. The Lee Hill Drive project was built by Boulder Housing Partners and will be run by the Boulder Shelter. City funding has also gone toward housing for homeless families, domestic violence victims and teenagers. With the opening 1175 Lee Hill Drive this fall, the 100-unit goal in the 10-Year-Plan will be achieved. The other 71 units are in Longmont in a converted hotel known as The Suites. And yet the most recent Point-in-Time survey found 139 chronically homeless people in Boulder County, with 105 of them living in Boulder. "I definitely don't think we're falling behind," Rahn said. "We've made progress. But the numbers were an inexact science and the whole system needs better data so that we can say more reliably, 'We need X more Housing First units, we need X more shelter beds.'" A shared intake system and client database between homeless service providers will help with those counts. That was a recommendation of the Burnes Institute Report, which looked at opportunities for efficiencies and cooperation between Boulder's homeless service providers. Rahn said Boulder is in a position to encourage the adoption of such a system, both by providing financial support for the costs of adopting new software and by making it a requirement to receive city money. More seeking shelter At the same time, some of the available numbers seem to indicate a worsening problem. In the 2010-11 winter season, the Boulder Shelter turned away 348 people because it didn't have room, while it provided 36,859 "bed nights" over the course of the season. In 2011-12, the Shelter provided 38,825 bed nights and turned away 944 people. But in 2012-13 and 2013-14, the Shelter turned away 2,549 people and 2,006 people, respectively. Boulder Shelter Executive Director Greg Harms said those people didn't necessarily sleep outside, as the Shelter provides a bus to take people to the Boulder Outreach for Homeless Overflow shelter, which operates out of church and synagogue basements and social halls. And, in fact, bed nights provided by BOHO increased by 3,000 each of the last two seasons, with 19,788 bed nights provided in 2013-14. Harms said shelter staff are well aware of the increase, but are not exactly sure why so many more people have tried to stay there. "Turning people away is a big challenge for us, so when it doubles or triples, we notice," he said. "Whatever the reason, it's clear that this problem is not getting better." Rahn said the city will need to look at how it apportions money toward emergency shelter versus permanent housing. "The focus is permanent housing solutions," she said. "The more resources we invest in temporary resources, the less resources are available in the entire system for permanent solutions. The best solutions are those that improve people's lives long-term, and that's what we're trying to do." 'We can't just cart them off' Billy Roberts, a former downtown resident who acknowledges he sometimes wishes homeless people could be sent out of town or to jail, said he has read about Housing First's success in Utah, and it seems to be the best solution. "If that really is cheaper, and that really does get them off the streets, nobody else has come up with anything better," he said. "Maybe we should just build them housing. We can't just cart them off somewhere." For his part, a homeless man who gave his name as Steve said he understands the reluctance of some to embrace more housing. "It's tempting to say housing," he said, when asked what is most needed. "But they don't want Boulder to become a mecca, which is happening anyway." And yet, "among the billions of dollars here, maybe they could find a modest place for people," he said. Steve said a social worker talked to him about applying for a spot at 1175 Lee Hill, where half the units are leased already. But he's reluctant because he's heard the facility, designed to house the chronically homeless, is for mentally ill people. Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere.