The Department of Justice has given Gov. Pat McCrory of North Carolina until Monday to abandon the state’s discriminatory law barring transgender people from using public restrooms based on their gender identity. The law also blocked Charlotte’s antidiscrimination ordinance, and prohibited cities and counties from enacting similar laws.

In a letter issued Thursday, the Justice Department’s top civil rights prosecutor, Vanita Gupta, warned the governor that the statute, which was passed in March, violates federal civil rights law. She said that the Department of Justice may sue North Carolina and that the Department of Education may withhold federal funding for its schools.

The state law peddles the malicious idea that transgender people are sexual predators and that allowing people to use a bathroom that reflects their gender identity violates the rights of others. It immediately drew a strong backlash from civil rights groups, religious leaders and businesses. Major corporations have decried the law, calling it an impediment to recruiting and retaining top talent. Employers have already suspended plans to expand operations in North Carolina, costing the state hundreds of jobs.

Mr. McCrory, a Republican, and his allies in the state’s legislature, the General Assembly, have tried to cast themselves as the victims of a radical progressive agenda. Yet the governor may be belatedly recognizing that he is the one pursuing radical ends in a society that has come to more deeply understand and accept variations of gender identity.

“Society is changing quickly and anybody who gets in the way is in trouble,” the governor lamented recently on a radio show. “And I might be in trouble. I might be looking for a side job over here.”

Photo

Mr. McCrory accused the law’s critics of bowing to political correctness. But he and his allies have been unable to explain whose safety and privacy the law stands to protect.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The governor has not said whether he will comply with the Department of Justice’s demand. Failing to do so would expose him and his state to more ridicule, litigation and lost revenue. The North Carolina attorney general, Roy Cooper — a Democrat who is running against Mr. McCrory in the fall — has sensibly decided not to defend the law in court, calling it a “national embarrassment.”

The Justice Department letter is the latest effort by the Obama administration to build stronger regulatory and legal protections from discrimination based on gender identity and sexual orientation.

Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, The Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world.

In the coming weeks, the Department of Health and Human Services is expected to release new rules regarding nondiscrimination protections under the Affordable Care Act. The department has signaled that it will include gender identity as a form of illegal sex discrimination. It is unclear, however, whether it also will classify discrimination based on sexual orientation in the same manner. It should. Doing so would be consistent with Equal Employment Opportunity Commission rulings and federal court decisions on that issue.

Meanwhile, the White House should press the Pentagon to rescind its ban on open service by transgender military personnel. Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter announced last July that the Defense Department intended to allow open service after a six-month review period.

He acknowledged then that transgender troops serving in silence were being “hurt by an outdated, confusing, inconsistent approach that’s contrary to our value of service and individual merit.” Mr. Carter is running out of time to undo that injustice and add an important achievement to his notable record on social progress.