Sarah Palin won Politifact's Lie of the Year award for her anti-Obamacare "death panels" trope in 2009, and in fact the Independent Payment Advisory Board she was warning about turned out to be a nonfactor in people's lives.

But the former governor of Alaska unwittingly heralded something real: As effective treatments like the Hepatitis C drug Sovaldi become more prevalent, more effective and more expensive, and as government seeks to subsidize health insurance for more people, someone, somewhere will have to decide who is treated and who is not.

Sovaldi, the breakthrough Hep-C drug from Gilead Sciences, has focused the nation's attention on that uncomfortable truth.

From New York to Oregon, state-level bureaucrats are grappling with the morally and ethically difficult question of who to treat, attempting to balance the human interests of curing millions suffering from a chronic disease against the realities of a finite budget.

They are using their "subjective judgment" to decide which citizens should receive care.

In New York, where an Express Scripts report estimated Sovaldi could cost the Medicaid program $3.6 billion, the state set up a Hepatitis C/Sovaldi work group made up of officials from the Office of Health Insurance Programs Pharmacy Department and the health department's AIDS Institute, as well as representatives of Medicaid Managed Care Plans and regional specialists.

The group has held an initial round of meetings and is compiling comments, a health department spokeswoman said.

"They are talking about how do you pay for it," said Leslie Moran, a spokeswoman for the New York Health Plan Association. "Not just Sovaldi, but they are thinking of other high cost drugs that are out there."

And the problem extends far beyond New York.

More than half the estimated 3.2 million people infected with Hepatitis C nationwide—including prisoners, veterans, the uninsured or Medicaid recipients—have their health coverage at least partially subsidized by taxpayers.

The Express Scripts report estimated it would cost the 50 states $55 billion to cover the treatment.

“That clearly can't happen,” Matt Salo, executive director of the National Association of Medicaid Directors, told Capital during a phone interview on Thursday. “There isn't the money to do that so the struggle we have is to say, 'OK, we have something that appears to be an enormous public good. At the price that it's at, we can't give it to everyone, so let's make sure we prioritize this.'”

Medicaid directors, as well as private insurance company executives, have for decades made decisions about what to cover and for whom.

That's not new, but Sovaldi is different both because of its high price—$84,000 for a 12-week treatment—and because the majority of people with Hepatitis C are on some type of government insurance, putting the burden to pay for the drug on taxpayers. And thanks to Obamacare's expanded Medicaid program, more people than ever will be eligible for a drug everyone wants but no one can afford.

Salo expects that states will have to choose which patients are sick enough to receive treatment.

Should it be patients with stage-four liver damage? Stage three?

And if a line is drawn, and states refuse treatment to some until their liver is in worse shape, is it ethical?

“I think rationing, which is what people are talking about doing, is not an ethical and viable approach,” said Brian Edlin, an associate professor of public health and medicine at Weill Cornell Medical College and a senior principal investigator at the Institute for Infectious Disease Research at the National Development and Research Institutes.

Imagine, he said, telling people they have an infection but they have to wait until their liver is really shot before they can be treated.

“That, to me, is, I don't know the word to describe it,” he said. “It's just horrendous.”

The Wall Street Journal reported that at the end of this month, an advisory committee of physicians will consider a recommendation by Oregon Medicaid staff to narrow the eligibility criteria to include only patients with stage-four fibrosis, the point at which liver damage starts to become irreversible, or cirrhosis. State officials say that treating all 1,450 Oregon Medicaid beneficiaries would cost $160 million.

It would cost California $6.7 billion to treat its Medicaid population. A state panel recommended giving Sovaldi to those with advanced disease but delay it for others.

Politics will naturally play into these calculations, and in fact it already has. States that have expanded their Medicaid programs are on the hook to treat more patients.

New York has a history of offering generous Medicaid benefits and if it chooses to serve a greater number of Hep-C patients, it could attract people from less generous states.

The true cost of Sovaldi is tough to figure. For starters, sick people are less productive than healthy people and that can have a long-term impact on the economy. And liver transplants can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars.

Like dealing with a leaky roof or malfunctioning brakes, long-term maintenance can be far more expensive than fixing it right the first time.

The Wall Street Journal cited a report from PricewaterhouseCoopers, which predicted a spending increase in the first two years but lowered costs over the next half-decade as older treatments are rendered unnecessary.

Then, there is the fact that of the estimated 3.2 million Hep-C patients, only about half know they are infected, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Of those who do know they are infected, many may choose to avoid treatment, at least for a bit, Edlin said.

What we are talking about, Edlin said, is spending $50 billion over five years, a far more affordable proposition.

"The answer is not rationing," he said."Rationing is the most irrational answer to the problem. That's just saying the drug companies can have what they want and the payers can spend what they want and the patients can die. It's outrageous that's the way this thing is going."

There has been some talk about negotiating with Gilead for a better price. Florida got a small discount on the drug. And other states may well follow suit. But the incentives to reach a deal are not in the taxpayers' favor.

First, Gilead knows that, for now, it has a monopoly. The state must buy the drug and there is no competition.

Second, Gilead knows the window to make money could be small.

“On some level the manufacturers have to be thinking about the long range on this,” Salo said. “And because there is this public health push to eradicate a public health scourge, these companies know if all goes well the market for these drug goes away. Their window to make back their research and development money is fairly narrow.”

Finally, Salo said, Gilead knows that wherever the state draws a line, the patients on the wrong side can sue.

Last month, three Arkansas Medicaid recipients suffering from Cystic Fibrosis sued the state when Medicaid refused to pay for a $300,000 treatment.

“There is a public health sense we should be covering everyone,” Salo said. “Gilead knows that at the end of the day, to the extent lines get drawn and people are on the wrong side of the line, they will sue and when the courts get involved they will win."