Ashton Carter

This morning, the U.S. military is pledging weapons, aircraft and commandos as part of a new rapid reaction force in Europe. Defense Secretary Ashton Carter is detailing the commitment to counter Russian aggression and the threat from ISIS. He is meeting with his NATO counterparts in Europe. Carter sat down with CBS News correspondent Margaret Brennan for an interview you'll see only on "CBS This Morning."

ISIS online

The U.S. is struggling with ISIS on two fronts: on the ground in the Middle East, where it has deployed more troops, and in the online world, which is creating a supply of real-world fighters for the ISIS cause. Its abilities online are formidable.

James Horner

Hollywood is remembering one of its greatest composers, James Horner. He died yesterday at the age of 61 in a Southern California plane crash. His small plane went down in a remote area north of Santa Barbara, triggering a brush fire. "CBS This Morning" co-host Charlie Rose reports the two-time Oscar winner composed music for more than 100 movies, resulting in some of Hollywood's most iconic soundtracks.

Shifting views

As the Supreme Court prepares to announce its ruling on same-sex marriage, a CBS News/New York Times poll shows 54 percent of Americans think there should be a federal law regarding same-sex marriage. Thirty percent of those who now support legalizing it say they once held the opposite view.

SCOTUS v Obamacare

As early as this week, the Supreme Court is expected to issue a ruling that could radically change -- and perhaps even doom -- Obamacare. The case the justices are mulling, King v. Burwell, poses a legal challenge to the tax credits offered to consumers in 34 states who bought health insurance through the Affordable Care Act's federally run exchanges. About 6 million people in those states who used the government program to buy insurance could lose their subsidies.

Spreading plague

The case of a Colorado teenager who died this month of a rare case of plague has revived concerns about a disease many people wrongly assume died out in the Middle Ages. How is this modern day plague spread, and where does it come from?

Singing vampire

The singer-actress Kat Graham says she's into everything from the 1990s -- from the era's music and films to the models and fashion. So it's no surprise that her upcoming album will feature '90s-inspired songs that tap into Graham's musical influences: Madonna, Prince, Boyz II Men and TLC. Now the Vampire Diaries actress is readying all-new material.

Food and Finance High

Eighty New York City high school seniors found their passion in the kitchen instead of the classroom. They take their next steps Wednesday after studying at Food and Finance High School, where 80 percent of students are considered "economically disadvantaged." CBS News Correspondent Michelle Miller reports on how their future is heating up.

World

ISIS operative killed in U.S. airstrike

Extreme heat wave kills hundreds in Pakistan

This pic made astronaut Scott Kelly do a double take

Politics

Lawsuit challenging presidential debate rules

2016 hopefuls react to Nikki Haley's call to more Confederate flag

U.S.

Severe weather sweeps through 3 Midwest states

U.S. women advance in World Cup with 2-0 win over Colombia

Tar from central California oil spill washes up in L.A. area

Diddy arrested on assault charge at UCLA

Money Watch

Walmart to remove items with Confederate flag

7 things debt collectors aren't allowed to do

Should you hitch a ride with a stretched-out car loan?

Summer jobs and tax questions

Health

Climate change poses "medical emergency"

How skinny jeans landed a fashion victim in the hospital