Ready, set, shop.

You’ll have countless choices and a lot to learn as you set off to buy health insurance on the exchange.

Eleven insurance companies are selling plans to New York City residents on New York State of Health.

A new carrier, WellCare, has joined, while others have expanded their reach.

NorthShore-Long Island Jewish CareConnect, which started out in Queens, Staten Island and Long Island last year, now will be selling exchange plans in Brooklyn and the Bronx.

“There is a broad array of options for people to investigate,” said Elisabeth Benjamin, vice president of health initiatives at the Community Service Society.

You’ll see changes on the website.

New York State of Health has launched a Spanish language version.

Consumers can check out a new “Plan and Compare” guide that summarizes all available plans within a county before they begin an application.

To get started on your search, you need to first understand how plans are organized.

There are four “metal” tiers: bronze, silver, gold and platinum.

Generally speaking, the lower the metal level, the less expensive the premium and the more you’ll pay out of pocket.

A bronze plan might be right for someone who is healthy and doesn’t expect to visit the doctor much.

But platinum could be a better match for someone with chronic health issues.

“With platinum, the premiums are much higher, but you have the knowledge that your plan will pay 90%,” said Nicole Duritz, vice president, health and family, at AARP.

Regardless of the tier you choose, you might be eligible for a tax credit that would help cover the cost of your premiums.

You can use the subsidy to lower the cost of any metal plan. But subsidies can’t be applied to catastrophic coverage — high-deductible insurance aimed at young people.

Use the calculator at New York State of Health to estimate the value of your subsidy (info.nystateofhealth.ny.gov/calculator).

Let’s say you are a family of four in the Bronx — two adults and two kids — you earn $60,000 a year and your tier choice is silver.

The value of your subsidy would be $336.20. If you bought a policy from Affinity Health Plan, you would pay $408.60 a month for a plan that costs $744.80, the calculator shows.

Overall, the average price of premiums in New York State, before subsidies, is set to go up about 5% next year.

Plans in the New York State of Health tiers have four coverage levels: bronze, silver, gold and platinum. (Zoonar RF/Getty Images)

“The important thing to remember is plan costs are 50% lower than when the marketplace went into effect,” said Danielle Holahan, deputy director of New York State of Health.

Some types of plans will see very modest increases.

The price of the benchmark silver plan in New York City will be going up 1.8% to $372 in 2015, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation study. Silver was the most popular tier last year.

Premiums are just one part of the equation. Plans come with deductibles, co-pays and co-insurance, and these costs can hurt.

Expect to see some high deductibles. A study conducted last year by HealthPocket found that the average entry-level bronze plan had a deductible of $5,081, 42% higher than the average for the 2013, pre-health-reform market.

“In some cases, those higher deductibles scared people away from buying insurance” last year, said Barry Sloane, CEO of Newtek Business Services.

Plans have an out-of-pocket maximum, which is the most you will pay during the year before your insurance plan takes over 100% of the payments.

This year, the maximum set by the government is $6,600 for an individual plan.

“The biggest thing I tell clients is make sure you have a plan that provides enough coverage,” said Rachel Klein, director of organizational strategy and enrollment at Families USA.

“It might be worth paying a few dollars more to make sure you can afford health care when you need it during the year.”

Don’t forget to dig deep into plans to see if they meet your needs.

Are your drugs covered? What are the co-pays?

Check to see if the doctors and hospitals you like are part of the network. This is important for both newcomers and those who enrolled last year.

Plans on New York State of Health generally do not cover out-of-network services. But there are consumer protections in place. For instance, if a plan lacks a particular type of physician or provider, the insurer must permit the consumer access to out-of-network providers at the in-network price.

Networks can change from one year to the next. Oscar Insurance, for instance, has dropped two hospitals, Maimonides Medical Center and Memorial Sloan Kettering, from its network.

All Oscar members who are currently being treated at Memorial Sloan Kettering or Maimonides will be able to continue receiving treatment for however long they need, rather than the typical 90-day period of mandated transitional care, the company said.

It’s a good idea to call your doctor to verify what you see on the website.

It pays to call the insurance company, too, to make sure you have a firm handle on the plan’s benefits and its costs.

“The health care system is very complicated,” said Oscar co-founder Mario Schlosser. “Call the insurance company and ask the tough question: ‘How much will it cost me?’”