Obama's role promoting policy intiatives has not been without controversy. FLOTUS flexes policy muscle

First lady Michelle Obama has shown this week she’s got the muscle to make big things happen.

She’s been no stranger to advocacy efforts that back her husband’s policy goals, from encouraging Americans to sign up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act to nudging major corporations to hire military spouses.

Story Continued Below

But the first lady and her office had largely avoided playing a major role in the process of crafting federal policy — focusing on partnerships with foundations and corporations, rather than on regulations and interagency coordination.

Until now.

( WATCH: Michelle Obama makes nutrition announcement)

On Tuesday, she and Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack unveiled new federal standards for food marketing to children that she played a central role in bringing to fruition. And on Thursday, the Food and Drug Administration released proposed regulations on nutrition labels that were more than a decade in the making.

The first lady and her office were key to pushing through both sets of policies, lobbyists, advocates and administration officials say.

“There is no better leader on this effort than first lady Michelle Obama, and she has done some amazing work on all these issues,” Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said Thursday as the administration unveiled the nutrition labels proposal.

Those outside the federal government sounded a similar note. “No one American has done more to change our diets than the first lady,” said Scott Faber, vice president for government affairs for Environmental Working Group and a member of Food Policy Action, a 501(c)(4) dedicated to getting Washington to act on food issues. “Dogged, persistent and unyielding are adjectives you could use to describe what Mrs. Obama has brought to food policy.”

( PHOTOS: Michelle Obama works out)

Her work through Let’s Move!, the anti-obesity initiative she launched four years ago, and the role she’s taken on in promoting administration policies have not been without controversy. Sarah Palin and other conservatives have bemoaned what they see as the federal government’s more active role in determining what Americans eat, while some healthy eating advocates have argued that Obama’s initiative hasn’t done enough.

This week’s announcements could produce even harsher pushback, from the food industry and from critics who see the first lady taking on too big a role in policy, as observers say Obama’s now edging toward more controversial territory.

“It’s not an election year. There are things she can do now that she couldn’t do then,” said Marion Nestle, a nutrition professor at New York University and author of the popular Food Politics blog.

( Also on POLITICO: FLOTUS goes big on food label changes)

One example: The release Thursday of proposed revisions to the rules for nutrition facts labels on packages for about 700,000 consumer products comes after more than a decade of work at the FDA and was given a sense of urgency by the involvement of Obama and her team in the issue. Under the proposal, serving sizes would be larger, as would the text on packages detailing how many calories are in a serving and how many servings are in a package. Added sugars would also have to be listed on labels.

Anti-obesity advocates are welcoming the proposals, and food industry groups are responding politely, aware that they will have at least several months to offer input through the rulemaking process. Administration officials say they hope to issue the final rule within the next year and require implementation over the two years after that, so that all new packages fit the new rules before the Obamas leave the White House.

While the proposals have yet to draw harsh criticism, the time frame of their production was a surprise to food industry lawyers and health groups, who expected a months-long Office of Management and Budget review process for the nutrition facts regulations because they had been in the works for more than a decade and are economically significant, expected to cost the industry about $2 billion.

Instead, OMB cleared the proposal in just over two months. By comparison, all four of the FDA’s biggest food safety regulations took more than a year to get through the White House review process, and even a proposal to add a requirement that mechanically tenderized meat be labeled with special cooking instructions languished at OMB for close to nine months.

Authors: