U.S. President Barack Obama (C) participates in a tele-conference town hall event on health care at the AARP in Washington, July 28, 2009. With Obama is Barry Rand (L), CEO of AARP and Jennie Chin Hansen, President of AARP. REUTERS/Jason Reed (UNITED STATES HEALTH POLITICS BUSINESS) - RTR265K1

4004136

The retired persons advocacy group AARP partners with the organization that helped craft President Obama’s “you can keep your plan” lie.

AARP, founded in 1958, is generating criticism from many of its members for heavily promoting Obamacare, which helps AARP’s bottom line to the tune of more than $1 billion. One legendary television personality told The Daily Caller that disgruntled members should leave the organization and join his rival group.

AARP partners with a small, unknown group called the Herndon Alliance, which has been described as “the messaging arm of a vast center-left infrastructure pushing health care reform.” AARP and Herndon’s co-founders participated in weekly conference calls during the run-up to the passage of Obamacare.

President Obama’s talking point that Americans could keep their “choice” of doctors and insurance plans was a Herndon strategy, developed by the end of Obama’s first 100 days in office. Herndon was in contact with then-Senator Obama during the 2008 campaign, discussing strategies to sell health care reform to demographic groups including “Marginalized Middle Agers” and “Mobile Materialists.”

“The Herndon Alliance was one of many broad stakeholder groups and coalitions – most notably Divided We Fail, which we led with partners like the Business Roundtable and NFIB – we worked with during the health reform process. These stakeholder groups frequently include organizations representing hospitals, physicians, employers, workers, consumers and health advocates,” AARP spokesperson Allyson Funk told TheDC.

AARP’s heavy promotion of Obamacare, including creating the informational website HealthLawAnswers.org and holding informational events and health fairs, has alienated many seniors who hold membership in the organization.

“Love it or hate it, we want to make sure that people have the information they need to make informed decisions,” Nicole Duritz, AARP Vice President for Health Education and Outreach, told TheDC.

AARP began partnering with the left-wing California Endowment, a foundation with close ties to the Obama White House and liberal billionaire George Soros and the Obama White House, in mid-October to “raise awareness about Obamacare” and “get Californians to enroll in health coverage.”

“Yes, there are some people who in those calls…the opinions go both ways. So we’re definitely reaching both sides,” said a spokesperson for AARP California, referring to telephone town halls the group has conducted with members on Obamacare. The spokesperson added that “the targeting we’re doing here in California is for the Hispanic population because they comprise 60 percent of the uninsured.”