Please enable Javascript to watch this video

(Memphis) It looks like you’re going to have to wait even longer to sign up for the affordable healthcare act.

The Obama Administration says problems with the website Healthcare.gov won’t be fixed until the end of the month, at the earliest.

The U.S. Government had the same amount of time to build the Affordable Care Act website that it had to fight WWII.

The difference? The U.S. won WWII and Healthcare.gov still doesn’t work.

Jeff Presley builds websites around the world.

He even created this video for Blue Cross Blue Shield to explain how the Affordable Healthcare Act is supposed to work.

“My guess is they need to scrap it and start over,” said Presley.

It’s a very difficult program to create because of all the agencies and programs it involves.

Presley says the website builders started with just a couple of programs and it grew into a mega process.

“It just kept growing and growing and growing in complexity. So the blueprints were never fully defined and frozen and said OK, now spend however long it’s going to take to build this out,” said Presley.

Presley says the website is such a mess because it’s like you're building a house and constantly making changes.

For example, just a week before you move in you decide to add three floors, move the bathrooms and switch the kitchen and the bedrooms.

Presley also says any website should be properly tested before it’s launched, which clearly wasn’t done with Healthcare.gov.

Now that people have been brought in to fix it, Presley says operating problems are only a part of the issues.

“They have people working in the system who they haven’t even done background checks so now we have data problems, and security problems,” said Presley.

Presley says there is no excuse for the website failures because more than $600 million were spent to build Healthcare.gov, which is more than Facebook, LinkedIn and Twitter put together.

Most people can’t even log into the exchange, which Presley says is one of the most basic functions in building a website.