People Moves of the Week: BTIG, TrueNorth Capital, KeyBanc

BTIG hires five bankers; TrueNorth names new head of Minneapolis office; KeyBanc taps Paul Griffin to be managing director

Baker & McKenzie — Lee McIntyre has returned to the law firm as a partner in Houston office. He previously worked at the firm from 2005 to 2013, when he left to lead his own boutique practice.

BTIG LLC — The investment bank recently announced a slate of new hires. They include managing directors Charles Mather and Gene Ramirez; directors Brett Fodero and Steven Marder; and vice president Matthew McLeod. Mather, previously co-head of equity capital markets at Janney Montgomery Scott, joins BTIG's New York headquarters with Fodero, who was previously at BMO Capital Markets. Ramirez, Marder and McLeod – each previously at Morgan Joseph TriArtisan – join the San Francisco office.

Houlihan Lokey —The Los Angeles-based investment bank named Patrick Schoennagel a director in London assisting private equity-backed companies raise capital, in addition to working closely with the firm’s US-based Capital Markets team on cross-border financings. Schoennagel joins Houlihan Lokey after spending roughly 10 years at GE Capital, where he most recently served as a senior vice president. General Electric (NYSE: GE) announced on April 10 it would sell GE Capital.

HRC Advisory — The retail advisory unit of Hilco Global recently promoted Farla Efros to president. She will continue to report to HRC CEO Antony Karabus. Efros joined HRC in January 2013 from Office Depot (Nasdaq: ODP) where she served as executive vice president and chief merchandising officer. Since then, Efros has helped HRC expand its services, which include advising retailers on a range of initiatives, including business models and integrating merchandising and supply chain logistics.

KeyBanc Capital Markets — The investment banking arm of Cleveland-based KeyCorp (NYSE: KEY) announced two hires and one promotion. Paul Griffin left his post at BMO Capital Markets to be a managing director at KeyBanc's Boston rbanch. Prior to joining BMO, Griffin was at Cowen and Co. LLC. Separately, KeyBanc also expanded its consumer retail segment in Charlotte, North Carolina, hiring Mike Jones as a managing director and promoting Brad Swanson to Segment Head of the Consumer & Retail Investment Banking Group. Prior to joining KeyBanc, Jones was a managing director at BMO Capital Markets. Swanson spent more than eight years at RBC Capital Markets.

Proskauer — Matt Rees has joined the New York-based law firm’s London office as a partner, advising private equity firms, sovereign wealth funds, and pension funds. He joins from Simmons & Simmons LLP, where he was a partner.

TrueNorth Capital Partners — Bill Jarrett has been hired as a managing director overseeing the advisory firm's Minneapolis office. There he will provide financial services to middle-market clients and focus on expanding TrueNorth’s footprint across the Midwest. Jarrett's past experience includes positions at Kidder Peabody, Prudential Securities, Lazard Middle Market and Quetico Partners, which he Jarrett co-founded in 2009.

Winston & Strawn LLP — Bill Bowers has joined the New York law firm where he will represent lenders and liquidity providers in a variety of structured finance transactions in the transportation sector. In the past, Bowers served as general counsel to GPA Capital in Shannon, Ireland from 1990 to 1993. After that, he became an associate general counsel for GE Capital Aviation Services Inc. in Stamford, Connecticut from 1993 to 1995.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: