They’re the odd couple of our times. Trump and Sanders. Donald and Bernie. Swashbuckling capitalist, firebrand socialist.

You can picture the mouthy duo as characters in the hit TV series, “Cheers” (1982-93). They could belly right up to the bar, in between “Cliff” and “Norm.”

Donald, boasting, taunting. A know-it-all, not entirely unlike Cliff. Bernie, bemoaning hard luck and hard times, not entirely unlike Norm.

Donald and Bernie, both improbably surging in the polls, perfectly personify America’s vacillating love/hate relationship with the rich. Admire them, root for them, envy them, resent them.

Advertisement

Donald and Bernie have similarities other than surging poll numbers and big enthusiastic crowds. Both are persona non grata in the parties in which they’re running.

Yet both parties are fearful of showing the two uninvited interlopers the door. How do you get them out of the house without causing a scene?

They’re also, Donald and Bernie, both offering up fantastical promises. Promises that go way beyond the customary campaign fare. No mere Peace & Prosperity from them. No indeed. Donald promises to “make America great again.” Bernie promises that old socialist standby, “Revolution.”

There, though, the similarities start to dwindle. Donald is vague about how he’ll attain his goals. Bernie is specific. He’ll attain his goals using a familiar, worn-down tool. Government.

Conservatives scoff: “Government?”

Weren’t the flubs and snafus of government what brought Donald and Bernie to the fore in the first place? Flubs and snafus such as:

The quagmires of Middle East military misadventures? The botched rollout of the ObamaCare Web site? The VA’s backlog of sick or dying patients? The EPA’s mine wastewater spill? The millions of dollars in fraudulent tax refunds annually paid out to prison inmates? The $18-trillion-and-counting national debt? The Ohio-size illegal immigrant population? Bankruptcy-bound Social Security and Medicare? And — gasp for air — so on and so on?

Yes, all of those were the dissatisfactions that greased the skids for Donald and Bernie. And in placing his bets on government — lots of it, more of it — Bernie does seem to be a bigger, bolder risk-taker than the hotshot, entrepreneurial Trump.

Donald’s keeping his details, if there are any, blurry. Pressed for specifics, he offers up braggadocio bluster and blather. If pressed further, he hurls name-calling insults. He understands entertainment, the media say.

Doubters who insist that distractions and ambiguities will never work in the long run should recall this: Nixon won by allowing the nation to believe he had a secret plan to extricate America from the tar pit of Vietnam, although he never once spoke the two words “secret plan” himself. And Reagan won on the evanescent, cotton-candy advertising theme, “It’s morning in America.”

Shouting himself hoarse, patches of sweat soaking through his shirt, whispy hair disheveled in the breeze, arms waving in accompaniment to his proletarian lamentations, Bernie seems a disinterred time capsule from the last days of the 1800s or the first days of the 1900s.

He’s a reissue of Eugene V. Debs, the Terre Haute, Ind., town clerk who five times led the socialist ticket in presidential elections — once from behind bars where the pince-nez’d Princeton progressive, President Woodrow Wilson, had locked him up on “sedition” charges for speaking out against the war. (World War I, i.e., which Prof. Wilson had anointed the “war to end all wars.”)

Debs championed such shocking causes as the right of women to vote and the right of workers to unionize, laws restricting child labor and providing minimal workplace safety. The best he ever did was 3.4 percent of the vote.

Bernie’s detractors are saying that he, being a self-proclaimed socialist, is running on a platform, really, of sharing the poverty. But there can be more pizzazz to the socialist pitch than hard-shell redistributionist ideologues typically bring to their turgid economic disquisitions.

There’s the dreamy fantasy of utopia — the lure of The Big Rock Candy Mountain. Lefty folksinger Pete Seeger, “the banjo Bolshevik,” famously conjured this utopia, where every day is Christmas, where there’s lemonade springs and the bluebird sings, where you can jump so high you can touch the sky. And “the handouts grow on bushes.”

Seeger’s gone on to the workingman’s paradise in the sky. Bernie has taken over the banjo and is plunking the same chords with astounding success. Even at evangelical, fundamentalist Liberty University, based in Bible Belt Lynchburg, Va., a big crowd cheered the old Brooklyn Jew and transplanted Vermonter.

While Donald overworks the pronoun “I” like a 19th century sweatshop employee, Bernie gets down to the business of stoking the furnace of outrage.

He rails against the wealth amassed by the Waltons of Wal-mart (where tens of millions of Democrats choose to shop). He spotlights the record 94 million workforce dropouts not counted in the unemployment rate. He notes that the real unemployment rate is 10.3 percent. He belabors the 50 percent unemployment among African American youths. If someone goes “Ahem” and reminds him it’s a Democrat who’s been in the driver’s seat the past seven years, Bernie can reply that, well, he’s not, technically, a Democrat.

Presumably, his fire-and-brimstone denunciations of money in politics are intended to exclude the $477 million the SEI, AFSCME, NEA and AFT — top 10 donors — have anted up in the last two and a half decades.

His support for union empowerment, meanwhile, seems out of sync with the preferences of the lumpen masses, the Holy See of socialism. Private-sector union membership has plummeted to an all-time low of 6.6 percent of the workforce. And the 35.7 percent unionization of public-sector employees seems an irritant to many taxpayers of the toiling classes.

Presumably also, Bernie’s fulminations against the billionaire oligarchs allow for the exception of the likes of George Soros, sugar daddy of the leftist MoveOn.org, whose Soros Management Fund over the years has favored certain politicians with $43.3 million of donations.

Nor does Bernie’s advocacy of European-level taxation and social spending exactly augur well for economic boom times — not if the 11 percent unemployment rate for the Euro area is any indication and worse yet, Spain’s 22 percent and Greece’s 25 percent. These, though, are mere quibbles to Bernie’s core acolytes.

But what about other, had-it-with-Hillary Democrats? If they’re not susceptible to the enticements of utopia, they may yet be susceptible to appeals to envy and resentment.

If exploited deftly, envy and resentment can be the most powerful of all human motivators. There are folks who believe they have so little money because people like Bill Gates and Warren Buffett have so much. These folks surely constitute a rich vein of votes for Bernie to mine.

Maybe, come to think of it, Bill and Warren are not the best examples for the point, the two richest men in America both being Democrats. Donald himself might be summoned to stand in as a more apt example of those who have money to burn and do so with unapologetic, rub-your-face-in-it ostentation.

Yet there Donald is, soaring aloft on the updraft of the polls.

So, what’ll it be?

Admire the rich?

Resent ‘em?

The battle is joined.

— Dave Neese may be contacted at davidneese@verizon.net.