Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton opened up to New York Magazine about a potential presidential run, saying she's both "pragmatic and realistic" about aiming for the nation's top office.

“I’m not in any hurry. I think it’s a serious decision, not to be made lightly, but it’s also not one that has to be made soon," Clinton said, noting she plans to work in "whatever position I find myself in to advocate for the values and the policies I think are right for the country."

Clinton also dismissed 2016 speculation, saying she doesn't "think it's good for the country."

"It’s like when you meet somebody at a party and they look over your shoulder to see who else is there, and you want to talk to them about something that’s really important; in fact, maybe you came to the party to talk to that particular person, and they just want to know what’s next," Clinton said. "I feel like that’s our political process right now. I just don’t think it is good.”

Clinton said she's currently enjoying more quality time with her husband, former President Bill Clinton.

“We get to be at home together a lot more now than we used to in the last few years," Clinton said. "We have a great time; we laugh at our dogs; we watch stupid movies; we take long walks; we go for a swim. You know, just ordinary, everyday pleasures.”

Clinton said her husband is also largely ignoring talk of her potential 2016 presidential run.

"Right now, we’re trying to just have the best time we can have doin’ what we’re doin’."

Despite the Clintons' reluctance to seriously speculate about 2016, others are confident Clinton's the right person to represent the Democratic party in the next presidential race.

On "State of the Union" Sunday, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) said Clinton is "one of the best-equipped, best-prepared people to enter the White House in a very long time," saying she's "more prepared" than the last three presidents to enter the White House. On "Meet The Press" on Sunday, conservative pundit Bill Kristol said Clinton is "a good candidate for Republicans to run against."

Click here to read more from New York Magazine.

Also on HuffPost: Hillary And Bill Through The Years Hillary And Bill Through The Years

1 of 21 Their wedding day on October 11, 1975 Share this slide:

Facebook