MURRIETA, Calif. (AP) - A Riverside County grand jury has indicted a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center for murder after the death of a man who was seeking help to treat a drinking problem, the first time in California that a corporation has been accused of murder, according to the facility’s attorneys.

Legal experts say the second-degree murder charges against A Better Tomorrow and four of its employees in the 2010 death of patient Gary Benefield may be hard to prosecute but that they send a jolt through California’s expansive drug and rehabilitation industry, the Los Angeles Times reported Sunday (http://lat.ms/1QlTkaF).

Deputy Atty. Gen. Joel Samuels argued that the company, in its drive for profits, accepted Benefield, a client it was not prepared to care for.

Benefield arrived in bad shape to A Better Tomorrow’s Murrieta facility. He had recently been hospitalized for pneumonia and was connected to an oxygen tank. The night he arrived he collapsed by his bed and died. The house manager had fallen asleep and failed to check on him like she was supposed to. Benefield’s body was found in the morning.

Prosecutors have argued the company killed Benefield by failing to refill his oxygen and allowing employees with little or no medical training to give him drugs that made it harder for him to breathe.

Defense attorneys have asked the judge in the case to throw out the charges, saying the prosecutor failed to call as a witness the coroner who found that Benefield died of natural causes.

“There simply was no homicide here,” attorney Benjamin Gluck told the court.

Attorneys for the defendants declined to comment or did not return calls for comment. Samuels, the deputy attorney general, also declined to comment.

The attorney general’s office may have filed the charges as a warning to treatment facilities “that you’d better clean up your act. We’re going to take this very seriously,” said Kelly Strader, a professor at Southwestern Law School.

Benefield was the fourth person to die after checking into the facility in a little over two years.

In their investigation into his death, state licensing officials found the company deficient in 14 areas, including dispensing sample medications to residents, providing medication without a prescription, filling out medication logs in advance and providing medical-related services beyond the scope of its license.

In the months after Benefield died, the state Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs moved to revoke the license for A Better Tomorrow’s Murrieta facility but by then, the company had already closed that rehab center.

___

Information from: The Los Angeles Times, http://www.latimes.com