Health care can be a maze for seniors

From left, Betty Talley, of Smyrna, Lovella Seward, of Dover, and Priscilla Lynch of Dover enjoy a lunch at the Modern Maturity Center Friday. All three ladies are appreciative and piece of mind they receive with their Medicare health insurance. “Thank God my health so far is pretty good,” Ms. Lynch said. (Delaware State News/Jen Rini)

DOVER — “Hey mom,” Lovella Seward, 62, called to Betty Talley, of Smyrna, 76, from across the table at the Modern Maturity Center Friday afternoon. Lunch, sweet potatoes, greens and turkey, was served.



“When I started to come her, I took her to be my mom,” Ms. Seward, of Dover, explained.



The ladies are close, intimately knowing the intricacies of the other’s medical care.



Though they both have different needs one thing remains constant — Medicare is extremely necessary.



“Everything seems to be pretty straight,” Ms. Talley said, but having Medicare as a service has been invaluable.



Ms. Seward, though three years shy of 65, has been on disability and Medicare due to her medical conditions.



Though a series of health care reforms are on the horizon per the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, Medicare, a national social insurance program, administered by the federal government since 1965, has been relatively untouched.



The program guarantees health insurance for individuals 65 and older and young people with disabilities.



Once individuals turn 65, they are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A, which covers hospital costs and hospice care.



If an individual would like Medicare Part B, which covers out patient services such as scheduled physician check-ups, home health care and medical equipment; Medicare Part C, which is run by private insurance companies and can include extra benefits for a supplemented cost; or Medicare Part D, which covers prescription drugs, those costs are additional.



For the past three years, Judy Taggart, volunteer with AARP Delaware, has made it her mission to educate senior citizens about Medicare. And how most importantly, Medicare coverage is protected under the Affordable Care Act.



Medicare is not a part of the health insurance marketplace established by the ACA, so seniors are not required to shop online for health insurance once the marketplace, www.choosehealthde.com, kicks off for open enrollment Oct. 1.



“It is easy to get mixed up,” Ms. Taggart, 71, said.



Just last week she was educating low-income seniors on the annual Medicare open enrollment, which is from Oct. 15 until Dec. 7, and how to avoid online scams.



“I know people are very anti-Affordable Care Act,” Ms. Taggart said. “[But] I think in the long run I have faith and it will help people tremendously.”



Under the provisions of the ACA, individuals on Medicare have expanded coverage for preventive services such as mammograms, without being charged a deductible. Also, the Medicare prescription drug coverage gap, known as the “donut hole” is predicted to be completely closed by 2020.



With Delaware’s aging population as the fastest growing demographic, facilitating information on Medicare is crucial.



More than 150,000 people are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B, said Kim Iapalucci, spokeswoman for AARP Delaware. And nearly 168,000 are members of AARP.



“That is a good percentage of the population,” she said.



“Benefit changes could harm older Delawareans,” she added. “Things are changing very quickly. This is the time to make sure members of Congress know that older Americans need these programs.”



Interested individuals can visit AARP’s ACA information, www.healthlawanswers.org, for supplemental information.



Currently there has been a movement among congressional leadership, mostly Republican, to defund the ACA, or “Obamacare.” However, no votes have been taken on the matter.



While he is appreciative of Medicare, Tim Murray, of Dover, is still skeptical of the ACA. He said with the new health law, his prescription drug bill has actually increased.



“They’ll have to be able to fix it,” Mr. Murray, 76, said over lunch at the Modern Maturity Center Friday.



“When you get a certain age you don’t like people messing with your stuff,” his friend, Jim Horan, of Dover, echoed.



“You don’t want to be good customers, but we are.”



Staff writer Jen Rini can be reached at

741-8250 or jrini@newszap.com.

Follow DSNJen_Rini on Twitter.