Arizona is going to reveal as little as possible about its defensive makeover -- "Why would I tell you?" coach Rich Rodriguez said -- but there are sure to be tantalizing hints over the next several months.

After two spring practices under four new defensive assistants, operating under parameters set from Rodriguez, we have some teasers about the big fall debut:

"Your eyes might widen a little bit," said safety Paul Magloire.

"It's going to be nasty," said safety Anthony Mariscal. "It's going to be something no one has ever seen before."

Take their word for it?

With only two of the 15 spring practices planned to be open to the media -- and one of those was Friday -- there won't be a lot of eyeballs on the changes the Wildcats are making from the 3-3-5 scheme of former coordinator Jeff Casteel.

New coordinator Marcel Yates ran a 4-2-5 base at Boise State in the past two seasons, and that was a look seen Friday at Arizona. More than scheme, though, the key difference will be philosophical -- attacking, aggressive.

Rodriguez calls it a "fresh start" for everyone, and one of those fresh starts we can report is the move of senior Sani Fuimaono (6-1, 294) from nose guard to 3-technique tackle, a more glamorous position on the defensive line.

He'll line up between the offensive guard and the tackle, or outside the tackle depending on how what the offense is running.

"What I am trying to get back to is being comfortable with the open room I have off the edge during pass rushes, just setting the edge and getting to the quarterback as quickly as I can," Fuimaono said.

"It's been a while since I've rushed off the edge, but it's slowly coming. I got a couple of good runs in there these last couple of days."

Rushing the passer?

Well, that is different.

As a nose guard in a three-man front, Fuimaono's task was to eat up multiple blocks in order to give the linebackers open alleys to make tackles and accept the glory.

Typically, the 3-technique tackle is supposed to be a playmaker in the opposing team's backfield.

"I'm excited to not have to worry about trying to take on all the double teams, triple teams down the middle," Fuimaono said with a smile. "I'm excited that Coach trustd me to move outside and let me play there."

SNAPPING COUNTS

Arizona has to replace two starting offensive linemen, including center Cayman Bundage, who stepped into the position because of injury as a senior after starting at guard for most of the previous three seasons.

His toughness and tenacity were unquestioned, but errant shotgun snaps in critical times were a source of frustration.

As many as seven offensive linemen are snapping during practice, but the top three are senior Zach Hemmila, sophomore Levi Walton and redshirt freshman Nathan Eldridge, according to offensive line coach Jim Michalczik.

"The biggest thing about snapping is consistency," Michalczik said.

"Last year, unfortunately, it was some inconsistent moments that cost us. The guys understand the importance. It's something they have to work on on their own because we can't work with them with the ball when we're not in practice."

Elsewhere on the line, Arizona has to find a new right tackle to replace Lene Maiava. One candidate could be freshman Keenan Walker, who delayed his enrollment until this January while he rehabbed an ACL injury.

He's a full-go in practice, Rodriguez said.

"He has all the stuff that you want," Rodriguez said of Walker, a four-star recruit from Scottsdale Chaparral High School. "He's a big, athletic guy. He has a nastiness and a physicalness to him. He's going to have some growing pains this spring and this summer, but we like what we've seen so far."

Arizona OL coach Jim Michalczik on freshman lineman Keenan Walker after today’s practice pic.twitter.com/FbaSZcUxSf — Matt Moreno (@MattGOAZCATS) February 14, 2016

TAKING A BREAK

After holding practice on Friday and Saturday, the Wildcats will now take a week off.

Why?

Rodriguez will be at a Nike-sponsored coaches conference in Hawaii.

"Believe it or not, I'm telling the truth here: It's probably as good a week of professional development as you can have, because there are 20 or 25 other coaches there who are at the top of the game and all we do is lay around and talk ball most of the time," Rodriguez said.

"We do talk a lot of football. Not all day, but just enough to make it look like a business deal."

Meanwhile, the Wildcats will lift weights Monday and Wednesday and meet with their position coaches on Tuesday and Thursday.

SOAKING IN THE SUN

Michigan coach Jim Harbaugh made news recently when he announced he would take his team to Florida for a week of spring practice.

Rodriguez said he could see this idea catch on for cold-weather schools.

"If that's a recruiting tool for them for one week, it's a recruiting took for us year round," he said.

"That's what we've been saying. If you want to come to where the weather is nice, you don't have to wait until spring break. We have spring break every week."

NOTABLE

--Sophomore Jamarde Cobb, who spent last season at fullback, has returned to linebacker. He could end up with spot-duty on offense. "He will probably still run some fullback for us," Rodriguez said. "I think last year, he only ran two plays, so if he can just remember those same two plays, he can maybe play a little both ways."

--Sophomore Darrell Cloy Jr., a little-used tight end last season, asked to move to the defensive line, Rodriguez said. He is 6-2, 259. "With our needs on the D-line, I think it was a good move," Rodriguez said. Cloy is 6-2, 259.

--Previously: RB Orlando Bradford into the spotlight

Arizona’s new coaches are doing a lot more showing instead of telling. Paul Magloire explains how it helps pic.twitter.com/CPON24XYkE — Matt Moreno (@MattGOAZCATS) February 14, 2016

- - -

Anthony Gimino has covered University of Arizona athletics for more than two decades, including as the football beat writer for the Arizona Daily Star and the columnist for the Tucson Citizen. Follow his coverage of the Wildcats on Facebook and Twitter.