While residents are looking forward to the convenience of a new Walmart on US-41 and Estero Parkway, some worry the lack of sidewalks might create a dangerous situation.

"I'm a walking fanatic," Amy Spoerl said taking a stroll down Estero Parkway.

Spoerl's walk has to end or continue on the grass or road after just a couple miles. The sidewalk ends on the south side of the road right at the railroad crossing. It's not the only place where the sidewalk cuts off on that road.

"Sometimes I would have to go out on the road. It depends on what the grass is like. Has it been mowed lately? Did it rain a whole bunch? I don't know," Spoerl said.

Spoerl says the one thing for sure is that it's not the safest place to walk.

"I'm only a couple of feet away from cars traveling in excess of 45-50 miles per hour, so it's a little unnerving," BikeWalkLee representative Doug Saxton said.

Lee County has already seen 11 pedestrians and three bikers die in crashes in 2015.

Saxton says the real problem might surface when the Walmart opens later this summer and FGCU is back in session. Estero Parkway is the road that connects the two hubs.

"There's going to be a huge increase in traffic here," Saxton said.

Saxton recently approached the Lee County Bicycle/Pedestrian Advisory Committee about the need for a mixed-use path on the parkway.

BPAC has the project high on their priority list, but it's currently unfunded.

BPAC is asking Lee County Commissioners for a bump in their budget to help tackle several projects. The advisory members sent a letter requesting $2 million in funding. Current funding is around $750,000 a year.

The debate over who pays for the project is not over yet. Estero council members are courting Lee County to pay for several road and sidewalk projects. The two parties still haven't decided who will maintain Estero Parkway in the future.

In the meantime, Saxton says he'll just keep being careful about where he's walking.

"For now everybody really has to be careful about what they're doing," Saxton said.