Police looking for Jason Arthur, 46, Thomas Ober, 29

Authorities were continuing to search Saturday for two men suspected of participating in a Northern Colorado heroin distribution network, according to Longmont Police Cmdr. Jeff Satur.

Longmont police and the FBI announced Friday that they had already arrested 12 other people in dismantling the heroin ring, after a joint investigation into a heroin use and distribution ring working primarily in Longmont but with connections to other communities in Northern Colorado.

Still being sought, Satur said, were Jason H. Arthur, 46, who's wanted on a state warrant for distribution of, and intent to distribute, a Schedule II controlled substance, and Thomas D. Ober, 29. who's wanted on a state warrant for possession with intent to distribute a Schedule II controlled substance.

Thomas Ober

The dozen people already arrested — 10 on Friday, and two taken into custody earlier — included four people who were wanted on federal indictments, including conspiracy to distribute, and possession with the intent to distribute, heroin, the use of which resulting in death.

Those four, according to identifications provided by authorities on Saturday, include: Jacquelynn M. Bradley, 21; Jesse W. Hervey, 24; Danielle Sciortino, 21; and Brice Alday, 24.

The other eight people arrested thus far on various state charges in the drug investigation were identified as: Elizabeth A. Cuffaro, 36; Martha Connelly, 56; Cheree J. Fambry, 37; Brandy L. Hendricks, 34; Mckenzie R. Highland, 26; Bruce A. Riddell, 47; David A. Fulford, 32; and Nicholas N. Hamann, 55.

Of those 12 people, all except Mckenzie, who's in the Adams County Jail, and Alday, who's in federal custody, were being held at the Boulder County Jail as of Saturday, Satur said.

Authorities have said the arrests culminated an investigation begun last September, launched in part because of an unidentified Longmont resident's fatal heroin overdose in March 2013.

"Heroin is a terrible drug that destroys families and takes lives," Satur said on Saturday. "We've had a lot of overdoses over the years."

"Heroin is a growing problem, and the purity of heroin is a growing problem," said Jeff Dorschner, a spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's Office in Denver.

Satur said a lot of people addicted to opiate-based prescription drugs have turned to heroin as crackdowns have made opiates harder to get. Dorschner said that when people no longer have the money to illegally buy the prescription drugs they've been getting on the street, they often turn to heroin.

Dorschner said, however, that because of the arrests that dismantled the Longmont-based heroin ring, "the amount of heroin available in Longmont has been dramatically reduced."

That could have other positive impacts, Satur said, because "a lot of heroin users are out committing other crimes" to get money to buy the drug.

The case was investigated by the FBI's Fort Collins Resident Agency and the Longmont Police Department. Authorities said the Boulder County District Attorney's Office has been working closely with law enforcement on the pending prosecution of the defendants facing state charges, while the federal defendants will be prosecuted by the U.S. Attorney's Office.

Satur said that there was no reported resistance by suspects when teams of FBI agents and Longmont SWAT and Special Enforcement Unit officers made Friday's arrests.

"Everybody was real cooperative," Satur said.

He said that in addition to arresting some of the suspects in Longmont itself, others were arrested in such scattered locations as Evans, Greeley, Frederick and Broomfield.

Satur said Longmont police would appreciate any tips about Ober's and Arthur's whereabouts. People can provide information to Longmont police by calling 303-651-8501 or can call Northern Colorado Crime Stoppers at 1-800-TIPS (8477).

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc