HDM Sport on FacebookHULL City join a host of clubs in the race for promising Blackpool striker Dom Telford, according to Goal.com.The Seasiders are resigned to losing their 18-year-old forward who was handed his first-team debut by manager Lee Clark this season, having been with the club since the age of ten.Telford isn’t currently tied down to a long-term contract at Bloomfield Road, prompting several Premier League clubs to show interest.Merseyside rivals Liverpool and Everton are monitoring his situation, whilst Sunderland are keen to make a move this month along with the Tigers.A source close to the Championship side told Goal: "The club are worried, they know there is a lot of interest in Dom and it is going to be hard to keep him."The Burnley-born striker hit the headlines with Blackpool when he struck the equalising goal in the 1-1 draw with Rotherham on December 28, prodding home with six minutes remaining for his first senior goal for the Championship club. Fletcher a £500,000 target City could snap up Manchester United midfielder Darren Fletcher for £500,000 in January, but face competition in the latest suggestion he is heading for Hull.The Daily Mail reports that Steve Bruce is closing on the Scotland international but the Daily Telegraph claims Aston Villa are also in the hunt. Tigers backed for a replay in Arsenal FA Cup tie? TIME to get carried away with the FA Cup today as the Tigers travel to the Emirates to take on Arsenal in a repeat of last year’s epic final.Gunning for revenge, Steve Bruce’s men will be hoping to avert the agonising 3-2 extra-time defeat at Wembley in tonight’s third-round tie.BetVictor pundit Michael Owen doesn’t believe that will happen, though, and is backing Arsenal to progress despite the Gunners’ woeful defeat at Southampton last time out."A repeat of last season’s Final and I expect the Gunners to prevail and bounce back after a disappointing result at St Mary’s on New Year’s Day,” Owen wrote."The Tigers will be lifted by their win against Everton on Thursday but Premier League survival will be their primary objective this term.”Meanwhile, BBC Sport pundit Mark Lawrenson believes the Tigers will force the tie into a replay at the KC Stadium - but still says Arsenal will win."The repeat of last season's final should be interesting because I cannot see Hull boss Steve Bruce changing his team too much from the side that beat Everton on New Year's Day,” Lawrenson wrote."The Tigers were in mid-table when they started out on their cup run last time. They are fighting relegation this season but, even so, Bruce is not the kind of guy just to throw a game away."Usually, I would expect Arsenal boss Arsene Wenger to juggle his squad but he is under a bit of pressure after the non-performance in their defeat by Southampton."That game underlined how the Gunners don't just need a new defender and defensive midfielder, they need a new goalkeeper too. Wojciech Szczesny is a good keeper but he is not top class, and therein lies one of their problems."Neither side will want a draw, so that is what I am going for.” Walcott raring to go ARSENAL striker Theo Walcott is confident he will return from his latest injury lay-off a more complete player in tonight’s FA Cup tie with the Tigers.The 25-year-old has only made three appearances for almost a year with a serious knee injury and a groin problem which delayed his comeback.Walcott came off the bench in the 2-0 Premier League defeat at Southampton, but is expected to lead the Gunners attack in what is a re-run of last season’s FA Cup final against Hull City.“It is about a year since the injury and it has gone very quickly. I have had loads of things in my life that have changed completely, so that side of it was a good thing,” Walcott told London24.com.“Things happen for a reason and it has given me the opportunity to work on different parts of my game that I missed out on when I was younger, the actual development stage of it.“I am looking forward to going out there and getting a few minutes. I am not expecting too much from these games early on.“It will be blowing the cobwebs away and will be good to be out playing with my mates again because I have missed it all.” Hull City Academy snap up striker Luer AHEAD of their Final Third Development League trip to Rotherham on Tuesday afternoon, Hull City’s under-21s side have completed a move for Burgess Hill Town striker Greg Luer.The 19-year-old arrives in East Yorkshire on an 18-month deal with plenty of promise and he told the club’s official website he can’t wait to prove his worth at the Premier League club.“It was a very easy decision for me to have to make – a move to the Premier League was a no brainer,” Luer said.“It’s everyone’s dream to get the chance to join a Premier League club. “I had a great time at Burgess Hill and I would like to thank them for all of their support during my development as a footballer there. “They have been very supportive of me in relation to the move and I can’t thank them enough.” Nice confirm Ben Arfa arrival IT’S official. After seemingly going AWOL at Hull City after a torrid loan spell, Hatem Ben Arfa has all but joined Nice to complete his Premier League exit.The French club posted a picture on their Twitter feed yesterday confirming Ben Arfa’s arrival at the Allianz Riviera, but says all the finer details are yet to be signed (if my GCSE French is correct)…So with Ben Arfa gone, and money possibly to spend on another loan signing, will the Tigers dip into the market again over the next few weeks?

Il n’a pas encore signé. Il ne porte pas encore notre maillot. Mais il connait déjà notre devise. #IssaNissa ! pic.twitter.com/Qo9tbfddiA — OGC Nice (@ogcnice) January 3, 2015

Hernandez wearing a wig? Hmm...

Hull City star Abel Hernandez has been named man of the thatch by fans — for playing in a wig: http://t.co/AvYdt2SSV6 pic.twitter.com/a5TewN0Z6a — The Sun (@TheSunNewspaper) January 3, 2015

IS it just me - or is the wig Abel Hernandez reportedly wearing the key to his recent success in Hull City colours?OK, so maybe I'm clutching at straws, but the Daily Mail and The Sun claim the Uruguayan forward is sporting a hairpiece after his rapid growth between Premier League games.If there's any hairdressers that can give us a clear answer once and for all, let us know in the comments below!