Peak Vista Community Health Centers announced a merger Thursday that could create a health system extending from Cripple Creek into Kit Carson County.

The nonprofit plans to merge with Plains Medical Center, another federally-qualified health center serving people through locations in Limon, Strasburg, Flagler and Kiowa, according to a statement by Peak Vista.

The merger will be finalized April 30, 2014, and officials will implement it during the following 12 to 18 months, the statement said. Once completed, it would create a health system serving about 80,000 people.

The chief executives of each health center hailed the move as a chance to reduce administrative costs in the face of increasing regulatory requirements, due largely to the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

"This project, this merger, will significantly improve the bigger organization's ability to compete in a different type of marketplace," said Morgan Honea, Plains Medical Center's president and chief executive.

Peak Vista officials plan to examine offering more physician rotations in rural Colorado, while also possibly teleconferencing patients to doctors living in Colorado Springs to provide more care across a wider geographic area, said Pam McManus, Peak Vista's president and chief executive.

Plains Medical Center serves about 9,500 people living across a 5,000-square-mile area.

"It just made sense strategically," McManus said. "As we're looking at all the changes in health care, we're really looking at making sure we maximize the dollars that are going into patient care. And keeping down the cost of overhead or duplicate (grant) reporting."

The announcement marks the latest in a series of expansions for Peak Vista, which primarily serves low-income residents who are uninsured or who qualify for Medicaid.

The federally-qualified health center received a $758,333 federal grant in early November to expand capacity at its Academy Boulevard health clinic by about 7,000 patients.

Peak Vista purchased that center in 2012, transforming the former Penrose Community Hospital off Academy Boulevard into a wide-ranging center with two family health centers, a pharmacy, a convenient care center, a laboratory, an enrollment services office and a health center for the developmentally disabled.

The nonprofit also plans to expand services in Fountain with the construction of a new health center - a 14,000-square-foot facility that is slated to open in April. The current center, a 3,300-square-foot facility, will close when the new building opens.