Gerry Leary, master roaster and owner of The Unseen Bean custom coffee roasting company, organizes bags of coffee for brewing in April 2007 after opening his Boulder shop. (Marty Caivano/ Longmont Times-Call file photo)

If you go What: Barley's Angels Colorado beer and barbecue tasting When: 6:30 p.m. Tuesday Where: Georgia Boys BBQ Company, 141 Fifth St., Frederick Cost: $20 More info: barleysangelscolorado.com

Gerry Leary has a nose for coffee.

Since he began roasting coffee in 2001, Leary, 62, has learned to detect the subtle changes in the beans by smell alone.

"About halfway through the process, the earthy beans start to develop that coffee smell," Leary said. "Then it becomes a hot coffee smell and then there's a toastiness and eventually a cotton candy smell from the sugars."

When he took an interest in coffee roasting in the mid-1990s, the Boulder resident was immediately attracted to the blind roasting process — which relies on smell rather than watching the changing color of the beans — because of his own limitations.

Leary, who sells blind-roasted coffee at The Unseen Bean in Lafayette and Boulder, has been blind nearly since birth. When he was 10 months old, Leary contracted an infection in his eyes and they were removed to prevent further complications. Now, Leary relies on his other four senses to compensate for his lack of sight.

"Oddly enough, my sense of smell isn't that great," Leary said. "After working as a mechanic for years and breaking my nose in four places as a teenager, it's not my strongest asset. But after 5,000 attempts at roasting coffee, you start to figure it out."

Advertisement

Before he began honing his sense of smell, it was Leary's hearing that sparked his interest in roasting during a vacation with friends in the 1990s.

In a coffee shop in San Francisco, Leary heard a noise he didn't recognize, which was unusual since Leary considers sound his best asset.

"That's how I figure out what's going on around me and when I was in the coffee shop in San Francisco, I was hearing this loud sound that I couldn't identify," he said. "I asked what it was, and the roaster ended up taking me on a tour of the place and I remember during the tour he said, 'You don't need to be able to see to roast. It's about flavor, not sight.' "

A few years later, Leary quit his longtime career as an auto mechanic and refinanced his house to purchase a small roasting machine.

"I would roast a quarter pound at a time and take notes about everything I smelled and tasted," Leary said. "Then I compared my notes and eventually figured out what temperatures were best and how long to roast and at what points the shells would crack. I wrote down every detail."

Leary roasted millions of coffee beans and sipped thousands of cups of coffee before launching his roasting operation, which is now hosted in his Lafayette shop. He also sells the coffee, pastries and sandwiches at his Boulder shop.

After more than a decade of roasting and honing his senses, Leary shared his knowledge with a group of Boulder County women at a blind beer and food tasting at Left Hand Brewing Co. on Wednesday.

The event was put on by Barley's Angels Colorado, a company that hosts monthly beer tastings and activities in Boulder County and Denver. Barley's Angels has another event scheduled for Tuesday at Georgia Boys BBQ Co., 141 Fifth St., in Frederick.

Participants at Wednesday's event were blindfolded and led through three beer tastings, where they discussed the characteristics of each beer before seeing what was in the glass.

It was a glimpse into Leary's process.

By taking away their ability to see the beer first, Leary said, the women learned how to focus on the taste and smell of the beer rather than making assumptions based on how it looks.

"I'm hoping they take away the realization that there is more to food and beer than what it looks like," Leary said. "I want them to experience the pure flavor rather than going into it with preconceived notions based on how it looks."

The women sipped Left Hand's Stranger American Pale Ale paired with chocolate-covered pretzels, a Milk Stout paired with Milk Stout cupcakes and Wake Up Dead Imperial Stout paired with coffee ice cream. One of the ingredients in the pretzels and ice cream, made by Longmont-based Lori's Cuisine, is Malawi Coffee roasted by Leary.

Deb Cameron, director of Barley's Angels Colorado, said the tasting allowed Leary to teach the women how to read and use their pallet, which will come in handy at future events.

"Our main goal is to educate women in a fun and unique way," Cameron said. "Since our focus is on beer and food, developing their pallet will really help them explore the flavors and understand the pairings going forward."

While Leary's focus has been on coffee, he said, the same principles he learned during the roasting process apply to any tasting.

Leary is currently using his pallet to experiment with a new line of coffee ice cream that he hopes to roll out in the Lafayette store by the end of the year.

"You always hear about heightened senses but my sense of smell or taste isn't any better than yours," Leary said. "The difference is that I'm thinking about the smells and the tastes and the way it feels on my tongue rather than focusing on how it looks."

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com