PORTAGE, MI – The superintendent of Portage Public Schools would like to have the top 32 administrators receive contract extensions into 2016.

Mark Bielang has asked the Board of Education for permission to tack an additional year on the contracts of the administrators so that instead of expiring in 2015 they will continue on to June 2016.

Bielang is not recommending any salary or benefits changes, leaving that up to the board when it holds a public hearing and casts a vote on the 2014-15 budget at its regular June 23 meeting at Portage Central High School.

The district is still in the process of interviews for the North Middle School principal vacancy, and hopes to have a decision by the next board meeting. It filled the Portage Central High School athletic director’s job with the hiring Monday of Joe Wallace of Iowa.

The administrators being considered for contract extensions are Dan Vomastek, information and technology director; Nancy Haas, curriculum director; Larry Killips, assistant superintendent of instruction and assessment; Karla Colestock, finance director; Ron Herron, assistant superintendent of operations, Bradley Galin, human resources director; Clint Walker, community education; Jan Drake and Pat Steinert-Otto, special education supervisors; Gail Van Daff, special education director; Eric Alburtus, Central High principal; Kim Lummis and Jason Frink, Central High assistant principals; Jim French, Northern High principal; Mike Huber and Justin Walker, Northern High assistant principals; Chris Riker, Northern High athletic director; Chuck Haskin, Central Middle principal; Jeff Hamilton, Central Middle assistant principal; Craig Medd, North Middle assistant principal; Denny Roehm, West Middle principal; and Kevin Doerfler, West Middle assistant principal.

Also in line for contract extensions are Mary Daoust, Amberly Elementary principal; Heather Yankovich, Angling Road Elementary principal; William Dygert, Central Elementary principal; Jeremy Zonts, Haverhill Elementary principal; Kelly Jensenius, Lake Center Elementary principal; Lori Kirshman, Moorsbridge Elementary principal; Beth Hartman, 12th Street Elementary principal; and Mark Root, Woodland Elementary principal.

In other action Monday, the Portage school board approved a one-year contract with members of the International Union of Operating Engineers Local 324, representing about 60 employees in food service.

Among the highlights of the agreement are a one percent pay hike for all members and a one-time payment for employees with extended years of service, elimination of language now prohibited by Michigan’s “right to work” legislation, new language on arbitration, removal of language that allowed sick time to be counted as time worked in the calculation of overtime, new language pertaining to mandates from the Affordable Care Act and one additional paid holiday for school-year employees.

It’s the first contract approval by the school board for the new school year. Negotiations continue with the Portage Education Association, bus drivers, secretaries and custodians.

Tom Haroldson covers Portage, Vicksburg and Schoolcraft for MLive/Kalamazoo Gazette. Contact him at haroldso@charter.net.