Sounds like I can hear the voices of our ancestors from the sugar cane fields saying keep on marching, keep on living, keep on loving. Morris Williams

Hundreds of people gathered Monday for marches and rallies in St. Charles and St. John the Baptist parishes to celebrate the life and achievements of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. Residents of the River Parishes were among citizens nationwide who attended special events to remember the sacrifices and celebrate the life of the slain civil rights leader who would have turned 85 on Jan. 15.

Story by Angel Thompson and Littice Bacon-Blood

Staff writers

"This event reminds us that we may be different people, but we are all equal," said Jordan Brown, a seventh-grader at Our Lady of Grace School in Reserve who attended a rally and was recognized as a winner in the MLK poster contest at the Percy Hebert Building in LaPlace. "Dr. King was a leader who helped to unite everyone. He wanted to help everyone, and he worked hard to bring us to where we are today."

King, who was assassinated in Memphis, Tenn., in 1968 while there supporting striking sanitation workers, was a Baptist minister who rose to international prominence as he battled segregation. His philosophy of nonviolence in opposition to unjust laws and his humanitarian efforts on behalf of the poor earned him a Nobel Peace Prize and a legacy as an American icon. Last year marked the 50th anniversary of his monumental "I have a dream" speech at the March on Washington.



In 1986, President Ronald Reagan signed legislation to make the third Monday in January a federal holiday in honor of King.

St. John Parish President Natalie Robottom reminded a crowd of about 200 gathered on the grounds of Percy Hebert Building that they must not be complacent and lose sight of the gains made by leaders such as King, but continue to take action to help everyone, just as King did.

"Dr. King was not just a dreamer - he was a man of action ... Dr. King lived a life of service to others and encouraged others to do the same. He led by example. ... Dr. King was known to say that 'Life's most persistent and urgent question is What are you doing for others?' As we look back at past years and embark upon this new year in 2014, I call upon everyone within the sound of my voice to look deep inside for an answer to that question. What are you doing for others? What example are you setting? Are your actions in concert with your words?"

Robottom also spoke of the 14 murders in the parish last year, 10 of which have been solved with help from the community.

"As we fight to gain control of our community, we have to gain control of our youth," she said. "Dr. King's non-violent approach to resolving conflicts is even more relevant today than ever. The King family is asking for a 'no shots fired day' as we celebrate their father's birthday. That is the least we can do."

"This past year has been very difficult for many families with a record number of murders in our small parish," she said. "This senseless killing has to stop. We are wasting generations of young black males to death or prison. This was not the dream Dr. King had in mind and it is definitely not my dream as the mother of a young African American male."

Robottom was the guest speaker for the LaPlace rally organized by Bethlehem Missionary Baptist Church's Victory Beyond the Wall Ministry and New Pilgrim Baptist Church, both of which are under the leadership of the Rev. Forell Bering Sr.

The theme this year was "Embracing the Dream." It also featured performances by the East St. John High School Band and Our Lady of Grace Adult Choir.

In St. Charles Parish, as they've done for the past two decades, members of the Martin Luther King, Jr., Commemorative Organization of St. Charles led a band of marchers down River Road from Luling to Hahnville in honor of the civil rights trailblazer and others who protested the injustice of racial inequality.

"Happy Birthday, Dr. King!" Reanda Pierre of Luling shouted into the loud speaker as the group - small in number, but big in spirit, made its way from the Hale Boggs Bridge in Luling to Eual Landry school in Hahnville for a rally and program.

Pierre, who said she's been participating in the event since she was a child, was tasked with setting the tone and tempo of the march.

She did so with songs and chants, interspersed with encouragement.

"When I was younger I really didn't understand the significance of events like this; we did it because we were told to do it," Pierre said after the march. "But as I got older, I realized how important it is for us to not only honor the man behind the movement, but others as well. There were so many others who fought for equality and justice and peace. I think it's important for us to come out and commemorate the life of Dr. Martin Luther King and also to honor the movement."

The St. Charles Parish march was filled with songs and reflection, similar to those held in St. John and across the New Orleans metropolitan for the federal holiday set aside in recognition of King's birthday.

"Sounds like I can hear the voices of our ancestors from the sugar cane fields saying keep on marching, keep on living, keep on loving," said the Rev. Morris Williams, who served as the grand marshal for the St. Charles march. "Can you hear them saying job well down my children? Keep up the good work."

Patty Johnson of Harvey participated in the march in St. Charles Parish and brought her sons, ages 14 and 12.

"I wanted my kids to come and be a part of this," she said. "It's part of their history and they need to know about it."

Nicole Brown, 11, of Luling was one of several students who marched. She said King's stance against injustice teaches her to do what's right when she sees someone being bullied.

"We should stand up and say that it's not right," Brown said.

At Landry, as the gym started to fill for the program that included the recognition of essay winners, guest speaker Arolyn Honor, a registered nurse with the St. Charles Parish public school system, said her message was targeted to the youth.

"I wanted to encourage the young people to always reach for their dreams, to be respectful with that reach and to be a good leader," Honor said.

In Edgard, a standing-room only crowd packed the community center for a program sponsored by the West St. John Civic Association that was part church revival and part political rally as the audience was urged to remember King's legacy, but not rest on the laurels of the past.

"What have we done to keep Dr. King's legacy of equality, peace and service alive today?" Asked Mary Elizabeth Johnson as she gave the purpose of the day's event. "Each one of us can make a difference. Anything we do to better mankind no matter how big or small helps to make Dr. King's legacy real."

U.S. Rep. Cedric Richmond, D-New Orleans, the guest speaker, said Monday's holiday was a celebration of King's courage.

"Dr. King observed the country and saw what the country was, but he changed the country into what he wanted it to be," Richmond said. "So, if you look at Dr. King and you look at his courage, his sacrifice and his vision and his commitment you understand why we celebrate his greatness."

However, Richmond said the holiday should also be dedicated to King's entire generation who helped pave the way for his success.

"I'm not foolish enough to think that I got here all by myself," he said. "I got here because of most of the people in this room, and especially my elders, showed the same type of sacrifice, commitment and courage that Dr. king showed. Because you all marched so that we can have the right to vote, you all boycotted so that I could go to some of the best schools in the country."

Richmond drew laughter and applause when he referred to a litany of President Barack Obama's political fights around social programs, from food assistance to universal healthcare.

"You all raised a generation with those core values that we have to believe in and because of that we elected a president who shares those same values that if you see somebody that's hungry you try to give them some assistance, and who cares if they call it SNAPS or food stamps? " Richmond asked, to a chorus of agreement. "That if you see somebody that's homeless, you try to find them a place to stay. Who cares if they call it affordable housing?

"And if you see somebody that's sick, you try to get them to a doctor or get them some healthcare. Who cares if they call it Obamacare? Because I can tell you one thing, as soon as it's a great success and it changes history, they're going to change the name. You won't hear anybody refer to it as Obamacare anymore, they will call it Affordable Care Act. "