The Milwaukee Art Museum's new two-story addition faces Lake Michigan. The museum’s signature wings, designed by Santiago Calatrava, are in the background. Credit: Mike De Sisti

By of the

Dan Keegan loves to show off the Milwaukee Art Museum's new atrium on the lakefront.

"This to me is the really cool moment," he said, walking to one of his favorite spots outside one recent afternoon. "On a day like today when the sky blends with the reflection, it really disappears and the whole thing floats."

Keegan, the museum's director, was talking about the architecture, the way the cantilevered upper level of the building seems to hover above the glassy first floor.

But he could have just as easily been talking about how the travails that brought the museum to this moment have seemed to evaporate. There was the fight with the architect, the critical backlash against initial designs, seemingly endless political wranglings and a construction schedule that went off the rails.

The new building, designed by architect James Shields, and the completely renovated galleries are part of a $34 million project that will be unveiled to museum members next weekend and to the public on Nov. 24.

Saturday night, though, what Shields calls the "vital mass" of humans who weathered a difficult chapter in the museum's history gathered for a preview, a black-tie-and-sneakers affair, designed to give the assembled a comprehensive peek. You would never know the champagne-drinking coterie of board members, donors, public officials, curators and other local art worlders were in crisis not so long ago.

"These cultural projects are much more difficult to pull off than the public is led to believe," said Shields. "They are really, really challenged."

Perhaps the greatest challenge was overcoming the embarrassment of releasing a lackluster design for the new atrium and the revelation that Shields, one of Milwaukee's most celebrated and good-natured architects, had walked away from what should have been a dream job.

The original, all-white designs were office park-like dull and panned by critics and the public alike. Shields and Keegan, among others, were at an impasse over fundamental design issues. It just wasn't working.

"Architects do not step back from such prestigious projects," said Bob Greenstreet, dean of the School of Architecture and Urban Planning at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee at the time. "And I've never known Jim Shields to walk away from a job."

Making matters worse, David Kahler, the architect for the museum's 1975 addition, suggested the museum and Shields, a respected colleague, were turning his building into a "junction box" with the plans.

After the public embarrassment, the key players came back together to deal with it. Shields returned with backup, Joan Soranno, a hotshot from HGA's Minneapolis headquarters. She helped smooth relationships and offered an objective critique of the designs.

"I do feel very proud of the people who were able to step back and not let their egos get in the way," said Christine Symchych, a board member and prominent collector, whose name will appear on one of the museum's newest galleries.

Walking around the stainless steel-clad atrium that resulted from those revisions, a few days before the big unveil to the key stakeholders, Keegan admitted what had been at stake.

"It would have been disastrous," he said, referring to the initial plans.

Battle for control

Meanwhile, in another public controversy, the museum wrangled with the War Memorial leadership and Milwaukee County to gain control over its facilities and to get funding for some of the much-delayed repairs.

Two of the museum's buildings, the 1975 Kahler addition and the 1957 Eero Saarinen War Memorial building, are owned by the county and were, until earlier this year, managed by the War Memorial.

Keegan accomplished what two of his predecessors, directors Russell Bowman and David Gordon, attempted and failed to do. He managed to reach agreement with the War Memorial, get a direct lease with the county and persuade the County Board to cover $10 million for the repairs.

"Five or 10 years ago, no one thought that was even possible," said Symchych, who is also chair of the museum's public relations committee.

Making matters even more complicated, the museum's construction and renovation schedule had to work in tandem with the county's. That made the whole operation "infinitely more complex," Symchych said.

"He got the slow-moving organization that is Milwaukee County to fund the project...and then got them to do it on his schedule," Shields said of Keegan.

"There were times when I didn't think we'd get here," said Milwaukee County Supervisor Patricia Jursik at Saturday's fete, ready to give Keegan lots of credit and getting a bit choked up. "It was a battle, it was a two-year battle."

Still, construction delays put the museum's first-ever, top-to-bottom reinstallation of its permanent collection galleries roughly two months behind schedule, said Keegan, who will leave the museum in May.

Making vision a reality

In recent days, the sounds of drills and cherry pickers have emanated from every corner of the museum as dozens of curators and installers are expected to work down to the last minute, placing precious antiquities into vitrines, "fluffing" a monumental textile sculpture, laying sod outside and stocking the new cafe and wine bar, among countless other details.

But the results are in stark contrast to five years ago when museum professionals from across the country were invited to Milwaukee to offer feedback on the presentation of art here. The harsh conclusion: The museum was a mess and the display of art had little logic to it.

"That was really the story," said Brady Roberts, the museum's chief curator. "Nothing was really satisfactory. You knew it could look better."

That critique and the increasingly urgent need to repair the museum's buildings, which had been leaking for years and put the art at risk, set things in motion for a fresh presentation of art and a new building.

As part of the project, the museum rearranged the configuration of the galleries and reclaimed swaths of space that had been given over to storage and offices. They took all of the art out and are now putting it all back, all 2,500 or so pieces, or about 1,000 more artworks than before.

"It's coming down to the last minute," said Jon Prown, director of the Chipstone Foundation, which is working in partnership with the museum to install areas devoted to American decorative arts. Some of the Chipstone rooms were still nearly empty as recently as Tuesday.

Roberts has been ever present in the galleries in recent days, from morning to night. He's often seen carrying blue and green tape, which he uses to mark dings in the walls that need paint or attention.

"After a while, you go snow blind looking at white walls," he said one recent evening.

But Saturday night, with a week to go before the more public openings, a red carpet was proudly laid out down the length of the long galleria in the Calatrava, leading to the new galleries and atrium.

"I feel overwhelmed," said Tyanna Buie, an artist who recently moved from Milwaukee to Detroit, and who was about to have a major new work unveiled inside the museum's contemporary galleries Saturday night. Her date was Dean Jensen, the Milwaukee gallery owner who represents her work. "It's all pretty awesome. I can't wait to see it."

The most prominent — and public — work of art in the museum looks like a jumbo eraser, a sculpture by Claes Oldenburg called "Typewriter Eraser" that's installed in the glassy atrium. It's a playful hint at the back-to-the-drawing-board nature of the whole project.

"I do have to say, when we got back together to work, it was really a great experience," Shields said. "One of the lessons of all of this — it's OK to change your vision."

Mary Louise Schumacher is the Journal Sentinel's art and architecture critic. Follow her on Facebook (www.facebook.com/artcity) and Instagram (marylouises). Email her at mschumacher@journalsentinel.com.