If you're among the tens of thousands of Central Florida workers planning to claim the Earned Income Tax Credit this year, there's good news: It will be both easier to qualify and more generous in how much money you get back.

The EITC, a federal initiative to encourage Americans to work, is also expected to top last year's collective return of well over a half-billion dollars to residents in Orange, Osceola and Seminole counties alone — a sum likely to have a positive ripple effect on the local economy.

"There's a substantial population out there that will qualify for this credit," said Mark Batchelor, manager of financial-stability initiatives for the Heart of Florida United Way, which is promoting EITC awareness and free-tax-preparation sites. "The average for our area is $1,500 to $2,000 per family. That's a ton of money for those folks, and typically that goes right back to the community. People use it to buy a washing machine or a car or something significant."

Credited as the nation's No. 1 program for lifting families out of poverty, EITC is available to those with a valid Social Security number, no more than $3,350 in investment income and at least some earned income last year, whether it was from tips, hourly wages or a salary. Unemployment compensation, alimony and disability payments don't count. And you have to file a return — which is how many low-income workers miss out.

This year, the maximum credit — for a married couple with three or more children, earning up to $52,427 — is $6,143. For a family living in a rent-by-the-week motel room, Batchelor noted, that's enough to put down first- and last-month's rent and a security deposit on an apartment.

If U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio has his way, workers who qualify would get that money in installments throughout the year, not in a lump sum at tax time. Think of it as a "wage enhancement," he told Jon Stewart of "The Daily Show" last week.

"We should put it into your paycheck," Rubio said. "I'd much rather have someone working and subsidize that through their Earned Income Tax Credit than have them collecting long-term unemployment."

The idea has gotten widespread support.

"It is incredibly important to families that receive it and would be much more effective if it was issued monthly, as Senator Rubio suggests," said Mark Vitner, senior economist for Wells Fargo Securities, who tracks the economy in Florida.

Stephanie Bowman of Orlando remembers the first time she learned of the credit: while living in a domestic-violence shelter as a young mother.

"I had worked since I was 15, but I never heard of the credit before then, when the people at the shelter helped me with my taxes," said Bowman, now founder of One Heart for Women and Children, a charity that helps the poor. "I got back $3,200, which was huge, because I was able to buy a car. I'd been taking the bus everywhere to that point."

She earned the credit again two years ago. By then, she was remarried, running her charity and going through chemotherapy. Her husband was working in automotive sales, but they were still struggling.

"If we hadn't itemized and claimed that credit, we would have owed the IRS $7,200," said Bowman, 48. "We wouldn't have been able to keep the lights on. It really saved us, and it helped save One Heart."

Now, she said, probably 90 percent of the clients she serves rely on the credit, sometimes to keep a roof over their heads. But she worries that many don't know about it.

The IRS estimates that one in four qualified taxpayers misses out. Others go to tax-preparation sites that either charge them to file or charge them interest for an immediate refund. Tax-filing season doesn't officially begin until Jan. 20.

"Our advice is: Wait until the 20th when the free sites open," Batchelor said.

Last year, taxpayers in Orange, Osceola and Seminole counties claimed over $609 million in earned-income credit. And nationwide, Florida ranked third for the total credited to its earned-income recipients, returning $5.2 billion to the state.

"That went out to about 2.1 million people here, meaning there are a lot of Floridians who benefit," said Sean Snaith, director of the University of Central Florida's Institute for Economic Competitiveness. "And they're not just taking the money and putting it in a Mason jar and burying it in the backyard. This money by and large tends to go right back out into the region's economy, creating jobs."

Residents can locate free tax-preparation sites by searching at hfuw.org or calling 2-1-1, the United Way help line. Hours, days and languages spoken vary by site, but collectively the volunteer tax program will be open days, evenings and weekends, and aides can help people in English, Spanish, Creole, Portuguese, Chinese, American Sign Language and Hindi.

And if you prefer to do your own taxes online and make less than $60,000 a year, you can use myfreetaxes.com. Powered by secure H&R Block software, the site is sponsored by the United Way as well as the Walmart Foundation, Goodwill Industries and the National Disability Institute.

Also new this year, the local United Way has set up a reminder service. Text "mymoney" to 898-211, and you'll get a welcome notice along with information on when tax-preparation sites open, tax tips and articles offering advice.

ksantich@tribpub.com or 407-420-5503