Pauline Brown’s Saturday started with an unwelcome surprise.

When the 94-year-old’s daughter knocked on the door of her Lakewood home, Brown thought they were headed to a movie. As they approached Union Station, Brown realized it wasn’t a film they were headed to, but rather a glimpse of her past.

Brown worked for years as a secretary for the Colorado Bureau of Investigation — a job she admits she didn’t love — at an office just down the hall from where Phil Anschutz, who later became a billionaire, began his empire in the station. When Brown’s daughter heard that the newly remodeled station would be opening to the public Saturday, she soon knew she wanted to bring her mother back.

As Brown, born just a few years after Union Station first opened, walked from the sweltering heat into the cool air inside the new station, what she initially viewed as a sour surprise quickly became a happy trip down memory lane. Lifting her head upward, she smiled.

“Just like another century,” she said, looking at the pristine white ceiling over the new shops and hotel. “They’ve done a beautiful job.”

Memories were plentiful Saturday morning as the refurbished station officially opened its doors to the public. Thousands flocked to the blocked-off streets around the area where food carts, music, beer and ice cream stood ready for excited patrons.

While the station in recent weeks has been the scene of several exclusive — and expensive — private openings, Saturday was the public’s turn to marvel at the new transportation and social hub.

“Back to the future,” Dana Crawford, the iconic Denver developer responsible for much of the renovation of the new station, said to those waiting to enter the building. “For the next 99 years, it’s all yours.”

And with an air-conditioned blast of cool breeze, dozens briskly entered the new station.

“It’s exciting today to open these doors to the people of Colorado,” Crawford told The Denver Post as many approached to thank her for her work and commitment to the city. “It’s really their place.”

Jesse Paul: 303-954-1733, jpaul@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/jesseapaul