Actress Heather Amos reluctantly signed up for MinnesotaCare, but has concerns about what it won't cover.

It’s become an all-too familiar tale: A busy, talented local artist unexpectedly runs into a dire medical crisis, but has no insurance to lean on. Once word gets around, community members pull together to organize a fund­raiser, but it’s no small feat and it may not even bring in enough cash.

Now that the Affordable Care Act (the so-called Obamacare) is in full swing, and more people are signing up for Minnesota’s version of the program, known as MNsure, will artists finally catch a break?

As the March 31 deadline to enroll looms, uninsured people are weighing the pros and cons of a program that’s been embroiled in controversy from the start. MNsure is starting to overcome some of its tech wrinkles, and more than 104,000 people have enrolled in it so far. Many are artists and others working in creative fields who have historically had limited options for coverage, said Nikki Hunt, health care program director at St. Paul-based Springboard for the Arts.

Springboard is helping artists navigate the system, thanks to a $50,000 federal outreach grant. Artists often lack coverage because they work independently or on temporary contracts, forcing them to shoulder the burden themselves, Hunt said.

A 2008 report from Minnesota Citizens for the Arts spells it out: Artists are more than two times likelier to not have health insurance as are other Minnesotans. Fifteen percent of full-time artists had no insurance. Another report, from LINCnet, shows that artists are more likely to have catastrophic health insurance (a plan with a very high deductible, which is only useful if something horrible happens) than non-artists. When it comes to regular checkups or everyday health care issues, artists’ needs aren’t being met, Hunt said.

People can sign up by March 31 to avoid paying the penalty, but MNsure recommends enrolling by March 15 to get coverage for April. Vita.mn talked to a handful of local artists about what the new law means to them. Check out their stories and decide for yourself whether to join the great Obama­care experiment.

Jeremy Messersmith: The artist entrepreneur

Singer/songwriter Jeremy Messersmith can testify to the challenges of navigating health care as an artist. Several years ago, he quit his full-time job as an instructor at McNally Smith College of Music because he found that being tied to a regular job limited his creative options.

“I would have loved to have toured a lot more around my first couple records,” he said, “but the most I could do was two to three weeks of touring a year around the U.S., because that was all I could fit into working a full-time job.”

Unfortunately, after he left his job and the benefits that came with it, medical expenses skyrocketed for Messersmith and his wife, Vanessa.

About a year ago, Messersmith had surgery at the Mayo Clinic. “It was just a huge financial hit,” he said. “At one point, just to make sure I was covered, I had to pay for two plans. I was coming off another plan for a couple of months because I didn’t want to have a gap in coverage, but it would be a while before the benefits kicked in. So for a long while we were paying about double our mortgage in just health insurance.”

So Messersmith was thrilled about MNsure, and the prospect of saving thousands a year on a higher-quality insurance plan, when he signed up in late 2013. Like many others, he ran into technical snafus. Eventually, he spoke with a representative who enrolled the couple in the program manually.

In the end, it was worth the hassle, he said. He was able to get a plan that saves the Messersmiths a small fortune every month. “My premiums before for my wife and I were $600 a month — and that was for insurance that wasn’t particularly good, but it was there in case of catastrophic stuff and whatever else.” Under their new plan, the Messersmiths pay $350 a month for “way better insurance,” he said. They have a $750 deductible, which is much lower than what it had been before, plus $250 a month in savings and “a lot less out-of-pocket costs,” he said.

Messersmith hopes the new law means greater freedom — not just for artists, “but also for small-business owners and people that want to quit their day job and do their thing,” he said. Now Messersmith is enjoying growing success with the release of his new album “Heart Murmurs,” a gig at the Sundance Film Festival in January, and an extensive tour that includes a stop in the U.K. and shows at the upcoming South by Southwest festival.

Laura Holway & Ben McGinley: Freedom from the ‘pre-existing conditions’ trap

Choreographer Laura Holway and her husband, Ben McGinley, who works in video production, have been working hard to eke out a living as freelancers. But getting health insurance has been difficult, in part because of their pre-existing conditions, even ones that seem innocuous.

A few years ago, Holway got health insurance through her then-employer, a local restaurant. But when her hours were cut, she found out she was going to lose her coverage. Before that took effect, she decided to get one more physical examination. After that appointment revealed an abnormal pap spear, “No one would cover me because I had a pre-existing condition,” she said.

Holway was finally able to get very limited care, which amounted to $170 per month “for basically no coverage,” she said.

In 2011, when the couple married, a health-insurance broker helped them get a plan with Medica. That lasted for a couple of years.

“That was pretty reasonable,” said Holway of the insurance, though there was a $6,000 deductible. They liked it because of the low cost per month — $260 for both of them — plus the couple got physical and eyecare examinations with their plan, including a $125 credit toward eyeglasses every two years. They also had a $20 co-pay on all physicals. It was “a pretty good situation,” though the downside was that it wouldn’t cover pregnancy, Holway said.

McGinley had been rejected multiple times for pre-existing conditions, relating to when he quit smoking. That might seem like a step in the right direction, but a prescription for anti-anxiety medication, to help him cope with withdrawal symptoms, turned out to be problematic.

It was just a one-time prescription, but whenever he tried to change his plan, McGinley was asked about taking anti-anxiety medication. As a result, he was rejected by insurance companies, he said.

Last year, McGinley again tried to switch plans to see if they could get a better rate. This time he was turned away because he’s taken antidepressants.

“We don’t even have a high standard of what we want,” McGinley said. “We just want to get physicals and maybe an eye exam. We aren’t choosy shoppers. We are small-business owners who get walloped every year with self-employment tax.”

In January, the couple knew their Medica plan was going to skyrocket, so they decided to try MNsure.

They are now on separate plans with different benefits. McGinley’s deductible is set at $3,500 and Holway’s is $1,500. Together, they pay a little over $300 per month “for pretty good insurance,” Holway said.

Joko Sutrisno: When disaster strikes

Joko Sutrisno, a gamelan musician from Java, Indonesia, who has lived in Minnesota for 20 years, recently enlisted the help of Springboard for the Arts to get health insurance. Using MNsure, Sutrisno was approved for the subsidized program MinnesotaCare — and none too soon. Last year Sutrisno’s wife had a health emergency, which meant multiple visits to an opthamologist at $300 per visit. “We were desperate,” he said.

Sutrisno learned music from an early age from his father, who was the leader of a musical group in their village. He further studied gamelan at a performing arts high school, eventually moving to New Zealand in the 1980s to work in the Indonesian Embassy as a cultural official and gamelan teacher. In 1995 he learned about an opportunity through the Schubert Club to teach gamelan in Minnesota. “I said, ‘Minnesota?’ I had to look at the map,” he said.

Sutrisno made $500 a month. He also taught at St. Catherine’s University for several years, which paid him $1,000 a year for his family’s health care needs.

Because it was so little money, Sutrisno found a supplementary program on Lake Street in Minneapolis called Portico, which cost $50 a month, but didn’t cover hospital expenses. The program also charged $10 for doctor visits.

Sutrisno says he and his family take care to eat healthily and get enough exercise, so they haven’t had much need for health insurance until the past year, when his wife lost her vision.

“I thought, what do I do?” Sutrisno said. “We have to do something.”

Sutrisno had received Springboard for the Arts’ newsletter, and he knew the organization offered vouchers for visits to an eye doctor. Unfortunately, the vouchers are to see a general doctor first, and the need was urgent.

Springboard offered to help set the couple up with MNsure, and Sutrisno and his wife qualified for MinnesotaCare. “It was amazing. Without Springboard’s help, I don’t know what we would do,” he said.

Still skeptical of Obamacare

Even with the Affordable Care Act in place, some artists are choosing to pay the penalty instead of signing up. It may be because they don’t like being told by the government what to do, or because they distrust insurance companies, or because they feel they still can’t afford it.

Amina Harper, a 26-year-old visual artist, has been without health insurance since last year.

When she occasionally works for a temp agency, Harper can get temporary access to a bare-bones insurance plan, which varies depending on where she’s working. “Anytime you make money, they take it out of your paycheck,” she said.

Lately, Harper hasn’t been getting much temp work, but she plans on holding off getting health insurance because of horror stories she’s heard about people’s experiences with the MNsure website. Harper also says she’s counting on the fact that she’s young and healthy. So far, her health problems have been rare.

Harper is wary of signing up for Obamacare because of the troubles that some of her friends have had signing up. “My thing is, I’ll sign up if the kinks get worked out,” she said. “I think I’ll give it another year.”

Heather Amos, an actor and a child-care worker, begrudgingly signed up for MinnesotaCare, though she’s concerned about the fact that it doesn’t cover the alternative medication and naturopathy — treatment she says she needs for Hashimoto’s disease. “I got MinnesotaCare, but it doesn’t cover anything,” she said. “My medication is $95 a month and my naturopath is out of network. It’s pretty much only good if I go in for a cold or something. And deductibles are really high.”

That said, Amos was able to get MinnesotaCare in time for a trip to the emergency room, to remove kidney stones.

Though not all artists are ready to join the MNsure system, there’s no doubt it will have an effect on the arts ecosystem in the Twin Cities and on a national scale. Will fewer artists have to choose between paying rent and going to the doctor? Will Obamacare encourage artists to quit their day jobs to pursue freelance careers? Time will tell.