Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 74-year-old retired Army colonel Bill Badger, who tackled Jared Loughner to the ground saving the lives of those around him, has died from complications from pneumonia.

Bill Badger, who helped bring down Jared Loughner in the 2011 mass shooting near Tucson, died of pneumonia on March 11, 2015. (Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic) Story Highlights Bill Badger was one of 13 people injured when a gunman opened fire at a constituent event

He served in the Army and National Guard for 38 years and had retired to Tucson's Catalina Foothills

Badger joined other survivors in lobbying legislators around the country for stronger gun laws

On her birthday each February, Patricia Maisch would pack up some cupcakes and take them the short drive to Bill Badger's house in Tucson's Catalina Foothills. She found the sort of comfort in the small ritual that a lifelong friend might, though the two had known each other only a few years.

On Jan. 8, 2011, Maisch and Badger had been strangers to each other, both standing in a line outside a Safeway grocery store not far from their homes. They were waiting to see their congresswoman, Gabrielle Giffords. In a terrifying instant, their lives intersected.

A gunman opened fire on the gathering and as he neared Maisch, he stopped to reload. Badger, his head bleeding from a gunshot wound, helped tackle the shooter and stop the attack.

"I was the next person in line," Maisch said Wednesday from her home. "That's why I would go see Bill with the cupcakes. I have another birthday because of him."

Maisch and Badger ate cupcakes again in February of this year. It would be the last birthday they would share. Badger, a retired Army colonel who spent the years after the attack lobbying for changes to gun laws, died of pneumonia Wednesday in a Tucson hospital. He was 78.

Badger was one of 13 people, including Giffords, who were injured in the shooting. Six others died. Badger and another of the men in line tackled the attacker and held him until police arrived. Maisch, on the ground, grabbed the shooter's ammunition magazine.

ROBERTS: An Arizona hero has died

RELATED: A fatal chain of events unfolds

The gunman, Jared Loughner, pleaded guilty to the shootings and was sentenced in 2012 to seven life terms and an additional 140 years in prison.

In a statement released Wednesday, Giffords called Badger a hero.

"I believe that Bill helped save lives that morning," she said. "And I will always be grateful to him for his selfless, brave actions. My heart, thoughts, and prayers are with Bill's loved ones as they mourn the loss of a great man."

Although he had been ill off and on in recent months, Badger for several years kept a busy schedule, meeting with lawmakers and speaking to groups about what he called common-sense gun laws, including comprehensive background checks and safeguards for people suffering from mental illnesses.

He and some of the other survivors grew close as they worked on a shared cause.

"We have such a strong bond and a place in our hearts for each other," said Nancy Bowman, a nurse who was in the grocery store when the shooting erupted and helped treat some of the injured. "We're like family. We keep in close contact. Bill was part of that family."

Badger joined the National Guard as a high-school student in South Dakota and learned to fly helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft, according to the South Dakota National Guard. He served part time for 20 years, then went on full-time duty for another 18 years.

In 1985, he and his wife, Sallie, moved to Arizona, and he helped set up the Western Army Aviation Training Site in Marana.

He had been retired from the Army for almost 20 years in 2011. He decided to go meet Giffords at the grocery store that day after hearing of changes to a military health-care plan as a result of President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act.

"I had never personally met Gabrielle Giffords," Badger said in the weeks after the shooting. "I liked her because she was a military spouse and my wife was a military spouse, and when you talked military matters to her, she knew what you were talking about."

He was waiting in line when the first bullets flew. "I could see he was going to shoot where we were at and that's when I dropped down and I felt the burning sensation in the back of my head."

Retired Army Col. Bill Badger, with his dog at his Tucson home in 2011. Badger helped hold gunman Jared Loughner until police arrived. (Photo: The Republic)

A bullet had grazed the back of his head, but the injury didn't stop him from moving quickly when the shooter came near. He and Roger Salzgeber subdued the gunman until police arrived. Badger later credited his Army training for his actions.

Maisch had thrown herself to the ground as the shooter neared and, when the men tackled him, she reached for an ammunition magazine.

"Between Bill and Roger, I am at least uninjured and maybe even alive because of their actions," she said Wednesday. "I'll be forever grateful."

In the months after the shooting, Badger joined some of the other survivors in their efforts to change gun laws. Bowman, the nurse, said she believes some people were more willing to listen because of Badger's military background.

"He once said to me he did not feel he needed to carry a firearm in order to stand tall as a man, and he sure proved that at the Safeway," she said. "He was a good guy without a gun who took down a murderous lunatic with a gun."

Friends said Badger was deeply affected by the shooting, in particular the death of 9-year-old Christina-Taylor Green.

"He couldn't say her name without becoming emotional," Maisch said.

"Every time he talks about her, his eyes well up with tears and he can hardly speak," Bowman added.

A few months after the shooting, the San Diego Padres paid tribute to Badger, Maisch and Daniel Hernandez, at the time an intern in Giffords' office and the first to attend to her wounds after the shooting. Badger and Hernandez found themselves waiting in the owners' box before the game started.

"He looked at us and he said, 'We make quite the strange couple don't we?' " Hernandez recalled Wednesday. "I guess we did. Here he was, an older guy, a retired colonel, pretty conservative, and here's me, a younger Latino who's gay and serving from a liberal part of Tucson.

"But we became good friends," said Hernandez, now a member of the Sunnyside Unified School District governing board in Tucson. "I looked up to Bill. He was a very serious man but also someone who knew when it was appropriate to have a sense of humor. He always told me, 'Always remember not to take yourself too seriously.' It was good advice."

Bowman saw Badger in the hospital Tuesday.

"I told him he was my hero and he was Tucson's hero," she said. "I have a place in my heart with such a love for him. It's something I can't explain and can't duplicate. He will forever be in my heart."

Memorial services are pending.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1C8UrUg