Loveland Public Library pairs middle and high school students through Ally teen mentoring program

Sarah Wolfe, 13, left, shares a laugh with Mattea Wabeke, 18, who is mentoring her through the Loveland Public Library's Ally teen mentoring program. They were at the library Saturday, April 4, to talk and figure out their plans for the day, which included a visit to the Loveland Museum/Gallery. ( Shelley Widhalm / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

High school student Mattea Wabeke doesn't have a younger sibling, so she likes hanging out with the student she mentors every week or two.

The Thompson Valley High School senior paired up with Sarah Wolfe, an eighth-grader at Bill Reed Middle School, at the end of February through a new program at the Loveland Public Library.

The Ally teen mentoring program pairs middle school with high school students, who want to spend at least three hours a month or more together at the library or out in the community. The name refers to comrade or friend.

"A lot of the things your mentee is going through are things you have gone through," said Wabeke, 18, explaining that she and Wolfe talk about homework, extracurricular activities, planning the future and dealing with boys.

Wabeke and Wolfe go to the library, attend church together, get coffee and last Saturday went to the Loveland Museum/Gallery, a place Wolfe hasn't visited before.

"We talk about just life, what we like to do, our friends and family," Wolfe said, adding that she's learning what she has to look forward to in high school and that when she gets there, she'll have to start thinking about college. "I like having someone to talk to and hanging out with someone that's mature."

Summer Maid, librarian in the teenseen section at the library, started the program in January. So far, she signed up three pairs - her goal was three to five pairs in a program she hopes to grow in the summer and fall semester with additional pairs.

Advertisement

"I noticed a lot of at-risk youth hanging out at the teenseen requiring one-on-one attention from staff," said Maid, who started working at the library in November 2013.

Some of the youth exhibited poor behavior, lacked an adult support system, had school or home issues or didn't have enough to eat, she said. Some stayed from right after school until 8 p.m., she added.

Maid read about a similar program and thought she'd try it at the library to help out those teens and others who were interested in being mentored, she said.

"I realized they needed a support system outside of their network and family," Maid said.

The pairs fill out application forms and have an initial meeting with Maid before they meet on their own. Maid bases the pairings on common interests and goals, giving the pairs goal sheets to fill out to identify three goals they want to complete during the semester, she said.

"What we're seeing is libraries are becoming somewhat of community centers," Maid said. "We have a focus in the teenseen on relationships. We're going beyond the teenseen's doors to build relationships in the community."

The teenseen also started a writing group in February, TeaInk, where youth combine writing with tea drinking. The group meets the second Tuesday of the month to engage in writing activities, such as writing prompts and reading the results.

"I encourage kids who are interested in writing to come in and have fun," Maid said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm