Lucas Jackson/Reuters

After a wild ride in August, the stocks of many major media companies ended the month with double-digit declines.

Markets around the world suffered their biggest monthly losses in years as concerns about a slowdown in growth in China and other emerging markets rattled investors in August.

For media companies — particularly TV network owners – global growth worries only added to fundamental concerns about how the industry will cope with an increasing number of consumers cutting the cord or downgrading to skinnier cable bundles. The meltdown in media stocks started earlier in the month as many companies reported disappointing earnings results.

The S&P 500 Media index fell 14% in August, a steeper loss than the S&P 500′s decline of 6.3%.

Among the hardest hit stocks in the sector, Class B shares of Viacom Inc., the owner of MTV and Nickelodeon, tumbled 28% in August, while 21st Century Fox’s Class A shares fell 21%. Time Warner Inc., which owns channels such as HBO and TBS, and Walt Disney Co., which owns ESPN and ABC, were down 19% and 15%, respectively.

Advertising holding companies were less rattled by the media meltdown, with the stocks of U.S.-based Omnicom and Interpublic posting declines of 8.3% and 11%, respectively.

Bernstein analyst Todd Juenger, in a research note last month, said that even channels’ once steadily growing revenue from affiliate fees are now at risk and that markets are now valuing TV networks as “structurally impaired assets.”

“We think whether cord cutting turns out to be just a small deal or a really big deal, the stocks are going to trade at this low multiple for quite some time, just like they did before [during the recession], until proven otherwise,” Mr. Juenger said in a conference call last month to discuss a new framework for valuing the media sector.

Meanwhile, Netflix, a highly volatile stock, ended the month with a 0.6% gain — one of the better results in media even after the shares were whipsawed along with the broader market more than most. Shareholders have high hopes for Netflix’s global expansion, and several analysts have said the video-streaming company is well-positioned to benefit from the advertising and ratings woes that plague traditional media firms. So far this year, Netflix shares have more than doubled.

During trading Tuesday morning, the S&P 500 was down about 2%, and most media stocks were in the red, led by Netflix with a 6% drop.