Thousands Of Iowans Could See Their Health Insurance Premiums “Rise Substantially” Next Year Due To ObamaCare.“Several thousand Iowans are receiving notices this week that their health insurance premiums could rise substantially next year. The letters went out to people who bought individual health insurance policies from CoOportunity Health or Coventry Health Care. The companies are the two main Iowa carriers selling insurance on the government’s new online marketplace, which is a key part of the Affordable Care Act.” (Tom Leys, “CoOportunity, Coventry Seek Health-Insurance Increases,” Des Moines Register, 6/13/14)

· “CoOportunity Health Sent Letters To 9,100 Iowa Customers Saying It Has Proposed Raising Base Rates 14.3 Percent Next Year.” (Tom Leys, “CoOportunity, Coventry Seek Health-Insurance Increases,” Des Moines Register, 6/13/14)

(Tom Leys, “CoOportunity, Coventry Seek Health-Insurance Increases,” 6/13/14) · “Coventry Told Customers It Plans To Raise Their Rates By Varying Amounts, Averaging 8.7 Percent.” (Tom Leys, “CoOportunity, Coventry Seek Health-Insurance Increases,” Des Moines Register, 6/13/14)

CoOporunity Customer: “It Feels Like The Ultimate Bait And Switch When An Increase Comes So Early In… Enrollment And Implementation Of The (Affordable Care Act.)” “‘It feels like the ultimate bait and switch when an increase comes so early in … enrollment and implementation of the (Affordable Care Act),’ one CoOportunity customer wrote.” (Tom Leys, “CoOportunity, Coventry Seek Health-Insurance Increases,” Des Moines Register, 6/13/14)

· “Another Customer Wrote: ‘It’s Upsetting And I Feel Like We Were Used And Betrayed.’” (Tom Leys, “CoOportunity, Coventry Seek Health-Insurance Increases,” Des Moines Register, 6/13/14)

Cliff Gold, CoOportunity’s Chief-Operating Officer, Said About Half The Proposed Increases Were Due To ObamaCare. “Cliff Gold, CoOportunity’s chief-operating officer, expressed sympathy. ‘We wish we weren’t increasing this much either,’ Gold said in an interview. Gold said about half of his company’s proposed price increase was due to an unexpected quirk in the way the federal and state governments are enforcing new coverage rules under the Affordable Care Act.” (Tom Leys, “CoOportunity, Coventry Seek Health-Insurance Increases,” Des Moines Register, 6/13/14)

FLASHBACK: ObamaCare Champion Bruce Braley Promised The Law Was Delivering “Dramatically Lower” Prices

Rep. Bruce Braley (D-IA) Claimed That Insurance Prices Are “Dramatically Lower” And That Iowans Would Save Money Because Of ObamaCare. BRALEY: “It took a long time for our Governor to embrace the expansion of Medicaid, and there’s a waiver request pending before the Secretary that’s kind of a hybrid, but it was passed by the Iowa legislature, which includes the Democrats in charge of the Senate. And what happened is, when the marketplace opened up the pricing on these products is dramatically lower than pricing available to consumers before the Affordable Care Act went into place.” (Bruce Braley, Bill Press Show Interview, 10/9/13)