A well-funded conservative fiscal advocacy organization, Americans for Prosperity, has hired a state director and started a state chapter in Louisiana.

The national group and its founders, billionaire businessmen Charles and David Koch, have been very active already in Louisiana politics, but this marks the first time the organization has hired local staff and set up a state organization. The group will be headquartered in Baton Rouge, but has not yet acquired office space.

Americans for Prosperity tapped Phillip Joffrion in December to run the new Louisiana state chapter. Joffrion served as campaign manager and chief of staff for former U.S. Rep. Jeff Landry (R-La.) and was political director for State Treasurer John Kennedy's campaign for U.S. Senate in 2004. The group plans to bring on more local staff in Louisiana, including a field director.

Americans for Prosperity's national operation has already been heavily involved in trying to unseat U.S. Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.) in the 2014 election.

The group announced today (Jan. 2) that it will run advertisements in Louisiana for the next three weeks attacking Landrieu for her support of the Affordable Care Act, often referred to as Obamacare. The Koch brothers' political action committee has also made large campaign contributions to U.S. Rep. Bill Cassidy, the Republican frontrunner in the race against Landrieu.

Still, the local chapter of Americans for Prosperity intends to be involved in a lot more than just the 2014 U.S. Senate race. It plans to push a conservative fiscal agenda at the state level as well.

"This is not just about Senator Landrieu," said Joffrion, "We will be working during the [Louisiana] legislative session to advance good fiscal economic policy."

Americans for Prosperity's local chapter count preventing Medicaid expansion, keeping state taxes low and advocating for tort reform in Louisiana among its top priorities, according to Joffrion.

"There will be a big effort to find donors and raise money here," he said.

Louisiana is the 35th state to gets its own local chapter of Americans for Prosperity. Texas, Arkansas and Florida are among those nearby that also have a local operation.