Topics: employment discrimination, employment non-discrimination act, enda, Family research council, housing discrimination, John Boehner, LGBT, Media Criticism, Mike Huckabee, peter sprigg, R-Ohio, The New York Times, Transgender, transgender rights, Media News, Politics News

The New York Times reports that LGBT activists are gearing up to push for a landmark civil rights bill protecting the community from discrimination, a little more than one year after the Employment Non-Discrimination Act (ENDA) passed the U.S. Senate, only for House Speaker John Boehner to refuse to bring the measure to vote in his chamber.

Given that the political dynamics just got even worse — an anti-gay Republican majority takes control of the U.S. Senate next month, and the House is slated to move even further to the right — we likely won’t see a sweeping LGBT civil rights bill anytime soon. Accordingly, the Times reports, advocates expect that the fight for such legislation could take 10 or more years.

With gay people lacking even basic employment protections in 29 states — and no gender identity protections in 32 — discrimination against LGBT people remains stubbornly persistent, despite the dramatic shift in public opinion on issues like marriage equality. The civil rights bill envisioned by LGBT advocates would outlaw employment discrimination, as well as discrimination in housing, education, jury service, lending, and public accommodations.

The “family values” crowd, you’ll be shocked to learn, won’t stand for this. While the sacred right to discriminate is the overarching concern that guides the anti-LGBT movement, the public accommodations issue particularly riles its ranks. The Times turned to the Family Research Council’s Peter Sprigg to elaborate on social conservatives’ concerns.

“This is where the term ‘bathroom bills’ has been coined,” Sprigg told the paper. “Applying gender protections to public accommodations would mean that you have situations in which people who are biologically male could claim that they have a civil right to use a female designated facility — including restrooms, showers and locker rooms.”