“I am willing, to a certain extent, to pay more, but I hope it ends up being something that is fair for everybody" -- Seth Maurer of Hampden Twp.





Seth Maurer is among hundreds of thousands of Americans whose health insurance plan will disappear because it doesn’t meet Affordable Care Act standards.

The 27-year-old landscaping company owner liked his health plan. Now he expects coverage will cost him at least $2,000 more per year.



He also feels let down by President Barack Obama, who famously stated, "If you like your health plan, you'll be able to keep your health plan, period."



“It’s either a failure of a promise or a lie or something,” said Mauer, who lives in Hampden Twp.

Related: for people in need of affordable coverage, the end result is worth struggling through the glitches.



Insurers across the county have sent out letters informing some customers their health plans will no longer be available. It’s causing a national uproar. Some insurers say the situation is being distorted to make it seem that plans are being abruptly canceled.

“I think the most important thing to understand is that people aren’t being thrown off their plan mid-year. … You are on your plan until your expiration date,” said Walt Cherniak of Aetna.

The situation involves plans that don’t meet minimum coverage mandates contained in the Affordable Care Act. The 10 “essential” benefits include items such as maternity care, prescription drugs and mental health treatment.

Some also are being canceled because they are “medically underwritten,” meaning premiums are based on medical history of conditions such as diabetes or knee surgery. Now, insurers can adjust premiums only according to geographic location, age and smoking status. And there are limits on how much more they can charge.

In Pennsylvania, Highmark Inc. has sent letters to about 180,000 people who have individual health plans.

This includes about 40,000 people with so-called “guaranteed issue” plans for people whose medical histories would have caused most insurers to reject them. Blues plans typically offer coverage as part of their nonprofit mission.

Coverage for the affected Highmark members ends Dec. 31. They can buy a different Highmark plan or shop for one on the insurance exchange.

Highmark spokeswoman Kristin Ash predicts most of them will be able to find lower prices. “Almost all of (the affected customers) will be getting better coverage at a better price come Jan. 1,” she said.

That’s because their health problems -- pre-existing conditions -- can no longer be held against them. They'll be part of much larger pool of insured people, with more healthy people to help offset their costs, according to Ash. Some also will qualify for government subsidies, which are based on income.

But Aji Abraham of Capital BlueCross, while agreeing that 2014 premiums will be lower for most, said that might not be true in subsequent years. It will depend on whether the exchanges succeed in attracting enough young, healthy people to sufficiently lower costs for the sickest, he said.

Capital has sent letters to about 9,000 guaranteed-issue customers.

And Highmark and Capital sent letters to an additional group of people who tend to be healthier and who paid lower rates because of their good health. Highmark sent 140,000 such letters; the number sent by Capital wasn’t immediately available. These customers are being allowed keep their plan in 2014 as long as they renew in 2013. Their old plan will be gone in 2015.

Health insurers acknowledge these customers are the ones mostly likely to see premium increases.

This group includes Maurer, the landscaping business owner. Having received a letter from his insurer, Highmark, he began trying to explore options on the exchange on Oct 1. He hasn't gotten far.

“Every time I try to log in, it just gives me blank screens. I’ve kind of put it on hold,” he said this week.





Maurer pays $195 per month for a plan that has no deducible and charges him 10 percent of the negotiated costs when he sees a doctor or needs medical care. Once he reaches a $1,500 cap, he pays no more co-pays for the rest of the year.

Based on a discussion with a Highmark representative, a similar plan with a $500 deductible will now cost him about $315 per month.

Mauer has been trying to maintain a fact-based, open-minded view of the exchange. As a veteran online shopper, he concedes that an electronic health insurance market that allows side-by-side comparison is a major step forward.

It also crossed his mind that the exchange might enable him to eventually provide health benefits for his employees.

But he also realizes he’ll wind up paying more because his premiums will go to help unhealthy people. He wonders about the fairness.

“I am willing, to a certain extent, to pay more, but I hope it ends up being something that is fair for everybody,” said Maurer, who doesn’t expect to qualify for subsidies toward his costs.

He also has misgivings about the individual mandate requiring most people to have health insurance in 2014.

“I think if the system could be good enough and affordable enough people would do it without being required,” he said.

Jim Beidler of Berks County also received a letter from his insurer stating that his plan doesn’t conform to the Affordable Care Act and won’t be available in 2014.

While exchange glitches have prevented him from enrolling, he has been able to view available plans. He concluded his premium will drop by nearly $180 per month, and his total costs, including co-pays, will be nearly $4,000 less than in 2013.

“To me, losing this policy is like losing a used car and being given the keys to a brand new one at a lower cost,” said Beidler, 53, a self-employed genealogy expert and tax preparer.