No more.

Since taking office, Barry has earmarked $10 million in city money to encourage the construction of affordable units and pioneered a program to donate vacant city-owned land to non-profit developers.

She also pushed the city council toward a vote on what has come to be called "inclusionary" zoning. It's a policy that requires developers to build units reserved for residents earning less than the median area income if they want permission to build higher-density projects.

Last week, the state legislature delivered a preemptive strike against Barry's plan, voting to ban mandatory inclusionary zoning.

On one level, the vote reflected the partisan clash between the city's Democratic leadership and Republicans who dominate Tennessee's legislature. (Two years ago, state legislators blocked the city's plan to build a new bus system.)

But the ban also reflects the delicate balancing act required to pass inclusionary zoning, a decades-old tool that has enjoyed renewed interest in recent years as cities seek to make affordable housing palatable to developers.

"We want to create mixed neighborhoods, avoid concentrating poverty," said James Fraser, a professor at Vanderbilt University who has consulted on Nashville's housing plan.

That's invited pushback from neighborhood groups that shun new affordable units, as well as from local developers. "They're going to use the state legislature to try keep it from happening," he said.

Inclusionary housing emerged from the suburbs of Washington in the early 1970s to meet two goals: Create affordable housing at low cost to local governments, and mix housing reserved for low- and moderate-income residents with higher-priced rentals and for-sale units.

The particulars vary, but the main idea was to tie the construction of housing for working-class households to market-rate projects. That often means granting a variance to build more units than zoning codes typically allow or offering tax abatements and other incentives.

About 500 local jurisdictions, from New York City to West Palm Beach County, Fla., have adopted these kinds of policies over the years.

But now, as developers rush to build new, market-rate apartments in cities big and small, some local officials are considering inclusionary zoning for the first time, while others seek to add teeth to existing programs, said Erika Poethig, director of urban policy initiatives at the Urban Institute.

These moves come as local real estate markets continue to recover from a recession that caused construction to grind to a halt, constraining supply and driving up rents.

As new projects did come up, the first to move forward were designed to luxury specs, famously targeting a new breed of affluent city-dwellers on the coasts.