The proposed 2015 premium adjustments for health plans created under Obamacare show rates going up, down and everywhere in between.

Some insurers have proposed double-digit increases for policies that take effect Jan. 1, while others are seeking regulatory approval to reduce rates for the second year of the Michigan Health Insurance Marketplace.

In the individual market, health plans submitted last month to the Michigan Department of Insurance and Financial Services had an average proposed rate increase of 4.6 percent, according to an analysis by accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers.

The proposals range from a 17.6 percent increase by Humana Medical Plan of Michigan to a decrease of 21.6 percent by Molina Healthcare of Michigan. Based on a PwC analysis of the filings, an individual policy in Michigan next year would have an average premium of $331, versus $373 nationally.

The wide variance in premiums adjustments for 2015 stems in part from the general lack of underwriting experience for the individual policies sold on the Health Insurance Marketplace created under the federal Affordable Care Act.

“You did not have a predictable block of business,” said John Dunn, vice president of small- and mid-group business at Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan.

Because all of the policies were new for 2014 and had to meet the benefit and cost mandates of the ACA, insurers had virtually no underwriting history to use to set first-year premiums, said Jon Snead, senior vice president of the health and benefits practice at the Grand Rapids office of benefits consultant Aon.

Insurance carriers also were uncertain on exactly what kind of risk pool to expect with the ACA plans for individuals, a number of whom were previously uninsured and qualified for a federal subsidy to buy coverage.

Snead believes the wide variances seen this year in annual premiums adjustments will narrow as insurers gain more underwriting history and data on enrollment patterns for policies sold on the exchange.

“My expectations for this year would be that maybe everybody would start to merge toward the median. You had so many outliers in the first round,” Snead said. “Last year, the carriers had no idea.”

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan filed for a 9.7 percent increase in the premium for individual policies, and its HMO subsidiary, Blue Care Network, proposed a 9.3 percent increase. Blue Cross Blue Shield intends to double the number of individual policies available on the Health Insurance Marketplace to 41 for next year.

Grand Rapids-based Priority Health seeks to reduce premiums for individual policies by 5.5 percent. Newly formed Consumers Mutual Insurance of Michigan, started in 2013 with federal seed money provided under the ACA, wants to lower rates 7.2 percent for individual policies and 8.5 percent for group coverage.

Across the small group market, insurers generally proposed 2015 rates with small single-digit increases over 2014 for ACA-compliant policies. A couple of insurers filed small rate decreases, though Total Health Care USA in the Detroit area proposed what is by far the largest rate increase over 2014, a 32.9 percent hike.

For group policies that begin Jan. 1, 2015 for employers with 50 or fewer full-time employees, Priority Health proposed a rate increase of 4.6 percent and 0.3 percent for a fully-insured plan. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan submitted a proposal to state regulators for a 2.7 percent increase, and Blue Care Network seeks a 6.8 percent increase.

Come Nov. 15, small businesses can buy group 2015 policies on another online exchange created under the ACA and apply for tax credits to offset the premium if they have 25 or fewer employees.

The online exchange for the Small Business Health Options Program, or SHOP, was to start last year for 2014 policies, but was delayed a year. Employers could only buy a SHOP policy and apply for tax credits through an insurance agent.

Executives at Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan and Priority Health doubt the SHOP exchange will generate a lot of volume.

“We don’t expect to see a lot of migration to SHOP, at least initially,” said Scott Norman, vice president of sales and client services at Priority Health. “There really is not a huge incentive to purchase on the SHOP.”

Under the ACA, small employers with 25 or fewer employees who meet federal wage guidelines can get a temporary tax credit for up to 50 percent of their contribution to health coverage for two years.

Except for allowing employers to apply online for the federal tax credit, independent insurance agents do essentially what the SHOP exchange does in comparing costs and benefit packages, said Blue Cross Blue Shield’s Dunn.

“I don’t think it adds a lot of new value into the marketplace that benefits the employer in a way they didn’t already have,” said Dunn, who expects that most small employers will continue to buy coverage through an existing agent. “You have a well-functioning market. The agents do a great job being able to educate the employers on what products are out there, how they work, pricing and so forth.”

Dunn notes that only a small minority of employers, primarily in low-wage industries, will even qualify for the tax credits anyway.

Another drawback to SHOP, at least for 2015, is that employers are limited to buying just one benefit package or carrier, rather than selecting multiple options from which employees could choose.

As the ACA further takes hold, the question for employers to consider is whether to continue offering health benefits or drop them, pay the penalty under the ACA and send employees to the individual exchange to buy coverage on their own.

After a year’s delay, that issue arises again this summer as a mandate approaches for companies with 50 or more employees to either offer coverage in 2015 or pay a penalty.

Key to answering whether to continue offering health benefits is taking a strategic approach and deciding if it helps to attract and retain talent, said Snead of Aon. If a company opts to drop coverage and have employees buy individual coverage, a competitor that still offers group coverage may lure away employees, he said.

Aon’s annual survey of employee benefits shows just 15 percent to 20 percent of respondents will actually consider such a move.

Snead’s first question for any employer who wants to consider dropping group coverage is “what is it you are looking to gain out of your health care plan?”

“It has to be part of a company’s discussion about strategy,” he said.

Priority Health’s data show about 6 percent to 7 percent of employers in group coverage plans have opted to drop benefits in favor of the individual exchange, a percentage that Norman called “pretty minimal.”

“Benefits still hold a really important value to employees,” Priority Health’s Norman said.