SPRINGFIELD, Mo. -- New numbers show some ups and downs for children in Missouri.

The Missouri Kids Count Data Book takes a look at trends, giving local and state policy-makers and other child advocates crucial information.

The Kids Count data tracks changes over time.

These numbers show seven measures improved, while three worsened.

Many of the improvements in the data have to do with health-- more specifically birth outcomes.

"Education is the key to all these things improving," said Springfield Pregnancy Care Center's Kimberly Costello.

Springfield's Pregnancy Care Center is one of the agencies that uses Kids Count data to help better the community.

"We use that information to make sure we are providing the services our clients desperately need in this area," said Costello.

According to the Kids Count data, teen births for those ages 15-19 dropped by 26.5% statewide from 2010-2014.

One of the largest drops in southwest Missouri was in Stone County, which saw a 30% decrease.

"We are so excited to see the rates of those situations improving in our area," said Costello. "Especially in the surrounding seven counties we work with with out clients."

The Pregnancy Care Center has a prevention education program in local schools and other places throughout the community, which guides teens and helps them make wiser, more positive decisions.

"Since we've been in schools and local organizations, the teen pregnancy rate has gone down by more than 20 percent in the southwest Missouri area."

Statewide infant mortality improved by 12 percent, and low birth-weight in infants slightly improved by one percent.

"Nutrition education, healthy pregnancy, labor and birth-- all those things they're getting access to early on in the pregnancy now," said Costello. "And it makes the pregnancy healthier and moves it forward in a better way."

The Pregnancy Care Center has a nutrition education and healthy pregnancy program dedicated to keeping babies in good health.

"100% of our clients who have gone through that program have avoided low birth weight and pre-term deliveries," said Costello. "And that's an amazing statistic."

Other improvements in the data included a 25% drop in unintentional teen injuries and homicides and a 24% decrease in annual high school dropouts.

Child deaths for kids ages 1-14 decreased by ten percent.

Areas that worsened include children under 18 living in poverty, children entering and re-entering state custody, and substantiated child abuse and neglect cases.