Gasoline prices are shown at a Shell gas station in Encinitas, Calif. Reuters

JASON BORDOFF: As the U.S. summer holiday season comes to a close, motorists may find their wallets in better shape than in recent years thanks to a spectacular plunge in oil prices to 6 ½ year lows. Driven by a surge in US supply and OPEC’s refusal to cut production, prices dropped 60% from June 2014 to January 2015. They spiked again to $66, before plunging nearly 40% from their 2015 high in May. The oil price collapse caused gasoline prices to drop more than one dollar from June 2014 to August 2015, boosting consumers’ spending power by more than $100 a month. Yet while lower prices are a boon to the U.S. economy and motorists, consumers may be in for a bumpy ride.

After years of adjusting oil production to influence crude prices, OPEC has seemingly given up its role of market stabilizer after top producer Saudi Arabia opted to increase its production to near capacity and increase market share in the face of falling prices. For years, the Kingdom had been the only country that produced significantly less oil than it economically could, and was thus the only one with any meaningful level of “spare capacity”—the ability to quickly bring new oil supply onto the market to compensate for production losses elsewhere. The U.S. Energy Information Administration now estimates OPEC’s total spare capacity at less than 1.3 million barrels a day, the lowest level since 2008.

Without that buffer, the oil market no longer has the same backstop to fill unexpected disruptions—although high inventory levels will help for a while. The threat of such events may be even higher now due to the current lower oil price environment, which has threatened the domestic stability of some major oil exporters. A new study by Columbia University’s Center on Global Energy Policy, for example, finds a far greater risk of macroeconomic and political turmoil in Venezuela following the oil price rout.

U.S. shale oil production can be ramped up and down relatively quickly, leading some to suggest that the U.S. could act as the world’s new “swing supplier,” providing price stability by bringing new oil on to the market when prices spike and idling production when they fall. Yet U.S. shale oil output has taken much longer to respond to the lower price than anyone anticipated, as producers increase efficiency and reduce costs. Output has barely budged, although it will likely decline next year. By contrast, OPEC can hike or reduce exports in a matter of weeks. Changes in U.S. output are the result of thousands of independent economic decisions by producers, not a single policy decision, as well as by capital markets’ willingness to finance shale oil production.

While demand is up in response to the price collapse, it too may play less of a balancing role moving forward. Policy and demographic shifts have lowered expected oil demand growth in the U.S. and Europe; the Chinese economy is shifting to less energy-intensive growth; and emerging markets may see a macroeconomic slowdown.

Without OPEC acting as a swing supplier, prices will need to drop low enough for long enough to curb uneconomic production and spur more usage (or, in the opposite scenario, rise high enough to incentivize more output and curb demand). The “choppy” adjustment of production outside OPEC may lead to greater volatility at the pump. Price swings may be exacerbated by speculative investments in the oil market, although there remains significant debate on this point.

High fuel price volatility is harmful to consumers because it undermines the ability of Americans to make longer-term financial decisions, such as where to live or what kind of car to buy. Consumers can often be shortsighted, as reflected in the surge in SUV sales this year, and quickly come to regret those moves if fuel prices move rapidly in the opposite direction. Unlike large users of oil like airlines, consumers cannot hedge their prices—although some innovative firms are trying to create just such a product. Economic literature also finds that oil price volatility harms the economy more broadly as the uncertainty created can stymie consumption and investment.

As consumers cheer the cheapest driving they’ve seen in six years, it would also be prudent to remember that what comes down must also go up—now more than ever.

Jason Bordoff, a former energy adviser to President Obama, is a professor of professional practice in international and public affairs and founding director of the Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University.