GDP is up, unemployment is down — good times are here again!

Sure, if you don’t ask too many questions.

While the economy grew 2.6 percent in the fourth quarter, what most reports don’t mention is that 20 percent of that growth was health care spending. And the majority of that spending was taxpayer-funded subsidies from ObamaCare.

In other words, the stimulus never ended.

Health care is what Americans are spending most of their money on today — far more than they spend on housing and utilities combined. Or cars, furniture, food or fuel.

Surging medical spending also explains the third quarter’s huge upward revision in GDP growth. President Obama in his State of the Union speech touted the revised 5 percent rate as the “fastest economic growth in over a decade.” But health care accounted for a whopping two-thirds of the uptick in consumer spending and much of the overall economic improvement.

“Health care spending might be higher” in coming revisions, says Commerce Department economist Nicole Mayerhauser, as additional data more accurately reflect health outlays spurred by new ObamaCare enrollments and subsidies.

Most of the 15 million who have signed up for ObamaCare or new Medicaid benefits gained coverage last April or later. Enrollment is expected to increase as people respond to penalties for failure to get coverage. The Congressional Budget Office projects total enrollment to climb to 23 million this year and to 34 million in 2016.

Health spending will continue to outpace GDP — in fact, government actuaries forecast a whopping 6.1 percent annual growth for 2016 to 2023 versus 4.7 percent for 2013 to 2015.

The economy wouldn’t be nearly as stable as reported if not for this massive injection of government steroids. Liberal, or Keynesian, economists think that’s a positive feature of the new health law. But it’s actually a drawback.

Over time, higher taxes and spending act as a drag on the economy, crowding out private investment. Almost 90 percent of ObamaCare users get federal aid. As a result, a new CBO report projects ObamaCare subsidies will balloon to nearly $2 trillion over the next decade, only partially paid for by more than $640 billion in ObamaCare taxes and fines, which means more government borrowing and more upward pressure on interest rates.

A government-funded flood of new patients, many of them forced into mandatory spending on services they didn’t previously want or need, may be good for the health care sector, but it drains revenue from other sectors of the economy. That means GDP won’t reach its full potential. University of Chicago economist Casey Mulligan estimates that the Affordable Care Act will reduce GDP by 5 percent in the long run, thanks to all of its offsetting negative provisions.

ObamaCare may be helping some uninsured, but it’s killing entrepreneurs — the jobs engine of the American economy.

“The ACA has three major taxes in it — two are taxes on full-time employment and the other is on income,” Mulligan said. “As a result, we are going to have fewer people working and less value created overall.”

Recent data bear him out. The Labor Department says the number of full-time jobs as a share of the adult population is at an alarmingly low 44 percent. In fact, “The number of full-time jobs as a percent of the total population is the lowest it’s ever been,” Gallup CEO Jim Clifton warns.

That’s why the seemingly low 5.7 percent unemployment rate is also an illusion, Clifton argues. Millions have given up looking for work or are underemployed, and are thus not counted.

The dearth of full-time employment is highly unusual this far along in a recovery. ObamaCare explains the anomaly, and here’s why: The ACA requires employers cover all full-time employees working 30 hours or more a week.

But many smaller businesses, or businesses with razor-thin profit margins, like restaurants, can’t afford the government’s comprehensive health benefits package and have been slashing full-time jobs to avoid the mandate.

Labor data show the share of part-time employees working just below 30 hours a week has been rising since ObamaCare went into effect, while the share working just over 30 hours has been falling.

“ObamaCare has caused millions of full-time jobs to become part-time,” Andy Puzder, the CEO of Carl’s Jr. and Hardee’s, recently asserted.

As of January, more than 450 employers have made cuts to work hours or staffing levels as a result of ObamaCare, according to a database compiled by Investor’s Business Daily.

Likewise, ObamaCare helps explain flat wages, also unusual in the latter stages of a recovery. A recent poll by the National Federation of Independent Business found that of 900 firms surveyed, 26 percent said they’re freezing or reducing wages because of the added costs from ObamaCare.

The new health law is also creating another economic deformity: New business formations are at a 35-year low, thanks in large part to ACA’s many business burdens and uncertainties.

“Firms and individuals appear to be more risk adverse — businesses are hanging on to cash, fewer people are launching firms,” the Brookings Institution noted in a recent study of “business dynamism” in America.

ObamaCare may be helping some uninsured, but it’s killing entrepreneurs — the jobs engine of the American economy.

In his State of the Union, Obama boasted he rescued the country from recession by rebuilding “our economy on a new foundation.” Unfortunately, that new foundation is government-run health care.

Paul Sperry is a Hoover Institution media fellow and author of “The Great American Bank Robbery.”