Almost every semester in one of my courses at LSU, I discuss Martin Luther King Jr.'s "I Have a Dream" speech. There's a passage, however, that we always overlook: "I have a dream that one day, down in Alabama, with its vicious racists, with its governor having his lips dripping with the words of 'interposition' and 'nullification' -- one day right there in Alabama little black boys and black girls will be able to join hands with little white boys and white girls as sisters and brothers."

I've never stopped to explain what King meant by "interposition" and "nullification." Perhaps I should, because my students and the rest of us may soon hear those words – or ones much like them – from Gov. Bobby Jindal if the U.S. Supreme Court rules that anti-same-sex marriage laws violate the U.S. Constitution.

Interposition and nullification are legal terms predating the American Civil War, most forcefully advanced in 1832 by Vice President John C. Calhoun of South Carolina during his feud with President Andrew Jackson over the imposition of protective tariffs on British imports. Southerners hated the tariffs, labeled them unconstitutional and feared that a powerful federal government might one day use its authority to abolish slavery. In November 1832, a South Carolina convention declared the federal tariff acts "null, void, and no law, nor binding upon this State."

Calhoun resigned the vice presidency and argued that when states determined that Congress exceeded its constitutional powers, they could "arrest the execution of the act within their respective limits." The 1833 federal Force Bill proved Calhoun wrong.

More than a century later when King spoke of "nullification," he evoked the political descendants of Calhoun who thundered about undermining federal authority – this time, enforcement of court rulings on desegregation. That sentiment was most brazenly expressed in the notorious 1956 Southern Manifesto, signed by 101 Southern members of Congress, which branded the Supreme Court's 1954 Brown vs. Board of Education ruling a "clear abuse of judicial power."

You'd think that given the stigma of being labeled a "nullifier," politicians – especially the Southern variety – would be wary of flouting federal laws or the Constitution as interpreted by the Supreme Court.

Well, you would be wrong. Look no further than Alabama, where that state's chief justice openly defies a federal court ruling on same-sex marriage. It's happened in Louisiana, too. In 2010, Jindal signed legislation declaring the Affordable Care Act unenforceable in Louisiana.

We don't know how the Supreme Court will rule on same-sex marriage, but Jindal already hints how he might respond if he doesn't approve: He will support interposition and nullification.

Earlier this year, asked about a possible court ruling affirming same-sex marriage, Jindal said he would propose amending the Constitution to reverse the verdict (that is one proper way to challenge a court ruling). Next, however, he issued a legally questionable executive order giving Louisiana businesses license to discriminate against gay couples. Equally alarming, Jindal told the Washington Examiner in a recent interview "he would 'absolutely' take executive action as president to defend traditional marriage" if a Supreme Court ruling displeases him.

"If I decide to run, if I'm elected president, both statutorily as well as in executive orders, I think it's important that we stand up for our First Amendment rights," Jindal said. "I would do everything I can to protect religious liberty." Jindal didn't say if, by "everything," he means defying the Supreme Court or challenging its authority, but he clearly didn't mean he would abide its ruling.

Plunging Jindal even deeper into the realm of nullifier is his endorsement of the "Convention of the States Project," which advocates a constitutional convention "to return the country to its original vision of a limited federal government." Among other things, the project aims to halt "power grabs of the federal courts" and impose terms limits on Supreme Court justices.

One of Jindal's allies, Bryan Fischer of the American Family Association -- which sponsored Jindal's recent prayer rally at LSU -- has forcefully challenge the court's authority. "Any ruling from any federal court that imposes domestic policy on a state is by its very nature unconstitutional, and no governor has any obligation to obey it," Fischer wrote last year.

Jindal isn't the only Republican presidential hopeful who questions the Supreme Court's power to interpret the Constitution. According to Politico, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee recently said "he cringes whenever he hears people call a court decision 'the law of the land.'"

Jindal, however, is a sitting governor, presumably running for president, desperate for attention and eager for religious conservatives to regard him as the nation's most radical opponent of same-sex marriage. In other words, viable candidate or not, he is a governor who can still inflict serious damage on Louisiana and its reputation.

In his words and actions, Jindal hasn't yet uttered the words "nullification" or "interposition," but the implication drips from his lips.

Robert Mann, an author and former U.S. Senate and gubernatorial staffer, holds the Manship Chair in Journalism at the Manship School of Mass Communication at Louisiana State University. Read more from him at his blog, Something Like the Truth. Follow him on Twitter @RTMannJr or email him at bob.mann@outlook.com.