Johnnie: With the city's great need for swimming pool time, it would seem appropriate to talk about putting a bubble over the Sunset swimming pool. The new Kevlar designs are rugged and long lasting. Any ideas why this isn't already a reality? — RB

RB: My guestimate is that it would take, at minimum, a 180-foot by 280-foot specially designed dome to cover the pool that would allow an extra 20 feet on all sides for tables, life-guard seats, etc. At 50,400 square feet, that far exceeds the 12,000-square-foot maximum that Ameri-Brand products offers.

So I went with 12,000 square feet, about a quarter of what it would take to cover Sunset Pool. But even at that size, the A-B website could not give an estimate for everything you would need. Their maximum-sized vinyl and nylon dome would require seven blowers to keep it inflated, plus airlocks (I picked the maximum of four), which are ADA compliant. Plus dome heaters. In the standard white. The A-B website could not give an estimate and suggested that I call for a consultation.

So, I halved the size to 6,000 square feet. The estimate was $41,896.

Advertisement

So, at a minimum, covering Sunset Pool would cost about $350,000. But I suspect that's unrealistically low. Sunset has two slides, so any dome that could cover them would be towering. To that, you would have to add the costs of maintaining a dome, of putting it up and taking it down at the ends of seasons, and expenses I can't even think of right now.

Given that the city spent about $1.3 million to build a new bath house at the pool three years ago, and that it now faces millions of dollars of repairs to infrastructure because of last fall's flood, it seems unlikely to me that spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on a pool dome would be not only financially impossible, but politically impossible.

RB, if you'd like to enjoy Sunset Pool under open skies, you can do so. Summer hours begin today (Monday), with lap swim starting at 10 a.m. and open swim at 1 p.m.

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com