Physical therapist Nancy Hayden assists William M. Cohen of Orange at the new inpatient Yale-New Haven Hospital Rehabilitation and Wellness Center inside Milford Hospital. Arnold Gold — New Haven Register

There are no more newborns at Milford Hospital, but there are an increasing number of patients at the opposite end of the age spectrum in a rather unique relationship with the Yale New Haven Health System.

The financially strapped community hospital has ended its obstetrical labor and delivery service, but it is leasing space to the Yale system for an inpatient short-term acute rehabilitation center that Yale owns and operates.

Over the summer, the Office of Healthcare Access gave Yale-New Haven Hospital permission to close the rehab center that was located in the Hospital of Saint Raphael, which Yale acquired in 2012.

In late October, OHCA also approved shutting down the inpatient rehabilitation unit at Bridgeport Hospital, which is part of the Yale New Haven Health System.

Advertisement

Both Yale-New Haven and Bridgeport hospitals will send their patients who need this kind of physical, occupational or speech therapy to the new facility in Milford, which will use Y-NHH and Bridgeport staff.

On the obstetrics decision, Milford Hospital suffered a major setback in 2012, when five of its six obstetrical providers shifted their deliveries to Yale-New Haven Hospital exclusively, according to the OHCA report. The sixth physician stopped providing obstetrical services, restricting his practice to gynecology.

Joseph Pelaccia’s testimony before OHCA lays out the scenario at Milford Hospital over the past three years.

Pelaccia has been the chief executive officer and president of Milford Hospital since 2010; he had been the chief financial officer there since 1975.

After the exodus of its obstetrics staff, Milford hired four new physicians but they were not able to generate a large enough patient portfolio to reverse the decline in volume to pre-2012 levels, Pelaccia told OHCA. By May of this year, all four had left, as well as the nurse manager, and the hospital closed its obstetrical operations.

Milford had 468 deliveries in fiscal 2011, but just 53 by fiscal 2015. Only 10 percent of all babies born to Milford residents were delivered at the hospital in 2014, according to OHCA.

Last year, Milford had a $7.2 million operating loss, according to OHCA, with $2.1 million of that attributable to the obstetrics program. It lost $1.2 million between October 2014 and May 2015 and was projecting to lose $4.8 million in fiscal 2015 if it did not close the delivery service.

Milford Hospital has seen deficits of $1 million or more for seven years in a row and cutting out a department that was losing money was seen as a way to keep providing services such as its emergency room and urgent care center, which are used more frequently.

In its final decision in September, OHCA agreed with Milford that keeping the obstetrical operation open was not clinically viable, nor was it financially advisable.

Vincent Petrini, senior vice president for public affairs at Yale-New Haven Hospital, said that hospital did not actively recruit the five physicians who left Milford in 2012.

The office manager for two of those doctors confirmed this and said they left because of cuts to ancillary staff at Milford Hospital.

Milford now will stabilize any woman who shows up in active labor or in need of emergency services and transfer her to Y-NHH, according to an agreement between the two hospitals.

The financial situation that drove the termination of the obstetrical and delivery services at Milford also generated an effort by Pelaccia to look for partnerships with other hospitals to help his bottom line.

Petrini characterized the arrangement with Milford as mutually beneficial to both hospitals.

Pelaccia testified before OHCA that this partnership “was vitally important to the future of Milford Hospital and its ability to remain financially viable and independent.”

He said that, including its affiliates, it is the largest employer in Milford with 800 workers, and it yearly contributes more than $168 million to the local economy.

Under the rehab center arrangement, the Yale New Haven Health System leases the space from Milford Hospital and contracts with it for a number of services. These include imaging, diagnostic, laboratory, pharmacy, respiratory, security, food service and rapid-response team services in emergencies.

Karen Kipfer, spokeswoman at Milford Hospital, said she did not know how much the arrangement has generated for the hospital since the center opened in July.

Pelaccia told the OHCA officials that, like many community hospitals, it has experienced a reduction in patient volume and a change in payer mix “resulting in a material reduction in revenue” and underutilized space at its facility.

Milford Hospital for eight of the past nine years has shown serious losses, Pelaccia testified.

Data collected by OHCA showed it had operational losses of $5.4 million in 2011; $1.7 million in 2012; $8.8 million in 2013; and $7.2 million in 2014.

With his board’s approval, Pelaccia said, he started having meetings more than two years ago with four in-state hospital systems. He asked two of them to present proposals on shared projects and the board picked Yale-New Haven Hospital as the most beneficial.

“We’re thrilled to be here. It has been a really nice transition for us,” said Patti Strasburger, the new patient service manager at the Milford facility. “The staff-to-patient ratio is great.”

Between equipment, salaries and the lease, the Yale New Haven Health System has invested $5.7 million in Milford, according to the OHCA report.

The system estimated that the number of rehab patients will increase from 221 this fiscal year to 388 by fiscal 2017 with a budget deficit in the first two years, but a $1.4 million profit by fiscal 2017.

The center opened with 12 beds and will go to 24 as of Tuesday, when staff from Bridgeport Hospital joins them; there will be 21 private rooms, according to Strasburger.

Strasburger said 15 to 18 support personnel from each hospital will be on staff in order to facilitate the three hours a day of one-on-one therapy. That is in addition to the 12 physical therapists.

The center serves patients primarily with strokes, traumatic injury, surgical patients with neurological deficits, bilaterial joint replacements and neurological deficits due to multiple sclerosis and Parkinson’s disease. Patients participate for one to several weeks.

“This is what sets us apart from a skilled-nursing facility,” Strasburger said of the intense short-term stays.

Strasburger said officials have also managed to have Milford’s Meditech computer system talk to the EPIC medical records system that Yale has in place.

In a recent visit to the center, William Cohen, an 89-year-old patient from Orange, was being guided by physical therapist Nancy Hayden as he worked on balance and walking.

“I’m very unfamiliar with the routine. I have been healthy,” said Cohen, who was about a week and a half into therapy as he tried to build up his strength following a stroke and chemotherapy.

The goal is to be able to get back home where family can help take care of him, Hayden said.

“I think we are developing nice friendships,” Cohen said of his stay.

While typically the rehab center serves an older population, Alisa Brissette, the assistant patient service manager, said recently they have had a run of patients in their 30s, 40s and 50s.

The arrangement worked out between the Yale system and Milford Hospital are expected to be more common in the future.

Strausberger said Richard D’Aquila, president and chief operating officer of Yale-New Haven, said “this is kind of the new norm, to have hospitals within hospitals — that we don’t need to acquire hospitals. We need to see how we can best serve the community by placing ourselves in an area that we can both benefit from.”

The Yale New Haven Health System is continuing to affiliate with other hospitals, with the official request to do so with Lawrence + Memorial in New London filed with the state. This relationship would be the same as it has with Bridgeport and Greenwich hospitals.

Yale-New Haven officials have said the Affordable Care Act requires that it expand and have a large network in order to efficiently provide services, something lawmakers have pushed back on as Connecticut evolves to two major systems, one run by Y-NHH and the other by the Hartford HealthCare hospital system.

OHCA recently approved Yale-New Haven Hospital’s request to close an urgent-care center in East Haven. Pending are requests to terminate an outpatient rehabiliation center in Branford and occupational medical service centers in Branford and East Haven.

In testimony before OHCA on closing the rehab unit at the Hospital of Saint Raphael, D’Aquila said Yale-New Haven wants to expand its services for musculoskeletal problems and to do this it needed to move the inpatient rehabilitation unit.

He said the Commission on Aging projects that the over-65 population will increase by 64 percent between 2006 and 2030, and musculoskeletal conditions will affect three out of four individuals.

Since Yale-New Haven acquired the Saint Raphael Healthcare System, it has been carving out the primary location for its services, between the Saint Raphael campus on Chapel Street and the York Street campus, D’Aquila testified.

A multidisciplinary musculoskeletal center, specialty geriatrics and low-risk midwifery obstetrical services are offered at the former Saint Raphael’s, while the York Street campus will include the Children’s Hospital, high-risk obstetrics, major trauma, transplant and cardiac surgery.

Other services will be offered at both campuses, according to his statements at the Certificate of Need hearing.

That musculoskeletal center would bring together orthopedics, neurology, rheumatology, physiatry (rehabilitation medicine), pain management and podiatry services.

Yale-New Haven determined that the inpatient rehabilitation unit did not have to be on its own campuses, that patients could easily be transferred to Milford. The new unit has the same 24 beds it was allotted at the Hospital of Saint Raphael.

The arrangement also allows Yale-New Haven hospitalists to provide some of the routine medical care for those patients in therapy at Milford, freeing up its physiatrists to see more patients in need of this specialty.

Petrini said they did not approach Milford about joining the Yale New Haven Health System and Milford made it clear it wanted to remain an independent entity.

“I must stress that this is not a Yale-New Haven takeover. We are independent,” Pelaccia testified before OHCA.

Petrini said it is important that Milford thrive and continue to be a community asset.

Yale-New Haven officials testified that there were no available options at its New Haven site and moving the rehab center to the Grimes Center, its skilled-nursing facility, would cost more than relocating it to Milford.

As for Bridgeport, it told OHCA that its acute-care medical-surgical occupancy rates have been between 85 percent and 96 percent. The only way to add more of these beds would be to build a new building or utilize an existing unit.

It testified that its inpatient rehabilitation unit was the only inpatient service that it could terminate with the services covered by other area providers, including Yale-New Haven, St. Vincent’s Medical Center, Norwalk, Danbury and Stamford hospitals, with minimal impact on its patients.

Bridgeport Hospital is licensed for 383 acute-care beds. A total of 357 are in operation, with 202 for medical-surgical services. Given the need for isolation rooms and patient privacy, it said it has not been able to create space for all 383 beds.