Sen. Mary Landrieu, Rep. Bill Cassidy and tea party-backed candidate Rob Maness stuck to their talking points and remained fairly calm in their first joint debate of the Louisiana Senate race at Centenary College in Shreveport Tuesday night (Oct. 14).

Cassidy and Maness, the two Republicans in the race, spent much of the debate linking Landrieu, the Democratic incumbent, to President Barack Obama. In his answer to almost every question, Cassidy mentioned Obama, who recent polls show is particularly unpopular in Louisiana.

"I don't trust this president. I think he is a very poor commander in chief," said Cassidy, responding to a question about the threat of the Islamic State, a militant group whose power is growing in the Middle East.

Meanwhile, Landrieu focused on touting her seniority in the Senate and its benefits for Louisiana during the debate. She took occasional jabs at Cassidy for not having the will -- or the influence -- to do the same in the House of Representatives.

"I'm getting the job done when it comes to energy. ... I'm fighting hard for my state. ... I've brought billions of dollars to this state," Landrieu said.

As they have the entire campaign, Cassidy and Maness hammered Landrieu for voting in favor of Obama's health care reform law in 2010. Even when answering questions about other issues -- like the equal pay for women -- Cassidy tried to steer the conversation back to the president's health care law, often referred to as Obamacare.

"We should repeal Obamacare," he said at the beginning of the debate. Cassidy then repeated the sentiment in some form or another throughout the event.

Landrieu went on the defensive for a bit about her vote for Obama's health care law. She said access to medical care was "a human right" at one point during the discussion, but also admitted the existing health care law had to be improved.

"The Affordable Care Act is not perfect. It needs to be fixed," she said.

The Senator also implied Cassidy had reversed himself on the issue of health care access. As a state senator in the Louisiana Legislature in 2007, Cassidy introduced a bill to create a state health care exchange very similar to ones set up by Obama's law, she pointed out. Cassidy didn't respond to this particular attack.

The most robust exchanges of the night took place when the three candidates argued about how to keep federal benefits for seniors -- like Social Security and Medicare -- solvent.

On Social Security, Cassidy is in favor of raising the minimum age for receiving Social Security benefits to 70 years old, but only for people who are currently young and can prepare for their retirement accordingly, he said.

Both Landrieu and Maness were adamant people should not have to wait until 70 to receive their Social Security payments. "People cannot work until their 70 and I think that is very bad policy," Landrieu said.

Maness added that Social Security spending could be cut by reducing the number of payments to people who are disabled. He said there is likely to be fraud and abuse in that section of the program.

"It's hard to imagine there are that many injuries on the job," said Maness.

When the issue of Louisiana's coastal erosion was raised, Landrieu tried to speak to both industry and environmental concerns. She expressed support for "saving the coast" from global warming damage, but also shoring up the oil and gas industries that create Louisiana jobs.

Cassidy -- while not denying that climate change exists -- shied away from saying a global change in temperature might be affecting Louisiana's coast. "I am not sure climate change is the issue as much as getting the sediment out of the Mississippi River is," he said.

Yet in a surprising moment later in the debate, Cassidy said he would support the legalization of marijuana for medical treatment, while Landrieu and Maness said they were opposed to medicinal marijuana legalization.

Near the end of the hour-long event, the candidates were asked to rate the job performance of both Obama and Gov. Bobby Jindal. Overall, Louisiana's top executive fared better than the president. Obama received zeros from both Republicans, and a 6/7 from Landrieu. Jindal garnered a 7 from Cassidy, 5 from Maness and "barely a 3" from Landrieu.

The event was the first of only two scheduled debates featuring all three major candidates in the race. Landrieu and Maness have asked for more three-way forums, but Cassidy is refusing to participate in other events.

The Louisiana Senate race is receiving outside, national attention -- both in terms of money and media coverage. Cassidy is thought to have a good chance of picking off Landrieu, the three-term Democratic incumbent. His campaign victory over Landrieu could help tip the balance of the U.S. Senate in the Republicans favor.

There's a good chance Louisiana's Senate campaign will extend beyond November. If no candidate gets above 50 percent of the vote in the first election, a runoff -- likely between Landrieu and Cassidy -- will be held on Dec. 6.

The Shreveport debate was sponsored by Louisiana Public Broadcasting and the Council for a Better Louisiana. The second -- and probably final -- debate featuring all three candidates will be held at LSU on Oct. 29.

. . . . .



Julia O'Donoghue is a state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. She can be reached at jodonoghue@nola.com or on Twitter at @jsodonoghue. Please consider following us on Facebook at NOLA.com and NOLA.com-Baton Rouge.