<p>CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR</p><p>Dr. Paulo Carvalho uses a walkie-talkie at the Conejo Valley Family Medical Group in Thousand Oaks. The time people wait to see a doctor has been reduced as the staff use the radios and other measures to improve work flow.</p>

SHARE CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR Registration clerk Marcela Ronquillo uses a walkie-talkie at the Conejo Valley Family Medical Group as part of efforts to minimize patient waiting. CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR The Conejo Valley Family Medical Group in Thousand Oaks has substantially reduced the time people wait to see a doctor. CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR Registration clerk Marcela Ronquillo and other employees at the Conejo Valley Family Medical Group use radios and other measures to reduce patient waiting. CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR People wait to see a doctor at the Conejo Valley Family Medical Group in Thousand Oaks.

By Tom Kisken of the Ventura County Star

Dr. Ateev Mehrotra decided to quantify the billions Americans lose waiting to see their doctors as he sat in an orthopedist’s office twiddling his thumbs.

The Harvard researcher and internist showed up at 8 a.m. to see his doctor. He discovered 30 other patients had been told to do the same thing.

Frustrated and anxious — his own patients were waiting in a hospital for him to conduct rounds — he decided to pursue a study designed as a kick in the pants.

Using federal survey data from 2010, he and other researchers concluded people spent an average of 123 minutes each time they saw their doctor.

Only 20 minutes of the time was spent with the doctor. The balance came in traveling, paperwork and waiting.

Calculating what they called opportunity costs, researchers estimated patients lost $43 for each visit in time that could have been spent on a job, with family, jogging or other activities.

“That totals up to a lot of time and money,” said Mehrotra. The study contends Americans spent 1.1 billion hours in pursuit of health care in 2010.

The time consumed $52 billion in lost opportunity.

“It’s a health care system that’s not very thoughtful of a patient’s time,” Mehrotra said. “If you quantify it, you can therefore do something about it.”

Lost wages and time

The waiting room would be packed when Marisol Magallon arrived at an Oxnard clinic for a doctor’s appointment. By the time Magallon’s name was called, the room would be empty.

“I would wait in the waiting room for hours,” the Oxnard woman said, noting the waits have improved but were longest when she was pregnant with her now 8-month-old daughter. “If my appointment was at 10 a.m., I would be done at like by 1 p.m.”

It meant her husband, who drove her, lost wages. Marisol lost time she would rather spend taking care of her other two kids.

When her name would finally be called, she would be led out of the waiting room to an examination area. Then she would wait some more.

“My reaction is like ‘whatever,’” she said.

Some observers contend waiting has grown worse because of the Affordable Care Act. The reform means 17.6 million Americans, including 1.3 million Californians, have gained insurance and the promise of better access to doctors.

Some doctors acknowledge booking patients closer together. Others say they’ve become more efficient and have minimized waits.

“Usually, I see patients within 10 to 15 minutes,” said Dr. David Mescher, pulmonary and internal care doctor in Oxnard. “There are other guys who have patients wait for one or two hours, which is ridiculous.”

Some wait longer

The data generated by Mehrotra and other researchers produced studies in American Journal of Managed Care and JAMA Internal Medicine. The research was supported by the California HealthCare Foundation.

The numbers show it took people who were unemployed longer to see a doctor than people with jobs. It took longer for people with a high school education or less than people with college degrees.

Non-Hispanic white people saw the doctor quicker than Hispanics and African-Americans.

Mehrotra does not think the differences in care are driven by bias. He doesn’t think a doctor’s office intentionally makes one group of people wait longer than others.

“It’s where they receive care,” he said, suggesting some clinics struggle more with wait times. “More of the places that they go, for a variety of reasons, are just slower.”

Dr. Paulo Carvalho serves as medical director for the Conejo Valley Family Medical Group. More than six of 10 patients at the clinic are insured through the government Medi-Cal program aimed at low-income people.

That doesn’t mean they wait longer, Carvalho said.

About seven years ago, Carvalho and his clinic were part of a project designed to reduce wait times. Patient visits were streamlined. Paperwork was minimized.

Doctors, nurses and medical students started using two-way radios to communicate, eliminating time scrambling from one office to another. The number of times a patient was handed off by one staff member to another was whittled.

At the beginning of the project, it took patients 80 minutes to complete a doctor’s visit. After 18 months, appointment times were cut to 45 minutes and remain in that ballpark.

“We learned it’s doable,” said Carvalho, who also has incorporated the patient flow strategies at Las Posas Family Medical Group in Camarillo and other offices.

‘Time is money’

The man in his 70s walking toward the Oxnard Public Library thinks he knows how the system works. Doctors schedule several patients for the same time and then work their way down the row.

It doesn’t bother him too much. He figures doctors want to get things done just as quickly as the patients do. That’s why, he said, they spend 10 minutes, 15 tops, with a patient.

“Time is money,” he said, identifying himself as Ed and declining to to offer a last name.

He worried his doctor might read his words.

Fill out my online form