Wrinkles are the inevitable signs of aging we can’t avoid unless we go under the knife, lasers, or chemical peels, but they’re expensive and only lessen the appearance. Nature has a way of supplying what we need, and as long as we know what we’re looking for, we can find our at-home remedies throughout our kitchen and bathroom cabinets.

Unfortunately, when skin ages it loses its collagen, which is the skin’s main tightening protein responsible for creating a smooth taut surface. This makes everyone susceptible to the fine lines, sagging and hollowness that appear on the face. The effects of aging on the dermal layer are significant. Not only does the dermal layer thin, but also less collagen is produced. With those odds against you, how do you prevent wrinkles?

While genes do play a role in the aging process, the actions you take control many of the processes’ speed and level of damage. Take control and try an inexpensive banana face mask or set time aside for a 30-second face massage every morning to prevent and treat fine lines and wrinkles.

12 Wrinkle-Fighting Hacks & Home Remedies:

1. Oils

Coconut oil is rich in antioxidants and can prevent the formation of free radicals that are one of the primary causes of early aging. It’s a natural skin-softening moisturizer and contains emollient, which helps reduce wrinkles that have already developed. Massage into your skin each night before bed to help reduce the appearance of fine lines and wrinkles while you sleep.

Olive oil was first used over 5,000 years ago when it was extracted from the olive tree, which Egyptians quickly adapted as a cosmetic product. It’s used more often as a moisturizer because it’s rich in antioxidants, vitamins A and E, which also help to fight the skin-damaging free radicals. Take a tablespoon of olive oil and massage it gently into the skin twice a day. It also works to protect against sun damage and after exposure.

2. Superfoods

Your skin is a combination of proteins, water, and fats, and it needs a healthy food supply for replenishment. Almonds pack skin-plumping and hydrating fats along with vitamin E, while a powerful antioxidant helps deter UV damage. Blueberries have a very concentrated combination of antioxidants and collagen-protecting vitamin C. Tomatoes are also packed with vitamin C, but they have the important component lycopene, which protects skin from sun damage and improves the vascular system, which will give you a natural glow thanks to the extra blood circulation.

3. Banana Mask

This powerfully healthy fruit isn’t just good for eating, but can also be used as a creamy face mask. Mash one banana up with a teaspoon of orange juice and a teaspoon of plain yogurt, then leave it on for 15 to 20 minutes. The vitamin A will help fade dark spots and blemishes, while vitamin B will prevent aging, and potassium will moisturize and hydrate skin cells. Vitamin E is known as “the protector” because of its strength in fighting free radical damage and bolstering the skin’s resistance to UV damage.

4. Topical Vitamin C

When you’re young, your skin is full of this critical vitamin. However, as skin ages it lessens over time but is still needed and plays a crucial role in maintaining healthy, resilient skin, according to the National Institutes of Health. By replenishing your skin’s vitamin C levels through an oral supplement or exfoliating with topical vitamin C every morning, you can repair sun damage, such as discoloration and fine lines. A rare side effect is dryness or flaking, which can be counteracted with a daily moisturizer post-vitamin C application.

5. Minerals

Selenium can be used as a preventive wrinkle treatment and functions as a powerful antioxidant. It neutralizes free radicals in the skin before they cause damage and restores any elasticity the skin may have lost from aging.

Copper is an essential mineral used to form collagen, elastin, and form as support and structure. It’s not advised to consume copper because it’s only needed in small amount, but a cream containing copper peptides helps to improve the skin’s clarity, decrease fine lines, wrinkles, and photodamage, according to WebMD.

Zinc is important if you tend to have breakouts or acne because it works to clear skin and tame oil production. It also helps heal acne scars or lesions that have already formed.

6. Egg White Mask

Mix together one egg white with a teaspoon of fresh lemon juice and half a teaspoon of honey to reap the antiseptic and antibacterial benefits of honey along with the astringents in lemon juice used to fight off bacteria. Those with oily skin will benefit most from the powerful ingredients in egg whites. It helps to tighten, tone, and shrink pores by reducing excess sebum, otherwise known as the oil secretion from your pores.

Egg whites are full of protein for tissue repair and growth, potassium to preserve the moisture in skin cells, fiboflavin to eliminate toxins and free radicals that are known to cause wrinkles, and magnesium, which slows down the aging process and makes skin radiant. Egg whites also contain lysozyme, which digests the cell walls of acne-causing bacteria.

7. Silky Sleep

Pillows made of satin or high thread counts are a worthy investment when it comes to wrinkle reduction. We spend a third of our lives sleeping, and having a soft place to rest our impressionable skin can change the way our skin resists or creates wrinkles. The American Academy of Dermatology recommends sleeping on your back to avoid sleep lines that can become etched into the surface of the skin. Sleeping on your side increases wrinkles on the cheeks and chin, and sleeping face-down can give you a furrowed brow.

8. Massage

Give yourself a massage with a do-it-yourself acupressure treatment. Use your index and middle finger on one hand to massage 20 rotations between your brows. Apply light pressure to each temple for 10 seconds and then to the jaw joint for another 10 seconds while clenching your teeth gently. It’ll smooth skin and relax the muscles from making unnecessary micromovements that cause wrinkles from tension and stress.

9. Lemon Juice Honey Dab

A simple remedy to reduce the appearance of wrinkles just before you head out the door, put on your makeup, or wash your face, is known as the lemon juice honey dab. Apply a thing layer of lemon juice mixed with honey on your face for 10 minutes to tighten skin then rinse off, feel fresh, and smell nice. The honey contains humectant, which preserves moisture in skin cells, while the lemon boosts collagen production.

10. Cucumber Yogurt Blend

Puree half a cucumber with mint leaves, mix in half a cup of Greek yogurt, and throw it in the fridge for a cool, naturally hydrating face mask. One cucumber contains B1, B2, B3, B5, B6, folic acid, vitamin C, calcium, iron, magnesium, phosphorous, potassium, and zinc. It tightens, lightens, hydrates, and tones the skin, while protecting it from dryness, peeling, or cracking. The smorgasbord of vitamins will help to guard from inflammation, and neutralize free radicles, which are known to cause premature aging.

11. Aloe Vera

The clear gel inside an aloe vera plant has wound-healing and soothing effects when applied to the skin, especially after sunbathing thanks to the vitamins and minerals it contains. Having an aloe vera plant inside your home or growing in your garden is convenient and less expensive than buying the gel by itself because the leaves regrow after they’re cut or removed from the base. Sunburns are one of the quickest ways to damage and wrinkle skin, so applying gel can ease the healing process with its anti-inflammatory properties.

12. Juice Cleanses

The skin runs on vitamins, minerals, and hydration, so what better way to treat your skin right than by feeding it what it wants? Juicing involves three-day cleanses that contain the best skin-nourishing vitamins and minerals through various fruits and vegetables. The Blonde Vegan has a long list of smoothies, shakes, and juice recipes to quench your thirst and fill your skin with what it needs to fight wrinkles.