Some students from Rutherford High School spent Saturday showcasing their hard work at F.S.U. Panama City's Holly Center.

Students in the International Baccalaureate Program have spent hours working on projects they think best represent their high school careers.

"The day I handed this in to Mrs. Rutland was the best day of my life."

Ryan Hodges had reason to be relieved. The Rutherford senior and his peers were showcasing their handiwork in performances, posters, books and, in Hodges' case, essays.

"It's over 3,000 words," he said, looking at his polished essay. "So it was a lot of long nights working on it."

Hodges and his friends in the I.B. program at Rutherford have spent hundreds of collective hours poured over their projects, essays and extracurriculars. These, they say, are representations of their school career up until now.

"I wrote it on the Battle of Midway," Hodges said, "Specifically the U.S.S. Yorktown.... It was good preparation for college."

"As I.B. in general, it's tough but definitely worth it," senior Jack Bischoff said. He stood with his partner, Cameron Lloyd, in front of a poster describing the main points of their class called Theory of Knowledge.

Catherine Rutland, I.B. coordinator for the school said she wanted the showcase to be an opportunity for the community and prospective students to see the work and better understand the program.

"It's a showcase of what the I.B. program does," Rutland said. "And what I said to the seniors was, 'I want you to think about your four-year experience here and the I.B. program, what are you the most proud of? What would you like to show off and show everyone that you've accomplished?'"

While there were few visitors throughout the day during the showcase, the students said they were glad to spent time together and reflect on their work.

"I think for one it's made me more of an international thinker," Bischoff said. "It's definitely allowed me to understand my own bias and other people's biases and to try to sort of remove that and view other people's viewpoints as well as my own."

For some of the students the work also had a personal touch.

My great grandfather is actually a survivor of the Battle of Midway," Hodges said. "And so what happened was the U.S.S. Yorktown sank and he swam for 40 minutes in the Pacific Ocean with a town shoulder until help came. So I wanted to share his story because I feel like it's crazy cool. So I feel like he deserves the justice."

"I'm very proud of all of them," Rutland said. "And I wanted them to take a look at what all they've accomplished so they could be proud of one another."