Scott Walker will do four things in the first 24 hours of his presidency, he announced yesterday. ( Reuters )

FDR had his famous "100 days." Scott Walker would like to compress that into one.

Today, he unveiled his Day One Plan, a project to highlight the reforms he would begin implementing on his first day as president. This document will be updated each week, but so far he has made the following pledges to American voters:

I promise to terminate President Obama's bad nuclear deal with Iran;

I promise to end President Obama's unlawful executive actions, and enforce our immigration laws. Ending outrageous instances of defying federal law—such as those practiced by so-called "sanctuary cities" will now be a priority;

I promise to send legislation to Congress to repeal and replace ObamaCare; and

I promise to end the taxpayer-funded subsidies that have protected lawmakers from the premium increases ordinary Americans have faced under this disastrous law.

Gov. Walker discussed his first day in office during the Fox News debate more than once.

"I know that God doesn't call me to do a specific thing," he said. "God hasn't given me a list, a Ten Commandments, if you will, of things to act on the first day. What God calls us to do is follow His will. And ultimately, that's what I'm going to try to do."

Walker is used to hitting the ground running. On his first day as governor of Wisconsin, he ordered his state to join the lawsuit challenging ObamaCare; created a commission on government waste, fraud and abuse; and issued an executive order calling for a special legislative session on jobs.

"President Reagan once said that we needed to drain the swamp in Washington. But since he left, the swamp has filled up again," Gov. Walker said. "We cannot expect those from Washington to fix it."

"It's time to wreak havoc on the status quo in Washington and put everyday Americans back in charge," he said. "I know it can work, because we did it in Wisconsin. I'm committed to doing the same thing in our nation's capital starting on day one. That's why my first day as president would be one of the busiest the White House has seen in years."

Draw closer to God. Experience the presence of the Holy Spirit every month as you read Charisma magazine. Sign up now to get Charisma for as low as $1 per issue.

Has God called you to be a leader? Ministry Today magazine is the source that Christian leaders who want to serve with passion and purpose turn to. Subscribe now and receive a free leadership book.

-

See an error in this article? This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.