What do Christina Hendricks, Karen Gillian, Lily Cole, Julianne Moore, Sheamus, and Lindsey Lohan all have in common? They are all redheads, which makes them part of a group of people who have the rarest hair color in the world. According to studies, only 1 to 2 percent of all people in the world have red hair! For the popular Hollywood elite, red hair is so rare that it can make a statement. Britney Spears and Megan Fox are a testament to that.

However, the rare gene that allocates a person to be a redhead may be in trouble. There are now reports coming in that the implemented increase of temperature due to climate change, or global warming, may be the linchpin that makes gingers extinct in the future… or is this true?

For further understanding, an article by Huffington Post reports that the gene that causes red hair and paler skin that thrives in cloudy climates is thought to be an evolutionary response to where climates have less sunlight. Dr. Alistair Moffat, the managing director of ScotlandsDNA, said the gene would be affected if weather in Scotland were to suddenly become clear clouds and sunshine reminiscent of the best propaganda shots of Hawaii or Florida. This was confirmed in a statement when Moffat said the following:

“If it was to get less cloudy and there was more sun, then yes, there would be fewer people carrying the gene. I think the reason for light skin and red hair is that we do not get enough sun and we have to get all the Vitamin D we can. If the climate is changing and it is to become more cloudy or less cloudy then this will affect the gene.”

In another report by Scotland Now, another scientist – who wanted to remain anonymous – believes the regressive gene is slowly dying and that climate change could see a decline in the number of people with red hair in Scotland. However, the reason for the scientist’s anonymity is because the possibility of redhead extinction due to climate change is in theory.

We even reported on redheads disappearing through climate change earlier this month. Our report also included rebuttals to the theorized view that the ginger gene would suddenly be gone due to hotter temperatures. Apparently, it has come out that those rebuttals now have more science to back it up along with a motive on why the grim initial report to redheads would release in the first place.

A counter argument in an article by The Guardian states the only way that the ginger gene could ever vanish is if two things happen. First, all redheads would need to stop procreating. Second, every person who carries the gene would have to stop too. Summarized, the ginger gene cannot be removed from existence just because the weather changes. As a matter of fact, the article reports the studies on the ginger gene disappearing is nothing more than “bad science” made to help promote a product that ScotlandsDNA (the company who came up with the theory redheads would no longer exist in the future) is known for selling: ancestry tests.