Mix the topics of health insurance rate hikes, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama and Obamacare.

Stir.

And you get a couple thousand comments.

Our report about people getting notice of dramatic rate hikes from Blue Cross and the role that reforms in the Affordable Care Act may have played in those hikes, drew lots of attention.

From commenters there was much political sparring. Much finger-pointing. And some thoughtful insight into a complex issue.

Broadly, the comments broke down two ways: anti-Obamacare and pro-Obamacare. Mixed up in the comment dish were many on both sides of the spectrum who pointed the finger at insurers and noted Blue Cross' dominant market share in Alabama.

Here's a sampling of the 2,300-plus comments (some have been edited for length):

1BamaNative4X: Just got my BCBS letter. My policy for my family is going up 328%. In order to comply with OBAMAcare, the policy I currently have will not be legal effective 1/1/14. Sooooooo, effective 12/31/13 I'm canceling my coverage.

greg2412: TEA Party was born out of obamacare...and now getting stronger as a result of its failed rollout.

uwlaw5856: Blue Cross has an 88% market share..They can charge whatever they want. Get some competition in there!!!

AU-Girly: Anyone got some money I can borrow to start a insurance company?

gaugia: I remember Obama's words as if it were yesterday: "if you like your current plan you can keep it." I guess he must have said this part under his breath: "You'll just have to pay more ha ha ha ha ha!"

Tator: Insurance companies add the extra expense of pre-existing conditions (which I think is a good thing) but cost a lot of money, and the laws were changed in other ways to make premiums go up. I've been told that directly by our hospital staff that works with insurance companies/polices everyday.

Emily Lowrey: When the rest of the country was making fun of Alabama for having such a high rate of obesity, we shouldn't have held our heads up in pride and our hands on our fried chicken legs. .... Until Alabama gets serious about preventative care, including what the people of the state put in their mouths at the dinner table and whether or not they exercise...then the people will pay higher rates than the rest of the country. Considering we have a doc for a Gov, it's kind of appalling that more is not done to educate people. Isn't it?

tokenau: Nice of the reporter to gloss over the 88% market share BCBS has in Alabama. No other state has such a monoplolistic insurance situation.

SoALGOP: Welcome to the days of Rate Suckers as Progressive calls it. If we can't force people who use more medical services to pay more for it, then we all will have to shoulder the burden. I hope all these Obama supporters enjoy their economics lesson

Robert_Stottle_394: Could it possibly be that Alabama opted out of every frikking thing to do with health care reform and Blue Cross Blue Shield and others are squeezing every penny they can out of us before light is seen? My god, the AL legislature turned down 100% coverage of expenses. Now we know who are paying our politicians.

IlCane: There is NO REASON....NONE WHATSOEVER......for insurance premiums to go up except to increase the profits of insurance companies. Under the ACA, the insurance companies will get MORE people paying the SAME premiums as everyone else. The SAME AMOUNT. For the poor, the government will pay what the individual can not pay. Taxes may go up, but there is NO REASON for insurance companies to raise premiums.

dead_mariner: Has it crossed your mind that there are a bunch of lazy fat people in ole bammy? Red states suck up the most in social services, they are high in obesity as well. Shut up and pay your way leeches.

BUBBAs against FRACKING!!!!: If this werks out the way it is INTENDED to werk out and end the end it drops Insurance rates, lowers health care costs and we don't have to pay for HOSPITAL and Dr bills that the people that don't have ins aren't paying now... then what will you good folks say?

mwgiii: Add me as one whose self-pay family plan is going to jump from $500/ month to almost $1000/ month with a reduction in benefits and loss of dental. I would like to personally thank everyone in Congress who voted for this monstrosity....On second thought, I would actually like to punch every single one in the nose.

nobottomfeeder: The problem is Blue Cross and their monopoly in this state. Their "costs" haven't gone up THAT much. They are manipulating this situation for their gain. And our state government is enabling them by refusing to develop a competitive marketplace.

ggsmith2013: Questions worth asking? Why has BCBS been allowed to monopolize the health insurance industry in AL (politicians and AL Insurance Commission should be asked this question)?

liveaction: I'm hit with the same problem in my home. If you do not receive health insurance through an employer or group plan, and If your annual income is too high to qualify for ACA health insurance subsidies, Your rates will jump dramatically. It is a greed-grab by the insurance companies.

Elvis_inthebuilding: I hate BUSH!

Tator: And I miss Bush!

riverdog777: "In wake of Obamacare, why are some getting hit with dramatic premium hikes in Alabama?" .... you answered your own question.

Rlldmntd: Here I thought NAFTA was the worst piece of legislation ever signed into law, now I'm positive ACA IS the worst legislation ever signed into law

newshound: For decades, many people in Alabama enjoyed very low health insurance rates from Blue Cross Blue Shield. That ends Jan. 1. I guess you can blame Obamacare for leveling the playing field, but it's far more complicated than that. Alabama is a state filled with people suffering from chronic diseases like diabetes, heart problems and arthritis. In the past, BCBS didn't have to provide coverage for those people, or if it did, it could charge incredibly high rates. As a result, rates remained abnormally low for relatively healthy people. But what about people who couldn't get insurance? Well, they usually went without health care, got on a government welfare program like Medicaid or just walked into the emergency room and got "free care." Those days are over, like it or not. There's a lot more to this story. Al.com should assign a reporter to spend some time examining this sea change in health insurance coverage instead of repeating the same old rhetoric about Obamacare.

And from the Mobile Press-Register Facebook page there were these comments:

Theresa Bowden McRee: Mine went from 600 a month to 1200 a month. No matter where I look to lower the premiums, I will have to meet such a high deductible that I would just be throwing money away. It's looking more and more like I will be going with the penalty. I'll be damned before I let Obama do this to me. We need to all pray for our country that is falling apart.

Kathy Robbins Burns Because of the Affordable Care Act my COBRA coverage will end Jan. 1, instead of Aug.6, as it was supposed to. Also, my plan had a Health Care Tax Credit qualification that also goes away. BCBS does not provide my plan, CIGNA does. It does not matter what insurance company you go to for coverage, they all have to comply with the Affordable Care Act plans, bronze, silver, etc. For my CIGNA plan, I spent about $175 per month after my HCTC was applied with a $400 deductible, and now I cannot replace my plan. The least expensive plan I can get is over $500/mo with $6300 deductible. This is NOT affordable!! I am healthy, I have never smoked, I am not obese, and I have maybe 1 glass of wine a week. I am a very good insurance candidate. This plan is going to hurt a lot of people. Also, if you qualify for a subsidy, it only affects the premium, not the extremely high deductible.