Smartphones make dumb kids

Brooklyn: Regarding Mayor de Blasio’s vow to end the cellphone ban in schools: As a parent and someone who has worked in the school system for over 30 years, let me tell you why this is a bad idea. I completely understand the need for parents to stay in touch with their kids, but cellphones in school cause more harm than good. Cellphones in the classroom can be distracting to other students who are trying to learn. Teachers have a lot to do, including classroom management, without having to police cellphone use.

If kids are allowed phones in school, they will text, log onto Facebook and be more interested in their phones than in learning. It’s also conducive to cheating. And many kids are bullied via text messages.

If parents need to get in touch with their kids, call their school. If you can’t pick them up, or need them to meet you at grandma’s, just call and ask to speak to your child, or leave a message for them. Heidi Lystad

A first lady’s place

Flushing: First of all, what is Chirlane McCray even doing at a high-level CompStat meeting? To the best of my recollection, no one in the City of New York elected her to anything. Wake up, NYC! This woman needs to stay out of city business and go back to whatever it is she did before her husband was elected to be our mayor. Kim R. Ohanian

Poetry in motion

Bronx: Jeter, Jeter, Jeter, there is no one neater. He is one stand-up guy. He’s leaving the game and saying goodbye. He played the game with all his heart. We really hate to see him part. He always gave the game his all. And forever was on the ball. We’ll miss his soft voice and boyish smile. He was the greatest by a mile. We shouldn’t feel bad he’s not playing the game. He’ll be in our hearts and in the Baseball Hall of Fame. Jennie Jesselli

Good question

Farmingdale, L.I.: Is Derek Jeter retiring? Mike Pedano

Crimes and misdemeanors

East Elmhurst: To Voicer Gerald Lebowitz, regarding the woman who was killed by a careless bicyclist: That was an accident. The idiot who slammed a heavy shopping cart onto a defenseless cat and then threw a flaming cloth on it to finish it off committed a crime that was intentional, callous and despicable. He deserves jail time. Nancy Locke

No more word games

Manhattan: When are we going to start calling domestic violence what it really is: assault, battery, sometimes maiming, sometimes mutilation? When a man assaults another man, there are dire consequences. There may be jail time, monetary compensation or court-appointed counseling. When a man assaults a woman or child, society acts as if the man has been given a God-given right to do so. This keeps perpetrators from accepting responsibility for their actions. Ernestine Morrison

Comply

Bellerose: When is enough enough? I voted for Mayor de Blasio, but I believe the anti-cop attitude in the city is partially his fault. The latest scenario: Police officers are trying to arrest a pregnant woman’s son, who has a record for robbery and gang assault. The mother intervenes — and the legal leeches and the press are implying “another police assault” on every news program. Sanford Rubenstein would be wise to advise his so-called clients that when a police officer is effecting an arrest, back off or you could get hurt and arrested also. Thirty years ago, you couldn’t raise a hand to an officer, let alone assault him and then have the nerve to sue him besides. Kathie Lucas

How do you say ‘scam’?

Jamaica: In regard to the pregnant woman claiming an officer threw her on the ground: If you watch this in slow motion, you will see she threw herself down, dragging the officer with her. Wake up, New York. Here’s another ploy for a lawsuit. If she does get money, maybe she can take some English lessons. Margaret Carbone

Invisible rainbows

Medford, L.I.: Where were the gay pride banners or floats at the German Day Parade? For that matter, where are those banners in the Columbus Day Parade or the Puerto Rican, Polish or any of the many other nationality day parades? Or are there only gay Irishmen in New York? Or is it because the St. Patrick’s Day parade is the biggest and gets the most publicity? Bill Barrett

Lowlifes

Bronx: To all the lowlife scam artists who are posing as roofers, utility men, contractors, plumbers and other uniformed personnel: You know who you are and so does the good Lord. Maybe the law won’t catch you now, but eventually you will be caught. And to all the unsuspecting people who fell for their stories and allowed themselves to be duped into an unfortunate outcome after years of saving and scrimping, don’t worry, because what was done to you will be done to them. How would you uncaring, lowest-of-humanity perpetrators feel if your families were targeted as we were? I know you have no conscience. Shame on you. Catherine Santarpia

Out of touch

Brooklyn: For Diane Francis (“Be grateful I have a pied-à-terre,” Op-Ed, Sept. 26) to write, “The superrich, rich and nearly rich already pull our weight under current laws” in New York City, or anywhere in the United States, is an absolutely lie. It’s delusional as well. Selfishness indeed. Ellen Levitt

Unfare

Brooklyn: Dear Gov. Cuomo and Mayor de Blasio: You must get the MTA to roll back the fare. It’s killing the city’s economy and everyone’s quality of life. I and my friends skip going out and spending money because each time is an extra $5 just to travel. That excessive $112 a month if you buy an unlimited MetroCard is money I would’ve spent at the movies or restaurants or buying stuff I need. The subways and buses worked as well as they do today back when the fare was only 50 cents, or $1.50 or even $2. So they can’t say they need $2.50 a pop to survive. Think big. Reduce the fare, and reduce the salaries of your hacks running it. Kalan Silver

1 big pain

Manhattan: Despite what the MTA says, there are frequent changes to the train service on the No. 1 line. For example, the notices up last week week at various stations on that line stated that there would be no service from 96th St. to 242nd St. from Friday at 11:30 p.m. to Monday at 5 a.m. This has happened many times in the past and will no doubt continue for a while. Hank Schenker

Peddling lies

Brooklyn: As both a cyclist and pedestrian, I’d like to point out how flagrantly dishonest the anti-bike crowd is. The response to Voicer Janice Amato’s flawless letter speaks for itself. Not one person rebutted her points, including that the Brooklyn Bridge pathway proves cyclists are more law-abiding than pedestrians. Instead they change the subject, which is a tactic of people who are lying. Is there a single honest person who hates lawless cyclists? If so, then I dare them to reply and explain why police should crack down on lawbreaking cyclists but not lawbreaking pedestrians. More New Yorkers die from jaywalking than being hit by cyclists. Jack Dickenson

Obamascare

Ossining, N.Y.: Voicer Richard Bargellini criticizes the Affordable Care Act, the President and Sens. Gillibrand and Schumer in his response to Voicer Marcia Epstein complaining that her husband’s doctor opted out of Medicare due to reductions in reimbursements. They should be praised. The ACA does reduce reimbursements, and some doctors will opt out. But long term, almost every senior and Medicare recipient will benefit. Preventive care is now 100% covered and the gap in prescription coverage will close. Benefits to recipients will not be cut. The law reduces costs related to poor management, such as charging $100 for an aspirin or those notorious “drive by” visits by doctors who bill Medicare for merely looking at your chart. By next year, 20 million more people will have health coverage and peace of mind. Stop the tired, discredited horror stories. Robert Rundbaken

Yellow peril

Floral Park: Has anyone else noticed the increase in taxicabs taking up parking spaces on the streets lately? In my neighborhood, it seems as if there is a new cab parked on the street every day. Some blocks have two or three cabs parked on the street, making it hard for the people who live there to park their cars. Commercial vehicles are not allowed to park overnight on the street. Why should cabs be different? Margaret Stein