In recent months officials with the Tax Assessor and Collector's office in Kemper County have been bearing more good news than usual to taxpayers.

"Most of them are very excited," says Joycelyn Robinson, who is the Tax Assessor and Collector for Kemper County. She says many residents have witnessed a drop in the amount of taxes they owe.

"As much as $40 to $100 on some parcels."

'For our people in the county, they're going to see a big tax decrease," says Kemper County Board of Supervisors Vice-President Mike Luke. He says within his district the tax savings have been even bigger than the ones that Robinson mentioned.

"In my district I have several people that own chicken houses, and they've seen as much as $800 and $900 decrease in their taxes, and $600," says Luke. "That means a lot of money that they can put on other bills that they've got."

County supervisors say the decrease in tax rates for many is largely due to progress that is being made at the coal plant site within the county.

"Once we started receiving this money we wanted to pass it on to our citizens, as well as stimulate economic development, and we saw this as one vehicle to do this," says Kemper County Board of Supervisors President Johnny Whitsett. "Over the last two budget years we were at 127 mills. We started at 127 mills, and took off 16 mills, and dropped it to 111 mills the first year. Then this past year we dropped it from 111 to 95 mills."

From car tags to property taxes, it seems that taxes overall are going down in Kemper County. The big question now is, 'How long will this last?'

"The millage rate two years ago was one of the highest in the state," says Supervisor Luke. "Now it's one of the lowest in the state."

"We're hoping that over the next two years we're going to drop it from 95 (mills) to the mid-80's to somewhere like 85 or 84 mills," says Supervisor Whitsett. "I'm very optimistic that we can do it."

As for the lignite coal plant that has sparked the drop in taxes for many in Kemper County, in 2013 that plant generated $8.2 million in tax revenue for the county. The ground was broken for the plant in December 2010. The facility is on track to start operating commercially during the first part of 2016.