Florence notches shutout of Manitou Springs

Jared Bombardier during the Florence Huskies' 12-0 win against the Manitou Springs Mustangs on Friday night at Husky Stadium. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

At the defense's rate, Florence might need new helmets by the end of the season.

Like many high school teams, they get stickers for achieving certain goals. And in Friday night's 12-0 win against Tri-Peaks League foe Manitou Springs, they reached quite a few.

Linebacker Cory Simolon said the team gets them for: a shutout, a three and out on the first drive of the first half, the same for the second half, a three-turnover game, five tackles behind the line of scrimmage, and a win.

They achieved all but one.

The unit had one interception, one fumble and three turnovers on downs. They also forced a three and out on the first drive of the first half, had 13 tackles behind the line of scrimmage, got the shutout and the win.

It was the unit's first shutout since Oct. 18, 2013, when it held Dolores Huerta scoreless. The Scorpions aren't close to the caliber team the Mustangs are, though.

Tough schedules, tough teams

Both Florence and Manitou Springs have played their share of big games against big-name teams this season.

They have each played Faith Christian, who earlier this season was ranked tops in the Class 2A Associated Press media poll. Florence won its game by six, and Manitou Springs lost its game by three.

The Mustangs also have losses against Class 1A power Buena Vista, 2A eighth-ranked Eaton, La Junta, and now fourth-ranked Florence.

"They haven't played any cupcakes either," Mustangs coach Monte Gutowski said. "They stacked their schedule just as we did. I think that showed tonight because that was a physical freaking football game."

During non-league games, Florence played three Class 3A teams along with Faith Christian.

The Mustangs entered the season ranked one spot higher than the Huskies. Manitou Springs beat Florence last year and won the T-PL.

Simolon turning into offensive weapon

Alec Lucero during the Florence Huskies' 12-0 win against the Manitou Springs Mustangs on Friday night at Husky Stadium. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Offensive coordinator Darin Serfoss found himself a little surprise.

When freshman tight end Jeremiah Spears went down with an injury, it forced the Huskies to move slightly out of their platoon system of each player only playing offense or defense.

Serfoss acquired the services of Simolon, who has turned in several solid performances. He had a 25-yard touchdown reception Friday night, and in past games he's rushed the ball effectively, once for a 30-yard touchdown.

Simolon also plays on special teams. The only time he came out of Friday night's game, he said, was for the team's three kickoffs.

"It's killer. It takes it out of you," he said.

"He works hard each week," head coach Jeremy Nix said about Simolon. "We're a little beat up right now, we're trying to heal up some guys. He's got to go both ways right now, but we're hoping that doesn't have to happen too much longer."