"If voters here want someone who's not intimidated of anyone, I've shown I'm not intimidated."

Scott Walker drove into the International Motorsports Hall of Fame Fox Sports 1 Dome at Talladega Superspeedway in a race car on Saturday as the keynote speaker of the Alabama Republican Party's summer luncheon. Come March, the Wisconsin governor and 2016 Republican presidential candidate will be hoping Alabamians wave the checkered flag for him as the winner of the state's primary.

Walker said his "solid conservative" credentials as a tax-cutting governor of a blue state who battled organized labor and overcame a recall effort headed by unions makes him an attractive candidate in Alabama and other southern states that will be part of the "SEC Primary" on March 1.

"Our view is we can play anywhere," Walker said in an interview with AL.com following his speech, which garnered applause when he mentioned he defunded Planned Parenthood in Wisconsin "years before these videos came out" and that he would rein in the EPA and reverse President Barack Obama's nuclear deal with Iran if it sustains a congressional veto. "If voters here want someone who's not intimidated of anyone, I've shown I'm not intimidated."

The Wisconsin governor said the crowded field of 17 Republican presidential candidates includes those who fight but don't have the experience of elected office and others who are elected officials that don't match his accomplishment.

"I'm the only one who's done both. I fought and I won. I did it without compromising our principles," Walker said. "My whole career I've been a solid conservative. We've cut taxes by $4.7 billion. We've balanced our budget, we took on the unions and won."

The candidate's speech to the Alabama Republican Party came a day after he announced that Alabama State Senate Majority Leader Greg Reed, R-Jasper, would head his campaign in the Yellowhammer State.

"He's tapped and turned a bunch of his colleagues" to the campaign, Walker said of Reed. "We view it as more than just an endorsement list, but [as] people [who] will organize and get the vote out."

Without naming him, Walker took a swipe at real estate mogul Donald Trump in his speech, referring to "these candidates who are moving up in the polls" that are channeling voters' frustrations.

"In the end I don't think people are just angry," he said. "They're standing up, saying, 'I want my voice to be heard and someone to listen.'"

Much of Walker's speech was a condemnation of Washington, which he called "68 square miles surrounded by reality."

"We need someone from outside of Washington with big, bold ideas," he said, pivoting to an attack on former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, the frontrunner for the Democratic presidential nomination.

"I'm ready to take on Hillary Clinton," Walker said. "It's not about emails, it's about national security. The Chinese and Russian governments probably know more about Hillary Clinton's email servers than do members of Congress and that's wrong because it puts our national security at risk. The more I listen to her I realize Hillary Clinton would be a pretty good deceiver in chief but we can't trust her to be the commander in chief."

His domestic policy agenda includes approving the Keystone XL oil pipeline, sending the power of the EPA back to the states, reducing the tax burden of individuals, small businesses and employers and repealing and replacing Obamacare.

On foreign policy, Walker said he would "terminate that very bad deal with Iran." He added that Obama got it wrong when he called climate change the largest threat to the country.

"The greatest threat to future generations is radical Islamic terrorism and we have to do something about it," he said. "We need to eradicate that virus. And I'd rather take the fight to them instead of them taking the fight to us here in America."

Walker said he would "recognize that Israel is an ally and start treating Israel like an ally." He said the country also has to stop Russia form "advancing into sovereign nations" like Ukraine and needs "to stand up and speak out about China's cyberattacks."

On immigration, the Wisconsin governor said it's more prudent to secure the border before thinking about what to do with the millions of illegal immigrants in America.

"To me it is just an abomination to think about the fact that we live in a country as great as the United States and we can't even secure our borders," he said.

Walker said his personal story – he is the son of a preacher and was raised in the Baptist Church – impacted his decision to run for president.

"I feel called to run. I don't know if God is calling me to win but he called me to run," he said.

Walker's Talladega visit marked the start of a tour of the South that included a planned stop to Dreamland Bar-B-Que in Birmingham. From there, the governor is headed to Tennessee on Sunday for a "Boots, Jeans, BBQ and Beans" event in Franklin, followed by a campaign stop in North Carolina on Monday.

He asked for the Republicans in attendance to spread his campaign's message. "The SEC Primary is going to be incredibly important here in Alabama," he said.

Walker ended his speech by trying to show his kinship with the state. He rattled off the names of three Green Bay Packers players who played for the University of Alabama: Eddie Lacy, Ha Ha Clinton-Dix and Bart Starr.

Whether that -- or the rest of his speech -- will resonate in Alabama will be determined on March 1.