ST. PETERSBURG — Though their cause appeared to hit a brick wall in Tallahassee, the mayors of the area’s three largest cities joined more than a dozen medical and business organizations Wednesday to push a project that would increase health coverage to 1 million uninsured working Floridians.

The mayors – Democrats Bob Buckhorn of Tampa and Rick Kriseman of St. Petersburg, and Republican George Cretekos of Clearwater – said Wednesday the issue transcends politics, and inaction on the part of the state Legislature and Gov. Rick Scott would hurt the state to the tune of $253 million a year in tax penalties and $3 billion a year in unpaid medical bills.

But at a legislative planning event held simultaneously at the state Capitol, House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, a Republican from Merritt Island, said expansion of the state Medicaid system is a non-issue.

The mayors are pushing a new program, “A Healthy Florida Works,” that would utilize the $50 billion in federal funds earmarked for Florida to establish a state health insurance marketplace involving private providers offering choices of plans.

“This issue that we are talking about is important. As mayors, we get it probably better than anybody,” said Buckhorn. “Mayors are on the ground, mayors have to look into the eyes of our neighbors and our friends out there, mayors understand what the lack of access to health care means: it is a direct impact on the quality of life of the people that we serve.”

The advocates are careful to avoid the words “Medicaid expansion,” stressing that the project involved a marketplace of private insurers, but Crisafulli indicated it didn’t matter how any attempt to overhaul of Florida’s health care system was described.

Scott and the Republican-controlled Legislature refused to establish a state marketplace under the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama’s signature legislative achievement, and refused to accept the $50 billion over 10 years to expand the state’s Medicaid program to provide private health insurance to more poor Floridians. The 1.3 million people who have enrolled in the ACA in Florida did so on a national marketplace.

The health advocates said the total cost for treating the uninsured was almost $3 billion in 2012, and the cost of charity care – treatment of sick people in public hospitals who don’t pay their bills – is a hidden tax on businesses that raises health insurance premiums around 8 percent, or $1,200 a year.

They made their case at an event billed as the “Cover the Bay” 2015 Bay Area Mayors Conference at the Mahaffey Theater in St. Petersburg. Joining the mayors were Jason Altmire, a former Democratic congressman from Pennsylvania and now an executive at Florida Blue.

Altmire noted that Indiana, under Republican Gov. Mike Pence, on Tuesday became the 28th state to strike a deal with the Obama administration to expand health care to the poor. He said the nation is seeing “momentum on the side of moving forward with reform.”

The solution doesn’t have to be straight Medicaid expansion, he said, but will most likely be partnerships such as “A Healthy Florida Works.”

He called Pence “very conservative,” adding, “If Governor Pence can find a way to make it work for the citizens of Indiana, there’s no reason we can’t find a way to make it work for the residents of Florida.”

That sentiment may have been shot down by the conversation occurring in Tallahassee, but if the expansion advocates have one wild card it’s a slew of pro- business support.

Joining the mayors Wednesday in St. Petersburg were representatives from all three cities’ chambers of commerce, the area’s largest hospital groups, the Tampa Bay Partnership and the powerful Tallahassee business group Associated Industries of Florida.

“This is not a political issue, this is a quality of life issue,” said Buckhorn. “It’s not Democratic issue, it’s not a Republican issue. It’s time for the bickering and the partisanship to stop. This is a fundamental right that affects the quality of the lives of the people that we represent. It’s time for the debate to end.”

jstockfisch@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7834