These days a trip to the doctor can seem almost like a drive-thru experience, thanks to the emergence of minute-clinics in retail stores, supermarkets, pharmacies and stand-alone urgent care centers.

Walk-in clinics for routine care and urgent care clinics for episodic care have surged. According to the Urgent Care Association of America, there are nearly 7,100 centers in the U.S. Retail medical clinics are projected to increase to 47 percent by 2017.

The steady growth in this type of medical care delivery, coupled with changes in healthcare since 2010, may have some people questioning the need for a family medicine physician, but it may not be prudent to ditch your primary care doctor.

When asked today, only about two in five physicians say they are comfortable with their patients using a retail clinic for preventive services, according to The Advisory Board Company.

Here are five reasons there is no substitute for a primary care physician:

Familiarity – Convenience (time, location) is a major factor in the growth of urgent care and walk-in clinics. It seems easier than ever to get a same-day appointment. At what point, however, do patients sacrifice the personal relationship nurtured with the family medicine physician for urgent care convenience?

The family medicine physician is familiar with the patient's medical history and is trained to care for a patient at all stages of life.

Primary Care doctors, who are made up of Family Medicine and Internal Medicine physicians, offer benefits that clearly outweigh the convenience of a visit to the "doc in a box" or the treatment in a retail clinic that may be staffed by a mid-level nurse practitioner.

Medical History - Family Medicine doctors are likely to take a comprehensive view of your health and wellness, and knowing your medical history then can put your illness or injury in context of past medical issues. The fast-paced nature of urgent care centers and retail walk-in clinics don't seem to afford those practitioners that opportunity.

Paul Guilbault, MD, Board Certified Family Medicine physician with Louisiana Heart Medical Group Family Medicine (LHMG) has specialized in family medicine for 17 years. He sees the long-term relationships and access to a patient's entire health history as a crucial part of receiving quality care. "When people come in for their appointment we look at the whole person," Dr. Guilbault said. "When a patient has a cold or an injury, we look at all of their needs, not just the symptoms. Traditional family medicine offers more comprehensive care."

Thorough examinations - Dr. Guilbault also notes that urgent care and walk-in clinics are less likely to recognize more serious health issues in the quick "evaluate-and-prescribe" model.

"If you come in [to your family doctor] with an injury or a cold and there is something else going on, like elevated blood sugar or heart issues, it is more likely that your primary care physician who knows your medical history will ask questions that could uncover more serious conditions, whereas an urgent care center or retail-based clinic will treat the illness or injury and let you go."

Knowledgeable referrals - Family medicine doctors also offer wrap-around treatment plans that include complementary medical referrals when specialty care is needed.

Since those doctors know you and your medical history, they are able to connect patients with local resources for health and wellness. A primary care physician also has relationships with other medical specialists such as cardiologists, and surgeons.

Healthcare coordination - As healthcare continues to evolve in the U.S. with the Affordable Care Act, primary care physicians like Family and Internal Medicine doctors play a crucial role in coordination of care, especially with regard to chronic or long-term health issues, such as cardiovascular conditions, neurological issues such as stroke, and orthopedic care.

They also can track a patient's visits to specialists and rehabilitative services after a major illness or medical event.

Strong relationships, holistic health services, and crucial diagnostics aside, family medicine also recognizes the importance of convenience and flexibility in scheduling. Many providers that offer family medicine, such as the Louisiana Heart Medical Group (LHMG) Primary Care, are offering same-day appointments and walk-in clinics as well as weekend hours on Saturdays and Sundays to add convenience and flexibility to the important services they already offer.

This article was sponsored by Louisiana Heart Medical Group Primary Care Network. To learn more about the primary care physicians of LHMG, visit Louisiana Heart Hospital's team of Primary Care Physicians that provide medical care for families.