STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- Democrat Michael McMahon has secured Conservative Party backing in the district attorney's race against Republican Joan Illuzzi.

Citing his vote against the Affordable Care Act while in Congress, securing federal funding for the Staten Island Expressway expansion and being tough on crime, the party voted Thursday evening to nominate McMahon, who was not present for the vote of about 50 committee members at the Road House in Sunnyside.

The committee's leadership had interviewed both Ms. Illuzzi and McMahon last week in considering which to support in the race.

Former Borough President James Molinaro, an ex-chairman of the Conservative Party, spoke highly of McMahon, a former councilman and congressman.

"He definitely has the ability to run that office, there's no question in my mind at all," he said.

He recalled McMahon opposing off-Island garbage coming to the borough.

"He's a hard worker, he's honest and he's committed to the community," said Molinaro.

Appearing at the meeting later, McMahon spoke briefly to the members still present.

"I'm joyful tonight, but I'm also deeply concerned about conditions as we find them on Staten Island," he said. "There's a lot of work to do and I know that working with you all, working together with our men and women who are in the law enforcement community and working with them to build bridges into all the communities here on Staten Island, we will make the office of Staten Island district attorney the best district attorney's office in the City of New York."

McMahon promised to bring "common sense" to the DA's office and said he would address the Island's heroin and drug epidemic, domestic violence and the spike in gun crimes.

He received support from Island Conservatives in his 2008 and 2010 runs for Congress but because the congressional district is split between Staten Island and Brooklyn, Brooklyn support for other candidates meant he didn't get the party line on the ballot.

In 2008, Brooklyn Conservatives supported Timothy Cochrane and in 2010 they supported Michael Grimm, leading the state party chairman to decide to support the Brooklyn candidates against McMahon for the ballot line.

In a statement, Ms. Illuzzi, an assistant district attorney in the Manhattan D.A's office and head of its Hate Crimes Unit, said, "I am surprised that the Conservative Party picked a career politician and Washington lobbyist over a senior prosecutor with 27 years of courtroom experience and proven leadership. Nonetheless, I am confident that when Staten Islanders go to the polls this November, they will vote for the only candidate with the dedication, the passion, and the qualifications to be our next district attorney."