'[Women] still will have access,' Oklahoma Gov. Mary Fallin says. GOP govs: Scant Hobby Lobby political fallout

NASHVILLE — Democrats see the Supreme Court decision of limiting birth control coverage in some employee health plans as galvanizing voters for November, but Republican governors say the Hobby Lobby case is barely a blip, let alone a reprise of the “war on women.”

Republicans interviewed at the National Governors Association summer meeting here this weekend described the high court ruling exempting some religious owners of for-profit businesses from the Obamacare contraceptive coverage requirement as a welcome brake on President Barack Obama and his intrusive health law. And they didn’t see it causing problems.

Story Continued Below

“No,” said New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie when asked if he was concerned that some New Jersey women could lose birth control coverage.

( QUIZ: How well do you know Chris Christie?)

Asked why not, he added, “Because I’m not.”

The response from the GOP governors — including some like Christie and Scott Walker of Wisconsin who are seen as possible contenders for the party’s 2016 presidential nomination — was much more low-key than that of congressional Democrats. Hill Democrats have already introduced a bill to restore the contraception coverage requirement, basically by carving out a health insurance exception to a religious freedom law that was at the heart of the Hobby Lobby legal argument. They may bring the legislation to the Senate floor as early as this week.

A Democratic bill on contraception won’t pass the GOP-led House but the Democrats see the fight as reigniting the “war on women” theme in the 2014 election season, and possibly motivating more single women to turn out in close Senate races like Colorado and North Carolina.

Republicans contend that the Supreme Court’s June 30 ruling in Hobby Lobby v. Burwell — simply that family-owned companies can’t be forced to include free contraception in employee health plans in violation of their religious beliefs — is a win for religious freedom.

( WATCH: Nancy Pelosi: Americans should be 'afraid' of Hobby Lobby ruling)

Republicans also said the court had limited the Hobby Lobby case’s scope. The ruling applies to “closely held” businesses such as the family-owned Hobby Lobby craft stores, and the majority of justices said the ruling applied only to contraception, not other health services. The liberals who dissented saw the ruling as potentially far more sweeping.

Advocates for broader access to reproductive health services say they are worried that thousands of women at family-owned companies could be in jeopardy of losing access to contraception services.

The governors here say they just haven’t witnessed any of the uproar that accompanied the ruling in Washington.

“It really hasn’t been an issue for us just because it’s a federal decision,” said Wisconsin’s Walker. “Honestly, we haven’t heard much of anything at the state level out on the street from people we bumped into and talked to. I’m not on the court and I’m not in the federal government so I don’t really get involved with it.”

More than half the states, including Wisconsin and New Jersey, already require insurers to cover contraception prescriptions or related services for women, although some offer religious or moral exemptions, according to the Guttmacher Institute. Although the Supreme Court’s ruling didn’t directly affect those laws, it’s unclear just a few weeks after the Hobby Lobby opinion how many companies will seek religious exemptions from the Obamacare requirement and how many women would be affected.

Oklahoma Gov. Mary Fallin, a Republican whose state is home to Hobby Lobby, told POLITICO that affected women have “other alternatives, like Planned Parenthood” to get covered. She pointed out that Hobby Lobby only objected to providing four of the 24 types of FDA-approved contraceptives.

“[Women] still will have access,” she said. “They can still go out and do that legally in the United States.”

Democratic governors have largely supported efforts by allies in Congress to undo the effects of the Hobby Lobby ruling. Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper praised his home state senator, Mark Udall, for taking the lead on Senate Democrats’ response. “Sen. Udall has always been good on those things,” he said. Udall is in a tight reelection race this November against Rep. Cory Gardner, who praised the Hobby Lobby ruling and then called on the FDA to allow birth control pills to be sold over the counter.

The conflict is already playing out in at least one gubernatorial contest. Charlie Baker, the front-runner for the GOP nomination in deep-blue Massachusetts, recently contended the Hobby Lobby ruling “doesn’t matter” to women in his state, where a contraception coverage requirement is already in place. After Democrats pounced, Baker, who supports abortion rights, said he “ misspoke,” according to The Boston Globe. He said that if elected he would set aside $300,000 in state funds to protect contraceptive services for what he said was a small number of Massachusetts women who could be affected by the federal ruling.

Other Republicans haven’t felt pressure to take any similar steps. Asked whether he’s worried about the implications for Iowa women, Gov. Terry Branstad, replied, “No. We think the court made a good decision.”

“I’m Catholic, I want religious freedom,” he said. “It’s a limited decision and … we think that the president has overstepped his bounds and that the court decision was appropriate.”