The Missouri General Assembly is mostly owned by special interests, led by lobbyists and composed of people who know how to get elected to office and not much else.

There are three reasons for this, but the principal reason for this now-intolerable situation is term limits. It takes quite a while (as in a minimum of 10 years) to figure out how the legislative process works, how to get along with fellow legislators, how to be of value to the public, how to write effective and constitutionally valid legislation, etc. It also takes that long to build a sufficiently large constituency so campaign fundraising isn't the be-all and end-all of a politician's daily life. Term limits ensure that by the time a legislator is experienced and is less dependent on lobbyists for campaign funds, he or she has to leave office.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Accordingly, few legislators know how to do much other than mouth platitudes, raise money and get elected by pandering either to the extreme wings of their party or to lobbyists (which is where most of the campaign contributions come from). Their focus is always on their next campaign. To fund that next campaign, promises to major donors to shepherd special-interest laws through the legislative process are made explicitly but surreptitiously.

An intelligent and nuanced discussion of the issues is gone from the scene — with good reason. That approach doesn't work in an election year. Because the voters appear to be willing to think about the issues only for a few minutes before reacting emotionally and then casting their ballots, the typical politician's focus is on making statements that will fit on a bumper sticker and generate the greatest visceral response.

The second principal cause is the present lack of any limits on political fundraising and expenditures. This is an error not entirely of Missouri's making. The U.S. Supreme Court, in its Citizens United opinion, equated contributions to political action committees to speech and thus held it unconstitutional to limit that form of speech. In another column, I'll explain my disagreement with that decision.

The third cause is the public's apparent indifference to the link between fundraising and special-interest legislation. These three problems have combined to form a "perfect storm" in Missouri. The legislature has abandoned any efforts to impose upon itself any ethical or economic restrictions on fundraising. Instead, it announced it was for sale to the highest bidder. What followed was an incomprehensible flood of funds from wealthy special-interest groups — some of them seeking a philosophical change to the laws, but most seeking some economic advantage at taxpayer expense. Legal and ethical limits intended to keep special-interest groups in check are gone.

The public's disregard for what legislators do after they have been bribed by the special interests seems almost willful. The disclosure of a legislator being in the pocket of one (or more) wealthy donors once spurred public outrage. Now, voters take it as a given that their respective legislator won't pay any attention to them unless they bring money to the table. People of modest means, by and large, have ceased to pay attention to the legislative system. When millionaires can get tax credits to fix up their personal property or to relocate their businesses, the public yawns and considers it to be expected.

In the Dec. 15, Tribune, Rudi Keller described a relatively recent addition to the methods our supposed public servants employ to access — personally and for their individual benefit — campaign contributions from their wealthy donors. According to Keller:

"Lawmakers hiring each other as political consultants took off after House Speaker Rod Jetton began a firm he called Commonsense Conservative Consulting in 2004. In 2008 and 2009, 17 committees paid Jetton $372,213.86 for advice."

Theoretically, campaign contributions are supposed to be used by candidates for public office only to pay expenses of campaigning. Politicians for years have tried to manipulate and circumvent that restriction, but if a politician became wealthy while holding public office, it usually was from outside business interests and not from "gifts" from campaign donors. Now we have: "You pay me as a consultant from your campaign funds, and I'll pay you as a consultant from mine."

The special interests do not give this money to legislators out of any charitable impulse. They expect a return on their investment. There is an oft-repeated "rumor" in Jefferson City that it is possible to "buy" a state representative for about $30,000 and a state senator for $100,000. Once bought, what do these supposed "public servants" do? Why, they protect their donor's interests at the expense of the public's, of course.

Think about it: What is it, exactly, that these politicians are selling? The answer is they are selling power we have given to them over us. They are selling to their patrons portions of the tax revenues collected by the state so those revenues benefit only a very few instead of the many. They are selling to their patrons their services as a spoiler of needed public-interest legislation. They are selling their positions of trust and breaching their fiduciary duties to the public in exchange for personal gain. They are like thieves in the night, assuming they will escape with their ill-gotten gains without being noticed or censured. That needs to change.