One could certainly see the attractiveness of fully insured health benefits—employers know their set costs each month and can budget for them, and responsibility for administration and paying claims is handed over to insurance carriers.

However, increasing health care costs and requirements of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) are leading more employers to consider self-funding their health benefits. “In many, if not most, cases, a properly organized self-insurance program with appropriate stop-loss coverage will be cheaper than a fully insured program,” says Joseph Berardo, CEO of MagnaCare, a New York and New Jersey heath care network, based in Tinton Falls, New Jersey. There are administration and other types of fees built into premium costs, he notes. (See “Self-Funding Health Benefits Another Cost-Saving Strategy.”)

Michael S. Tesoriero, vice president and benefits consultant at The Segal Company in New York City, adds that Segal finds that health care trends for medical and hospital are still in the high single digits, and prescription cost trends are from 13% to 15%. In addition, the ACA is requiring fully ensured plans to pay more taxes and subsidies. According to a Sibson Consulting Perspectives article, co-written by Tesoriero, the ACA’s new federal tax—the Health Insurance Industry Fee—has made it more attractive for organizations to self-insure or remain self-insured as the tax only applies to insured plans. The Health Insurance Industry Fee has increased rates for insured plans by approximately 2.5% to 3% (in addition to existing state premium taxes that can be as high as 2% to 3% of premium).

He adds that the ACA requires certain plan design features be included in fully insured plans which do not have to be included in self-insured plans. Berardo explains that self-insured plans still have to adhere to the minimum essential value and affordability requirements of the ACA, but sponsors of self-insured plans are free to not cover certain things, such as infertility treatments, if they don’t want to.

According to Berardo, traditional thinking has been that self-insuring health benefits was only an option for large plans, and he says, in some states, smaller employers are not allowed to self-insure. However, there are now products from providers such as CIGNA and AETNA that offer level funded self-insured plans to the small employer marketplace. The plans are self-insured, but allow employers to pay equal monthly fees up to their liability amount, and if the plan doesn’t pay that amount in claims, employers get a refund.

Tesoriero adds that the thinking used to be that an employer needed to have a group of at least 300 to self-insure, because a small group may not be able to withstand claims fluctuation on monthly basis that a large group can. But, now that costs and requirements are increasing, funds with fewer than 300 lives are considering self-insuring. “I understand some plans in the 50-lives range are considering self-insuring, and there are solutions out there,” he tells PLANSPONSOR.

A key consideration for employers thinking of moving to self-insured health benefits is monthly cash flow and how they can handle monthly cost variations—claims may be higher in some months than others. “Different employers have different risk tolerances and they have to consider what they will be comfortable doing,” Tesoriero says.