While most oppose Obamacare in recent polls, former tennis player Martina Navratilova told CNN that at least communism gave health care to its people and praised it as a good thing CNSNews reported on Monday.

Navratilova told CNN that she was not happy with those who do not want Obamacare and said, “Because we don't want for people to be healthy? We don't want people to be taken care of? It's crazy.”

Navratilova, now a retired tennis player and coach and one of the best tennis players of all time, next to Billie Jean King was born in Czechoslovakia, a former U.S.S.R. communist satellite nation, defected when she was eighteen to the United States on political asylum reasons.

Navratilova comments are in stark contrast on how communist health care worked in communist nations and then considering that, she fled her communist nation.

Richard Pipes, a Polish-American academic who specializes in Russian history, especially the former Soviet Union wrote in his book, “Communism: A History” on the effects of healthcare in communist Cuba, “In the pre-Castro years of the 1950s, the Cuban population as a whole had access to good medical care through association clinics. The clinics, predated the American concept of health maintenance organizations (HMOs) by decades, as well as through private clinics.”

“At that time, the Cuban medical system ranked among the best in the world.”

“But today, under the communist regime, with its system of socialized medicine that Castro first instituted decades ago, hospitals for ordinary Cubans possess a dearth of even the most basic medicines and medical equipment. They have virtually no access to antibiotics, insulin, heart drugs, sphygmomanometers to measure blood pressure, sterile gloves, clean water, syringes, soap, or disinfectants,” said Pipes.

In 2009, Human Events ran a story about Katrina Alexis Belova, a young American medical student from Ukraine, who was distraught that anyone would embrace Obamacare and compared the old Soviet medicine and President Obama’s health care policies as being equal.

Belova told Human Events that her mother, who was a physician, were forced to practice medicine without allowance for conscience, under communist rule in Ukraine.

Katrina said, “Abortion was never an issue in the Soviet Union, simply because the communist government dictated that it was not an ethical dilemma, and all physicians were required to perform the procedure. Those who disobeyed could not obtain their medical license or continue their practice.”

“I became very concerned when I learned about President Obama’s plan to rescind the conscience clause,” Katrina continued. “It made me uneasy to think that my adopted country, which was always proud of its democratic heritage, had begun to remind me of a communist country my family fled ten years ago.”

“Where will I flee next?”

While no one on Navratilova’s twitter account has opposed her “healthcare was good in communist countries” comment, there were plenty of anti-Tea Party and radical remarks about conservatives from her followers.