Joe Jordan | Nebraska Watchdog

Updated: 11 p.m.

OMAHA—Fix it or else.

That’s the message to the city’s powerful arena board from City Attorney Paul Kratz.

Kratz telling MECA it has 30 days to reverse its vote for longer terms or suffer the consequences. According to Kratz that means “possible termination” of the contract between the city and the Metropolitan Entertainment and Convention Authority.

During a tense Tuesday meeting MECA upped its terms from the current five year appointment with possible re-appointments, to a “one and done” seven-year stint.

Following Kratz’s legal threat MECA’s Jim Vokal insisted the board acted properly.

“We have the right to amend our by-laws which are our governing structure,” said Vokal, a former member of the Omaha City Council. “The contract between MECA and the city is a completely different document.”

MECA Chairman John Lund, who fought the extension, now hopes to avoid a legal fight.

“The last thing I want is a court battle,” said Lund.

Board member Dana Bradford who proposed the seven-year term, argued Tuesday that without “tenured talent” — keeping current board members around longer — MECA would lose experience and suffer.

Board member Willy Theisen countered that longer terms would make MECA’s poor public image problems worse. “We have to hit the reset button… this is self-serving.”

MECA’s lawyer, Robert Freeman, said the board could vote to increase the terms and in the end the board voted 3-2 for longer limits.

Bradford, Jay Noddle and Vokal voted yes. Vokal’s term was supposed to end next month, now he’d serve until 2016.

Following the vote Mayor Jean Stothert also called the board’s plan “self-serving.”

“I think it surely hurts any effort to work with MECA. It’s very difficult to work with them if they are making these unilateral decisions.”

Stay with Nebraska Watchdog for more on this developing story.

Contact Joe Jordan at joe@nebraskawatchdog.org and listen to Joe every Monday morning at 7:40 on KFAB radio in Omaha.

To subscribe to news updates from Nebraska Watchdog at no charge, click here.