Daniel Pena and David Niemeyer Jr. don’t have a lot in common.

Both men are over six feet tall and have facial hair, and both of them know a woman named Jackie Davis. That’s about it.

But those similarities, Pena said, landed him in jail for a crime to which Niemeyer later confessed.

“It was a big, big mistake by the police department,” said Pena, who owns an auto shop in Tampa.

Davis worked for him until 2011, Pena said. On Jan. 19, police say, Niemeyer borrowed a rental car that was under Davis’ name and robbed three HHGregg appliance stores. Using the license plate on the car, investigators traced it back to Davis, and used their computer system to look up her known associates.

An old driver’s license photo of Pena came up, and an employee at one of the HHGregg stores told police he was “80 percent sure” he was the thief, Pena was told. So, on Jan. 26, a Tampa police detective knocked on Pena’s front door and put him in handcuffs.

A Hillsborough County sheriff’s deputy arrested Niemeyer on a warrant three days later, and eventually the younger man admitted he was the one who committed the crime, authorities said.

Niemeyer remains in the Hillsborough County jail without bail, while Pena said he still is waiting on official notification that the charges against him have been dropped.

Pena could have proven through credit card receipts and transactions that he was with his girlfriend all day when the robberies occurred, he said. The Hillsborough deputy told Pena he didn’t think he did it, and the security guard at the store wasn’t positive he picked the right photo.

So why was he forced to spend a night in jail?

“I was clearly the wrong person, and they arrested me,” Pena said. “I have no priors, no nothing.”

Niemeyer is accused of robbing three HHGregg stores — one in Tampa and two in Brandon. Because two were in the Hillsborough County Sheriff’s Office jurisdiction, a deputy also was investigating the case, police department spokeswoman Laura McElroy said.

At the Tampa store, the police detective had an ID from the store security guard and some grainy surveillance footage that showed a man similar to the guard’s description of the robber, McElroy said.

The day after Pena bonded out of jail, new surveillance footage surfaced that showed the robbery from a different, closer angle. The man in that footage — the 215-pound Niemeyer — was obviously much bigger than the 190-pound Pena, McElroy said. The department met with the state attorney’s office the next day to start the process of dropping the charges.

On Jan. 29, Niemeyer confessed to committing the crime, McElroy said. He is scheduled to go to trial in April.

After reviewing the case, the police department found that the detective did not follow proper procedure during the investigation.

Pena’s arrest would have been prevented — even though he was picked out of the photo lineup — if the detective had gotten the second surveillance video “in a timely manner” like she was supposed to, McElroy said.

The detective was given a letter of counseling after the internal investigation was concluded, McElroy said.

The photo lineup was conducted according to the recommendations of The Innocence Project, a national organization dedicated to exonerating people who have been wrongfully convicted, McElroy said.

A package of six photos — one of the suspect and five people who resemble the suspect — are shown to an eyewitness, one at a time. An officer who is not working the case and does not know who the suspect shows the photos, so he or she doesn’t unintentionally give a cue that could potentially influence the witness.

“The reason for that is to try and prevent misidentification,” McElroy said. “Because the last thing we want is the wrong person to be arrested.”

Unfortunately, those safeguards can fail — although that rarely happens, McElroy said.

In December, Tampa police arrested 19-year-old James Allen Wade after a witness mistakenly identified him as a suspect in a murder case.

Department officials in both Wade’s and Pena’s cases have been working with the Florida Department of Law Enforcement to have the charges expunged from their records, McElroy said. Pena’s mugshot has been taken down from the jail website.

“Witness identification is a difficult process and that’s why they always continue investigating in order to gather physical evidence to corroborate witness statements,” McElroy said.

Human memory isn’t always accurate, said Karen Newirth, a senior fellow with The Innocence Project. The “best practices” her organization recommends for photo lineups are simply meant to prevent memory contamination after the fact, she said.

“Even under the best conditions, people make mistakes,” she said.

At least in terms of the photo lineup, the Tampa Police Department seems to have done everything right, Newirth said.

But that doesn’t give any comfort to Pena, who said his business has suffered since his arrest.

“As far as what they’re doing right, it stops right there,” Pena said.

He still doesn’t understand how a trained detective could arrest him when the detective had proof Pena didn’t commit the crime. The sheriff’s deputy who was investigating the case didn’t believe it was him, but the police detective told him she was “100 percent sure he did it.”

“At the interview time, that’s where everything fell apart,” Pena said.

An officer visited him last week to apologize and explain the error, Pena said. But he doesn’t have a piece of paper proving the charges against him were officially expunged from his record. He also hasn’t been refunded the $200 he paid in bail.

What Pena does have are questions about the dependability about the department, he said.

“The question is how reliable is the Tampa Police Department when it comes to their detectives,” Pena said.

“These people can ruin someone’s life in a minute.”

Ebehrman@Tampatrib.com

(813)259-7691

Twitter: @LizBehrmanTBO