The following article is entirely the opinion of LeKesh Pettis and does not reflect the views of the Inquisitr.

Millions are expected to tune in for tonight’s reality show reunion, also known as the Fox News GOP debate. With the world watching America’s every move, we can only ask that the “stars” at least try to make us look good. But with constant miseducation and the public’s poor understanding of the basic political platforms, many voters feel frustrated, hopeless, and ready for relocation to Canada.

Fox News GOP Debates

Following a series of debates that some have described as mere buffoonery, Fox News will take on the GOP candidates today in Detroit, Michigan. Miles away from the recent water filtration crisis, Republican hopefuls will have their chance to make their claims to lead the Republican ticket for the presidency. The question from voters should be: will they finally discuss their ideas and platform or continue to make waves with comedic performances that evade the real issues?

Most consider this election season a choice between few evils. Tonight, as you tune in to evaluate each GOP candidate’s stance on the important topics, it’s important to first understand the Republican party platform.

The Republican Platform

With business and economy as the backbone of the party, will the lives of individuals be a first thought? Will #AllLivesMatter or just the livelihood of big business? Before casting your ballot and securing the next leader of the free world, or at least the GOP, consider the facts presented by campaigners.

Donald Trump’s Basic Health Scare Plan

Take a look at the new Health Care Plan proposed by Donald Trump. In the short document, voters can read of the call to completely repeal Obamacare. After months of tension caused by incomprehensible legislative details, reforms, reforms, and more reforms, Trump sums up his feelings of Obamacare and his first duty, should he be elected, with these introductory words.

“This legislation, passed by totally partisan votes in the House and Senate and signed into law by the most divisive and partisan President in American history, has tragically but predictably resulted in runaway costs, websites that don’t work, greater rationing of care, higher premiums, less competition and fewer choices. Obamacare has raised the economic uncertainty of every single person residing in this country. As it appears Obamacare is certain to collapse of its own weight, the damage done by the Democrats and President Obama, and abetted by the Supreme Court, will be difficult to repair unless the next President and a Republican congress lead the effort to bring much-needed free market reforms to the healthcare industry…But none of these positive reforms can be accomplished without Obamacare repeal. On day one of the Trump Administration, we will ask Congress to immediately deliver a full repeal of Obamacare.”

Obviously a “full repeal” contradicts Trump’s support of certain features of the Affordable Care Act. During debates he seemed engaged, to an extent.

“I want to keep pre-existing conditions. I think we need it. I think it’s a modern age. And I think we have to have it.”

According to his minimalist reform plan, he promised a plan that was “much better“. All, however, seems based on the premise that the key to affordable health care is competitive markets which agencies can sell across state lines. The downside to such a theory is that larger, reputable companies are likely to swallow the little fish, benefiting only the corporate industry and even going against the GOP’s desire to boost small businesses.

The winner under Trump’s plan is big pharma and insurance industry leaders. The ultimate loser? You, the insured.

Marco Rubio, Where Does He Stand?

Rubio, on the other hand, has a textbook adherence to the goals of the party. So much, it makes one wonder what will HE do? Of the few things the candidate makes a deliberate stance, small business tax reform is at the forefront. Under his tax reform plan, Rubio plans to cut taxes for small businesses to 25 percent; allow businesses to immediately expense new investments, and permanently repeal the death tax.

Although critical of Trump’s health care plan, Rubio has made the following clear, he will expand access to health coverage through “advanceable, refundable tax credits” usable for insurance purchases. And, that’s about all he’s made clear on health care policy. Rubio was one of many to “nay” the Affordable Healthcare Act.

Ted Cruz and Medicare

About all you’ll hear from Cruz is his support of affordable health care for elderly and competitive marketplaces that cross state lines, just like everyone else and his party platform. After promising to repeal every line of Obamacare, Cruz was asked to share his plans. His response, the “most pragmatic, the most prudent” thing to do is repeal the law and start over then, expand marketplace competitiveness allowing Americans to buy health insurance across state lines.

Unfortunately, his party has already beat him to the punch regarding affordable healthcare for the elderly. The GOP, creators of Medicare, are also great supporters of this benefit for all over age 65.

Informed Voters = Informed Decisions

So, as you tune in to the debates tonight, reflect on the words coming from each candidate. Do they stand in support of their platform? If not, how far will those promises go? Have they really provided best laid plans to “make America great again,” or have they simply sensationalized the most important season for America’s voters with hoopla and irrelevant distractions. YOU be the judge!

But remember, if all lives really matter, your health care, your rights, and your future should be the biggest concern in the Fox News debates.

[Photo Credit: Image by Anthony Antonello]