As seniors age, they become more vulnerable to a wide variety of chronic diseases that require medications. According to MUST For Seniors, a resource for adults and caregivers provided by the National Council on Patient Information and Education, seniors make 34 percent of all prescriptions purchases in the country. As the aging population continues to grow, the U.S. is working to ensure that all older adults are able to afford the necessary medication. The Medicare Part D coverage gap under the Affordable Care Act was designed to make covered prescriptions more accessible for seniors.

The amount that the Medicare Part D coverage gap, also called the donut hole, covers for certain prescriptions depends on how much seniors and the Part D plan have spent on the medications needed. Once adults and their drug plans have met the required spending amount for covered medications, the coverage gap will apply to them. After seniors and their plans have paid $2,960 this year, which is the deductible combined with the total amount, they'll be in the coverage gap.

If you're an older adult or senior caregiver who's already under the coverage gap or would like to be, you should fully understand the donut hole and how it may affect your access to the drugs you need. Here are a few facts to know:

Who is eligible

You may be eligible for savings under the Medicare Part D donut hole and not even know it. According to Medicare.gov., there are three requirements that you must meet in order to benefit from the savings in the coverage gap program. The first is that you aren't receiving subsidies from the Extra Help Medicare program, which provides financial aid to those who are unable to pay for Medicare prescription costs due to limited income.

The second requirement is that you must also be enrolled in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes coverage of medications or in a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan. This includes people enrolled in employer waiver and group health plans. Lastly, before you start saving on prescription costs, you will first have to meet the established coverage gap spending amount for 2015.

How brand-name and generic medications are covered

For brand-name prescriptions covered by Medicare, you will receive a 55 percent discount on the original price of your medication. This is due to the 55 percent manufacturer discount on prescriptions applied after you meet their 2015 coverage gap.

If you use generic drugs during the 2015 donut hole, you will have a slightly smaller discount in which you pay 65 percent of the original cost - Medicare will cover 35 percent. An enticing aspect of purchasing generic medications under the coverage gap is that the price you pay will decrease every year until you're only paying 25 percent of the price in 2020.

Once you spend $4,700 out of pocket in 2015, you will move out of the coverage gap and begin to receive catastrophic coverage, which is when patients pay for a small coinsurance or copayment for the prescription for the rest of that year.

Seniors under special plans

If you are enrolled in enhanced Part D coverage, you may receive a discount for your prescription after the coverage has been applied to the original price. The coverage gap discount is then subtracted from whatever you still owe after the coverage has been applied.

Those who benefit from the State Pharmacy Assistance Program, or any other program - except Extra Help - that offers coverage for Medicare Part D medications, are also eligible to participate in the coverage gap. The discount is applied to the drug cost before SPAP coverage.