Butler Health System launches lung cancer screening program

Basic facts Criteria for patients in lung-cancer screening program: • Be 55 to 80 years old • Have At least 30-pack-a-year smoking history • Have smoked within the last 15 years • No additional medical conditions that would preclude additional testing or treatments • Referral from primary doctor The cost is $150. For more information on Butler Health System's lung cancer screening program, call 724-284-6211. Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

A new lung cancer screening program at Butler Health System's Lung Center is aiming to make the county's No. 1 killer less fatal for high-risk patients.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of death in Butler County, according to Butler Health System's most recent Community Health Assessment, completed in 2013.

After opening the Butler Health System Lung Center last summer in response, hospital officials decided a new screening program could help high-risk patients, said Dr. George Davliakos, co-director of the center.

The program, which began July 1, offers high-risk patients low-dose CT scans and scan interpretation for $150, said Davliakos, a cardiothoracic surgeon. Several people have taken advantage.

“It's important for our community because there are a lot of former smokers,” said William Adams of Portersville, 69, the program's first patient. “If this hospital provides this service, it really could be a life-saver.”

Adams, chairman of Portersville furniture maker Adams Manufacturing Corp., said he quit smoking a couple years ago after about 20 years. His doctor thought Adams would make a good candidate for the program with his smoking history.

The low-dose CT scan revealed Adams' lungs have no signs of cancer.

“It's a relief to know that there was no danger left inside me,” he said.

The scans not only give people peace of mind, but they can discover lung cancer at its early stages, when it is more curable. By the time lung cancer can be diagnosed through a standard chest X-ray, it's usually in an advanced stage and chances of curing it are “fairly low,” Davliakos said.

If the disease is detected early through low-dose CT scans, which show small spots on the lungs, there's more than a 50 percent chance it can be treated or cured, Davliakos said.

“The purpose is to identify lung cancer early at a stage where it can be treated much more effectively and possibly cured,” Davliakos said. “There's a much higher cure rate to find it earlier.”

Davliakos said the National Lung Cancer Screening Trial shows that low-dose CT scans in high-risk patients improve the survival rate by 20 percent over six years.

It's important the scans are used on the appropriate patients and with a multidisciplinary team of doctors, said Dr. Lana Schumacher, co-director of the institute for the treatment of esophageal and thoracic disorders for Allegheny Health Network.

“If you don't stick to the guidelines, it can be dangerous,” Schumacher said, because of the high risk for false positives and the small exposure to radiation.

“But I really don't see too many downsides. There's a dramatic difference in outcomes when it's diagnosed early,” Schumacher added.

To qualify for the Butler program, patients must be between 55 and 80, have smoked within the last 15 years, have at least a 30-pack-a-year smoking history and have no other medical conditions, such as severe emphysema, that would prevent additional testing. They also must have a referral from their primary care doctor.

If a scan shows potential problems, any follow-up treatments or procedures are generally covered by insurers.

Lung Center officials hope the screening program will be free next year under the Affordable Care Act as preventive care.

Rachel Farkas is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. She can be reached at 724-779-6902 or rfarkas@tribweb.com.