If you have driven past East Mississippi State Hospital over the past few weeks, you may notice some major construction underway. That's because the hospital is continuously expanding.

Psychiatric treatments are still ongoing at EMSH, but to stay ahead of the game with the innovations and improvements in psychology, the hospital is consistently looking to expand.

"Over the years the legislature has been so willing to listen to what we're asking," Director of the hospital Charles Carlisle said. "We're saying we need this, we need to work with this and we need to change the way we're doing things."

Carlisle said they have been working with the legislature to do renovations on several buildings to get them up to code and that will be the case as they continue to move forward in the future.

"Being on the board and being able to work with our board, our executive director, and work with our local legislatures has been really a positive," said Carlisle. As you can see, all the construction going on out there, it's not only going on out there, its been happening for the last 10 years."

With a growing hospital one wonders where do the funds come from and Carlisle addresses that issue.

"Everything we have for our hospital, it is all general fund dollars," Carlisle stated. "We do have a nursing home that does collect some Medicaid funding, so that does offset some costs. We have a 65 million dollar budget, and well over half, probably 70 percent of that does come from general tax dollars."

Carlisle says the East Mississippi Business Development Corporation did a study and say that the hospital has 86 million dollar economic impact on the Meridian area.

The hospital was established in 1882 by the Mississippi State Legislature and opened its doors in 1885, as East Mississippi State Insane Asylum. A 19 year old man from Meridian was the first patient. In the 1930s, the hospital changed its name to the current East Mississippi State Hospital. Currently the hospital serves 31 counties, with a population of approximately 900,000.