Dale Stetina, two-time winner of Colorado’s Coors Classic and father of Boulder pro cyclist Peter Stetina, remains in critical condition with head injuries Sunday after crashing in Lefthand Canyon on Saturday.

According to the Boulder Camera, a 1999 Jeep SUV was headed westbound when an adult male driver pulled across the center line and attempted to pull back into his lane. A group of cyclists heading eastbound entered the roadway and all avoided the car. However, Stetina lost control trying to maneuver away.

“He swerved and braked so hard he went over the handlebars,” Cpl. Heather Cobler of the Colorado State Patrol was quoted as saying.

He was airlifted to Boulder Community Hospital’s intensive care unit where he is being treated for head injuries, according to Cmdr. Heidi Prentup of the Boulder County Sheriff’s Office.

The driver, whose name was not released, was not given a citation but may once an investigation is concluded, Cobler said.

According to the Boulder-based cycling website, VeloNews, American racer Steven Tilford posted on his website that Stetina’s injuries are “very serious.”

Tilford printed an email from an unnamed Stetina friend reading: “Dale did not hit the car, but hit the pavement, landing face first, suffering significant facial and ocular damage, and loss of responsiveness. EMTs were on the scene rapidly, he received good care …The CatScan diagnosis revealed brain stem injuries. The neurosurgeon describes the injuries as very serious. Dale is in tough shape. The future of Dale’s recovery is not known at this time, the doctors have offered no predictions. His vital signs are stable given the trauma he encountered. We are all hopeful.”

Stetina, 57, won more than 200 domestic and international bike races during a career from 1965-83. He held the Mt. Washington Hill Climb record for 20 years until it was beaten by Jonathan Vaughters, CEO of Peter Stetina’s former Boulder-based team, Garmin-Sharp.

Peter Stetina, 26, was one of Garmin-Sharp’s bright young stars. In 2012 he won stages at the Tour of Utah and Giro d’Italia and was third in the Best Young Rider in the 2011 Giro. He won the 2009 national Under-23 time trial championship.

Last month he announced he had signed with BMC Racing for 2014.