Being our semi-regular weekly survey of the state of Our National Dialogue which, as you know, is what Boston would have performed had they composed "Moron: A Feeling."

Before we start with the hilarious hijinx of the nutty neighbors on our favorite electric teevee political situation comedies, let's check in with the bats in Maureen Dowd's belfry, shall we?

WASHINGTON — JEB, dragging his wilted exclamation point around, is so boring…

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Nope. Sorry. Not going any further into the dark, rustling Freudian underbrush. Staying in the boat. Not even J!ohn E!llis B!ush deserves this kind of treatment. Jesus H. Christ on The View, this is one twisted frail.

As you might expect, there was a lot of extended discussion of the incredible claque of spoiled, whiny brats who are running for president on the Republican side of the campaign. But first, we must deal with the obvious notion that, on many fronts, the conservative movement seems to be demanding that all our major political and social institutions conspire with them to make the ideological bubble bigger and more invulnerable to reality. If it's not the candidates complaining about the Bakuninite bastards at CNBC—and, it should be pointed out, exempting the Fox Family of Networks from any criticism whatsoever going forward—it's Ben Carson, the man so dead-set against political correctness that he thinks Rick Santelli practices it, demanding that the political speech of college professors be "monitored." It also is a barely disguised subtext of the assault on university tenure that is going on in a number of places, most notably Wisconsin, and in the multipronged attack on public education in general. They not only want us to help them build a bigger, stronger bubble. They want us all to live in it, too. I hope that the journalism-industrial complex realizes what a genuine threat this is. However, I doubt it does, because it is a huge, brainless beast that is still stumped by the existence of the Intertoobz. I note, for the record, that, when the White House said unkind things about the Fox News Channel, "straight" reporters leaped to that landfill's defense. I don't see the same energy being expended to fight the ludicrous notion that CNBC is a liberal plot.

Most Popular

Anyway, on the Sunday Showz, Paul Ryan, the zombie-eyed granny starver from the state of Wisconsin and first runner-up in our most recent vice-presidential pageant, hit the Sabbath Slam for himself. (All three broadcast networks and Fox and CNN. Touch 'em all, Paul!) Most interestingly, of course, Ryan, who insisted on family time before condescending to be Speaker of the House, pronounced himself opposed to paid family leave because it would be a government "entitlement." Just as Social Security survivor's benefits are to everybody except young Paul Ryan, who used them to help launch his career in Not Working For A Living. The man is the Vasily Alexseyev of pulling up the ladders behind him. Biggest. Fake. Ever.

But this week's House Cup finds its way to CBS, where John Dickerson continues to replace the casters on the chair long-held by former Golden Horde media consultant Bob Schieffer. Ryan showed up there, too, of course, to accuse the president of bad faith on immigration reform, which was one of his basic themes at every pop stand on the Sunday circuit.

RYAN: Look, I think it would be a ridiculous notion to try and work on an issue like this with a president we simply cannot trust on this issue. He tried to go it alone, circumventing the legislative process with his executive orders. So, that is not in the cards. I think if we reach consensus on how best to achieve border and interior enforcement security, I think that's fine. But, look, we have taken plenty of tactical risks here in Congress. I think it's time we take some policy risks by showing people what we really believe, who we are and how we can fix this country's great problems. So, we have been timid around here for too long, in my judgment. And I think we have to offer people a bold agenda.

Yeah, that Senate immigration bill that sat in the House for a year because John Boehner didn't dare bring it to a vote, lest it pass, certainly is no reason to trust the president on this issue. And, besides, Ryan has other things on his mind, like letting the Austerity Hounds howl.

RYAN: Well, I think we should say what the new tax code looks like. I think we should say what Obamacare replacement looks like. People don't like Obamacare. Members of Congress don't like Obamacare. We -- most of us in the majority, we all voted against this. But I think, if you take look at the premiums, if you take a look at the fact that decisions are being taken away from patients and their doctors, people are starving for an alternative to this vision.

This is a guy who, based on his magic-asterisk budgets, is certainly someone we "can trust" on issues like the tax code and entitlements.

But, as we said, Ryan's mendacity was shared on many platforms on Sunday, so that isn't what won CBS this week's House Cup. What put the Big Eye over the top is the fact that Our Lady of The Magic Dolphins has a new book out, ghosted by the cartoon canaries that flit in and out of her ears and around her head. Apparently, it is an anthology of her columns and speeches, and what comedy gold must there be to be mined in there. Here, for example, is the Dolphin Queen on The Writing Life.

NOONAN: -- it doesn't. The words have never flown for me. It has always seemed like work, but very satisfying and delightful work. But -- but still work. But, you know, you can't complain, you're trying to describe to people what you see and what is true. And then when you think you've got it right, you take, oh, right. Oh, right.

DICKERSON: (INAUDIBLE).

NOONAN: And when you got it wrong, of course, you go hide under your desk.

DICKERSON: And -- and you listen to movie soundtracks while you're writing.

NOONAN: Yes, I do. To the -- to movie music. Because other music would take me away from my work but movie music is meant to help the story along. And what you're writing when you're writing a column or an essay, you're writing a story.

And here she is, wrestling with our old friend Clio, Muse of History, also known by her Marvel superhero name The Proclaimer (!).

NOONAN: Yes, I've got to tell you, this was -- I told your producer, Mary Hager -- and this is sort of 30 years in the making, the putting together of the manuscript. A through line? I was surprised by the -- how the preoccupations of 30 years ago and 20 years ago are, indeed, the preoccupations of today, not only mine, but America's. The greatness game, presidential politics, the importance of history, the people who move us, do you know what I mean? Sort of the theme -- it all comes down to America, I guess.

And, mysteriously, all the klonopin and cheap whiskey on Mount Olympus seems to have vanished.