<p>Tracy Maple/CLU Athletics Junior Landry Kiyabu has moved into the closer role for the Cal Lutheran baseball team this season. The right-hander is 2-2 with a 2.48 ERA, 34 strikeouts and fives saves in 29 innings pitched.</p>

By Rhiannon Potkey of the Ventura County Star

Landry Kiyabu was willing to play any role on Cal Lutheran's pitching staff this season.

But knowing the closer's job was open after the graduation of Aaron Roth, Kiyabu wanted the chance to prove his mettle.

The junior right-hander is gradually getting more comfortable in the late-game spotlight.

Kiyabu is 2-2 with a 2.48 ERA, 34 strikeouts and fives saves in 29 innings pitched.

"I like it because each pitch is magnified and the impact is magnified," Kiyabu said. "I enjoy the high-pressure situation and going in there and giving it all I have every pitch. It's a really unique situation to be in because in a three-game series over the weekend you get a chance to play a big role in each game."

Kiyabu and CLU's pitching staff helped the Kingsmen (22-10, 14-7) register a big series win against SCIAC leader La Verne (18-13, 15-6) over the weekend.

After suffering a 5-4 loss on Friday, CLU rallied by sweeping Saturday's doubleheader by scores of 3-1 and 2-1.

Kiyabu recorded saves in both of the victories, allowing no hits and striking out two in each game.

"Our staff felt pretty dang good about what we accomplished to limit them to one run in each game," Kiyabu said. "The starters pitched great and Evan Peterson really helped me out by coming out of the bullpen and being that bridge to get to the ninth inning."

The Kingsmen are in a fight to the finish for a chance at another SCIAC title.

The two-time defending champions are in a four-way tie for third place with Pomona-Pitzer (22-10, 14-7), Chapman (21-11, 14-7) and Occidental (19-13, 14-7). La Verne is in first place and Redlands (23-9, 16-8) is in second place.

Cal Lutheran plays Occidental in a three-game series beginning Friday at home at 3 p.m. and culminating with a doubleheader at Occidental on Saturday.

"It hasn't been the picturesque season because our expectations were a lot higher, but we feel fine where we are right now because we are still in control of our season," Kiyabu said. "We are not going to have to wait on people to lose. It's in our hands, and we just need to take care of business and control what we can control."

The 6-foot-1, 210-pound Kiyabu, a Hawaii native, appeared in only one game during his freshman season in 2012. But he made the most of it, striking out the only batter he faced.

Kiyabu redshirted his sophomore season after partially tearing the ulnar collateral ligament in his throwing arm.

He returned to the field last season, going 4-0 with a 4.35 ERA as CLU's setup man out of the bullpen.

"It's been a long four years, but I am really lucky I still have one year left after this season," said Kiyabu, a computer information systems major. "The coaching staff and my teammates really stuck behind me the whole way in my recovery. Some of the catchers had to catch my throwing program and that is pretty rigorous. I am just glad to be back on track to where I want to be and able to make an impact on the team."

Kiyabu is hoping to be in more save situations for Cal Lutheran down the stretch run as the Kingsmen battle to stay in contention for another regular-season and tournament title.

"It would be really nice to get hot and start rolling and get the team going," Kiyabu said. "I feel like we are heading in the right direction. The next few weekends will be exciting for sure."

News and notes

Freshman golfer Keegan Sheard finished as the individual champion at the SCIAC No. 2 tournament after shooting a school-record 9-under 63 in the opening round at the Los Serranos Country Club over the weekend. The Kingsmen finished fourth overall. ... Melissa Skiba (1,500), Allie Hadley (javelin), Kendahl Waalk (5,000) and Julie Teitzel (high jump) were event winners for the Cal Lutheran women's track team in the final SCIAC dual meet of the season. Mary Case recorded the second-best pole vault mark in program history (10 feet, 11¾ inches) and Savannah Sipes registered the sixth-best 400 hurdles time (1:05.46) and seventh-best 100 hurdles time (15.66). For the men, Ronny Camacho (100), Conor Finfrock (200) and Trevor Wood (110 hurdles) won events. ... CLU placed nine athletes on the SCIAC All-Academic team for the winter season. Sofia Cruz, Haley Hodgson, Katy Lindor, Taylor Messick and Natalie Stone represented the women's basketball team. Reagan Chapman and Jacob Dawe represented the men's basketball team and Tianna Pasko and Ryan Brem represented the CLU swimming and diving teams.