On September 4, DeFuniak Springs Fire officials responded to a structure fire off of Highway 331, but when they arrived on scene, this case was different than most.

Inside the home was a 91-year-old World War II veteran stuck among the flames.

It was just a normal shift for DeFuniak Springs Firefighter James Stultz, responding to a structure fire in the middle of the night.

But when he arrived on scene, the sense of urgency was not just focused on putting out the fire. A person was still stuck inside the home.

Andrew Thompson, 91, and his caretaker were both in the home when the fire started,

Thompson's care-taker was trying to get him out of the home, but the smoke was too much for her to handle.

That's where Stultz came in, in his words, just doing his job to save someone in danger.

"That's when I wrapped him in the sheet and got him outside, and he was thankful to be outside for sure," he said.

It wasn't until after Thompson was out of the house, and under medical care, that Stultz realized this man was a hero too.

"After we were doing some mop up of the structure after the fire, we did see some pictures, some old pictures of him wearing some uniforms, and that's when I put two-and-two together that he was a war hero," Stultz said.

Walton Fire Rescue officials responded to the fire as well and said they were impressed by Stultz's actions.

"To be able to pull out someone, does not happen very often, especially in this rural area, we don't have that many opportunities to find a victim, pull him out and for that person to be a veteran himself of war. That is great recognition for someone to be able to do that," Walton Fire Battalion Chief James McMillan said.

"I knew for him to be in there that long survive, I knew that he was a fighter right off the bat," Stultz said.

The story of one hero helping another.

"He kept telling me please get me out of here, get me out of here, and I reassured him, 'Don't worry, I will get you out. Hold on tight.'" he said.

NewsChannel 7 was not able to get in touch with Mr. Thompson.

But fire officials say that, as of last week, Mr.. Thompson was still at the Healthmark Regional Medical Center in DeFuniak Springs recovering from severe burns.