Topics: Editor's Picks, Feminism, Love and Sex, Pornography, Sex, Life News

In 1992, Sallie Tisdale wrote an essay in Harper’s about enjoying pornography — as a woman. In response, she received some “thoughtful letters” and “mash notes.” She was also told that she shouldn’t be allowed to have children. A man offered to cut off his penis and mail it to her. A couple dozen readers canceled their subscriptions.

Two years later, “Talk Dirty to Me: An Intimate Philosophy of Sex,” a book expanding on that controversial essay, premiered. In it, Tisdale writes about porn, yes (“pornography is a hall of mirrors, a central symbol of the societywide confusion over sex”), and enters the fray of feminist debates over the industry. At its heart, though, it’s a personal exploration of her own sexuality — whether it be through visiting seedy sex shops or reading about the communal homes of certain Native American tribes. “Studying [sex] was part of my reconciliation with a large and demanding aspect of my life,” she wrote. “All I’ve read of sex in history, in anthropology, in religion, in other people’s lives, I’ve read more for my own reassurance, to assuage my own guilt and clear up my confusion than for anything else.”

To commemorate the two decades that have passed since the book’s release, it was reissued in the U.K. last month and will be republished as an e-book in the U.S. in the new year. I thought it was a great excuse to catch up with Tisdale, a Salon alum, to talk about how our sexual culture has changed — and hasn’t — in the past 20 years.

How has our sexual culture changed in the two decades since your book first came out?

I think the primary change, and everybody mentions it, is the Internet. That’s a change of visibility and accessiblilty but it doesn’t change the fundamental nature of sexuality. It doesn’t change the existential questions that sexual behavior raises in people and I think there is a concomitant rise in resistance and supression. Visibility of sexual behavior and sexual orientation and sexual identity always have brought forth a proportional resistance. In the last twenty years we see a dramatic rise in fundamentalism and even violent repression of sexual identity. So it’s easy for liberal Americans to say, “Oh everything is so much better now because of the Internet,” but if you actually go and look at what’s on the Internet it’s not very different and the conversation is not particularly different, and there is definitely a backlash. I think if you look at the history of sexual expression and sexual orientation you see the same pattern. This is human history, this is the same pattern that we’ve always seen.

So what has the Internet actually changed with regard to sex?

I’ve been following all the sexting lawsuits and dramas that have happened; they’re terribly terribly sad. It’s easy to say that isn’t it wonderful that we can have access to fetish material that would be difficult to find and allow people with minority sexual expressions to find each other, but at the same time the erosion of privacy is devastating to many people. And dangerous to many people. The same thing in fundamentalist cultures, the Internet has allowed people to get together and find each other in terms of resistance to authoritarian government but it has also exposed people in very dangerous ways. So, I always work in the territory of ambivalence and ambiguity. I think we have to recognize that the Internet is an ambivalent technology.

Going back to what you were saying about how the existential questions about sex have not changed, what are some of those questions?

Well, you’re going to have a different answer to this than I am. Everybody is going to have their own existential abyss in sexuality. The only thing I’d be sure of is if you say you don’t, you’re not paying attention. The nature of sexual behavior is to expose oneself in particular ways — not to say that you can’t have perfectly comfortable anonymous sex with groups of strangers. There still remains this exposure, this vulnerability that is part of sex and I think a necessary part of sex, because if you want to talk just in biological terms, sexual behavior creates intimacy, which creates relationships, which creates community and family and protects the species. I think there is a reason why humans and primates have evolved sexuality which causes us to have a psychic response. That existential question of, “Am I being seen? Am I being recognized? Am I safe being seen this way?” will always be with us. To the extent that we can move into that it deepens the physical experience. I’m not saying sex is better if you love somebody. I think it is for some people, it is probably for most people, but I’m talking about the ability and willingness to be really seen. Those questions will always be there.

I think the question we really don’t talk about very much, and maybe this is something that has changed a little bit with the Internet, is: What do you do? What’s it like for you? What happens behind your bedroom door? Everybody asks that question, everybody wants to know what other people do. The Internet has allowed us to see performance a great deal more easily including the dramatic rise in amateur porn. But it is performance based, still. To truly see unscripted, spontaneous sexual activity is rare, and I think that question is always with us, “What do you do and how does it feel?”

How has porn changed since the days you were boldly venturing solo into sex shops?

Not much, Tracy! Not much! Nina Hartley has lessons for men on her website where she’ll say, This is how you do oral sex and this is how you stimulate this part of a woman. She shows them how to do. We had our books, “The Joy of Sex” and things like that, but now it’s a little easier to learn, just like cooking, to really watch somebody do it. Nina also, bless her, models being an older woman and has told me that she really wants to continue to make pornography for the middle-aged and older-middle-aged woman to show that that doesn’t change. Candida Royalle is doing that as well. It’s women who are leading the fray there of saying, “This is what we want from sex. This is what sex can be like.”

But plain old straightforward pornography, if you put in a few keywords and get taken to some standard triple-X site? Gosh, it looks the same. The same tropes are there. Young girls in schoolgirl uniforms. Girl-on-girl action. Inflated boobs will never go away, I guess. The same trope of the insatiable woman is always there. The virile, enduring male character is always there. Maybe now it’s more frequently omnisexual and bisexual and so on, but the underlying trope is the same. The presentation of bodies is largely the same.

What the Internet can show you is what there is a market for. There definitely a market for feet. There will always be a market for feet. There will always be a market for leather and I leave it to others to go more deeply into what that is expressing, but certain things just recur for forever in our sexuality. Bondage and domination will always be with us, and that one’s a little more obvious to me why so many people have those fantasies.