Tracy Gnadinger

February 26, 2015

The latest Health Policy Brief from Health Affairs and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) provides an update to an earlier brief on the Affordable Care Act (ACA)’s risk corridor program, which allows the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to collect and make payments to qualified health plans. As the brief explains, a recent amendment to federal appropriations raises questions as to whether insurers will receive their full risk corridor payments for 2014.

While the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2015, which funded the government for the 2015 fiscal year, did give HHS the authority to collect user fees, an amendment was included that specifically prohibited HHS from transferring money from either trust fund. The amendment did not eliminate the risk corridor program, nor did it prevent HHS from using payments received from insurers to pay out claims under the program (that is, user fees), but it effectively made the risk corridor program budget neutral unless HHS can find another source of funding. As a result, insurers expecting payments from HHS may not receive the full amount due.

But based on the latest regulation from the benefit and payment parameters for 2016, HHS still plans to collect enough “user fees” (payments made from insurers) during the three years of the risk corridor program to make all necessary payments. Take for example, past experience with Medicare Part D.

The risk corridors in Medicare Part D began with the program in 2006 and are still in effect, with the amount of risk held by plans increasing over time. In the first year of Part D about 80 percent of insurers made payments back to Medicare, and only 20 percent of insurers received money, according to a report from the HHS Office of Inspector General. Since the inception of Part D risk corridors, the federal government has collected more money from insurers than it paid out through the program.

The brief further expands on a recent report from Citi Research, which “found that some insurers are expecting significant payments from the risk corridor program.” Overall, insurance companies are not happy with language in the appropriation law for fear that it will lead to higher premiums.

Even though HHS expects risk corridors to remain budget neutral in the three years of the program, within the “proposed rule on benefit and payment parameters for 2016, HHS describes a process for adjusting the program should it take in more money under risk corridors than it pays out.”

The brief also reviews the implications of the Supreme Court decision in the upcoming King v. Burwell case and recently proposed legislation to eliminate the risk corridor program.

About Health Policy Briefs. Health Policy Briefs are aimed at policy makers, congressional staffers, and others needing short, jargon-free explanations of health policy basics. The briefs, which are reviewed by experts in the field, include competing arguments on policy proposals and the relevant research supporting each perspective.

Sign up for an e-mail alert about upcoming briefs. The briefs are also available from the RWJF. Please feel free to forward the briefs to any of your colleagues who are tracking health issues. And after you’ve taken a look, we welcome your feedback.