Photo

To the Editor:

I hope that Pamela Gallin’s May 15 Op-Ed essay, “Kids Who Can’t See Can’t Learn,” will make parents take their kids to get their eyes checked.

I’m a mother of three with access to top pediatricians and a network of neurotic moms, yet I was never advised to get my children’s eyes checked. Last summer I took my 4-year-old to an optometrist with an air of confidence that I was just being overprotective. Much to my sickening surprise, he could barely see, as it turns out. One of his eyes was giving up, a nonreversible condition if not caught early.

My son’s eyes lit up when glasses were put on and he could see properly. (Insert mom guilt.) His whole demeanor changed; he would cry, scream and nap a lot until that point. We had taken him to many specialists, and no one had suggested that we get his eyes checked. My son now loves to draw.

I tell lots of people our story and ask them: “Do you know how well your kids can see? Are you sure?”

Our optometrist is in an affluent part of Los Angeles and says he sees lots of high school students who are doing poorly in school because of their eyesight.

LINDSAY KAVET

Los Angeles

To the Editor:

Basic vision care for children — as well as for adults — is often treated as an optional service that is less critical than other medical needs. But as Pamela Gallin points out, poor vision affects every facet of a child’s life through developmental stages and educational outcomes.

Even with the advent of the Affordable Care Act, there are many who do not have vision coverage and cannot afford to pay the average $154 cost of an eye exam and $200 cost for a pair of eyeglasses (according to VSP, a vision care insurance leader).

Until vision care is accorded the importance of vaccinations and other preventive medical services, nonprofits like mine, New Eyes for the Needy, can fill the gap by providing new prescription eyeglasses to needy children and adults. We constantly seek and embrace partners in the optical industry as well as those in the medical community to help us provide these disadvantaged people the simple yet critical tool of clear vision so that they may lead productive, independent and successful lives.

JEAN GAJANO

Executive Director

New Eyes for the Needy

Short Hills, N.J.