The Moto X, billed as the first real Google phone because it is the first smartphone that Motorola built from the ground up after the company was acquired by the online search giant in 2012, offers three stand-out features that could tip the scales in its favor among consumers weighing a new cellphone purchase.

That’s a fairly significant accomplishment in an era in which it’s increasingly difficult for Android-based devices to differentiate themselves.

To start, the Moto X handles voice commands better than any phone before it. Rather than having to push a button to activate the feature, a user simply speaks the phrase “OK Google Now” to wake up the phone. To place a call, a user would say “OK Google Now, call (person’s name).” The phone can be trained to respond only to the owner’s voice.

In addition to making calls, voice-activated commands can be used to write a text message (accurately) and search Google for store locations, directions and other information.

The feature isn’t perfect but works great where you need it the most: in a car. With substantial background noise, the phone doesn’t always wake up. Still, the so-called touchless control feature offered by the Android Jelly Bean-powered Moto X is far more useful than Apple’s Siri, the much-hyped virtual assistant that turned out to be a dud.

Second, the Moto X’s battery life is remarkable. Under light use — limited Web surfing, game play and text messaging, and an occasional phone call — the phone endured two and a half days without a charge before the battery level fell below 15 percent. It easily lasted through the day under typical daily usage, which includes fetching and writing e-mails and heavy mobile Web browsing.

Motorola says it was able to equip the Moto X with more power by using a custom-shaped battery that bolsters capacity by 31 percent without adding bulk.

Lastly, the phone’s appearance is customizable, the feature that drew the most attention when the device was unveiled this summer. The phone is assembled in the U.S., allowing Google to offer custom options with the promise of delivery within four business days.

Through the Motorola website, consumers can design the look of the Moto X by picking among 18 colors for the backplate and seven for the accents, such as the power and volume buttons. The front of the phone comes in white or black.

The so-called Moto Maker also allows consumers to select the splash message when the phone powers up and add accessories such as earbuds from SOL Republic. Backplate engraving wasn’t available when I went through the ordering process.

While the phone is available for the four major carriers, AT&T currently holds the exclusive on the custom options.

The Moto X costs $200 with a two-year contract from AT&T, though reports have surfaced that the price will drop to $100 before the end of the year.

It costs $600 contract-free from T-Mobile.

The Moto X’s specs are fairly standard: a 4.7-inch touchscreen, 10-megapixel rear camera and 2 megapixel front camera, 2 gigabytes of RAM and 16 gigabytes or 2 gigabytes of storage. It sports a curved plastic backing that feels a bit cheap when compared to the HTC One’s aluminum body. The volume button is more difficult to press than it should be.

One other noteworthy item is the Motorola Skip magnetic accessory included with the phone. The wearable gadget is similar to Samsung’s TecTile tags, though it does only one thing. When the Moto X touches the Skip, the phone’s screen will automatically unlock, eliminating the need to swipe a pattern or enter a PIN.

The price drop to $100 with a contract would put the Moto X in direct competition with Apple’s forthcoming iPhone 5C. Based on specs released by Apple last week, the 5C is essentially the year-old iPhone 5 with a plastic backplate and an updated operating system.

Unless you’re a die-hard Apple fan, the Moto X is the more appealing option.

Andy Vuong : 303-954-1209, avuong@denverpost.com or fb.com/byandyvuong