R.J. Niko, 17, front left. coordinates volunteers from his Boy Scout troop as they work Saturday on his Eagle Scout project building benches that will be placed at the Milner-Schwarz house in Loveland. Pictured, from left, are Tristan McLaughlin, 15, R.J., Mark Cooper, Ben McLaughlin, Collin Willilams, 16, and Seth Niko, 16. ( Steve Stoner )

With 2 ½ months left to his 18th birthday, Boy Scout R.J. Niko knew he had to hurry to get his Eagle Scout project started and finished.

The Loveland boy, who turns 18 next Saturday, isn't a procrastinator, but he missed his freshman year of school to undergo chemotherapy and other treatments for osteosarcoma. He then spent his sophomore and junior years taking on an extra load to make up for the lost year, not wanting to be in the same grade as his younger brother, Seth, 16.

"I really wanted to get the final rank," said R.J., now a senior at Thompson Valley High School. "No matter how old you are, you're always an Eagle."

To become an Eagle Scout, Boy Scouts have to finish a project that benefits the community by their 18th birthday after also earning at least 21 merit badges.

Tristan McLaughlin, 15, sands boards while volunteering his labor with other Boy Scouts on Saturday for fellow Boy Scout R.J. Niko's Eagle Scout project to build benches for the Milner-Schwarz house in Loveland. ( Steve Stoner )

"You have to put a lot of work into it. You have to be dedicated to getting your Eagle," R.J. said.

When he was ready to do his project, R.J. contacted the Loveland Historical Society. Two of his fellow scouts from troop 587 did projects for the nonprofit that included building a windmill and an outhouse for the Milner-Schwarz house. He wanted to build two 18-foot stadium benches for the grounds from the nonprofit's project list submitted to the troop.

With the help of his father, Rob, R.J. designed the benches to have steel frames and redwood seats and foot boards, and then raised the money and materials to do the building.

"We're making it so it's portable," R.J. said Saturday, the second work day he organized with members of his troop.

The Boy Scouts work on each other's Eagle projects, said Collin Williams, 16, who helped R.J. with his.

"It's really hard to do it by yourself. We all support each other," Collin said. "It gets it done a lot faster."

The benches will be delivered at an undetermined date to the Milner-Schwarz house once the access road, damaged in the 2013 flood, reopens. The benches, which will seat 50 people, will be used for events and lectures by the Loveland Historical Society and the Colorado State University Extension's master gardener program.

"I'm just going to finish this up and make it good," R,J. said. "I can't wait to say I'm an Eagle."

Earning the Eagle teaches the Boys Scouts leadership and time management skills, said R.J.'s mother, Helen.

"I think just seeing him, knowing everything he's gone through, seeing him work really hard the last couple of months to earn that Eagle rank has been really cool to watch," Helen said. "He's done good. It's not always been easy."

Boy Scout Tyler Brian helped with the windmill and Tyler Murdock, also a Scout, worked on the outhouse for their Eagle Scout projects. The outhouse was knocked down during the flood and will have to be reset by crane, and the windmill, completed just before the flood, will be installed using the same crane.

Tyler needed one part to finish the windmill, but then the flood came, he said.

"Now, I'm waiting," said Tyler, who officially will earn his Eagle Scout when the windmill is placed on the grounds. "It's just fun to be with everyone else and make stuff."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.