M.Scott Mahaskey/POLITICO Walker lays out Obamacare replacement plan But conservative rivals say it would create a new entitlement.

Scott Walker became the first top-tier Republican candidate Tuesday to release a plan to replace Obamacare, but conservative rivals said it is too liberal and would create a new entitlement.

The Wisconsin governor pledged that on the first day of his presidency, he would send a bill “to Congress to once and for all repeal Obamacare entirely.”

Story Continued Below

Speaking at a machine parts shop outside of Minneapolis, Walker also said he would sign an executive order to undo what he calls the “special deal for Congress,” which allows the federal government to pay a portion of Hill staffers’ and members’ health insurance as their employer. The provision has raised the ire of conservatives but repealing it would raise insurance costs for staffers on Capitol Hill.

Walker said that repealing that would “light a fire under Congress” to pass the repeal and replace Obamacare.

Walker says he would replace President Barack Obama’s signature law with a plan that would return authority to the states and provide sliding-scale tax credits directly to consumers who don’t get coverage at work to help them buy insurance. The tax credits would be based on age — not income — an element that immediately drew criticism as a new entitlement.

GOP rivals chastised Walker’s plan for proposing to help Americans who might not need it.

“We’ve uncovered the central conceit of Walker’s plan: It’s not conservative in the least. We suspect that he collaborated on it with Bernie Sanders,” said a spokesman for Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, who until Monday had been the only presidential candidate to outline an Obamacare replacement plan. “It creates a new federal entitlement program, which gives money to people without any means testing.”

Washington Examiner managing editor Philip Klein wrote that by including elements such as refundable tax credits, Walker chose pragmatism over ideological purity. The decision reflects Walker’s desire to make the plan politically viable by minimizing the disruption to millions of Obamacare beneficiaries who would otherwise lose coverage, Klein said.

Walker would also expand the role of health savings accounts and allow consumers to buy insurance across state lines — standard Republican ideas. States would also be able to set up high-risk pools with federal funds to help consumers with pre-existing health problems purchase coverage.

In a nod to the most popular aspect of Obamacare, Walker pledged that people with pre-existing conditions would be protected. He would eliminate the mandate to buy insurance, but consumers would have to maintain continuous coverage to prevent a large premium increase or a denial of coverage. He also said that states would have more flexibility over a restructured Medicaid, as well as over insurance regulations, such as whether to allow children to stay on their parents’ policies until they turn 26, which Obamacare permits.

Walker leaves many other questions unanswered about his plan, including how many people might be covered and how he would pay for it, except to say it would require no new taxes or fees.

Conservative health policy expert Avik Roy, an adviser to Texas Gov. Rick Perry, wrote in Forbes Tuesday that Walker’s plan appears to rely on a $1 trillion Medicaid cut and a revised version of an Obamacare tax on expensive health plans. But Roy argued it would do little to usher people out of government-run insurance.

“[T]he key to improving the way we sponsor health coverage for the poor is not by rearranging the Medicaid deck chairs,” Roy writes.

The speech comes as the Wisconsin governor is losing his foothold atop the polls in neighboring Iowa and served as an attempt to show he’s the party’s best messenger on Obamacare. It was also a chance to showcase his policy chops in an early caucus state. Minnesota Republicans will cast ballots on March 1, as part of the “Super Tuesday” bloc that could be decisive if the early voting states fail to elevate a likely nominee.

Until now, the only GOP candidate to issue a plan was Jindal, who has scraped the bottom of Republican primary polls. On Monday evening, Sen. Marco Rubio also laid out elements of a health care plan in a POLITICO opinion piece, which recommended a refundable tax credit that consumers could use to buy insurance, and insurance reforms to protect consumers with pre-existing health conditions. Like most Obamacare alternatives, there are few specifics.

By offering more specifics than his rivals, Walker hopes to be the candidate to exploit the anger over the health care law — an issue with continuing potency among GOP primary voters.

“There is both value and risk,” at being first, said Tevi Troy, president of the American Health Policy Institute and former deputy secretary at HHS during the George W. Bush administration. “The value is that you appear substantive and that subsequent plans may be seen as a reaction to yours. The risk is that it opens you up to other entities scoring your plan and highlighting perceived gaps.”

Walker also criticized congressional Republicans for not doing enough to block the president’s health law. “They told us during the last election that if we just elected a Republican Senate, the leadership out there would put a bill to repeal Obamacare on the desk of the president,” he said Monday at the Iowa State Fair. “It’s August, we’re still waiting for that measure.”

Walker is also seeking to differentiate himself from rivals such as Jeb Bush — who wasn’t in office when Obamacare was put in place — and Govs. John Kasich and Chris Christie, who embraced the health law’s Medicaid expansion in their states.

On Tuesday, he defended what he called a “tough” decision to turn down the federal dollars available through Medicaid expansion.

“That was pretty tough in a blue state like Wisconsin,” he said. “We knew how difficult it would be to repeal Obamacare … if states were adding to it” by expanding Medicaid.

Walker, who has consistently opposed Obamacare and called for its repeal, has a complicated relationship with the health law — one that his Republican opponents may be able to exploit. But it is not nearly as clear-cut as the critiques that can be lobbed at Kasich or Christie for supporting Medicaid expansion.

Walker used the Affordable Care Act to cut approximately 60,000 people from the state’s Medicaid plan, moving them to subsidized private plans offered through the state’s Obamacare exchange instead. He then used the state’s Medicaid savings to add more of the state’s poorest residents to the Medicaid program.

Walker has defended the decision as one that focuses on protecting the poorest of the poor without growing the Medicaid rolls. It preserves the state’s safety net and provides health insurance without subjecting Wisconsin to unpredictable federal budget decisions.

He touted the move on Tuesday, saying that he was the only governor to turn down Medicaid and not leave some poor residents in a “coverage gap.”

Critics say that the messy plan left many people once on Medicaid uninsured or with an Obamacare plan that cost them more money, and that Wisconsin could have saved more money — and covered more people — by expanding Medicaid under Obamacare.

It’s also not a model that can be replicated nationally — any state that would want to copy it would have had to start out with a relatively liberal Medicaid plan like the one Walker inherited when he became governor.

But he can use the approach to burnish the well-worn Republican argument that states need to have flexibility to come up with their own Medicaid plans, not a top-down plan delivered by Washington.

“I’ve always thought that notwithstanding all the president’s language on this being ‘a done deal,’ Obamacare and health care issues are still very much at the center of public awareness, particularly among Republican primary voters,” said Lanhee Chen, a Hoover Institute research fellow and former top policy adviser to Mitt Romney.

For Walker, the Minnesota speech also helps him emphasize a Midwestern strategy, focusing on states near Wisconsin where his name recognition is high and he has a strong base of support.

Though Minnesota, a Democrat-leaning state, embraced major elements of Obamacare, the state’s large medical device industry — which includes companies like Medtronic — has cried out for relief from Obamacare’s medical device tax, and flaws in the rollout of the state’s Obamacare exchange hobbled enrollment for several months.