For years, the Democratic Party has been mostly dormant in Collin County.

There were some passionate members, but even those focused much of their political energy beyond the seemingly hopeless local races.

This year, party leaders hope to change that. Spurred by a perceived Democratic opportunity with suburban women and a popular candidate for governor, local leadership is predicting a burst of new activity in the party. Their support might still pale in comparison with that of the rival GOP. But Democrats are determined to be a force in the 2014 elections.

“There is a completely different dynamic this time,” said Shawn Stevens, chairman of the Democratic Party of Collin County.

So far, most of the work has been organizing and preparing for next fall. In October, Battleground Texas, a statewide organization devoted to turning Texas into a swing state, hosted house parties to train volunteers.

In November, local party leaders hosted what they described as an unusually energetic crowd at their annual Ann Richards Dinner. And lately, a group has been meeting weekly at the Plano strip mall that houses the county party’s office to call other potential volunteers for 2014.

The hope is to have a large group of supporters ready for the fall who can make personal connections with as many voters as possible. And this time around they will probably have outside help, a rarity for Collin County.

Bleak recent record

There’s a reason there was a lack of energy in the party in the past. For years, Democrats have failed to even be competitive with the local GOP.

In 2010, Republican Gov. Rick Perry won Collin County with 64 percent of the vote, compared with 33 percent for Democratic former Houston Mayor Bill White. In 2012, more than 133,000 people voted straight-ticket Republican. Only 61,000 voted solely for the Democrats.

It will be next to impossible to turn that around in one election. But one reason for the current effort is the conclusion that Democrats can’t simply ignore the counties they know they won’t win, organizers said.

Battleground Texas has pushed for a new statewide attitude, arguing that the party needs a presence in all 254 counties to win elections. Its leaders say similar efforts are happening in other GOP-dominated counties across the state.

“Collin County is a fantastic example of the excitement we are seeing across the state of Texas,” said Jenn Brown, executive director of the group.

But Democrats say they also see a particular opportunity in suburban areas like Collin County. Their likely nominee in the race for governor, Wendy Davis, became famous for her filibusters to conclude the two most recent regular legislative sessions. One was in protest of strict new regulations on abortions and the clinics that perform them. The other was opposed to cuts to public education funding.

Democrats argue that both of those actions could make her an attractive choice to suburban women. And some believe that those women are vital to a Davis victory in 2014.

According to polling by the Texas Tribune and University of Texas, 50 percent of suburban women identified themselves as Republicans in 2010. By June 2013, that had decreased to 38 percent. Meanwhile, the proportion identifying themselves as Democrats rose from 37 percent to 46 percent.

But since that June 2013 poll, the numbers have been less encouraging for Democrats, according to James Henson, director of the Texas Politics Project, which conducted the poll. More recently, the share of suburban women identifying as Republican rose back up to 45 percent. Henson attributed that largely to frustration with Democrats nationwide after the difficulty surrounding the rollout of the Affordable Care Act.

Either way, polling indicates that 33 percent of women still have no opinion in a possible contest between Davis and Republican front-runner Greg Abbott. That’s more than twice the number of undecided men.

Aiming to ‘inch up’

Republicans remain confident, however. State Rep. Jodie Laubenberg of Parker has drawn a Democratic opponent for the first time in years. But she said she isn’t worried. She knows many suburban women who agree with the GOP’s anti-abortion efforts, she said.

And Collin County is thriving economically and has strong schools, she said, so it’s unlikely that Democrats will find enough people who are unhappy with their state government.

“What they are anticipating is not going to work,” Laubenberg said.

Even many Democrats admit that winning the county or individual races in 2014 is a long shot. But they view the fact that they have already begun a significant effort as a positive sign.

And they argue that even a little progress can help Democrats statewide.

“Our voting numbers might not be 50 percent plus one,” said Stevens, the party chairman, “but if you inch up the vote a little bit, you can affect the election.”