Texas is a bastion of conservative ideology. It’s a place where folks believe in smaller government that spends less money. They also tend to oppose abortion, same sex marriage, Obamacare, and any discussion of climate change. They do, however, support free speech, self determination, and the right to tote a fully loaded howitzer around with them if they so choose.

Texas is the the spiritual home of the Tea Party, a collection of ultra-conservative politicians whose philosophy it loosely based on that of the American colonists who dumped shiploads of English tea into Boston Harbor to protest against King George III more than 200 years ago..

Tesla Motors has a modest presence in Texas; it expects to sell only about 2,000 of its electric cars there this year. But there’s a problem; Texas has a ban on selling cars to people except through licensed dealers. Tesla has a corporate philosophy that favors selling direct to the public using small stores similar to the sales outlets pioneered by Apple. You might think Tesla would have no problem finding Tea Party politicians in Texas eager to repeal that ban on the grounds that it interferes with the free market, but you would be wrong.

According to an article in The Atlantic, the Tea Party representatives who got elected to the Texas legislature over the past 10 years have run into an aspect of government they never counted on – the Armani clad, Gucci shod lobbyists who sweep through the halls of government in every state capitol, devouring any shred of logic or common sense in order to secure special privileges for their well heeled clients.

There are more lobbyists today than there were locusts in Egypt in Biblical times. They come in ceaseless waves, as unstoppable as the incoming tide. Their job is to see that the will of the people is subverted at every opportunity in order to increase the wealth and power of the people and corporations who employ them.

Naturally, the Texas automobile dealers have a phalanx of lobbyists doing their bidding at the state capitol in Austin. They have no intention of letting Elon Musk or anyone else kill the goose that laid the golden egg, namely their monopoly on selling cars in the state and the stupendous profits it yields. The current arrangement amounts to “a government sponsored price fixing cartel among dealers” says The Atlantic, with consumers unwittingly paying a substantial premium above market prices in order to pad corporate profits.

So far, Tesla has tread very carefully in Texas. Officially, it has no interest in repealing the laws that protect established dealers. That would be like jamming a stick into a hornets nest and giving it a good stir. Instead, it is modestly proposing a limited exemption that would favor it and it alone. Let others who come later worry about cracking the Texas automobile market, if they dare. It hopes by asking for a limited exemption, the entire weight of the Texas automobile dealers’ lobby will not be called into action to oppose them.

Is it counter-intuitive for Tea Party free market advocates to support a government approved monopoly? Of course it is, but even ideology collapses in the face of a withering array of lobbyists. It just goes to show that even in Texas, where government – any government – is viewed with suspicion, the people still have elected “the best government money can buy.”