Can I use 401K to buy a home?

Today, I have answers to questions from readers about flexible spending accounts and using retirement funds to buy a first home.

Q: Peter R. writes, "A friend has a question on a home purchase. As a first-time home buyer, can he cash out of his 401(k) and put that money toward the down payment to reach 20 percent and not be penalized for early withdrawal from the IRS? The price of the home is about $350,000."

A: No. "The first-time home buyer exception does not apply to distributions from company plans, such as a 401(k). The exception only applies to distributions from individual retirement accounts. Plus, the exception, among other requirements, is capped at $10,000 for the life of an IRA owner," says Jeff Levine, an IRA technical consultant with Ed Slott & Co.

However, "There are a few potential strategies here," he adds. "First, if the person is eligible to take a distribution from his 401(k) plan, he could roll money over to an IRA, and then take a distribution from the IRA of up to $10,000 and claim the exception to the 10 percent penalty, assuming he or she meets all the other requirements.

Another possibility is to see if he is eligible to borrow a portion of his 401(k) balance. "If so, he could use the loan proceeds, which would not currently be taxable, to help with the down payment. Of course, the loan does need to be repaid in a timely manner, or else it would become taxable and likely subject to the 10 percent penalty as well," Levine adds.

Q: David S. has a question in response to my Friday column on new rules for flexible spending accounts. "Do the new FSA rules apply to retirees, too?"

A: The new rules relax the long-standing "use it or lose it rule" that discouraged many workers from participating in FSAs. These accounts let employees put a portion of their pretax salary into an account to pay for certain out-of-pocket medical expenses, excluding health insurance premiums.

Under the old rules, employees forfeited any money they hadn't spent by the end of the plan year - or by 2 1/2 months after the end of the plan year if their employer had adopted a grace period. About 64 percent of employers have adopted the grace period, according to Alegeus Technologies, which provides technology to companies that administer FSA plans.

Under new rules announced last week, employers can amend their flexible spending accounts to let employees carry over up to $500 in unspent funds from one year to the next, unless they provide a grace period. Employers do not have to offer the grace period or the carryover.

The answer to David's question is no, because retirees can't have an FSA plan, unless they are retired from one company but are working for another. "In order to have an FSA, it has to be offered by an employer. You must be employed and have your employer able to withhold pretax funds from your wages," says Natasha Rankin, executive director of the Employers Council on Flexible Compensation.

Q: Diana T. has two questions: "Will flexible spending accounts be affected in any way by the new Affordable Care Act? And for people who already have flexible spending accounts, are they exempt from the requirement to buy a health insurance plan?"

A: The answer to the first question is: FSAs have already been affected by the act.

Before the act, there was no Internal Revenue Service limit on how much an employee could put into an FSA, although employers could set their own cap. "Typically, they didn't allow more than $5,000, but in theory they could allow any amount," says Bob Natt, executive chairman of Alegeus.

The care act put a cap on FSA contributions. Starting in 2013, employers cannot let a worker put more than $2,500 per year into the accounts.

The good news is, that limit allowed the Treasury Department and Internal Revenue Service to loosen its use-it-or-lose-it rule, says Jody Dietel, chief compliance offer for WageWorks, which administers FSA plans.

Under another provision of the act, starting in 2011 employees could no longer use their accounts to pay for over-the-counter drugs and medicines without a doctor's prescription, with a few exceptions including insulin and diabetes supplies, glucosamine and prenatal vitamins.

Employees can still get reimbursed from the account without a prescription for medical supplies and devices, including bandages and first aid kits, reading glasses, condoms, pregnancy tests, orthotics, blood pressure monitors, contact lens solutions and broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of 15 or higher.

If you have a question about whether a certain item is eligible for reimbursement, consult your FSA plan administrator or its website.

Many savvy consumers have responded to that rule by getting their doctors to write prescriptions for any conceivable cold, flu or other over-the-counter remedies they might need. If they get sick, they can either submit the prescription to a pharmacist or to their FSA plan administrator when they seek reimbursement.

The answer to the second question is no. Although an FSA is technically a health plan, it is not the type of health insurance most Americans are required to obtain under the act.

"An FSA does not meet minimum essential coverage unless it is also paired with an underlying plan that meets Affordable Care Act" requirements, Dietel says.