Large employers expect their healthcare costs to rise moderately next year as they shift a growing share of the burden to workers, according to a new national survey.

While big companies estimate that their costs of providing health benefits to workers will jump an average 6.5 percent in 2015, they plan to hold increases to 5 percent by shifting more costs to employees via mechanisms like higher deductibles, increased co-pays and other tools, the National Business Group on Health found in June survey of 136 large companies that employ about 7.5 million people.

Employers also reported a 5 percent increase for 2014.

In the survey, published Wednesday, employers cited high-cost patients, specific diseases or conditions and specialty pharmaceuticals as leading drivers in rising costs. Compliance with the Affordable Care Act, which placed new regulations and restrictions on the types of coverage employers can offer, was cited as “the highest cost driver” by 7 percent of employers.

Starting next year, the health law requires employers with at least 100 full-time workers to offer health coverage benefits to at least 70 percent of them or face penalties that start at $2,000 per employee. Although the requirement, also called “the employer mandate” is new, the vast majority of large businesses have been offering health benefits for years.

Just 2 percent of businesses said the would not offer health insurance that complies with the health law, according to the survey.

Another 16 percent said they will offer at least one plan that doesn’t comply with new standards. Such plans, called “skinny plans” offer bare-bones coverage at lower costs. While those plans are not permitted to cap the value of annual benefits, they can exclude coverage for certain procedures or categories of care, such as hospitalization.

While the report didn’t specify from which industry those companies were in, the skinny plans are expected to be offered by employers with a large number of lower-wage workers, like retailers and restaurant chains.

Employers also are taking the first steps to trim back coverage to ensure it meets another Obamacare regulation that goes into effect in 2018 called the “Cadillac tax.” Under the regulation, employers will face an additional tax on health benefits deemed too rich.

The most-common strategy employers are using to lower exposure to rising health care costs is shifting more employees into high-deductible health plans. Thirty-two percent of employers said they plan to offer a high-deductible health plan as the lone option to workers next year, up from 22 percent this year.

Such plans, also called consumer-directed health plans, are often paired with a health savings account and carry deductibles about three times as high as the most-popular type of employer-based health plan, the PPO, or a preferred provider organization. While they have lower monthly premiums, the plans require consumers to spend far more out of pocket for their health care before insurance benefits kick in.

The median deductible for those plans is projected to be about $3,000 for family coverage, compared to an annual deductible of $1,168 for a family with a PPO, the study said.

High-deductible plans, along with higher employee cost-sharing, wellness and disease management programs and narrow provider networks are the most effective ways to control health costs, companies reported.