NATIONAL HARBOR, MD - FEBRUARY 26: U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) addresses the 42nd annual Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) February 26, 2015 in National Harbor, Maryland. Conservative activists attended the annual political conference to discuss their agenda. (Photo by Alex Wong/Getty Images)

4512654

“Surely Senate Democrats can provide better evidence that a law #works than the fact that people with large public profiles comply with it.”

So says Jim Antle. Check out his must-read piece about the long-term thinkers who are crowing about Ted Cruz complying with Obamacare, “even though” he wants to repeal it.

I don’t have anything to add to Antle’s take, except for the barrage of tweets I’ve already fired off at these geniuses. So here you go:

BREAKING NEWS FROM @Tara_CR: Republican Forced to Comply with Law He Wants to Repeal — Jim Treacher (@jtLOL) March 24, 2015

Ted Cruz is complying with the law. That means he's a hypocrite for wanting to repeal it. #logic @Tara_CR — Jim Treacher (@jtLOL) March 24, 2015

Ted Cruz is complying with Obamacare. That means he's a hypocrite. Obama only complies with the laws that suit him. That means he's not. — Jim Treacher (@jtLOL) March 24, 2015

You're actually gloating about forcing your awful law on people. MT @SenateDems Ted Cruz: Obamacare for me, but not for thee. — Jim Treacher (@jtLOL) March 24, 2015

"I don't like this law. It should be repealed." "Yeah, well, until then it's the law." "Okay, I'll comply." "GOTCHA!" @TheDemocrats #fascism — Jim Treacher (@jtLOL) March 24, 2015

No wonder @TheDemocrats think Ted Cruz submitting to Obamacare is a big gotcha. When they don't like a law, they just break it. — Jim Treacher (@jtLOL) March 24, 2015

#FTFY MT @TheDemocrats RT to congratulate Ted Cruz on being one of millions to submit to an awful, awful law called Obamacare — Jim Treacher (@jtLOL) March 24, 2015

#FTFY MT @thinkprogress After pledging to ‘repeal every word of Obamacare,’ Cruz admits he’s complying with the law until then — Jim Treacher (@jtLOL) March 25, 2015

Can't wait to not watch Jon Stewart's googly-eyed "Wha-wha-WHAAAA??" over Ted Cruz complying with a law even though he wants to repeal it. — Jim Treacher (@jtLOL) March 25, 2015

.@TedCruz: "Obamacare is a bad law, but I have no choice but to comply until it's repealed." @JuddleGum: "A-HA!!!!!" — Jim Treacher (@jtLOL) March 25, 2015

This is a good line of attack, totalitarians. Smugly mocking people for obeying an unpopular law they want to repeal? That simply cannot backfire.

And now that Cruz has signed up for Obamacare, he’s sure to use his public platform to tell everybody how great it is for him and his family, right?

Right?

Hello? Guys? Where’d you go?

Update: Never mind, everybody, Obamacare is awesome!