The Club for Growth PAC has endorsed Dan Sullivan in his bid to unseat Sen. Mark Begich (D-AK), one of the four Red State Democrats seeking reelection in the 2014 mid-term election. The endorsement is a rare instance of a conservative group backing the same candidate as the National Republican Senatorial Committee (NRSC).

“Dan Sullivan is a fiscal conservative with a stellar track record in Alaska and we strongly endorse him for the United States Senate,” Club for Growth President Chris Chocola said in a statement on Wednesday. “Dan has fought for pro-growth tax reform, taken on ObamaCare in court, and beaten back federal overreach by Obama’s EPA.”

“In the Senate,” he continued, “Dan Sullivan will continue the fight for economic freedom and we can’t wait to see him help deliver for America the kinds of pro-growth policies he’s already delivered for Alaska.”

Sullivan, a former Alaska Attorney General and state Department of Natural Resources commissioner, is one of five candidates seeking the Republican nomination for U.S. Senate and is considered the favorite in the August 19 primary.

The most recent poll out of Alaska found Sullivan was the most competitive Republican against Begich, though he trailed by 4 points, just outside the margin of error. A separate poll paid for by American Crossroads, a Republican super PAC, showed Sullivan leading the Democratic senator by 6 points.

Chocola slammed Begich, calling him a “disaster” and a reliable voter for President Barack Obama and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-NV).

“Liberal Democrat Senator Mark Begich has been a disaster in the United States Senate,” said Chocola. “He votes for the Obama agenda nearly every chance he gets, from ObamaCare to Obama’s failed stimulus, and he works with Harry Reid to stymie pro-growth policies from passing the Senate.”

While the Club for Growth place heavy emphasis on the need to replace Begich, Chocola said that the “next Republican Senate Majority must consist of the right kind of Republicans,” pointing a solid fiscal conservatives already in the chamber, including Sens. Tim Scott (R-SC), Mike Lee (R-UT), and Rand Paul (R-KY).

“Chris McDaniel, Ben Sasse, Tom Cotton, and now Dan Sullivan in Alaska are the next generation of candidates needed to ensure not only a Republican Senate majority, but also a fiscally conservative majority within that majority,” he added.

Begich has, like other vulnerable Democrats, tried to distance himself from President Obama and his party, recently telling CNN: ”I don’t need [Obama] campaigning for me — I need him to change some of his policies.” In 2013, Begich voted with his party 93% of the time.

Defeating Begich is a necessity if Republicans hope to take control of the Senate in this year’s election. The seat is currently rated “Toss-up/Tilt Democrat” by The Rothenberg Political Report.