State Rep. Stephen Webber on Thursday officially began his campaign to recapture Boone County’s state Senate seat — held by Republican Sen. Kurt Schaefer — for the Democratic Party.

Webber launched his campaign for the 19th District with a list of more than 140 endorsements posted on his campaign website and about $190,000 in the bank. He said he has raised about $100,000 since he won a fourth term in the Missouri House without opposition.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Webber said his “deep roots” in the area and work during the past seven years as a representative have made “a broad group of people feel comfortable with me pushing for the future of Central Missouri in Jefferson City.”

Since Jan. 1, Webber has received large contributions of $25,000 from MBS Textbook Exchange CEO Bob Pugh and $30,000 from Secretary of State Jason Kander’s campaign.

Webber, 32, is a former Marine and an Iraq War veteran who served two tours of duty overseas. A graduate of Hickman High School, he holds a degree in economics from St. Louis University and a law degree from the University of Missouri. His father, David Webber, is a retired associate professor of political science at MU.

“When I was sitting in Fallujah, the place I wanted to come back to was Boone County, it wasn’t anywhere else in the world,” Webber said. “The community has invested a lot in me and I want to make sure we invest in the next generation of Missourians.”

Schaefer was elected in 2008 and is the first Republican to represent Boone County in the Senate for two terms. Four GOP lawmakers — Reps. Caleb Jones and Caleb Rowden of Columbia, Chuck Basye of Rocheport and Dave Muntzel of Boonville — live in the 19th District.

The 19th District includes Boone and Cooper counties, with more than 90 percent of the district’s constituents in Boone County.

Schaefer is barred from another term under the constitution, as is Webber, who is in his fourth term in the House. Under term limits, Jones can run for one more term, Rowden and Muntzel are eligible for two terms and Basye, who won his seat in November, could serve up to three more terms.

Schaefer is seeking the Republican nomination for attorney general.

In a statement issued Thursday, Rowden said he would seek another term and expects to support Jones “if and when” he announces he is a candidate. “Stephen is a good friend, but I believe his politics simply don’t line up with the people of the 19th Senate District,” Rowden said.

Muntzel and Basye said they will not be candidates for the Senate. “I have no intention of running,” Muntzel said.

Basye was even more emphatic. “I will never run for Senate,” he said. “I can guarantee you that.”

Jones could not be reached for comment.

In the news release announcing his plans, Webber said he wants to move to the Senate to continue work to make college more affordable, support families and expand access to health care.

In the current session, Webber has sponsored bills to expand Medicaid eligibility under the Affordable Care Act, add sexual-orientation and gender-identity protections to state anti-discrimination laws and direct the state Department of Labor and Industrial Relations to write a best-practices guide for promoting gender pay equity.