Photo

Readers discuss the impact of Medicare and Medicaid at 50 and offer their suggestions.

To the Editor: In “Medicare and Medicaid at 50” (editorial, July 3), you referred to polls between 1999 and 2009 that showed “consistent majorities in favor of expanding Medicare to people between the ages of 55 to 64 to cover more of the uninsured.” The next day, “Insurers Seek Steep Increases in Plans’ Rates,” a front-page news article, reported on likely double-digit rate increases — something the Affordable Care Act can discourage but not prevent.

Isn’t it time to accede to the wishes of the “consistent majorities” and begin dropping the qualifying age for Medicare one decade at a time? It would probably be less costly for consumers, since any increase in payroll taxes would be more than offset by lower premiums and out-of-pocket costs, it would provide truly universal care to those in the covered age groups and it would certainly be less inflationary.

MARCIA ANGELL

Cambridge, Mass.

The writer is a senior lecturer in social medicine at Harvard Medical School and a former editor in chief of The New England Journal of Medicine.

To the Editor: Congress created Medicare 50 years ago to provide seniors with health care, giving them protection against financial ruin and peace of mind. Five years ago Congress could have and should have extended Medicare to cover all Americans, creating a single-payer system with the much freer choice of doctors and hospitals that seniors enjoy. Instead, it passed the hopelessly complex Affordable Care Act, which has kept the wasteful and bureaucratic insurance industry in health care and left millions uninsured and millions more with woefully inadequate coverage. It has also cost far more than simply extending Medicare.

It is well known that people without insurance or with high deductibles wait longer to seek medical care; thus their illnesses or problems become more difficult to treat. And sometimes they die because they have no insurance (an estimated 50,000 every year). Those with Medicare have more protection against the devastating effects of illness and injury, get more help overcoming or living with disabilities, and are protected against financial ruin.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Equal protection” has been used, with some success, to improve access to education and, now, to allow same-sex couples to marry. It seems that an even stronger case can be made regarding access to health care — which is considered a right in every other developed nation.

ANN TROY

San Rafael, Calif.

The writer is a pediatrician.



To the Editor: After 50 years, it is high time to finally correct a major structural flaw by moving coverage for long-term care from Medicaid to Medicare. If this were to happen, those of us in need of long-term care would no longer need to spend down most of our assets in order to qualify for coverage. Moreover, the services that would be covered would no longer depend on which state we happened to live in. It would also provide welcome relief to those states that have expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act as they begin to assume their 10 percent share of the cost of the Medicaid expansion.

Most of all, it would provide enormous relief and peace of mind to the growing number of Americans who are struggling to find affordable long-term care for themselves or their parents. And for those who believe that this could never be done, bear in mind that seniors and their baby-boomer children represent two of the most powerful voting blocs in American politics.

PAUL JELLINEK

Mercerville, N.J.

To the Editor: The salient limitations of the Medicare and Medicaid programs that you correctly identify are unlikely to be overcome without reform of the physician payment system. By retaining fee-for-service payments, which private health insurers then emulate, young doctors have abandoned primary care and flocked instead to the more lucrative specialties. A step in the right direction: Continue the fee-for-service payment mechanism in primary care only, and pay specialists in some other way that reduces the perverse incentives to undertake procedures and operations when the scientific evidence fails to support them.

MATTHEW MENKEN

Princeton, N.J.

The writer is a neurologist.



To the Editor: Medicare provides better care at lower cost than private health insurance can achieve. But it is woefully underfunded and may become insolvent. Many argue for privatization. However, every health care system in the world, especially our private insurance industry, faces increasing costs and a decreasing willingness of patients (and taxpayers) to pay for them.

Remarkably, Medicare costs are rising slower than those of private insurance — despite caring for older, sicker patients. Privately administered Medicare Advantage costs more than traditional Medicare; that’s not because patients receive care they don’t need, but because private insurance companies receive extra federal payments they don’t earn. Clearly Medicare needs less private interference, not more.

Medicare delivers high value. Its critical features — prepayment during high earning periods, reduced cost-sharing at time of need, inclusion of the broadest possible population, comprehensive benefits — should be reinforced. Then these features should extend to the rest of us. Medicare for some is good. Medicare for all is better.

SAMUEL METZ

Portland, Ore.

The writer is an anesthesiologist and a member of Physicians for a National Health Program.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

To the Editor: Your editorial rightly celebrates the impact that these two vital programs have had on the health and economic security of millions of Americans. With the enactment of the Affordable Care Act, our nation now has an even more mixed array of approaches to the financing of health care. This patchwork makes it nearly impossible to address health care systematically. One result is discontinuity of care, for which we all continue to pay a high price as patients and practitioners. Across our lives, health care coverage can change with age, income, employment, location and other variables.

Even without a unified health insurance mechanism, we need to find ways to facilitate continuity in health plan coverage and provider relationships for people, separate from the question of who is paying the bills. Ideally, our goal as a nation should be to enable individuals and their families to remain in the same health plan with the same team of providers throughout our lives.

WILLIAM J. ARNONE

Port Washington, N.Y.

The writer is chairman of the board of directors of the National Academy of Social Insurance.