The state of mind of a psychotic



"[W]e've done all this while cutting our deficits by almost three-quarters." Pollack writes, "This is pure fiction. Obama has doubled the national debt, and it's not because he cut the deficit. Rather, he spent staggering amounts of money in his first months in office – which he assigns, dishonestly, to the previous fiscal year, under George W. Bush. He "cut" (i.e. spent more gradually) from that spending, but only under protest, after Republicans took the House in 2010. (Update: It is true that Obama's 2015 budget deficit was about 25% of his 2010 deficit. But he referred to "deficits," plural. Until last year, all of Obama's deficits were worse than all of Bush's deficits except for the last two.)"



However, these figures are based on the popular progressive propaganda and false economic assumptions that the federal deficit as of Dec. 2015 is just shy of $19 trillion ($18,775,084,981,440) to be specific. (Even Trump errantly uses this false number regarding the nation's current economic health). However, in an academic paper by noted economics Professor Laurence J. Kotlikoff of Boston University, states the following in Testimony to the Senate Budget Committee on Feb. 25, 2015 titled: America's Fiscal Insolvency and Its Generational Consequences:



Unfortunately, the federal debt is not an economic measure of anything, including our nation's fiscal position. Instead, the federal debt and its annual change, the deficit, are purely linguistic constructs that reflect how you members of Congress choose to label government receipts and payments.



Kotlikoff continues his tragic economic thesis of America's fiscal condition with this blunt statement using as an annual real measure of economic deficit spending – "$750 billion the government is collecting this year from workers under the heading Social Security payroll taxes and the future Social Security transfer payments." This real measure of deficit spending contrasts diametrically with President Obama's delusional lies of the SOTU address. "This simple change in language would more than double this year's reported federal deficit," Kotlikoff writes.



"Anyone claiming that America's economy is in decline is peddling fiction." Pollack writes, "With that line, Obama took a shot at his would-be Democratic successors, as well as his Republican critics. But the truth is that despite the slow recovery – the slowest since World War II – labor force participation is the lowest it has been in decades. Wages are stagnant, household incomes still have not recovered from the recession, and young people see a bleak future."



Obviously this statement is a venal lie for Obama purposely leaves off the over 94,000,000 Americans (nearly 1 / 3 of the total American work force) who are so disgusted with looking for a job that they have stopped looking. "Indeed, were we to go back in time and re-label all past Social Security taxes as borrowing, official federal debt held by the public would not be $13 trillion, but $38 trillion, which is 211 percent of U.S. GDP, Kotlikoff writes." Therefore, the real deficit is not the Obama socialist propaganda figure of $19 Trillion but as of Dec. 2015 over $222 Trillion which are based on 2012 numbers, not the revised ones that includes America's economic number to the end of 2015; we'll have to wait until perhaps mid-2016 to get those figures.



"That's what the Affordable Care Act is all about. It's about filling the gaps in employer-based care so that when we lose a job, or go back to school, or start that new business, we'll still have coverage." "That is a cruel joke, given that Obamacare canceled insurance coverage for millions of Americans who did not change jobs. It also raised deductibles and premiums so high that many insurance companies are leaving the Obama exchanges totally," Pollack writes.



Obama's Stalinist healthcare scheme which the Supreme Court foolishly granted constitutional legitimacy in the case King v. Burwell (2015), not only opened the floodgates to the immoral, unconstitutional Obergefell v. Hodges homosexual marriage decision later that year, but also hearkened to Reagan's famous 1964 speech, A Time for Choosing where Reagan predicted a Socialist demagogue like Obama would rise and seize power over We the People and the U.S. Constitution. Reagan said, "Back in 1936, Mr. Democrat himself, Al Smith [who ran against FDR in 1932], the great American, came before the American people and charged that the leadership of his party was taking the part of Jefferson, Jackson, and Cleveland down the road under the banners of Marx, Lenin, and Stalin." Indeed, Reagan was right when he prophesized that, "No government ever voluntarily reduces itself in size. Government programs, once launched, never disappear."



"Food Stamp recipients didn't cause the financial crisis; recklessness on Wall Street did." "Actually, food stamp recipients, metaphorically speaking, were indirectly responsible – as well as Wall Street sharks. Obama leaves out the government's role, under the Community Reinvestment Act, in pushing mortgages on people who could not afford them, and in backing the derivatives based on those mortgages that ultimately burst the whole bubble," Pollack writes.



In a 2008 essay, Faust, Greenspan and America's financial collapse, I wrote: "It was irresponsible to grant millions of high-interest loans to the poor, many times with little or no money down, so they could buy a home when the mortgage companies, the Federal Reserve, secretary of the treasury, Wall Street investment banks and their supposed watchdog, the Securities Exchange Commission, all knew that this contract was a Faustian bargain with the devil and in due course would prove disastrous to America's economy."



Of course the history revisionists of the Progressive Left have rewritten history 25 years later to totally exonerate former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan (and thus establishment pols on both sides of the aisle): "Where Mr. Greenspan bears responsibility is his role in ensuring that the era of cheap interest rates created a speculative bubble. He cannot claim he was not warned of the risks," wrote David Blake in a Feb. 2008 article published in the Financial Times.



"We've protected an open internet...." "Obama's policy of Net Neutrality has turned Internet service providers into public utilities under an ancient regulatory regime. The result has been a sharp decline in broadband investment and a much less free and open system. In addition, the Obama administration is rushing to shift control of ICANN to the international community, which will ensure that the Internet is less free, and subject to overseas censorship," Pollack writes.



One of my intellectual mentors, Dr. Walter Williams, the great Professor of Economics at George Mason University (where my son, Stone is a freshman history major and under his tutelage), wrote a book in 1999 titled, More Liberty Means Less Government: Our Founders Knew this Well. This book dispels the deceitful Socialist-Progressive legal philosophy of "Neutrality" the backdoor they throughout history sought through Machiavellian and Fabian Socialist means to force their worldview to dominate the marketplace of ideas. This is the Myth of Neutrality.



"Seven years ago, we made the single biggest investment in clean energy in our history. Here are the results." "It is laughable that Obama would claim his failed clean energy spending – think Solyndra – led to the fracking-fed energy boom we have enjoyed for the past several years, especially when the administration did all it could to stop oil and gas development. He also nixed the Keystone pipeline and started a plan to kill coal plants," Pollack writes.



Under President Obama's green energy tyranny there are now over 50 green energy companies that despite trillions of dollars illegal taxpayer dollars and fraudulent kick-back fraudulent schemes, are now all defunct. Obama's last year in office will doubtlessly see that number of failed green energy pseudo companies triple or quadruple because these Holocaust Democrat leeches (on both sides of the political aisle) know that their bloodsucking days will be over once Trump is elected president in Nov. 2016... Heads will roll!



"No nation dares to attack us or our allies because they know that's the path to ruin." "Of all the lies in Obama's speech, this was undoubtedly the worst, coming hours after Iran seized two U.S. Navy boats and ten sailors. Obama did not even mention those Americans in captivity at any point in his speech, declining the chance to reassure the nation that they would come home safely. It is an omission that will define this address in history," Pollack writes.





Outrageous: This is the dramatic moment 10 American sailors accused of 'snooping' surrendered to Iranian troops (without firing a shot) where Secretary of State Kerry and the ship's commanding officer servilely apologized to Iran.



"As someone who begins every day with an intelligence briefing, I know this is a dangerous time." "Obama does not attend most of his daily intelligence briefings, preferring instead to read intelligence reports – so he claims – on his iPad, a stark contrast to the attentive approach of his predecessor. Late last year, even as Obama claimed that there was little risk from attack, radical Islamic terrorists carried out brutal attacks in Paris and in San Bernardino," Pollack writes.



In October 2014, Free Beacon reported that Obama skipped 62.5% of his daily intelligence briefings. If you took my history or law classes and only got one third of the answers right you would flunk my class. Obama has flunked as our U.S. President. Obama has flunked as the leader of the free world, and he did it on purpose for if one consistently underestimates the terrorist threats domestically and internationally, then once attacks like the 130 murdered in France, or the 14 murdered in San Bernardino, CA, you are left unprepared and ignorant of the proper defenses and We the People are defenseless against devout (not radical) Islamic terrorism as millions of unvetted Muslims continue to pour into America.



"We are training, arming, and supporting forces who are steadily reclaiming territory in Iraq and Syria [from Islamic State]." "The Obama administration's attempt to train and arm Syrian rebels has been a disaster. Belatedly, the administration has helped Kurdish peshmerga forces, and the Iraqi military has made gains lately, but Obama has not made a serious effort to defeat the Islamic State, and is even giving up on regime change in Syria," Pollack writes.



That outrageous statement by Obama belies his feckless and purposely reckless foreign policy which has made America the laughing stock of the world during his two terms in office. Former V.P. Dick Cheney even blames Obama for pulling troops out of Iraq in October 2011 – a direct failure to uphold and maintain the successful Bush "Surge" in Iraq of 2007-08. Cheney wrote in his 2015 book:



As you look at the track record of this administration, it's not just that it differed from or was contrary to the policies we put in place during the Bush-Cheney administration. It's that it was a decided break with 70 or 75 years of American history," he said. "Democrats like Harry Truman and FDR and John F. Kennedy would never recognize the policies that Obama has pursued from the standpoint of national security. They believed in a strong national defense.



"Fifty years of isolating Cuba had failed to promote democracy, setting us back in Latin America." Pollak writes, "And a year of appeasement has not promoted democracy, either. The Castros remain firmly in power, and we are not helping the opposition. Worse, the Cuban regime continues to arrest thousands of political dissidents, to cozy up to enemies like Iran and North Korea, and to carry out provocative acts – such as stealing a U.S. Hellfire missile. Towards the end of his speech, Obama told one important truth: "There's no doubt a president with the gifts of Lincoln or Roosevelt might have better bridged the divide...."An unusual, but overdue, admission of guilt.



<NOSPAM>

By Ellis Washington Psychotic: President Barack Obama's gun control speech (5 Jan. 2016) included fake tears *N.B.: Crying tears out of only one eye, on cue is a very difficult feat indeed.Presidential candidate Donald Trump called President Barack President Barack Obama's final State of the Union address among other things to be 'boring', 'slow' and 'lethargic' . Two more adjectives I would add to Trump's list would be 'delusional' and 'psychotic,' thus the title of this essay – The State of Mind of a Psychotic.Obama's speech was so replete with dishonesty, psychological displacement, and lies in every sentence it was reminiscent of the aphorism regarding the Devil –Breitbart writer Joel B. Pollak wrote a very good article titled, Top Ten Lies on Obama's State of the Union . I will use this article as the basis for my review of Obama's Stalinesque SOTU speech he assaulted America with on Jan. 5, 2016.Beginning from First Principles with a simple definition that "Psychosis is an abnormal disorder of the mind defined as a loss of contact with reality," then it is obviously follows that President Obama's SOTU speech was a case study of a truly psychotic mind. Here are Obama's 10 most psychotic lies followed by Pollak's and then my commentary:Only a political psychotic and Socialist apparatchik like Obama raised and indoctrinated for 10 years (from age 8-18) by communist radical Frank Marshall Davies ( likely his real biological father ) and indoctrinated by Marxist-Progressives professors at Columbia and Harvard, could possess such a profoundly perverted understanding of history. If Obama were one of my history or law students, I would have flunked him out-of-hand. First, the idea of "democracy" was so abhorrent to the constitutional Framers that they went to war with England, the superpower of the eighteenth century, not to replace the hated monarchy with democracy, but with a Republic. "Madame, we have given you a Republic, if you can keep it," was Benjamin Franklin's retort after the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia in Sept. 1787 in answer to a woman's inquiry: "Dr. Franklin, what have you done for us today?"Second, to avoid the JFK's feckless foreign policy and warmongering which inexorably led the U.S. into the jaws of the Cuban Missile Crisis in October 1962. (Obama and I were barely over one-year-old). JFK's colossal ignorance of communism and foreign policy averted World War III when at the eleventh hour the U.S. made a treaty with Khrushchev's Russia to never invade Cuba if Russia took their nuclear weapons out of Cuba. Yet, to a liberal fascist like Obama, a demagogue who brags that he rules by decree, evading our treaty obligations is a little impediment for this ends/means Holocaust Democrat.In an earlier essay regarding the psychopathy of Hillary Clinton , I quoted British medical writer Markus MacGill who defined Delusions as "beliefs that are not supported by the cultural or religious context and there is clear evidence that they are false – nevertheless, they are strong convictions that the patient believes in completely." Obama's SOTU speech is a classic case of psychosis. Psychosis is an abnormal disorder of the mind defined as a loss of contact with reality. A psychotic is therefore a person possessing this psychosis or disconnect with reality. People suffering psychosis may exhibit some personality distortions and thought disorder. Conditional to its severity is the connection to strange, bizarre, or even sociopathic conduct, in addition to difficulty with social contact and deficiency in conducting daily functions of life.Radio talk show legend, Dr. Michael Savage went even further than my contention that Obama is a psychotic with sociopath tendencies. Dr. Savage called Obama a "psychopath" and compares his invasion of his own country to Hitler's invasion of Germany in the 1920s-40s: "Hitler was a psychopath, no one on earth would disagree with that except Nazis who still exist," he said. "What did Hitler do? He invaded other countries to impose his nation's, let us say, distorted values and race upon other countries. What is Obama doing? He's invading his own country with people of other races and other cultures and other languages to wipe away the predominant language, the predominant culture of his own nation. Barack Obama is as equally as mad as Adolf Hitler in that regard."Hitler, notwithstanding, Germany gave the world more than the Nazis. The outstanding poet, novelist, and literary legend, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1842), said it best regarding Jacobin Tyrants and Holocaust Democrats down through the Ages – "There is nothing more frightening than active ignorance."Please purchase my latest opus dedicated to that Conservative Colossus, Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas. Here are the latest two new volumes from my ongoing historical series –(University Press of America, 2015):However, before the book is officially released to the public, I have to place 100 pre-publication orders (50 orders per each volume). I need your help to make this happen ASAP. Please place your order today for Volume 3 & Volume 4. Of course, if you can order all 100 copies today, the book will become official tomorrow.Please circulate this flyer to all your email contacts & Facebook/Twitter followers who may be interested in purchasing this opus which will serve as a ready apologetic against the rampant Marxist-Progressive propaganda taught in America's public schools, colleges, universities, graduate schools, and law schools. Thanks in advance to all my friends, associates and colleagues for your invaluable support! Law and History Blog: www.EllisWashingtonReport.com I am starting a new a program on my blog dedicated to giving young conservatives (ages 14-35) a regular place to display and publish their ideas calledIf you know of any young person who wants to publish their ideas on any subject, have them send their essay manuscripts to my email at ewashington@wnd.com .© Ellis Washington