Already on probation, al-Obeidi faces trial in October on assault charge

Iman Al-Obeidi, who says she was sexually assaulted by Libyan dictator Moammar Gadhafi's men, is led away March 26, 2011, by authorities of the Rixos hotel in Tripoli, where she was coming to tell her story to journalists. She now lives in Boulder under the name Eman Ali. ( Associated Press )

In 2011, Iman al-Obeidi became the international face of defiance against Moammar Gadhafi's regime in Libya after she claimed she'd been brutally raped by more than a dozen of the dictator's men.

Three years later, as a political refugee living in Boulder, al-Obeidi is "destitute," according to her attorneys, and has been arrested three times. On probation already in an assault on a police officer, she faces trial this fall in a second assault case — which could jeopardize her ability to stay in the U.S.

Al-Obeidi, now 32, became the center of a media frenzy after she stormed into a hotel room in Tripoli and told the international press there that she was raped after being detained at a security checkpoint. In turn, the Libyan government claimed al-Obeidi was an alcoholic and mentally ill.

After a failed attempt to seek refuge in Qatar, al-Obeidi was granted asylum in the U.S. in June of 2011 and, with the help of then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, she settled in Denver as a political refugee.

But things have not gone smoothly in Colorado for al-Obeidi, who is now going by the name Eman Ali and lives off a $1,800-per-month stipend from the Libyan Embassy.

She had enrolled in Ecumenical Refugee and Immigration Services, a refugee placement agency in Denver, to try to get help adapting to her new life.

"The adjustment, it's hard for all the refugees," said Ferdi Mevlani, executive director of the agency. "Some adjust very quick, some very slow. It just depends."

Mevlani said his agency tried to provide resources for Ali, who had told media outlets she wanted to learn English so she could earn a degree. But Mevlani said that when Ali left Denver, she dropped out of contact.

If he'd known how much she apparently was struggling, Mevlani said he would have tried to get her more help sooner.

"Maybe I would have paid a little more attention, had a conversation with her, seen if she needed more resources on our part," Mevlani said. "It's pretty sad."

'That is not OK in my country'

Ali has been arrested three times in Boulder County since 2013, and all of the cases started at downtown Boulder bars.

In January 2013, Ali was arrested on suspicion of unlawful conduct on public property stemming from an incident in which an apparently intoxicated Ali was reported to be "causing a disturbance" at Tahona Tequila Bistro on Pearl Street, according to police reports. That case was later dismissed.

Last August, officers were on patrol in the 1000 block of Walnut Street when they were flagged down by witnesses who pointed out a "stumbling" and "intoxicated" Ali, according to court documents.

Officers tried to take her to the Boulder County Addiction Recovery Center, but while she was getting in the squad car, Ali allegedly spit in one officer's face and chest, and then began kicking the officers, according to court records.

Ali was charged with felony second-degree assault on a police officer and misdemeanor counts of third-degree assault, obstructing a police officer and resisting arrest.

In September, she pleaded guilty to attempted third-degree assault and was sentenced to one year of probation and ordered not to consume alcohol.

But while still on probation in that case, Ali was arrested again in February on suspicion of assault.

According to an arrest affidavit, while at the Bohemian Biergarten in downtown Boulder, a woman accidentally "brushed up" against Ali while in the bar. The woman told police that Ali said, "That is not OK in my country," and then poured a beer on her.

About half an hour later, the woman's friend said Ali came back and threw a glass at her head, giving her a one-inch gash on her forehead that required four staples to close, according to court records.

She was arrested on suspicion of second-degree assault, third-degree assault and obstructing a police officer. She has pleaded not guilty, and is scheduled for trial Oct. 20, and also has a hearing in September regarding a possible revocation of her 2013 probation.

Free on $5,000 bond, Ali had to forfeit her passport after a judge granted the request by prosecutors, who cited the "aggravated nature of the allegations, the seriousness of the potential penalties facing the defendant, and her continued and increased international flight risk."

Court records also show that one of Ali's Boulder neighbors is suing the Libyan refugee for allegedly totaling her car.

When reached by phone last week, Ali insisted her criminal case had been dismissed and declined to comment further.

"I am nobody important," Ali said. "I am a regular person."

But prosecutors said they have not dropped the assault case.

Harold Flowers, listed in court records as Ali's attorney, did not return calls for comment last week.

'They are not very forgiving at all'

Boulder County District Attorney Stan Garnett said his office will not be involved in any issues regarding Ali's immigration status, and added that her status as a political refugee has no bearing on how she's prosecuted.

"I'm confident it will be fairly resolved at trial," Garnett said. "We try to deal with everybody consistently. The consequences of other things will fall where they may."

Mevlani, of Denver's Ecumenical Refugee and Immigration Services, said it's possible that, if convicted at trial this fall, Ali could face deportation.

An Immigration and Customs Enforcement spokesman declined to discuss Ali's case, but confirmed that immigrants can be deported for criminal convictions. ICE handles each person on a case-by-case basis, he said.

"I know she has a green card, but it just depends on the outcome and the severity of the crime," Mevlani said. "It's up to immigration services."

Violeta Chapin, a law professor at the University of Colorado who works at the school's criminal defense clinic, said there are many factors that go into whether immigrants are deported, including their criminal history, how long they've been in the country and their ties to the community.

"They are not very forgiving at all, especially if you begin to rack up criminal convictions," Chapin said of Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

Chapin said many immigrants face hardships in moving to the U.S.

"It's very difficult and stressful for people to leave their home country and support networks behind and come to a foreign country out of necessity," Chapin said. "I can't imagine how horrible and stressful that can be. Sometimes they can turn to alcohol to manage that, and that can be unfortunate."

'People move on with their lives'

According to court records, Ali has had trouble finding a job and making ends meet.

In fact, her attorneys filed a motion asking a judge to lift her court-mandated drug and alcohol testing because "the defendant is a political refugee, is destitute and the continued testing constitutes a financial hardship as her sole income is $1,800 per month from the Libyan Embassy, although she has unsuccessfully attempted to obtain gainful employment."

Mevlani said that, for most immigrants, finding a job is the first step to getting as close to a normal life as possible.

"People move on with their lives, and get a job and go to school and buy houses," Mevlani said. "We tell the clients, we try to make them as self-sufficient as possible."

Mevlani said the agency offers job training and other resources to help its clients accomplish that, but he said Ali's move out of Denver made that more difficult.

"We do have the resources and education, but unfortunately she moved to Boulder, and we were limited as far as working closely," Mevlani said. "At that time, basically we kind of lost contact."

Mevlani said he had heard about Ali's arrests, but that she herself had not reached out to his agency.

"I'm very surprised she has not," Mevlani said. "I was hoping she would."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Mitchell Byars at 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars.