WASHINGTON -- The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) released 2015 final payment rules for inpatient rehabilitation, inpatient psychiatric, and skilled nursing facilities -- with mostly good news for providers.

For instance, the aggregate payments to inpatient rehabilitation facilities (IRFs) will increase by $180 million, or 2.4%, in 2015 compared with 2014, CMS announced late Thursday.

"This estimated increase is attributed to a 2.2% payment update, which includes a 2.9% market basket increase factor, reduced by a 0.5-percentage-point multi-factor productivity adjustment and an additional 0.2-percentage-point reduction as required by law," the agency explained in a fact sheet. "In addition, CMS will update the outlier threshold, increasing IRF PPS payments by an estimated 0.2%."

For skilled nursing facilities (SNFs), CMS intends to increase aggregate payments "by $750 million, or 2.0%, from payments in [fiscal year] 2014, which represents a higher update factor than the 1.3% update finalized for SNFs last year," CMS said. "This estimated increase is attributable to a 2.5% market basket increase, reduced by the 0.5-percentage-point multifactor productivity adjustment required by law."

The agency also is trying to soften some of the reimbursement decreases that will occur as a result of revisions recently made to the wage index nationwide by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).

"In an effort to mitigate the potential negative wage index impacts for some providers of the revised OMB delineations, CMS is implementing these changes by providing a 1-year transition with a blended wage index for all providers," the agency said in a fact sheet. "The wage index for each provider will consist of a blend of 50% of the FY 2015 wage index using the current OMB delineations and 50% of the FY 2015 wage index using the revised OMB delineations."

For inpatient psychiatric facilities, CMS will increase total payments by 2.5% compared with 2014, according to a CMS fact sheet. This includes a 2.1% increase in the federal per diem base rate, from $713.19 to $728.31.

The per diem base rate increase "is comprised of a rehabilitation, psychiatric, and long-term care market basket increase of 2.9%, an ACA-required reduction of 0.3 percentage points, and an ACA-required productivity adjustment reduction of 0.5 percentage point," the agency noted.

As part of the payment rule for psychiatric facilities, CMS also added several new quality measures to the Inpatient Psychiatric Facility Quality Reporting Program. For reporting beginning in 2016, a "patient experience of care" measure and a "use of electronic health record" measure were added, and for reporting beginning in 2017, two tobacco use measures and two immunization measures -- one for inpatients and one for providers themselves -- were added.

The final 2015 payment rule for skilled nursing facilities will be published on Aug. 5 in the Federal Register. The inpatient rehabilitation facility and inpatient psychiatric facility final rules will be published on Aug. 6.