As a journalist with a professional background in film and television writing about women in business, I was thrilled with Mary Alice Williams' keynote speech Thursday evening at the 2014 “Rising to New Heights” event in honor of the Top 25 Leading Women Entrepreneurs.

That’s because Mary Alice Williams — a news anchor for NJTV — is quite the woman to live up to.



Williams’ award-winning work as an investigative reporter, television host, author and film and television documentarian on such topics as foreign policy, ethics, technology and health is an astounding achievement all by itself — one I may only aspire to match.



But to hear her describe the obstacles she faced while achieving these goals was simply extraordinary.



“Until 1988, if a woman wanted to start a business in America she would be required to get the signature of her spouse or a male relative to take out a loan,” Williams said.



As one of the primary architects behind the design of CNN — the first worldwide television network — Williams oversaw the construction of CNN’s New York Bureau at the World Trade Center prior to the launch of the network in 1980.



And even though she would become one of the highest ranking female executives as vice president in charge of CNN’s New York Bureau and one of the most recognizable principal news anchors, Williams’ herself found being a woman in business rather difficult.

RELATED: Event honors women entrepreneurs’ courage, fortitude — and success



“When I started CNN, I couldn’t get an American Express card without my father’s signature,” Williams said.



So who better to speak to the achievements of New Jersey’s Top 25 Leading Women Entrepreneurs than an Emmy-award winning Jersey native that went through it all herself?



“This is my favorite thing,” Williams said as she addressed the crowd last night.



“A room full of Jersey girls.



“The 25 of you tonight represent a dizzying array of arenas: medical communications and devices, wellness, development and construction, telecommunications, data and cybersecurity, food, fine dining, events planning, car rentals, moving, limos, legal services, sports management, marketing, environmental consulting, staffing and capital growth, employing thousands, generating millions and giving back.”



Even more impressive is that she said this all in one breath as she used the opportunity to take her shoes off.



“So that I could reach the mic,” she said. “Distraction!”



Williams also spoke to several other “distractions” in the media that have diminished the true meaning of what it means to be a Jersey girl.



“We Jersey girls have been defined nationally by stories of Real Housewives, Carmella Soprano, and Snooki,” Williams said.



“And those stories resonate, right? I mean, we all love drama, trash talk, big hair, orange makeup — you know, with the line (along the chin) — but we have other stories to tell about the real Jersey girls.”

RELATED: Does height help businesswomen? Experts offer their take



Like how in 1789, Jersey girls had the right to vote in the very first presidential election.



“It was probably an oversight,” Williams said. “Nothing in the state law said they could but nothing said they couldn’t.”



Or how last month, voters sent the first woman to Congress in a dozen years, and the first African American woman ever in New Jersey’s political history.



“Women get stuff done,” Williams said.



“Just a year ago, during the government shutdown when the male partisans at the top were dug in, six women saved this country. Three Republican senators and three Democratic senators sat down in a room and solved the problem. Even Sen. John McCain gave them full credit for it.



“We don’t just solve problems — we build things: families, communities and companies.”



Just look at the statistics, she said.



According to the National Association of Women Business Owners and the National Women’s Business Conference, 9 million businesses are owned by women in the United States, creating more than 23 million jobs and generating almost $1.5 billion in sales.



“The economic impact of women-led and women-owned businesses in this country is more than $3 trillion,” Williams said. “And women-owned firms are growing at twice the rate of male-owned companies and 1.5 times the rate of all businesses.



“Today — for the first time in American history — there are more women in the workforce than men, and 40 percent are the sole or primary breadwinner in their household.”



And in Jersey alone? Fughettaboudit.

Click here to read more about women Breaking Glass



According to the American Express Open’s 2014 State of Women-Owned Business Report, there are 230,000 women-owned businesses in New Jersey employing 260,000 people — an increase of 48 percent since 1997.



“That’s my favorite story,” Williams said. “That’s what defines us: powerful, smart, educated, exhausted overachievers.



“And I think that story resonates more strongly than Snooki, don’t you?”



Yes, indeed.



Hence why I’ll sign up as one of the first producers to help with Williams’ pitch of her new half-hour documentary — affectionately titled “Jersey Girls.”

ALSO ON THE NJBIZ "BREAKING GLASS" WOMEN IN BUSINESS BLOG:

How to succeed in business — when you're short

Q&A: Caldwell's Nancy Blattner explains how not to impress a woman during a presentation

#GivingTuesday: Learn about virtual charity drive company YouGiveGoods and how its founder balances work and life