Avalere's analysis quantifies what have to date been anecdotal reports about the more than 10 million customers of newer Obamacare plans often facing "narrow" or "skimpy" health provider networks compared to customers of traditional forms of private health coverage.

If a person uses a hospital or doctor outside their health plan's network, their medical costs are not covered to the same extent—if at all—by their insurance. And they thus must foot a bigger share of the bill by paying out of pocket.

For its report, Avalere Health examined the largest rating region—an area where a group of health plans are sold—of Florida, California, Texas, Georgia and North Carolina—the top five states for Obamacare enrollment this year.

"Patients should evaluate a plan's provider network when picking insurance on the exchange," said Elizabeth Carpenter, vice president at Avalere. Carpenter noted that costs of being treated "out of network" are not capped by the Affordable Care Act as they are with in-network treatment, "leaving consumers vulnerable to high costs if they seek care from a provider not included in their plan's network."

Read MoreHigher costs for Obamacare's new Medicaid patients



"The good news is that the exchanges have a lot of choices for consumers," she said. "What's important is that consumers recognize important plan features like network size to ensure that plan meets their needs."

Obamacare exchanges, as a rule, offer fewer plans to customers than the policies available outside the exchanges. However, the exchanges are the only place that eligible customers can receive federal tax credits to lower the cost of their monthly premiums—nearly 9 out of every 10 exchange customer gets such subsidies.

In response to the report, a spokeswoman for the insurance lobbying group America's Health Insurance Plans said that a "key point to keep in mind" is that "consumers who are shopping on the exchanges are increasingly price sensitive."

"They also want choices," said the AHIP spokeswoman, Clare Krusing. "So when they are shopping for coverage, they are looking for the plan that is right for them."

"Particularly for those individuals who are looking for more affordable premiums, a tailored network of providers is one tool that plans use to keep coverage affordable. All of these networks must meet federal and state requirements on network adequacy as well," she said.