PALM BEACH, Florida – Radio host Rush Limbaugh is now broadcasting the fact that President Obama never personally signed any executive order in connection with his recent move providing amnesty for up to 5 million illegal immigrants.

“Do you know that Obama has not signed any executive action or order for this?” Limbaugh stated on his top-rated national program Tuesday. “Folks, this is even more corrupt than anybody conceived!

“He just wrote a memo instructing Homeland Security not to deport 5 million people. There is no actual executive order.”

The news that Obama had not signed an executive order to carry out the policy he announced to the nation in a televised address Nov. 20 was broken last week by WND Senior Staff Writer Jerome Corsi.

As to why Obama would not sign any official amnesty order, Limbaugh opined, “The reason for this is abundantly clear. If anybody wants to prosecute this, what do you prosecute? There’s no executive order. There’s no person to go focus on.”

He concluded by lamenting “the lying that’s going on in mainstream America today! … The truth is the biggest casualty because the truth has become relative. The truth is all dependent on what the powerful can make it be.”

Limbaugh’s remarks come one day after U.S. Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., a leading opponent of Obama’s amnesty plan, expressed astonishment and ridiculed the administration for not carrying out the action through an executive order.

In remarks made at the Washington office of the government-watchdog group Judicial Watch, Sessions said: “I guess they just whispered in the ear of (DHS Director) Jeh Johnson over at Homeland Security, ‘Just put out a memo. That way we don’t have to enforce the law.'”

As a result of the president’s use of a memo instead of an official order, the senator observed: “We don’t even have a really significant, direct, legal direction that we can ascertain, precisely what the president is doing. It’s a stunning event in my view.”

Like the reporting you see here? Sign up for free news alerts from WND.com, America’s independent news network.

The senator believes the result was “the creation of a new, alternative immigration system” despite the fact the president “is not empowered to do that.”

Sessions noted the president had publicly acknowledged more than 20 times in recent years that he did not have the constitutional authority to unilaterally implement amnesty. As the senator read excerpts of Obama’s own words, members of the audience laughed aloud at how much those words differed from the president’s actions.

The president should simply uphold the Constitution as it is, Sessions said, “not as he wishes it would be.”

Sessions, who was a U.S. attorney for 12 years and Alabama attorney general for two years, said it was clear the Constitution gives Congress powers over naturalization law.

He called Obama’s amnesty a scheme Congress had explicitly rejected after multiple efforts.

“The House said no, and the American people said no. Congress said no, and the president has gone forward.”

Despite that, Sessions observed, powerful forces wanted amnesty.

“I mean, the president wanted that, Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y, wanted that, some Republicans wanted that, business groups wanted that, La Raza wanted that, ACLU, all these people wanted it,” he said.

But the American people did not, said the senator, which is why Congress had decided to limit the number of people who can enter the country to live and work.

The senator dropped a bombshell last week when he revealed he had learned the Obama administration is opening a facility in Crystal City, Virginia, to implement the president’s amnesty plan.

Sessions discovered the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, or USCIS, is hiring 1,000 full-time and permanent staff members to quickly approve illegal immigrants’ applications for amnesty.

Sessions also learned the administration will provide work permits, photo IDs, Social Security and Medicare to illegal immigrants.

He noted that all of those benefits for illegal immigrants had been rejected by Congress.

The Obama administration had initially indicated illegal immigrants would not be eligible for Social Security benefits, but officials were forced to admit the plans after Sessions revealed them.

On Monday, Sessions repeated his call to House leaders to add language into the pending omnibus spending bill blocking funds for executive amnesty. House leaders have resisted the effort by GOP conservatives.

He said the most effective tool is public opinion, and he asked voters to make clear to their elected representatives how much they oppose amnesty.

“We’ve got a challenge, but I think the American people get it. I think they are going to insist their voice will be heard,” predicted Sessions.

Sessions said it was known that government officials held some 20 meetings with business stakeholders hoping for amnesty, adding, “You know who’s not a stakeholder? You. John Q. Public.”

Sessions was introduced by Judicial Watch President Tom Fitton, whose organization has broken numerous big developments in administration scandals involving the IRS, Benghazi, Obamacare and Fast and Furious gunrunning, as well as immigration.

Just last week, Judicial Watch Director of Investigations Chris Farrell told WND a government assertion that no terrorists had crossed the southern border into the country was “simply false” and provided details to the contrary.

In his introduction, Fitton noted the public doesn’t want amnesty, “but leaders of both parties do.”

He reminded listeners how Judicial Watch had published “story after story” exposing the Obama amnesty agenda and its inherent dangers.

Most pointedly, Fitton observed that amnesty was not about illegal aliens, it was about the illegal alien vote, and “the illegal alien vote is about stealing elections.”

He referred to a study he said showed that enough illegals voted in 2014 to give Obama a margin of victory in his re-election campaign. Illegals also provided enough votes to elect the 60th Democrat senator needed to pass Obamacare in the face of GOP opposition.