One college graduate is whistling quite the different tune from Obamacare poster-boy Chad Henderson, saying the President’s signature healthcare law “raped” her future.

Days after Henderson touted his faux enrollment in the Affordable Care Act’s exchanges, Ashley Dionne, a 26-year-old graduate from the University of Michigan, took to her blog, Radical for Capitalism, to voice her disdain for the law. Dionne works the night shift at a local gym for $8 per hour, and saw her premiums more than quadruple.

“I have asthma, ulcers, and mild cerebral palsy,” Dionne wrote. “Obamacare takes my monthly rate from $75 a month for full coverage on my ‘Young Adult Plan,’ to $319 a month. After $6,000 in deductibles, of course.

“Liberals claimed this law would help the poor. I am the poor, the working poor, and I can’t afford to support myself, let alone older generations and people not willing to work at all. this law has raped my future.”

Dionne, as a 26-year-old working part-time, does not qualify for coverage from neither her parents nor her employer. And as a young person — whose enrollment is designed to offset the high cost of healthcare for the elderly — the spike in her premium is unfortunately the norm.

“[This law] will keep me and kids my age from having a future at all,” she wrote. “This is the real face of Obamacare and it isn’t pretty.”

Though Dionne does qualify for the subsidies President Obama praised throughout the Affordable Care Act’s roll out, she calls herself an Objectivist, the philosophy made popular by Ayn Rand, and has economic objections to the credits.

“People keep saying, you’re eligible for subsidies, and that’s true,” she told Yahoo!. “I could get them. But I’m an Objectivist … and I just don’t want them. It’s just a matter of my personal beliefs. I know I could get them, but I just don’t want to have to.”

The effects of the Affordable Care — demonstrated by Dionne — have reverberated nationwide, as many have found their premiums rise exponentially despite Obama’s promises to the contrary.

Read Dionne’s full letter below: