The Republican Study Committee Repeal Task Force is running a two-for-one special: repeal one, get one free. It’s been trying to eviscerate the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) since its inception in 2009 and its passage in 2010, but without success. Instead, it now wants to sabotage it by making sure it can’t possibly work.

Actually, they’re right. It can’t. But not for the reasons they think. Rather, the canard of Obamacare is the sleight-of-hand that puts 32 million sick people onto the health care insurance rolls, based on the economic subterfuge that we can save money by providing preventative services before people get sick – for example, go to the doctor’s office instead of the emergency room. Sounds good, but here’s the rub. There are no medicalized services that prevent “metabolic syndrome” – the constellation of diseases that America suffers from – diabetes, lipid problems, hypertension and stroke, heart disease, fatty liver disease, cancer, and dementia. The data show that over the past decade, we have reduced smoking and blood pressure and lowered cholesterol; yet our obesity and diabetes rates have skyrocketed to offset any gains. People aren’t dying as fast; rather, they’re living with metabolic diseases that reduce productivity and requiring expensive medications, without reducing hospitalization rates. The Government Accountability Office says on our current path, Medicare will be broke by 2026. The diseases of metabolic syndrome account for 75 percent of our $2.7 trillion annual health care budget. But there’s no magic pill for metabolic syndrome, and there’s no magic pill that will save our health care system until we deal with it.

[Read: Why You Shouldn't Take a Flying Leap at Healthy.]

So, the RSC asks, what’s the most sure-fire way to sink Obamacare? Break it by flooding it. Flood it with more patients than it can handle. The example is fresh and indelible. Under Presidents George H.W. Bush, Clinton and Geroge W. Bush, the U.S. engaged in 17 military conflicts while adding another 2 million veterans to the VA healthcare system (which services 9 million of the nation’s 22 million vets), without increasing the number of doctors or improving the infrastructure. And today, General Eric Shinseki is the former Secretary of the Department of Veterans’ Affairs, which has no hope of righting itself any time soon.

Yes, the RSC says, let’s sink Obamacare with even more chronic disease, and let’s see to it that those patients are as young as possible. Let’s overload the system with sick teenagers to generate the maximum number of Disability-Adjusted Life Years (each DALY constitutes the loss of one year of healthy life), so they need more medical care and for longer. And the sheer weight of the health care system will scuttle it. The diseases of metabolic syndrome account for 43 percent of the DALY’s worldwide, and even more so in the U.S. And how to do that? Remove the nutrition standards for children in schools.

[Read: The No. 1 Skill for Weight Management.]

Indeed, children are now the unwitting victims of every adult chronic disease. In 1980, I went into pediatrics so as not to deal with chronic disease. Now, that’s my entire job. In 1980, there were no children with Type 2 diabetes. Today, there are 60,000. In 1980, fatty liver disease was only due to alcohol, to which children aren’t exposed. Today, one-seventh of all American children harbor non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.

Everyone thinks this is due to obesity, and obesity is due to behavior – you eat too much, you exercise too little. Therefore if you’re fat, it’s your fault. Except for one little scientific glitch. While it’s true that 80 percent of the obese have the various diseases of the metabolic syndrome, so does 40 percent of the normal weight population, and these people harbor the same biochemical defects, even at normal weight. Indeed, 33 percent of Americans now have non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and 8.3 percent have diabetes, and they’re not all obese. If normal weight people get these diseases, how can it be due to behavior? Because this isn’t a behavior, this is an exposure. And the exposure is the Western Diet; aka the Industrial Global Diet; the Consumable Chemical Diet; the high sugar-low fiber, processed food diet that's being served up in fast-food restaurants, in grocery stores and in school cafeterias. And everyone is at risk, especially our children.

[Read: Why We All Need to See the Movie 'Fed Up.']

The movie “Fed Up” (full disclosure, I appear in it) documents the actions of the food industry over the past 35 years to pass off the Industrial Global Diet as healthy food in the name of profit, and the political shenanigans of the U.S. Congress to enable it, at the expense of our next generation. Indeed, it was Congress who declared pizza a vegetable. The Healthy Hunger-Free Kids Act passed by Congress in 2010 raised the national per-pupil lunch expenditure from $2.80 to $2.86. Apparently, the increase wasn’t enough to allow school cafeterias to break even … they’re not making enough on french fries and pizza? So instead of upping the dollar amount, Rep. Robert Aderholt (R-AL) and the House Appropriations Committee this week decided to go back on their own handiwork by allowing schools to “opt-out” of the federal nutrition standards. This will no doubt start to roll back the nutrition standards for all schools, which Congress expects will culminate in the “No Hungry Kids Act,” currently wending its way through the House.



[Read: House Panel: Schools Can Opt Out of Nutrition Requirements.]

Two for the price of one. A double-dip. Gut nutrition standards and in the process deep-six Obamacare. A win-win (or lose-lose, depending on your point of view). Indeed, the RSC Repeal Task Force works to “eliminate U.S. federal laws and regulations that inhibit, restrict or are otherwise harmful to the American public.” Sure, let’s mortgage our country’s future in the name of free enterprise. In fact, it’s a triple-dip – by poisoning our teens now, they will be Too Fat to Fight and 4-F’ed from military service, so we won’t have as many vets clogging up the VA healthcare system in the future.