Buy Photo Participants in the 2013 Susan G. Komen Race for the Cure 5K race to the finish line in downtown Des Moines. This year’s race is Saturday, starting at the Iowa Capitol. (Photo: Charlie Litchfield/Register File photo)Buy Photo

The sea of pink runners and walkers making their way through Des Moines every October does more than draw attention to breast cancer and research. Their efforts help pay for local screening and support programs through Susan G. Komen Iowa.

The public may not realize the impact Komen Iowa has beyond the Race for the Cure, said Roger Dahl, executive director of Komen Iowa.

“People still focus on the words ‘for the cure.’ We’re continuing to look for a cure, but until we have a cure, people still need to do their screenings and get their treatment and follow up care,” he said.

The Race for the Cure, set for Saturday at the Iowa State Capitol, is by far the affiliate’s largest fundraising event, generating about 80 percent of funding, Dahl said. In addition to registration fees, many participants make personal donations and form teams to raise even more money.

Last year’s event brought in roughly $700,000 and the races draw between 12,000 and 15,000 participants, with hundreds more supporters.

Up to 75 percent of the net proceeds stay in the service area, with the rest going to the national group for research projects. Locally, more than $4 million has been invested in the service area in the past five years.

The bulk goes to grants funding education, screening, support services and programs helping Iowans gain access to diagnostic services, treatment and follow-up care.

Dahl said those grant programs have seen long-term success, boosting Iowa’s screening rates above the national average. The projects are also helping detect cancers – in 2013 alone, 110 breast cancers were detected through grant programs.

Grant projects must address the priorities set forth in a study the affiliate completes every four years focusing on breast cancer issues around the state, Dahl said. The process begins following the Race for the Cure. Applications are due in December and are reviewed by an independent panel of experts.

One of the current grantees is the Polk County Health Department, a partner since 1995.The Komen funding allows Polk County to extend free screening, diagnostic testing, follow-up care and case management to women under age 50 as part of the Healthy Women program. That program also receives funding from the Iowa Department of Public Health’s Care for Yourself program and Bras for the Cause to focus on women ages 50 to 64 and can provide cervical and cardiovascular services.

With breast screening recommended to begin annually at age 40, the Komen dollars helps Polk County target a younger population, said Kari Lebeda Townsend, disease prevention supervisor at the health department.

“Numerous women tell us they would not be getting these preventative services were it not for the funding we have through the program. Really, I feel like every woman we see in the program is a success story because she’s getting the screening,” she said.

Healthy Women participants must meet income guidelines and be underinsured or uninsured. About half of participants are women of color. Men are also served, although they make up less than one percent of cases.

Health care partners help direct patients to Healthy Women and complete the enrollment process. That makes the process seamless for patients, Lebeda Townsend said.

In fiscal year 2012-13, Komen funding covered screening for 1,273 Healthy Women patients, seven of whom were diagnosed with breast cancer. About 44 percent of those diagnosed throughout the entire program were younger than age 50.

Lebeda Townsend stressed that younger women should see a medical provider immediately if they notice any changes or feel a lump in their breast.

“Too often we see where it’s progressed by the time women finally go in and see a provider,” she said. “Know what’s normal for you. Know your body.”

In addition to screening, Healthy Women provides education about breast health, community resources and insurance for all their medical needs. Staffers also provide care coordination and support, lining up appointments, working through barriers, and helping set expectations during treatment.

“I think that’s invaluable. That’s not something you typically get with insurance,” Lebeda Townsend said.

Due to the Affordable Care Act, the program has seen a shift in services used. Routine screenings provided through Komen funding dropped to 807 patients last year. But 409 patients benefitted from diagnostic screening, 174 more than the previous year.

Some participants became insured in that time, but had coverage for preventive services and not diagnostic testing, which is usually more expensive. The Polk County program helps fill in the gap, Lebeda Townsend said. Once insured, past Healthy Women participants are more likely to continue annual screenings because of the education provided during the process, she added.

Lebeda Townsend said in addition to the grant, Komen has also provided educational material that the health department shares with women. Polk County usually staffs an information booth at the Race for the Cure and also has a team walking in the event – Pink POLK-a Dots – to show the need for local funding of programs, she added.

Komen Iowa Race for the Cure

WHEN AND WHERE: Saturday at the Iowa State Capitol, 1007 E Grand Ave., Des Moines. Events begin at 7 a.m.

DETAILS: 1-mile walk, 5K run/walk, Kids’ race

REGISTRATION: Varies from $10-$35. Donations accepted. Fundraising remains open through Nov. 1

INFO: www.komeniowa.org

Healthy Women

For information on Healthy Women, the breast, cervical and heart health assistance program operated through Polk County Health Department, call 515-286-3642.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/YD7ImT