‘If we can’t defeat it, we’ll at least make it very hard to enroll’ appears to be the logic behind Arkansas’ Republican legislators’ approval of a 2014 amendment to the state’s so-called private option Medicaid marketplace. The cynical tactic appears to have worked.

According to a recently released report by The Collaborative, a Rhode Island think tank that provides policy advice for lawmakers, Arkansas has enrolled the lowest percentage of healthcare exchange-eligible residents of any state nationwide.

Robert Hackey, a professor of Health Policy and Management at Providence College, explains that the data show only 19 percent of eligible Arkansans enrolled.

“This really looks at the percentage of folks who are eligible, who actually signed up,” Hackey said. “So it’s a sense of how well the state is actually reaching those who are uninsured, or low-income and eligible for subsidies, to get them to actually purchase coverage through the marketplace.”

Overall, the state received a C grade for four combined categories, including premiums, number of new insurers added, and the overall enrollment increase. Hackey explained that this was due in part to an overall state improvement in 2013 and 2014.

So why do we lag so horribly? Back in 2014, state Republicans realized that they would not be able to defy the Affordable Care Act. It was coming to Arkansas, and Arkansas was obliged to figure out how to make it work. In their typical peevish and insolent manner, they chose the path of subterfuge. In a 2014 amendment to Arkansas’ private option, lawmakers banned all state spending on outreach for the Health Insurance Marketplace (including the private option but also the entire marketplace created by the Affordable Care Act). This stricture meant there would be no advertising, direct mail, or any other form of promotion. It also proscribed the work of the trained guides whose job it was to to help people enroll in the Marketplace.

Just to put a point on the absurdity, most of these promotion activities were fully funded by the federal government, but the amendment prevents the state from spending the federal monies. Of course, those eligible can still sign up for the private option, but the state can’t promote it. The ban does not prevent private entities such as insurance companies from doing outreach or advertising. It just makes things needlessly more difficult.

State Rep. Nate Bell, the sponsor of the amendment, freely admitted in a 2014 Arkansas Times interview that this obstruction to enrollment was the central purpose of the bill. As Bell told the Times, “without active marketing, you probably get declining enrollment… We’re trying to create a barrier to enrollment.” Less enrollment means lower costs, he said. “In general, as a conservative… if I have the opportunity to reduce government spending in a program from what’s projected … I’m probably going to take that deal.”

If President Barack Obama were the only person affected by this kind of myopic nose-thumbing, it might be acceptable, but he’s not. Some of Arkansas’ poorest families have experienced avoidable illness and tragedy because people like Bell would rather make an empty political point than do the right thing.

It’s the kind of “let them eat cake” moment out of which violent revolutions spring. It’s shameful in the deepest sense of the word.

As the recent legislative session demonstrates, Bell and his kin aren’t satisfied, nor are they finished. They will seek to undermine this successful and necessary program at every turn. They will do so pointing to fiscal conservancy and “governmental overreach,” but their collective tantrum only hurts Arkansans. And now there are statistics to prove it.