Beverly Johnson has written an autobiography, "The Face That Changed It All." (Photo: Beverly Johnson)

Beverly Johnson earned a place in history in 1974 when she became the first Black woman to grace the cover of Vogue.

Considered the first African-American supermodel, she was a jet-setting celebrity in the '70s who was pals with the likes of Jackie Kennedy, Calvin Klein and Andy Warhol. There were also battles with drugs and bulimia, and a romance with Arthur Ashe.

Now 62, Johnson has refashioned herself as an entrepreneur with several product lines, which she'll discuss in Phoenix this week during the Chase Women's Business Symposia. The event is invitation-only, but Johnson has plenty to share, including details on her upcoming autobiography, "The Face That Changed It All," and her recent allegations in which she claims Bill Cosby once spiked her drink during a business meeting in the '80s.

Before an early-morning round of golf, she called from her home in Rancho Mirage, Calif., to talk about her life and career.

Question: Tell us about your involvement with JPMorgan Chase.

Answer: They have this business women's symposium and what it basically does is bring together a lot of small-business women. We share our ideas and practical advice. It's really empowering.

Q: Do women have specific questions for you?

A: It's really a meeting of the minds. As an entrepreneur, I don't think people realize how difficult it is. It is the most challenging thing I've ever done. I've usually had licensing deals with companies throughout my modeling career, and you're involved in business but not really. I finally took advantage of a dream of mine to go into business myself. It's really challenging and difficult, but so rewarding.

Q: How long have you been in business?

A: It was four years ago. I was kind of semi-retired, then I had the Oprah moment about finding your bliss. One thing led to another, and I decided to build this Beverly Johnson lifestyle brand. I have a mineral makeup line, an absolutely phenomenal hair extension line and a patented handbag will be on the shopping channels very soon. And then the memoir is coming (Aug. 25). The book has a lot of trials and tribulations, but it works out in the end.

Supermodel Beverly Johnson has written an autobiography, "The Face That Changed It All." (Photo: Atria Books)

Q: You make it sound tough, but your 20s and 30s must have been incredible.

A: Oh my God, I wouldn't want to go back to my 20s for anything. Except for the birth of my daughter, I don't want to go back there. It was all a learning curve and there were some very serious lessons, some knocks on the head and some amazing people.

Q: So you're not a nostalgic person?

A: Not at all! One thing I love about myself is that I thrive on challenges. I learned to play golf about 12 years ago, and golf is a game of mistakes. You must forget the mistakes you made last time. I've always had the ability to do that, and that is basically how I see life. You learn from your mistakes and you move on.

Q: What did you learn from your mistakes?

A: When I grew up, my mother said that everyone is basically good. I had a very sheltered upbringing. But there is evil in the world, and I wasn't taught that.

Q: Speaking of the good: You had a very high-profile relationship with Arthur Ashe.

A: I talk about him in the book. It breaks my heart when young people don't know who he is. He was the first African-American to win Wimbledon; I was the first African-American on the cover of Vogue. We were this little power couple!

Q: Being the first Black woman on a Vogue cover: Were you aware at the time it was a big deal?

Beverly Johnson graced the cover of Vogue in 1974. (Photo: Vogue)

A: I didn't have a clue. I wake up today and look at my cover to make sure it really happened. And when I realized that I was the first person of color, it was like, "Are you kidding me? This is the '70s! Why is this still happening?" I didn't know anything about my heritage, and that set me on this journey of self-discovery about my roots.

Q: You wrote about Bill Cosby in a December Vanity Fair article. Does it bother you that this could overshadow the book?

A: No, the wonderful part is he is a lightning rod for conversations that we've needed to have for a long time. The conversation on violence on women is a conversation that must be had. We can do something good with this. With Cosby being the lightning rod, it could be expanded to a bigger conversation.

Q: Is Cosby in the book?

A: He wasn't, but Simon & Schuster said we needed that story in there. Like I said, it gives a platform for a much-needed conversation. You can show women that you can get through something like that. It's not easy, but you can.

Reach the reporter at randy.cordova@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-8849. Twitter.com/randy_cordova.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1Cdasbw