The secrets and symbolics of the president’s obsession with basketball are finally revealed

Gerald Ford was a college-football star at the University of Michigan. George W. Bush ran the Texas Rangers. Barack Obama’s hoop dreams petered out as a reserve player on his Hawaii high school team. And yet no modern president—not Ford with football nor Bush with baseball—is as identified with a sport as Obama is with basketball.

In his new book, The Audacity of Hoop, longtime Sports Illustrated writer Alexander Wolff explores the role basketball has played not only in Obama’s life, but also in Obama’s America. I recently spoke with Wolff about the president and the sport and asked him, among other things, why Obama doesn’t wear shorts when he plays, and whether a Republican president would put more emphasis on football. A lightly edited and condensed transcript of our conversation follows.

JZ: When did you first notice that basketball was something important to Obama?

AW: I didn’t know until the 2008 presidential campaign, until he really started to showcase it. In New Hampshire he played with firefighters and policemen and these small groups. I think it was a conscious decision to get him in unconventional settings. And whether that was a decision that was made because they wanted to emphasize his youth and vigor, or just a generational thing, I don’t know.

How much did his race play into viewing him through the prism of basketball then? If it had been John Edwards playing those pickup games, do you think it would have been viewed differently?

[His campaign] wanted to make sure he was established on another level, on a policy level, before they introduced basketball. In some ways it was a twist on that whole Bill Bradley dilemma. You’ll remember that Bradley ran away from basketball, he wouldn’t even play with his campaign staff, because he was so concerned about being regarded as the ex-jock. Obama didn’t care if people judged it as something traditionally African-American or not. It’s what he really wanted to do, especially during these long days on the campaign trail. I think about him running with the University of North Carolina varsity during the campaign. That was a kind of Clinton-playing-the-saxophone-on-Arsenio-Hall moment for Obama. There was a recognition that, “Okay, this is not John McCain. This is a younger, more vigorous, generationally-in-synch-with-me kind of person.”

When Obama played with UNC, it was right before the North Carolina Democratic primary, and he was trying to beat Hillary Clinton. That was a route she obviously couldn’t take. Do you think there was a gender dynamic at play as well?

On some level it underscored the difference with Hillary, but I wonder if that was so carefully calculated. There were, however, a number of gender-related missteps having to do with basketball once he was president. Certainly when he started filling out the bracket for ESPN that first year, he didn’t do the women’s draw and he took a lot of heat for it. There was a bit of a reflexive boys’-club thing going on. Which is ironic, because there were a lot of women in his administration with basketball backgrounds. Samantha Power was a real ball player in high school and loves sports. Obviously Susan Rice was a really accomplished basketball player. Mary Jo White apparently was an outstanding five-foot-one, really feisty player. It seems as if he’d wanted to bring some women into that circle through basketball—he could have, and he didn’t.

If you look at the current Republican presidential field, it’s more football-oriented. Rubio and Jeb talk about their fantasy teams, Christie shows up in Jerry Jones’s box. Do you think there’s a partisan split to sports that these guys reflect? That Democrats like basketball and Republicans like football?

Generally the Democratic Party is kind of like the game of basketball: It’s untidy and there’s a lot of turnovers. And the Republican Party is like football: It’s very regimented and the kingmakers crown who the next nominee is going to be, and you wait your turn and it’s top-down. Now, that got scrambled somewhat by digital media and some other factors, but I think it pertains for the most part to the last 30 or 40 years.

Basketball has had a little more of a liberal or diverse profile than football, whose great centers of interest are in the Southeast and Texas, which are very Republican and have become even more so. Still, in the last couple years, filling out an NCAA tournament bracket has become all the rage on the right. There was all this sniping about it early, that Obama was shirking his duties and all that. But the last couple years, you’ve had Paul Ryan getting on the bandwagon with the Badgers, and Marco Rubio filling out a bracket that had Florida winning, and Chris Christie showing up at the Big East Tournament.

One of the great ironies is that in 2012, Obama’s going against Mitt Romney, and everybody, in the spirit of equal time, runs to Romney and asks Romney for his bracket, and he shrugs his shoulders and fesses up that he wasn't really following it. And then last year Romney did fill out a bracket, and he finished in the 99th percentile. So I guess timing is everything in politics, and poor Mitt Romney didn’t have the timing.

You write about this new generation of basketball stars who are politically engaged, whereas past stars weren’t. There’s that possibly apocryphal remark Michael Jordan made about why he wouldn’t support a Democrat running against Jesse Helms, saying, “Republicans buy sneakers, too.” Obviously, LeBron James is not afraid of offending Republicans or anybody else with some of his political statements. But do you think LeBron would be doing the political stuff if Obama weren’t president?

You know, it’s funny you ask that question, because I was just turning over in my head yesterday—is it a cause-and-effect thing? Obama’s elected, therefore these players suddenly get politicized? I think it was a two-step process. I think Obama runs for president; he’s so identified with basketball, he has this standard of cool that he’s setting, and NBA players will glom on to anything that’s cool and trendy; and they glom on to him.

And then there’s a second order of fact: He is elected; he has these things he’s trying to accomplish; there’s this generational change—it’s become more acceptable to care about philanthropic things than it was back in the Jerry Maguire “Show Me the Money” days, in which Michael operated. So it was actually that process: “Okay, we rode this horse, he became president, now what do we do?” There was this weird, almost call-and-response thing going on between the White House and the NBA locker room, in which Obama said, “Okay, I need more signups during this critical period for the Affordable Care Act, the signup period happens to fall during the NBA season. Let me get Alonzo [Mourning] on the phone. Let me get Magic on the phone. Let me get Kobe to Tweet out this is where people should go to sign up.” Or Obama rips the Arizona immigration legislation, and lo and behold the Suns wear “Los Suns” jerseys on Cinco de Mayo.

There’s this valence of stuff that both parties, the White House and the NBA locker room, are aware of. A lot of them golf with him a whole lot. They brought in all those NBA stars for his 49th birthday party. I wouldn’t say it’s coordination, but they’re interacting. I think they kind of rode into town together on it, NBA players and Barack Obama.

It’s interesting that golf has now replaced basketball as Obama’s favorite recreational activity, but at the same time he’s playing golf with basketball guys: Alonzo Mourning, Ray Allen, Steph Curry, and Dell Curry. Is it at all telling that he plays golf with basketball players?

Yeah. And if it weren’t basketball players, it seems as if he’s almost defiantly not playing with Vernon Jordan, the classic Bill Clinton golfing partner, the Washington insider, because everyone’s saying he should, that doing so will improve the tone in Washington. What’s the phrase? He has no more fucks left to give about whatever people have been saying. That’s certainly been true these last couple years of his second term.

He’s the president, so if he does anything, it’s going to be in this very hermetic environment. Here’s a guy who grew up in Hawaii, and he’s now essentially confined to a limo or the residence or the Oval Office or Air Force One. There’s a bubble, and golf is a chance to get outside it. He can’t really play basketball outside of it. He did play on the Vineyard a few times early in his presidency, and obviously on the outdoor White House court, but he can’t leave the bubble playing basketball outside.

I think golf also feeds his competitive instinct, because he isn’t real good at it. I think the self-improvement part of him likes it. He’s seen his basketball skills deteriorate, and he has commented on that. I think he still sees room for improvement in his golf game, and that makes sense. He’s a pretty competitive guy. One of the things that surprised me the most is just how much of a trash-talker he is. Michelle Obama told [Sports Illustrated writer] Scott Price that when they would play Scrabble with Barack’s mother, she was a trash-talker. In Scrabble games! That starts to begin to explain it, although to hear that his mother, who’s the daughter of people from Kansas, who became an academic, was a trash-talker, even at Scrabble, that’s not what you would expect. You’d expect he would have picked that up somewhere else.

You look at Obama on the basketball court in his gray shirt and black sweatpants—what you hilariously describe as the “police-academy-trainee look”—and then you look at his game, which you liken to Lenny Wilkens’, and the way he plays basketball is not cool. But then there’s this hyper-competitive and trash-talking side of him, both on the court and then also in the political arena, saying he wants the ball for the last shot and comparing himself to LeBron. Do you think that’s what NBA guys identify with?

Yeah, I think there’s something there. The only real naysaying of his game came from David Stern, who said he’s really not that good. And Barack Obama himself admits he can’t really go to his right, he never developed a right hand. Part of it was maybe not having his dad take him in the driveway when he was growing up.

But if you listen to Ernie Grunfeld, Magic Johnson, real NBA people will look at the glass half full about his game, and he’s self-taught, he’s not classically trained. And look at that picture from the North Carolina scrimmage: He’s in the lane, hanging with Tyler Hansbrough coming over at him. And even though he’ll only get into the lane with one move, it’s a fake right and dribble left move, he’s in the lane mixing it up.

So no, he’s not going to throw down a dunk, but there’s something—you know, cool is such an ineffable thing. It’s your posture, how you carry yourself. All the descriptions of him as a pickup player describe a cool head. He was the guy who, back at Harvard Law School, would defuse arguments on the court. You can imagine him saying “my bad” and patting someone on the butt, just being slightly above it all and not being a hothead. And if you think of the coolest NBA players going back to Clyde Frazier, that was their thing. They were cultivating their persona even as they were playing the game. I think if anybody recognizes that in a player, NBA players do.

There’s your game, and then there’s this parallel thing, which is your reputation that you’re cultivating, you’re taking care of, you’re protecting. And if you go back to Obama’s memoir, Dreams from My Father, he talks really explicitly and pretty insightfully about how it was on the basketball court that he learned you didn’t show people parts of yourself you didn’t want them to see. And that brings me to another thing that is really revealing. We talked earlier a little bit about Bill Clinton playing the saxophone on Arsenio. The thing about Clinton was, he wasn’t cool. He was asked the question boxers versus briefs, and he answered the damn thing. He was going to tell you anything. And when Obama was asked the same question—and I’m sure he rehearsed the answer—but the old pickup-basketball player in him said, I don’t answer those humiliating questions, but whatever it is, I look good in them! A guy who would say something like that, you don’t even need to see him play basketball to know that he can play basketball. That just gets it. Whereas Clinton would go out wearing those short shorts when he went jogging, those things that Nolan Richardson famously said of, “We gotta get you out of those Marilyn Monroes.”

I never heard that.

When Arkansas won the national championship and visited the White House, Richardson gave Clinton a pair of those classic baggy Razorback shorts, the down-below-the-knee model. They usually give the president a jersey, but in this case they gave him the shorts, and Richardson said, “We gotta get you out of those Marilyn Monroes.” No one would ever have to tell Barack that. In fact, the sweatpants pretty much give the game up. Rick Telander had this great throwaway line in one of his columns way back about it. He said you notice the sweatpants. What’s up with that? It’s gotta be his bird legs. He’s really self-conscious about his bird legs. The only picture I’ve ever seen of him in shorts playing basketball, it’s in the book, he’s playing on Martha’s Vineyard in August, and it must have been a really hot day. And I think that goes back to the whole growing up in Hawaii and kind of learning how to protect your reputation on the basketball court.

After George W. Bush left office, people thought maybe he should be baseball commissioner. Where do you see Obama and basketball going once his presidency is over?

I would be really surprised if he made basketball the centerpiece of anything he did. I just think his ambitions—he’s such a serious person—and I think his ambitions are going to take him to things like the My Brother’s Keeper initiative and things that are much more serious. Now, will basketball be part of his idiom? I think it will be. I think he’s seen the game again and again. Whether he’s trying to bond with somebody from another country or trying to establish a rapport with someone here, he’s called on the game again and again, and it’s worked pretty successfully for him. So I think if anything, it will be part of his vocabulary, but I don’t think it’ll be a centerpiece.