Buy Photo Dr. Eric Yancy, chief medical officer for Managed Health Services, is shown in his pediatrician office, 1815 N. Capitol Ave., Suite 304, Indianapolis, on Thursday, August 7, 2014. He has been in medical practice for 35 years. (Photo: Charlie Nye/The Star)Buy Photo

Dr. Eric A. Yancy likes to be busy.

“I wouldn’t have it any other way,” said Yancy, chief medical officer and practicing pediatrician at Managed Health Services.

In addition to overseeing staff, he holds clinic hours as a way to best have an understanding of what MHS’ members need and want.

Health care has changed a lot since Yancy’s career began, and he doesn’t see an end to that. The implementation of the Affordable Care Act has added new challenges and excitement.

“We plan to build upon what we have learned (from the Health Insurance Marketplace) and offer the best options we can for our members,” he said.

Yancy’s passion for his job goes beyond the clinic. When he thinks back on his career, he is reminded of handing a newborn to his parents after he successfully resuscitated the baby, and watching two young boys run home in the rain without coats. Those memories remind him of why this work is important.

“I thought to myself, these little ones, in the heart of the inner city, deserve the best health care I can give them.”

Question: How do you define leadership?

Answer: Leadership is the ability to get others moving in the same direction to accomplish a common goal, no matter how small or how challenging. A leader inspires by his or her own commitment and activity.

Q: What is the best piece of advice you’ve received?

A: My freshman English Lit teacher told me to learn the language and learn it well. If you are able to communicate well, you will go far in whatever field you choose. My mother and grandmother always told me to always put God first in all that I do.

Q: What do you know now that you wish you knew 10 years ago?

A: Each year of my life brings new experiences and new knowledge. Since I have lived 10 additional years, I wish I had the medical knowledge the last 10 years have afforded me.

Q: What will your industry look like in 10 years?

A: We have seen a great deal of change in the health-care industry over the past 20 years, and the industry will continue to evolve with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. I’m not exactly sure what our industry will look like in 10 years, but I am confident MHS will continue to do our best to serve our members and work with our partners, including small-practice providers like me, to provide access to quality care.

Q: Rising medical costs are a concern for many Hoosiers. What advice do you have to help calm those fears?

A: One piece of advice never changes — you have to be engaged in your health care. There are a lot more options and choices out there than people realize. It’s important that Hoosiers understand they have to do their part and spend time understanding and prioritizing their family’s health-care needs. Once they know what they’re looking for, they need to research the right doctor, the right plans — making the right match is key.

To recommend someone for this feature, call Jill Phillips at (317) 444-6246 or email her at jill.phillips@indystar.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JillPhillips05.

More about Dr. Eric A. Yancy

Title: MHS Chief Medical Officer and Practicing Pediatrician

Age: Timeless.

Resume highlight/Proudest moment on the job: One day in the mail I received a picture of a little kindergarten-aged child who was starting her first day of school. I thought I had never seen her before, but as I read the letter I realized she was a child I had resuscitated five years previously, as she lay unable to breathe in a delivery room. That was huge to me.

Family: Wife, Pamela, and three children.

Favorite Quote: Be not deceived for God is not mocked. Whatsoever a man should sow, that shall he also reap. Book of Galatians 6:7

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/Vwxwzr