We missed it. Readers and I, along with almost everyone else, failed to foresee the rise and confounding political buoyancy of GOP presidential hopeful Donald Trump, whose ride atop the polls was the nation's biggest story in 2015.

Instead, a year ago at this time, a strong plurality of respondents to my annual predict-the-news poll hewed to conventional wisdom and guessed that former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush would be the leading Republican contender heading into the Iowa caucuses. I, on the other hand, confidently on a different wrong track, thought the front-runner would be Ohio Gov. John Kasich, whose resume, mainstream conservatism and swing-state heft has not, to date, outweighed his lackluster skills on the stump.

Trump wasn't even among the 16 multiple-choice options I presented in the online survey because, come on. Birther reality TV star Donald Trump? "Other," the category into which he fell, got just 4 percent of the vote from readers.

Oh, well.

The hive mind and I also failed to predict that Mayor Rahm Emanuel would be forced into a run-off election and that Ohio State University would emerge from college football's final four to win the first NCAA football playoff.

We also mistakenly bet that the Dow Jones Industrial Average would stay above 18,000 (it's now in the mid-17,000s), that Illinois would boost the state's minimum wage to $10 (it's still $8.25) and that the Comedy Central network would cancel the show hosted by Stephen Colbert's replacement, Larry Wilmore (Wilmore's ratings are very low, but he's hanging on).

What did readers and I get right?

We predicted that Emanuel would be re-elected, that President Barack Obama would choose the South Side of Chicago as the site for his presidential library, that the Chicago Teachers Union would not strike, that U.S. Sen. Mark Kirk would run for re-election despite his health challenges and that Attorney General Lisa Madigan would not make a run for his Senate seat.

We correctly guessed that the Illinois Supreme Court would declare changes in the pension law unconstitutional, and that the U.S. Supreme Court would legalize gay marriage nationwide.

And we got it right when we said that Hillary Clinton would be leading the Democratic presidential field at year's end, that world health officials would get Ebola under control, that Derrick Rose would finish the 2014-15 season without a serious injury and that sullen Jay Cutler would remain the Bears' starting quarterback into the fall.

Readers accurately projected that the U.S. unemployment rate would be below 5.8 percent, and I blew that one. It's now at 5.

But I was right and the collective judgment of readers was wrong when I predicted that the Cubs would make the playoffs, that lawmakers wouldn't hike our state income tax rate, that Obama would block the Keystone XL oil pipeline, that the U.S. Supreme Court would uphold key provisions of Obamacare, that Chicago would still be planning to build the blobby Lucas Museum of Narrative Art on the lakefront and that a federal appellate court would order a new sentencing hearing for imprisoned former Gov. Rod Blagojevich.

It's not about keeping score (though if you are keeping score, as I am, out of 25 predictions I got 18 right and readers got 13). It's about looking back with a sense of awe and humility at the wild ride the news has taken us on, then taking stock of the mysteries that lie ahead.

In 2016, the nation will elect a new president, and the Supreme Court will issue pivotal rulings on the hot-button issues of abortion and affirmative action.

Voters will decide if such incumbents as Cook County State's Attorney Anita Alvarez, Illinois Treasurer Leslie Munger, U.S. Rep. Bobby Rush, U.S. Sen. Mark Kirk and mutinous Democratic state Rep. Ken Dunkin will get to keep their jobs.

Judges will pass sentence on former U.S. House Speaker Dennis Hastert and former Chicago Public Schools CEO Barbara Byrd-Bennett, and decide how much of a sentencing break, if any, Blagojevich deserves. Federal prosecutors will decide whether to indict former Peoria congressman Aaron Schock.

Since the alternative is unthinkable, we'll see a state budget compromise between Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner and the Democrat-controlled General Assembly. Or will we?

Cubs fans will find out if 2016 is the "next year" that they've been waiting for since 1908. Blackhawks fans will find out if the team can again raise the Stanley Cup, something they've been waiting for since June. Bulls fans will find out if the Golden State Warriors will beat the NBA regular record of 72-10 set by the 1995-96 Bulls.

I have my premonitions on these and other matters, and I invite you to offer yours in this year's survey, expanded to 30 questions to account for all the interesting elections ahead.

Click here to join the fun. I'll compare your collective forecasts to mine in next Sunday's column.

Re:Tweets

This week's winner of our reader poll to pick the best tweet of the week is @mrnickharvey for " 'You only live once' … a pessimistic cat."

Subscribers to the weekly Change of Subject email newsletter — go to membership.chicagotribune.com/newsletters to sign up — will receive an offer for a free, 50-page collection of all the nominated tweets of 2015.