Photo

Good Tuesday morning from Washington, where the repercussions of Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel’s resignation and a grand jury decision over the death of Michael Brown are playing out. Senate Republicans are getting ready to test their influence in confirmation hearings, and we look at the three finalists to host the Democratic convention in 2016.

The split-screen coverage on CNN summed up the story. On the left, President Obama was making a personal appeal for calm; on the right, cars and buildings were burning in Ferguson, Mo.

The limits of presidential power and influence were on vivid display Monday night after a grand jury declined to indict Officer Darren Wilson in the shooting death of Mr. Brown, an unarmed black teenager.

Mr. Obama was on the air almost immediately after the decision was announced, speaking for nine minutes from the White House briefing room. Americans, he said, should accept the decision even if they were understandably angry and disappointed. In Ferguson, tear gas canisters flew.

The president said the decision shouldn’t be an excuse for violence and called on law enforcement to “work with the community, not against the community” and to distinguish those who were stoking the turmoil from those who “just want their voices heard.” In Ferguson, riot police officers marched.

Mr. Obama acknowledged that violence would “make for good TV,” but appealed to reporters and broadcasters to focus on those offering solutions.

“We do have work to do here,” he said.

The president is to travel to Chicago on Tuesday afternoon to talk about his immigration plan. Ferguson is about 300 miles to the southwest.

— Julie Hirschfeld Davis

As President Obama spoke, dozens of Howard University students were on the march from campus to the White House, hands and voices raised. “Hands Up, Don’t Shoot,” they chanted, and “Black Lives Matter.”

The students commandeered U Street for the two-mile march, with drivers honking their horns in unison with the students, and passers-by cheering. Police cars followed along but stayed out of the way.

Rodney Leggette, 27, said he hoped the images would be “broadcast across the country, that Missouri knows they’re not alone.”

He said the events on Monday night were “an encapsulation of American race relations — a black man in the White House and poor black people in the streets getting tear-gassed.”

— A. J. Chavar and Elena Schneider

The Obama administration’s sudden need to fill both the top job at the Pentagon and the No. 1 post at the Justice Department will provide the Senate’s new Republican majority with immediate opportunities to challenge the White House after assuming control in January.

The nominee to replace Chuck Hagel as secretary of defense will join Loretta E. Lynch, the New York prosecutor who is the president’s choice for attorney general, as the first test subjects of the Republicans’ approach to administration nominees.

The Senate Armed Services Committee, which will be led by Senator John McCain of Arizona, can be expected to press the Pentagon candidate on the administration’s conduct of antiterrorist operations in the Middle East — a sore point with Mr. McCain.

As for Ms. Lynch, Republicans have made clear that they intend to focus on the president’s use of executive authority on immigration during her confirmation hearings.

“What I will say is that no attorney general should be confirmed unless that attorney general makes perfectly clear that they’re not willing to be a part of this illegal and unconstitutional action,” Senator Ted Cruz of Texas told Fox News on Monday.

Mr. Cruz and other Republicans have suggested that all nominations be blocked in retaliation for the executive action, though they would allow exceptions for national security posts like secretary of defense. Even if that doesn’t happen, the confirmation landscape has been altered considerably by the Republican takeover, and nominees should brace for tough scrutiny.

— Carl Hulse

President Obama travels to Chicago on Tuesday in hopes of selling his immigration plan beyond the Hispanics who are most affected by it. And he figures his adopted hometown is the place to do it — specifically in a speech at a community center dedicated to Polish-Americans.

When he announced his new policies last week, Mr. Obama placed them in the context of the United States as a nation of immigrants, “whether our forebears were strangers who crossed the Atlantic, or the Pacific or the Rio Grande.”

He will make his pitch at the Copernicus Community Center, named after the famous Polish astronomer. The location was carefully chosen: There are more than 168,000 Americans of Polish ancestry in Chicago, about 6 percent of the city’s population, according to the Census Bureau.

— Julie Hirschfeld Davis

The Democrats’ three finalists for their 2016 convention city — New York; Philadelphia; and Columbus, Ohio — neatly capture the party’s state of limbo.

What the party did not say in its news release on Monday about the finalists, but numerous Democrats indicate is the case, is that neither President Obama nor Hillary Rodham Clinton have offered much input about the decision. Mr. Obama has never been much interested in party-building, and Mrs. Clinton is not yet a candidate, let alone the party’s leader.

The search committee wants to avoid the wrong choice as much as it hopes to find the right location.

Do they go with New York — Brooklyn, to be exact — as a nod to Mrs. Clinton’s current home state and Bill Clinton’s nomination in Manhattan nearly a quarter-century ago? Or is there pressure to follow the Republicans, who picked Cleveland, to the swing state of Ohio? Or do they go a third way and choose Philadelphia?

The ideal option might have been Chicago — Mrs. Clinton’s original hometown and Mr. Obama’s adopted one — but officials there were not interested.

— Jonathan Martin

Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York discusses “what went wrong for Democrats in the 2014 election” at the National Press Club.

The United States Public Interest Research Group releases its 29th annual Trouble in Toyland report and list of dangerous toys.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention update their estimates on H.I.V. diagnosis, care and treatment.

She has loved Robert Redford; divorced Woody Allen, Jack Nicholson and Dustin Hoffman; browbeat Anne Hathaway; been roommates with Cher. That’s in the movies.

In real life, Meryl Streep makes President Obama babble.

The occasion was the White House ceremony on Monday honoring recipients of the Presidential Medal of Freedom, men and women like Ethel Kennedy, Stevie Wonder and Tom Brokaw.

In introducing each one, Mr. Obama was dignified, stately, talking of gender discrimination, civil rights, A.L.S. research and scientific breakthroughs.

Then he came to Ms. Streep.

“I love Meryl Streep,” the president said. “I love her. Her husband knows I love her. Michelle knows I love her.”

“There’s nothing either of them can do about it.”

— Steve Kenny

Have a look at the top candidates to replace Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel.

The speaker-elect of the Nevada State Assembly was forced to relinquish his leadership role over newspaper columns and radio commentaries that were “rife with derogatory remarks about blacks, women, Latinos and gays.”

The F.D.A. wants restaurants to count your calories for you.

Lost your luggage? It may now be for sale in an Alabama store.

Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel “freely acknowledged his own shortcomings” in several meetings with President Obama before he stepped down, according to Politico Magazine.

The St. Louis Post-Dispatch details how much of the area was shut down in anticipation of the Ferguson grand jury report. See the grand jury’s evidence here.

Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo has won himself a new group of enemies: the meteorologists he blamed for not predicting last week’s mega-snowstorm, New York magazine says.

Given that it’s Thanksgiving week, Mother Jones highlights an effort by Ohio legislators that would allow retail employees to say no if they’re asked to work on the holiday.