The Scott County sheriff’s department received this MRAP as the U.S. military reduced its inventory with the wars in the Middle East winding down. (Photo: Photo Special to The Register )

The tragic events that seemed to turn unnecessarily violent in Ferguson, Mo., have focused attention on the so-called militarization of city and county police departments across the country. That is an important issue, but the focus on war materiel in the hands of local law officers is the wrong question.

A better question is whether police departments and sheriffs see themselves as peacekeepers or at war with their citizens.

Register staff writers Daniel P. Finney and Jeffery C. Kummer toted up the amount of military equipment donated to Iowa law-enforcement agencies in Sunday's Des Moines Register, and the figures are staggering. Iowa police departments and sheriff's departments have armed themselves with everything from grenade launchers to armored vehicles capable of withstanding roadside bombs that killed and maimed scores of U.S. soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Iowa law enforcement agencies were not as greedy as communities in other parts of the country, where more than $4 billion worth of excess military hardware has been distributed. Still, more than 2,000 pieces of military hardware found their way to Iowa, including military assault rifles, worth $7.5 million. All of it free, donated by the Department of Defense as the military operations in the Middle East wind down. At least 75 of Iowa's 99 counties have acquired at least one item since 2006 through the program created by Congress.

This raises the obvious question of why any local Iowa law enforcement agency would need a grenade launcher, for example. Or night goggles. Or M16 rifles. Or any weapon designed for war.

DATABASE: Military gear owned by Iowa police forces

The most absurd acquisitions surely are those local law agencies that have taken possession of the super-armored mine-resistant ambush-protected vehicles (MRAPs). These behemoths, which weigh upwards of 17 tons, were designed for combat zones, not for Iowa municipal streets or county roads. One military transportation bulletin said these massive armored vehicles are not designed for U.S. roads, and they surely could not be safe on the thousands of Iowa county bridges that are considered unsafe even for large farm vehicles.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share A military recycling program has put an MRAP vehicle in the hands of Washington, Iowa, police. Rodney White/The Register

The question must be asked: What does Washington County, just to pick one example, need with one of these massive armored vehicles? Or Buena Vista, Cerro Gordo, Story, Jasper or Scott counties? Is there really any domestic threat so large to warrant such armor?

In central Iowa, in contrast, the Des Moines police and Polk County sheriff's departments — the largest local law-enforcement agencies in the state, arguably with the greatest potential for civil strife — have limited their acquisitions of excess military equipment to rifles and military trucks. Even that raises questions of whether the equipment is really necessary or just nice to have since it's free.

What is really important is the difference between the purpose of this sort of military equipment and ordinary tools of law enforcement. It is fair to say that local law enforcement has failed if it must resort to the armaments of war to deal with crime and unrest in their communities.

The most powerful weapon in the arsenal of a local police department is the relationship it has with the people in its community. If that relationship is based on trust, on the idea that the police are there to protect the citizens rather than to go to war against them, then there will be no need for weapons of war in the police departments and sheriffs' offices in Iowa.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1tMtdNb