Sharknado 3 is scheduled to release in 2015 and Tara Reid has announced two new members to the already iconic cast.

Although the announcement is not official, the Irish singing and dancing sensations Jedward, twin brothers John and Edward Grimes, are speculated to join the film. The duo traveled from Ireland to Orlando to meet up with Tara Reid and take part in the third installment of the Sharknado series. In addition to the new talent, Tara Reid and Ian Ziering have been confirmed to return as well. The series has traveled from Los Angeles, to New York, and now to Orlando Florida, where the Sharknado is planned to strike again.

Orlando Weekly reported on Sunday that the Sharknado team is looking for extras between 18 and 55 years of age to join in a theme park scene, girls 18-30 to partake in a bikini scene, and men ages 18-35 to become soldiers in the film. Production continues through February 24, so the progression is moving right along. Although the excitement of extra casting has become a hot topic of conversation, the announcement of the two newest members of the cast has many more excited about the 2015 release.

Metro reported that twin brothers Edward and John Grimes flew into New York and met with Tara Reid prior to filming. The brothers met Tara on Celebrity Big Brother in 2011 and have become great friends ever since. Jedward flew in early to hang out with Tara before learning their lines and preparing for their acting gig. Both boys gained fame in 2009 when they appeared on X-Factor, where they quickly became one of Simon Cowell’s least favorite acts.

Tara Reid was quick to announce the addition of Jedward to Sharknado 3, but rescinded her announcement just as quickly. It is possible that she was not allowed to make the announcement and took it back to cover her mistake. However, it seems as though the rumors are true after she posted a selfie alongside the twins on Twitter, with the caption, “‘Sharknado’ Cast Bowling Party! Pictures coming soon of us striking that’s how we roll @planetjedward”

Whether or not the rumor is true, Sharknado 3 is one of the most anticipated television movies of the year. The unexpected success of the first two movies quickly ensured its place as a modern cult classic. Whether the third installment in the franchise can live up to the first two remains to be seen.

What are your thoughts on Sharknado 3? Are you anticipating or dreading it?

[Photo Courtesy: MStarz]