Hurricane season, which starts June 1, will be a major topic this weekend on local public-affairs programs. The lineup:

WKMG-Channel 6 chief meteorologist Tom Sorrells hosts that station's "Flashpoint" at 8 a.m. Sunday. His guests will be Max Mayfield and Bill Read, both former directors of the National Hurricane Center, and Craig Fugate, administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. They also look back at Hurricanes Charley, Frances and Jeanne 10 years ago.

WFTV-Channel 9 chief meteorologist Tom Terry talks to "Metro Center Outlook" at 9 a.m. Sunday on WUCF-Channel 24. Host Diane Trees asks Terry about the technology of hurricane forecasting and what to expect this hurricane season. She also discusses hurricane preparation with Alan Harris of Seminole County Emergency Management.

Orlando Mayor Buddy Dyer talks to host John Brown on "Orlando Matters" at 7 a.m. Saturday on WRBW-Channel 65. Dyer discusses proposals in his annual State of the City Address. The topics include the first three weeks of SunRail, new plans for the Creative Village and the Community Policing Initiative. They also talk about changes on the way for Parramore with Orlando District 5 Commissioner-elect Regina Hill.

Greg Warmoth examines domestic violence and homelessness on "Central Florida Spotlight" at 12:30 p.m. Saturday on WFTV-Channel 9. His guests are Carol Wick, CEO of Harbor House of Central Florida; Tammy Douglass, executive director of Help Now Osceola; and Andrae Bailey, CEO of the Central Florida Commission on Homelessness. They discuss local cases of domestic violence that brought attention to problem's severity. The discussion explores the related problems of homelessness and domestic violence. Recent research shows that many female victims of domestic violence end up stuck in shelters because of the lack of affordable housing with the security they need.

Ybeth Bruzual previews the major August primary races on "Political Connections" at 11 a.m. and 8 p.m. Sunday on News 13. Her guests are Democratic strategist John Morgan and Republican strategist Frank Kruppenbacher. They talk about races for governor and the U.S. House. Analysts Lou Frey and Dick Batchelor discuss Val Demings' exit from the Orange County mayor's race and what it means for incumbent Teresa Jacobs. The program uses PolitiFact's Truth-O-Meter to weigh a claim by Hillary Clinton about the Affordable Care Act.