Re: “Colorado arts groups take sides in a battle over millions in funding,” Aug. 31 news story.

The increases in funding for the medium (Tier II) and small (Tier III) organizations in the Scientific and Cultural Facilities District as proposed by the SCFD Board are substantive, nowhere “close to what they are now,” as claimed in your article.

The changes supported by the board will increase funding for Tier II groups by $22 million and for Tier III groups by $15.3 million over the 12 years covered by the proposal. Funding for the larger organizations — Tier I — would drop by $37.3 million.

Why this shift? The board recognizes there is a need to provide additional funding for the medium and small groups while at the same time preserving and maintaining the infrastructure and assets of our most iconic institutions — the Denver Art Museum, Denver Museum of Nature & Science, Denver Botanic Gardens, the Denver Center for the Performing Arts, and the Denver Zoo.

These organizations may be located in Denver, but they serve a vast regional audience. More than three-fourths of their attendance comes from the counties outside of Denver.

These institutions have tremendous overhead, charged with preserving art that is thousands of years old, our state’s paleontology and rare botany, as well as caring for literally thousands of animals. The original intent of the SCFD legislation 27 years ago was to make sure these institutions would be able to serve our citizens for countless generations.

Over the years, the funding levels have not remained static. Funding for the organizations in tiers II and III has increased in prior votes and, if approved, will increase again.

The radical change suggested by a small group arriving late to the party (after a four-year process) to change the funding formula to 50 percent for Tier I, 30 percent for Tier II and 20 percent for Tier III simply is not based on real needs — 50/30/20 may make a great slogan, but it is not a plan.

I believe the increases proposed by the SCFD board are prudent and responsible and, most importantly, will be seen as reasonable when scrutinized by voters.

Dan Hopkins is chair of the Scientific and Cultural Facilities District board.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.